
The Bank of England has cut interest rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>
, taking the base rate to a new low of 0.25%. This is the first cutsince March 
2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/mar/05/interest-rates-quantitative-easing>
, and how welcome it is will depend on your financial situation. The Bank also 
announced a new round of quantitative easing (QE) – pumping money into the 
economy to buy government bonds.

What does the cut mean for mortgages?

For anyone with a fixed-rate mortgage, it does not mean anything. But if any 
of your borrowing is on a variable rate then it’s likely to be good news.

The 1.5 million borrowers with mortgages that track the base rate will see 
their monthly repayments fall, probably from the start of September. For a 
homeowner on the average variable mortgage rate of 2.86% and a mortgage of 
£150,000, a reduction in line with the base rate will mean monthly repayments 
falling by £19.68 to £687.

There are no longer any borrowers with tracker rates below the base rate, but 
there are some people lucky enough to be paying just 0.09% above the Bank base 
rate. These are Chesham building society customers who took out lifetime 
tracker mortgages several years ago – their pay rate will fall to just 0.34%.

In the main lenders can chose what to do with their standard variable rates, 
although Nationwide building society has an old base mortgage rate pegged at 2% 
above the Bank base rate. It will have to cut that by 0.25%.

When it comes to normal SVRs, lenders have discretion - although Bank’s 
governor has made it clear that he expects them to pass on the cut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/lenders-svr-urged-pass-on-interest-rate-cut-bank-of-england>
.
effect of rate cut on mortgage payments 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/08/mortgages-zip/giv-31075tbE3l3d3pRma>
What about savers?

They have been suffering since the last interest rate cut and are likely to 
see returns fall further as a result of the Bank’s decision.

According to financial information firm Moneyfacts, there are 385 savings 
accounts that could end up offering no interest at all if banks and building 
societies pass on the whole reduction. It found 60 variable rate accounts on 
the market paying an interest rate of 0.25% or less, alongside 325 accounts 
that are closed to new business but still hold customers’ cash.

Sue Hannums from Savingschampion.co.uk says huge numbers of savers have money 
“languishing in these appalling accounts” and are likely see returns fall.


“I don’t think there are going to be many providers who are going to hold 
back,” she says. “Previously, after a rate cut banks and building societies 
have waited until the end of the month or the beginning of the next to pass on 
a reduction. However, things have been turned on their head.”

On Monday, Moneyfacts reported that 13 best-buy accounts had been withdrawn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/01/savings-accounts-disappear-bank-of-england-prepares-cut-rates>
 from the market in July, even though the base rate remained unchanged.
average savings rates 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/aug/2016-08-02T13:28:51/embed.html>
Will other types of borrowing be cheaper?

Don’t expect your overdraft or credit card to get cheaper because of the base 
rate cut – the interest rates on these types of borrowing are detached from the 
Bank base rate and have been rising in recent months.


According to the Bank, the average interest rate on a UK credit card is now 
17.94%, compared with 15.73% in March 2009, while overdraft rates have gone up 
from 18.62% to 19.6%. Personal loan rates have tumbled over the same period. 
The average cost of borrowing £10,000 was 9.66% when the base rate was last cut 
and is now 4.3%.

Andrew Hagger of Moneycomms.co.uk says the best-buy loan rates on £10,000 have 
fallen by almost five percentage points since the last cut. In 2009, Tesco Bank 
topped the table with a rate of 8.1%, now Ikano has a deal at just 3.2%.

He does not expect the full 0.25% to be automatically deducted from loan 
rates. “Competition has been fierce in recent years and lenders margins are 
already thin,” he says. “However, we may see one or two banks with a strong 
appetite for new business perhaps shave 0.1% off their rates to benefit from a 
better ranking in the best-buy tables.”

Will pensions be affected?

The interest rate cut and pumping more money into the markets by acquiring UK 
government bonds - a process known as quantitative easing - will hit new 
retirees and pension funds.

As a result of the Bank’s measures, the price of government bonds, known as 
gilts, has gone up. Gilts have a fixed rate of return, so as their price rises 
investors get less income - a lower interest rate - for their money.


Pension funds that offer a payout based on salaries often invest heavily in 
gilts, and the lower return available means they will face a struggle to meet 
their promises and deficits could grow. Annuities - the products offering an 
income for life for pension savers when they retire - are also linked to gilts. 
Annuity payouts have already fallen, and are set to fall further if returns 
from gilts remain low.

But there may be one bright note for savers further from retirement - QE could 
also boost share prices as investors take on more risk in search of returns. 
This could be good news for anyone building up their pension.

Where can I put my money to get a good savings rate?

Times are tough for savers, but you can do better than a variable rate account 
paying less than the base rate. Current accounts are offering the best rates, 
with Nationwide and TSB both offering 5% interest on their everyday accounts, 
but this applies only to balances of £2,500 and £2,000 respectively.

On larger sums you will need to be prepared to lock in your money to get the 
best rates. Savingschampion says Shawbrook bank is offering 1.55% to savers 
with at least £1,000, but the notice period for withdrawals is 120 days. 
Fixed-term accounts can offer more. Deposit money with Paragon Bank or Al Rayan 
bank for two years and you can earn 1.8% year, or lock-in with Paragon for 
three years at a rate of 2%.


What about alternatives?

Aside from an emergency fund which you need to easily access, you might want 
to consideralternative homes for your cash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/26/where-to-put-1000-pounds-if-we-enter-a-world-of-negative-interest-rates>
. Peer-to-peer lending, where you invest money that other people borrow, 
generally offers higher returns than deposit accounts. Gold and shares are also 
popular alternatives, but investing in either of these can involve charges and 
you won’t be able to get hold of your money instantly.

What does this mean for house prices?

It could help push them up as the low cost of lending may encourage more 
people to take out mortgages. The fall in bond yields has already started to 
reduce the cost of 10-year fixed-rate mortgages and fixed-rate deals are at or 
near an all-time low across all time periods.

Lenders have started to increase the margins on tracker rates, charging more 
on top of the base rate than previously, but variable rate mortgages are still 
cheap and likely to remain so.

While this means lower monthly repayments for anyone who can raise a deposit, 
it is unlikely to lead to a flood of money into the market. Since 2014,lenders 
have had to do stress tests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/apr/25/mortgage-rules-homebuyers-fca-rules>
 to check that borrowers can still afford mortgage repayments even if rates 
rise, and the level is likely to stay the same.


“You still have to meet the affordability criteria and those don’t necessarily 
change because the Bank base rate comes down,” says Hollingworth.
 