
The UK has been stripped of its last AAA rating as credit agency Standard & 
Poor’s warned of the economic, fiscal and constitutional risks the country now 
faces as a result of the EU referendum result.

The two-notch downgrade came with a warning that S&P could slash its rating 
again. It described the result of the vote as “a seminal event” that would 
“lead to a less predictable stable and effective policy framework in the UK”.

The agency added that the vote to remain in Scotland and Northern Ireland 
“creates wider constitutional issues for the country as a whole”.

That downgrade was swiftly followed by a cut to the UK’s credit score from 
rival agency Fitch.

Intensifying the pressure on the UK’s standing on international markets, Fitch 
cut the UK’s rating to ‘AA’ from ‘AA+’. The UK had already lost its top rating 
with Fitch back in 2013. The agency hadwarned more recently that Brexit could 
prompt another cut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/14/brexit-hurt-uk-credit-score-fitch-ratings-agency>
 and that it alsorisked sparking disharmony across the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/16/brexit-eu-referendum-europe-political-centre-fitch>
.

S&P was the last of the big three ratings agencies to have a blue-chip rating 
on the UK’s credit-worthiness. Moody’s, which stripped the UK of its top notch 
rating amid the austerity cuts of 2013, said last week it might further cut its 
view of the UK.

Rating agency moves have the potential to make it more expensive for the 
government to borrow.

The moves form S&P and Fitch came after another torrid day on the financial 
markets. The pound hit fresh 31-year lows and £40bn was wiped off the value of 
the UK’s biggest companies on Monday, despite efforts by George Osborne to 
quell investors’ concerns about the economic and political ramifications of the 
Brexit vote.

After three days of silence, the chancellor  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/27/george-osborne-calm-markets-brexit-turmoil>
 made a statement on Monday morning to try to calm the markets. However, 
sterling remained under sustained pressure on the foreign exchange markets as 
economists slashed their forecasts for UK economic growth. Wall Street was also 
weaker while continental bourses sold off sharplyafter Friday’s record $2tn of 
losses on global stock markets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/24/bank-of-england-markets-pound-shares-plummet-brexit-vote-carney>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fchancellor-george-osborne-seeks-to-calm-brexit-fears-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chancellor%20George%20Osborne%20seeks%20to%20calm%20Brexit%20fears%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fchancellor-george-osborne-seeks-to-calm-brexit-fears-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chancellor%20George%20Osborne%20seeks%20to%20calm%20Brexit%20fears%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fchancellor-george-osborne-seeks-to-calm-brexit-fears-video&media=>
Chancellor George Osborne seeks to calm Brexit fears 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/27/chancellor-george-osborne-seeks-to-calm-brexit-fears-video>
Expectations are mounting that the Bank of England will cut interest rates – 
possibly to zero from their historic low 0.5% – to stimulate the economy, and 
yields on government bonds fell below 1% for the first time, which could spell 
cheaper mortgage rates.

In a live broadcast just after 7am, as dealers in London braced for another 
day of turmoil, Osborne insisted: “Our economy is about as strong as it could 
be to confront the challenge our country now faces.”

But moderate losses on the FTSE 100quickly deepened and at one point sterling 
was down 3.5% against the dollar, at $1.3122, its lowest level since 1985. 
Against the euro, the pound was down 2.4% at €1.19.

Speaking at the World Economic Forum in China, Nouriel Roubini, economist at 
New York University, described Brexit as “a major significant financial shock” 
that would create “a whole bunch of economic, financial, political and also 
geopolitical uncertainties”.

By the end of trading, the FTSE 100 index was down 2.6%, or 156.5 points, and 
below 6,000. The FTSE 250, the next tier of companies and more closely tied to 
the UK economy, was down 7%, coming on top of a 7% fall on Friday.

“It’s been another dramatic day of trading on the UK stock market,” said Laith 
Khalaf, senior analyst at the financial firm Hargreaves Lansdown.

Companies likely to be impacted by a Brexit-induced recession were hit hard. 
In two days, about £40bn has been wiped off the value of banking stocks and 
£8bn off housebuilders. At one point, shares in the bailed-outRoyal Bank of 
Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup> 
plunged 25%, while housebuilders such as Persimmon and Taylor Wimpey have lost 
more than 40% in just two trading days.

Michael Hewson, chief market analyst at CMC Markets, said while Osborne’s 
statement had been measured his comments “were unable to prevent the feeling 
that UK politics remains in a state of paralysis, with no clear contingencies 
in place to deal with the fallout of a leave vote”.

The biggest faller in the FTSE 100 was short-haul airline easyjet, which 
plunged by 22%after warning that wary consumers would now rethink their travel 
plans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/27/foxtons-and-easyjet-issue-profits-warnings-eu-referendum>
. Exchange rate movements, the carrier added, would add £25m to costs.

Another profit warning came from the London-focused estate agent Foxtons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/foxtons>. Its shares dived 25% after it 
said Brexit would hit sales for the rest of the year. Shares in so-called 
challenger banks such as Virgin Money were also pummelled.

Osborne spoke after it emerged that the Bank of England governor, Mark Carney, 
hadcancelled a trip to Portugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/26/market-turmoil-fears-likely-to-force-mark-carney-to-abandon-ecb-meeting>
 to remain in the UK to oversee any response from Threadneedle Street.

The Bank’s financial policy committee, set in the aftermath of the financial 
crisis to look for threats to stability, will meet on Tuesday, when the Bank of 
England will again offer emergency loans to banks as part of its Brexit 
planning.

The fallout from the vote is being felt around the world. Italy’s main index 
fell 4%, extending Friday’s record losses of 12.5%. In Germany and France there 
were losses of 3%. At the time of the London close, on Wall Street the main 
share indices were all down more than 1%.

The chancellor may have taken some comfort from the fall in yields on 10-year 
government bonds. Yields on these gilts, which move inversely to prices, fell 
below 1% for the first time. This fall in gilt yields will keep government 
borrowing costs down and lead to lower mortgage rates. However, they also mean
pension companies have started cutting the amount paid to the newly retired 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/27/annuities-hit-rates-fall-brexit>.

Osborne refused to repeat his pre-vote warning of a Brexit recession, saying 
only that the economy would face “adjustments”. But analysts started to cut 
their forecasts for UK growth. Goldman Sachs, forecasts just 0.2% growth in 
2017, down from 2% predicted previously.

The consultancy Oxford Economics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics> said interest rates could be 
slashed to 0% within weeks. Morgan Stanley analysts said European and UK stocks 
would fall up to 10% over the coming months and sterling would fall to between 
$1.25 and $1.30.

Much of the market’s focus has been on the pound, particularly after the 
speculator George Soros, who made $1bn when sterling fell out of the exchange 
rate mechanism in 1992,had warned of a “black Friday” in the event of Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/20/brexit-crash-pound-living-standards-george-soros>
. His spokesman stressed that he had not bet against the pound last week.


“George Soros did not speculate against sterling while he was arguing for 
Britain to remain in theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>,” 
the spokesman told Reuters. “However, because of his generally bearish outlook 
on world markets, Mr Soros did profit from other investments.”
 