
François Hollande <https://www.theguardian.com/world/francois-hollande> has 
sent one of the strongest warnings yet that Britain will have to pay a heavy 
price for leaving the European Union, adding to deep concern in financial 
markets.


“There must be a threat, there must be a risk, there must be a price, 
otherwise we will be in negotiations that will not end well and, inevitably, 
will have economic and human consequences,” the French president said.

“Britain has decided on a Brexit, I believe even a hard Brexit. Well, we must 
go all the way with Britain’s will to leave theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>,” he told a dinner in Paris attended by 
the EU commission president, Jean-Claude Junker, and the EU’s top Brexit 
negotiator, Michel Barnier.


Why Europe wants a hard Brexit to hurt | Charles Grant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/07/europe-hard-brexit-hurt-british-trade-deal>
Hollande’s remarks echo a toughening of rhetoric by the German chancellor, 
Angela Merkel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/05/angela-merkel-takes-significantly-tougher-brexit-stance>
, and a hardening of positions in European capitals afterTheresa May announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/02/may-on-collision-course-with-backbenchers-seeking-soft-brexit>
 that the UK would begin formal negotiations by the end of March and indicated 
it was heading for a hard Brexit.

Hollande has long insisted that Britain would have to live with the 
consequences of exiting the EU, and there was no chance of any informal 
negotiations before article 50 was triggered to officially leave.

After a week in which London appeared to be gearing up for a clash in talks, 
Hollande made clear he was more resolved than ever that EU countries must be 
firm with the UK in order to preserve the cohesion of the bloc and put off 
other countries seeking to follow Britain’s lead.

Hollande said firmness was absolutely necessary otherwise “the principles of 
the European Union will be questioned” and “other countries or other parties 
will be minded to leave the European Union in order to have the supposed 
benefits and no downsides or rules”.


His speech on Thursday marked the 20th anniversary of the creation of the 
Institut Jacques Delors, a thinktank founded by the former president of the 
European commission. The president used it to make a barbed reference to the 
recurrent exasperation inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> 
with Britain’s long-held assumption that it could have its cake and eat it.

 He said Delors “had also faced crises provoked by the United Kingdom”, noting 
that in the 1980s the late British prime minister Margaret Thatcher obtained a 
rebate on its EU contributions worth billions of pounds every year.

 Thatcher “wanted to remain in Europe, but receive a cheque in return”, he 
said.

 “Today, Britain wants to leave, but does not want to pay anything. That is 
not possible.”

May announced on Sunday that the government would trigger Brexit negotiations 
by the end of March, putting the country on course to leave the EU by early 
2019.

Hollande, who is mindful of a possible re-election bid next spring, is, like 
other European powers, keen to dampen rising Euroscepticism in his own backyard 
– namely growing support for the far-right Front National which wants a 
referendum on whetherFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> should 
leave the EU.


Freedom of movement: the wedge that will split Britain from Europe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/06/freedom-of-movement-eu-uk-brexit-negotiations-theresa-may>
 While the UK is divided over whether to go for a hard or soft withdrawal, 
European leaders are taking an increasingly firm line. A hard Brexit would mean 
quickly severing all links with EU institutions and pulling out of the single 
market, relying instead on World Trade Organisation rules to trade with other 
countries.

 Since the UK voted to leave the EU in June, Hollande has urged European 
partners to use the exit as a “wake-up call” to improve the European project.

 Earlier this week, Merkel told an audience of German business leaders that 
any exception to the EU’s single market rules would represent “a systemic 
challenge for the entire European Union”.

She appealed to German firms to show a united front with EU governments in 
negotiations over Britain’s departure from the bloc, urging them to support the 
principle of “full access to the single market only in exchange for signing up 
to the four freedoms”.


If any country was allowed an exception, she said, “you can imagine how all 
countries will put conditions on free movement with other countries. And that 
would create an extremely difficult situation.”

 