
The home secretary has vowed to stem the flow of “dirty money” into the City of
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> in an attempt to end its 
reputation as a safe haven for “criminals and corrupt kleptocrats” to hide 
their money.

Amber Rudd <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/amber-rudd> highlighted a 
National Crime Agency estimate that £90bn is laundered via London each year.

Rudd conceded that the UK has much more work to do to prevent financial crime, 
which she called a “national security threat” that costs the UK £24bn a year 
and undermines its reputation as a place to do business.

“I’m deeply concerned by claims London is a major global money-laundering 
centre,” Rudd said at a conference hosted by theFinancial Conduct Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/financial-conduct-authority>, the City 
regulator, on Thursday.


“The UK is attractive to criminals and corrupt kleptocrats who steal billions 
from their own people, often some of the poorest people in the world. We will 
reduce the flow of dirty money into the City.”

The government last month unveiled its criminal finances bill 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/criminal-finances-bill>, detailing 
measures to make London less attractive to international criminals as a place 
to launder money.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fuk-block-dirty-money-flowing-city-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31b458f679414251ec3d818259dc1020b828693f%2F0_111_3515_2109%2F3515.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20moves%20to%20block%20'dirty%20money'%20flowing%20into%20City%20of%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fuk-block-dirty-money-flowing-city-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20moves%20to%20block%20%27dirty%20money%27%20flowing%20into%20City%20of%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fuk-block-dirty-money-flowing-city-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31b458f679414251ec3d818259dc1020b828693f%2F0_111_3515_2109%2F3515.jpg>
 Amber Rudd. Photograph: Niklas Halle'N/AFP/Getty Images 
Measures in the bill aimed at money laundering include new unexplained wealth 
orders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/13/properties-seized-assets-corrupt-cash-crackdown-criminal-finances-bill-tax-haven>
, under which people suspected of trying to launder the proceeds of crime will 
be asked to explain the source of their money.

If they cannot, assets such as property can be seized to ensure criminals are 
unable to launder their cash by investing in property.

Rudd also said that an online raid in which hackers stole from thousands of 
Tesco Bank customers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/tesco-bank-cyber-thieves-25m> 
last weekend indicates the UK has yet to “make a dent” in the growing threat of 
cybercrime.

“The recent events at Tesco Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/tesco-bank-cyber-thieves-25m> 
are a stark example of what we face,” she said.


“It’s clear that for thousands of hard-working people [...] public confidence 
in our institutions gets shaken by this sort of event.

“The [Tesco] incident served to demonstrate that the private sector has a 
crucial role and a responsibility in countering cyber-enabled fraud,” she added.

Tesco Bank cyber-thieves stole £2.5m from 9,000 people
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/tesco-bank-cyber-thieves-25m> 
“While we have made some good progress and taken some significant steps 
forward, we haven’t yet put a dent in the problem. The threat remains great and 
there is very much more to be done.”

The FCA’s head of financial crime, Rob Gruppetta, hailed government efforts to 
tackle financial crime as a “positive step in the right direction”.

But he also proposed a series of measures that the regulator believes would 
beef up companies’ defences.


The measures include a centralised database of suspicious transactions, which 
could help firms save money on building their own systems and make it easier 
for them to share data with other firms and law enforcement agencies.

Gruppetta also said the government should rethink rules under which officials 
tasked with reporting suspected money laundering can be held criminally liable 
for failing to do so.

He said this could be doing “more harm than good” because it leads to overly 
conservative reporting. Rules that make banks legally liable if they share 
flawed information on financial crime with rival companies should also be 
relaxed, he said.

The FCA chief executive, Andrew Bailey, called on companies to make the UK a 
“hostile environment” for financial criminals by making better use of 
technology.

The regulator was ticked off by the Treasury select committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/tesco-bank-cyber-raid-unprecedented-financial-regulator-fca>
 earlier this week for the lack of technical experts among its board of 
directors, particularly in the light of the hack of Tesco Bank.
 