
As a trans man, only once in 40 years have I been unable to use the public 
loos. As a disabled man, too often to recount. Anne Wafula Strike (Paralympian 
forced to wet herself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/02/paralympian-anne-wafula-strike-wet-herself-train-no-accessible-toilet>
, 2 January) and Penny Pepper (When nature calls we all need to answer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/03/disability-accessible-toilets-paralympian-train>
, 4 January) outline the experiences of all (yes, all) people in the UK who 
require an accessible toilet (and only a minority of us are wheelchair users).


There is an answer: a legal requirement that by 2025 all toilets outside the 
home are accessible, with an “in the meantime” requirement that all refits are 
made accessible. And I mean all loos, not just one but all in a building. 
Exemptions could be given for ancient buildings; however, exemptions must be 
exceptional. Imagination is the real answer. Made to imagine wetting or 
shitting themselves in public, providers would find answers. A requirement to 
clearly advertise the day’s accessibility and limitations of the loos would 
mean service users were warned.

Rail companies, however, have no excuse; it is a matter of service and 
sufficient cleaning staff. Airlines also; have you seen the space in the 
first-class shower? In small planes they could unload a row of seats and a tiny 
slice of profit.

Finally, dump the gender signs. They not only intimidate the gender-different, 
but they also make for the inefficient use of available loo space.

While we wait, we should use the provisions of the Equality Act to demand some 
compensation for our humiliation; money soon creates change.

Stephen Whittle
Professor of equalities law, Manchester Law School
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fuk-needs-to-spend-quite-a-few-pennies-on-disabled-access%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa862ece971ccb4a4089f5a3da800312498866a0%2F330_509_4504_2705%2F4504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20needs%20to%20spend%20quite%20a%20few%20pennies%20on%20disabled%20access&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fuk-needs-to-spend-quite-a-few-pennies-on-disabled-access%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20needs%20to%20spend%20quite%20a%20few%20pennies%20on%20disabled%20access&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fuk-needs-to-spend-quite-a-few-pennies-on-disabled-access%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa862ece971ccb4a4089f5a3da800312498866a0%2F330_509_4504_2705%2F4504.jpg>
 Employers may have preconceived, negative perceptions about the capabilities 
of disabled people, says Laura Gregory. Photograph: Alamy 
• As a disabled person in my 20s, my biggest challenge (as I suspect it is for 
many of my peers) in finding secure, full-time employment has been in trying to 
overcome preconceived, negative perceptions that employers can potentially have 
about my skills and capabilities, and fears about my disability affecting my 
ability to work (The crisis of disabled millennials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/08/the-crisis-of-disabled-millennials-it-feels-hopeless>
, 9 January).

In order to improve the lives of young disabled people in this country we need 
better education, more empathy and understanding about disability and about the 
potential of disabled teens and young adults to lead ordinary, independent 
lives, playing meaningful and productive roles in our communities, including 
within the working world. It is hard for young disabled people who are trying 
to stay positive and hopeful for the future not to become despondent when there 
are so many barriers in the way of disabled people of all ages in attaining 
equal access to training, opportunities and employment.
Laura Gregory
Wrexham

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 