
Britain risks a “disorderly crash landing” if it assumes it can safely walk 
away from troublesome Brexit talks, business leaders have said, in a last-ditch 
plea for a negotiated settlement withEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

As Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> prepares to 
reveal an uncompromising set of UK objectives on Tuesday, pressure is mounting 
on the prime minister to take a firm line with other member states and 
ultimately fall back on World Trade Organisation tariffs if no deal can be 
agreed.

Hard or soft Brexit? Theresa May can have both | Matthew d’Ancona
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/16/hard-soft-brexit-theresa-may-speech>
But the CBI is calling on politicians to wake up to the limitations of the WTO 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/wto> and dangers of a disorderly Brexit, 
despite the long and painful concessions that may be necessary if the UK is to 
obtain a replacement free-trade agreement when it leaves the single market.

“The practicalities of a disorderly crash-landing need to be understood,” said 
Carolyn Fairbairn, director general of the CBI, in an interview with the 
Guardian. “We have had conversations with some of the proponents of just 
walking away and we will again talk to them about what we see from our members 
about the consequences of that.

“An exit into WTO at the stroke of midnight without the proper planning and 
preparation in place would be very serious for the UK economy. There are some 
signs that there is more conversation around that being an outcome. Our job is 
to demonstrate how difficult that would be because of all of these unanswered 
questions.”

While keen on a “implementation phase” with Europe, the CBI is also positive 
about prospects for a US trade deal. In the interview, carried out shortly 
before news of Donald Trump’s promise to do a deal with Britain, Fairbairn 
pointed out that the UK and US had a large reciprocal relationship with 
significant enough trade flows in either direction to ensure British interests 
were well reflected.

The risk of a disorderly Brexit has risen in recent days as EU27 leaders have 
insisted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/12/eu-law-will-continue-to-apply-in-uk-during-transition-deal>
 that even a transitional arrangement – to allow a trade deal to be negotiated 
after the two-year divorce talks have concluded – would still require the UK to 
adhere to rulings from the European court of justice in the interim.

May was widely reported on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/15/theresa-may-uk-is-prepared-to-accept-hard-brexit>
 to be preparing to call for a “clean and hard” Brexit when she makes her 
speech at Lancaster House this week, even though the government also still 
favours a transitional phase to avoid the cliff edge feared by business.

“We have been listening to what business is saying about the need for 
certainty wherever it can be brought,”wrote David Davis 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/comment/britain-will-shine-post-brexit-and-must-make-it-work-for-europe-too-xsx6jxgmz>
, the Brexit secretary, on Sunday. “That’s why, if it proves necessary, we have 
said we will consider time for implementation of new arrangements.”

National tensions exposed within Brexit Britain | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/16/national-tensions-exposed-within-brexit-britain>
But many in the Tory party believe such ambitions must be abandoned if they 
come at too high a political cost, not least to demonstrate tactically that 
Britain goes into negotiations with the option of walking away.

Michael Gove last week called for a “full Brexit, not fake Brexit” that would 
be completed “in months not years”. Even the relatively moderate chancellor, 
Philip Hammond, said this weekend in an interview with German press that the UK 
could aggressively compete with Europe on tax if it made a trade deal 
difficult, as ministers try to signal a harder-edged tone as the time for 
formal exit negotiations draws close.

For British business, the hardening of political opinion on both sides of the 
Channel is alarming, not least as theEU negotiator Michel Barnier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/13/eu-negotiator-wants-special-deal-over-access-to-city-post-brexit>
 and the Bank of England governor Mark Carney have spoken about the dangers of 
financial instability without a deal.

The CBI is calling on May to set open-trade with Europe as a priority when she 
makes her speech. “The idea of barrier-free access is an incredibly important 
principle for British business,” said Fairbairn. “Yes there may be a 
negotiation and yes, there may be trade-offs, but it is far too early for us to 
be saying in any way that these cease to be important and valid objectives for 
our economy.”

Though the business lobby is trying to seek constructive ways forward on 
Brexit, it also remains concerned at the continued anti-immigration rhetoric 
coming from politicians.

“We do have to be incredibly careful about the reputation of the UK around the 
world for openness and being a welcoming trading nation,” said Fairbairn. 
“There is no doubt that the world is watching. They are watching our every 
move.”

She said things had improved since talk of a register of foreign workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/05/government-faces-backlash-from-business-leaders-over-foreign-workers>
 made at Tory party conference and that business welcomed Downing Street 
distancing itself from new talk of a£1,000-per-worker immigration levy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/11/britain-considering-1000-a-year-levy-for-skilled-eu-workers-robert-goodwill>
 last week. “We are in a significantly better place, but we need to remain 
hugely alive to the interpretation that is going to be placed on what we might 
perceive as relatively small announcements,” said Fairbairn.

The CBI is also calling for urgent clarity on the government’s objectives 
before members start making irreversible decisions on relocation.

“The longer that we don’t have answers to key questions like ‘what’s the new 
immigration model going to be?’ and ‘what is the access to our main trading 
partner going to be like?’ business will be forced to make assumptions and that 
is why clarity matters so much,” said the director general. “The next three to 
six months will be vital for that.”
 