
The UK economy is on course for a solid finish to the year after activity in 
the services sector picked up and consumer spending continued to rise last 
month. But there were fresh signs of concern about inflation as the weak pound 
raises the cost of fuel and other imports.

A closely watched survey of firms in Britain’s dominant services sector, which 
spans banking to hotels, showed they enjoyed the fastest growth since January 
as they continued to recover from a short, sharp downturn following the Brexit 
vote. TheMarkit/CIPS UK services PMI 
<https://www.markiteconomics.com/Survey/PressRelease.mvc/5cc8d3c635dc45e09f8aa63bcad547a1>
 [pdf] report chimed with other indicators suggesting businesses and consumers 
have shrugged off the referendum result 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/22/the-brexit-economy-remarkable-resilience-as-spectre-of-inflation-looms>
 for now.

The survey’s compilers, Markit, said the economy was on course to grow 0.5% in 
the final three months of the year based on the service sector report and its 
polls of the smallerconstruction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/02/uk-construction-activity-costs-brexit-vote>
 andmanufacturing sectors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/01/manufacturing-growth-slows-as-weak-pound-pushes-up-prices>
 last week. That would matchthe pace of GDP growth in the third quarter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/25/gdp-growth-brexit-vote-ons-business-investment>
 and defy economists’ post-referendum warnings of a sharp slowdown this year.

Consumer and business confidence tumbles in November, surveys find
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/30/consumer-and-business-confidence-tumbles-in-november-surveys-find>
Separate figures from Barclaycard released on Tuesday showed consumer spending 
grew 5.1% in November, the second highest year-on-year increase since it 
started publishing data five years ago. That followedrecord growth of 5.5% in 
October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/cinemas-pubs-winter-clothes-consumer-spending-barclaycard>
.

The increase reflected an ongoing trend for people to spend money on meals out 
and cinema trips as well as the fact they had to pay more for essentials in 
November. Fuel prices were a big part of that, with spending on petrol up 11.7% 
on a year ago as a litre of unleaded petrol cost 116p, compared with 108p at 
this point in 2015.

The figures chime with warnings from economists and the Bank of England that 
higher inflation andlacklustre pay growth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/24/ifs-warnsf-biggest-squeeze-on-pay-for-70-years-autumn-statement>
 will squeeze living standards next year and could hit an economy that has so 
far proved resilient to the Brexit vote.

Commenting on the Barclaycard figures, its managing director, Paul Lockstone, 
said there had been a noticeable rise in the amount households were spending on 
necessities.

“Though there is little visible evidence of households yet being forced to 
decide between filling up the car or eating out with friends, the narrowing gap 
between essential and non-essential spend growth means they may need to look 
more carefully at how they allocate their cash once Christmas is out of the 
way,” said Lockstone.


The pound’s sharp fall since the Brexit vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2016/oct/30/a-weak-pound-is-no-tonic-for-uks-long-term-economic-recovery>
 has raised the cost of imports to the UK and services companies were also 
feeling the pressure of higher fuel prices last month as well as more expensive 
food imports and pricier business travel.

Markit’s poll of services companies showed those inflationary pressures 
combined with political uncertainty knocked business sentiment last month. It 
weakened for the first time since July, with companies also citing Donald 
Trump’s victory in the race for the US presidency as a fresh source of 
uncertainty.

But for now, companies in the sector are enjoying strong growth, with the weak 
pound helping to boost overseas demand. The headline reading on the services 
survey rose to 55.2 in November from 54.5 the month before. That beat 
economists’ forecasts for it to ease to 54.0 in a Reuters poll of economists. 
The index has now been above the 50-mark separating growth from contraction for 
four months.

Chris Williamson, the chief business economist at IHS Markit, commented: “The 
further upturn in the vast services sector shows that the pace of UK economic 
growth remains resiliently robust in the fourth quarter, despite ongoing 
uncertainty caused by Brexit.”

Retailers reported that the Black Friday sales event had also boosted sales 
for part of November. Figures from the British Retail Consortium showed 
non-food sales were about 40% higher in the week including Black Friday than in 
other weeks during the month.

Overall, like-for-like retail sales were up 0.6% in November on a year ago. 
BRC chief executive Helen Dickinson commented: “Consumer spending remains 
stable, although very much value-driven with a focus towards products on 
promotion.”
 