
Britain’s vote to leave the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/11/cameron-announces-he-will-step-down-after-pmqs-on-wednesday>
 has unleashed a wave of discrimination against UK researchers, with elite 
universities in the country coming under pressure to abandon collaborations 
with European partners.

In a confidential survey of the UK’s Russell Group universities, the Guardian 
found cases of British academics being asked to leave EU-funded projects or to 
step down from leadership roles because they are considered a financial 
liability.


In one case, an EU project officer recommended that a lead investigator drop 
all UK partners from a consortium because Britain’s share of funding could not 
be guaranteed. The note implied that if UK organisations remained on the 
project, which is due to start in January 2017, the contract signing would be 
delayed until Britain had agreed a fresh deal withEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.


The backlash against UK researchers began immediately after the June 
referendum when thefailure to plan for a post-Brexit Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jul/07/brexit-is-also-a-vote-against-the-elitism-in-science>
 cast serious doubts over the chances of British organisations winning future 
EU funding. British researchers receive about £1bn a year from EU finding 
programmes such as Horizon 2020, but access to the money must be completely 
renegotiated under Brexit.


The 24 universities in the Russell Group are regarded as Britain’s elite 
institutions. With Oxford, Cambridge, Edinburgh, University College London and 
Imperial College among their number, they are renowned for world-class research 
and academic excellence.


One leading university said anecdotal evidence that UK applicants were being 
dropped from EU bids came almost straight after the vote. Since then they had 
witnessed “a substantial increase in definitive evidence that EU projects are 
reluctant to be in collaboration with UK partners, and that potentially all new 
funding opportunities from Horizon 2020 are closing”.


It's not 'business as usual' until Brexit. UK scientists are already feeling 
the effects
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jul/12/its-not-business-as-usual-until-brexit-uk-scientists-are-already-feeling-the-effects>
Incidents reported by the universities suggest that researchers across the 
natural sciences, the engineering disciplines and social sciences are all 
affected. At least two social science collaborations with Dutch universities 
have been told UK partners are unwelcome, one Russell Group university said in 
the survey.


Speaking at Oxford’s Wolfson College last Friday, the university’s chancellor, 
Chris Patten, said Oxford received perhaps more research income than any 
European university, with about 40% coming from government. “Our research 
income will of course fall significantly after we have left the EU unless a 
Brexit government guarantees to cover the shortfall,” Lord Patten said.

The uncertainty over future funding for projects 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jul/11/referendum-academic-research-universities-eu-students-brexit>
 stands to harm research in other ways, the survey suggests. A number of 
institutions that responded said some researchers were reluctant to carry on 
with bids for EU funds because of the financial unknowns, while others did not 
want to be the weak link in a consortium. One university said it had serious 
concerns about its ability to recruit research fellows for current projects.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fuk-scientists-dropped-from-eu-projects-because-of-post-brexit-funding-fears%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0f07937ea250e74b8bc1e1073703ba0bb8b5da8%2F0_149_4900_2941%2F4900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20scientists%20dropped%20from%20EU%20projects%20because%20of%20post-Brexit%20funding%20fears&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fuk-scientists-dropped-from-eu-projects-because-of-post-brexit-funding-fears%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20scientists%20dropped%20from%20EU%20projects%20because%20of%20post-Brexit%20funding%20fears&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fuk-scientists-dropped-from-eu-projects-because-of-post-brexit-funding-fears%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0f07937ea250e74b8bc1e1073703ba0bb8b5da8%2F0_149_4900_2941%2F4900.jpg>
 Researchers in natural sciences, the engineering disciplines and social 
sciences are all affected. Photograph: Alamy 
Some Russell Group universities declined to comment for the survey, and not 
all of those which did knew of any discrimination against their researchers. 
Though one university said concerns over the impact of the referendum had 
become a part of almost every conversation about research, their academics were 
continuing with funding applications as usual.


A week after the referendum, science minister Jo Johnson told academics and 
industry figures he hadraised concerns over potential discrimination 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/30/uk-scientists-already-risk-exclusion-from-eu-projects-in-wake-of-brexit-vote-jo-johnson>
 against UK researchers with the EU science commissioner, Carlos Moedas. 
Johnson has asked a team at the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills 
to gather evidence for discrimination and urged organisations to report any 
incidents. Until the UK left the EU, he said the situation was “business as 
usual”.


Others see it differently. Joe Gorman, a senior scientist at Sintef, Norway’s 
leading research institute, said he believed UK industry and universities would 
see “a fairly drastic and immediate reduction in the number of invitations to 
join consortiums”.


Only 12% of bids for Horizon 2020 funds are successful, a rate that falls by 
more than half in highly competitive areas. Given the low probability of 
winning funds at the best of times, Gorman said it was natural risk aversion to 
be cautious of UK partners. In many cases, British organisations will not have 
a clue they have lost out. “If you don’t get invited to the party, you don’t 
even know there is a party,” he said.


Here's why science should take a seat at the Brexit negotiation table
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/political-science/2016/jul/12/heres-why-science-should-take-a-seat-at-the-brexit-negotiation-table>
“I strongly suspect that UK politicians simply don’t understand this, and 
think it is ‘business as usual’, at least until negotiations have been 
completed. They are wrong, the problems start right now,” he added. As a former 
European commission official, Gorman oversaw research projects and now advises 
universities and companies on how to succeed in EU-funded research programmes.


According to Gorman, the UK government must make a clear and immediate 
statement on how Britain will take part in future EU projects from outside the 
union. “All the talk is about when negotiations will start,” he said. “We don’t 
want that. People want to know now what is going to happen. This could all be 
solved by one pronouncement from one minister.”

Another obstacle British researchers face is the potential bias, whether 
conscious or not, of the independent evaluators who score applications for EU 
funding. Xavier Aubry at Zaz Ventures, a consultancy that works with 
consortiums to win Horizon 2020 funding, said Switzerland was discriminated 
against at the evaluation stage after its 2014 referendum to restrict 
immigration.


Aubry’s firm operates a “no win, no fee” policy, which has left him 
second-guessing how the evaluators will respond to the Brexit vote. “Right now 
the problem is that we don’t know how the evaluators will react, he said.” 
“Even if they are briefed that they should not discriminate, they could have 
unconscious biases.”

As a result, he thinks British organisations will have to bring more to the 
table to justify the risk of them being included in a consortium. “We are 
becoming more strict,” he said. “But we are not telling people to stop working 
with the UK.”

 