
Britain’s trade deficit  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/10/uk-trade-deficit-hits-new-record-of-24bn-pounds-eu-referendum-brexit>
in the months before the Brexit vote was narrower than first calculated after 
the government’s statistics agency uncovered a major mistake in monthly import 
and export data going back to 2015.

The multi-billion pound errors mean the UK appears to have relied slightly 
less on the “kindness of strangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/26/mark-carney-fails-to-rule-out-eight-year-term-at-bank-of-england>
” in the run up to the referendum.

Bank of England <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> 
governor Mark Carney used the phrase to highlight how Britain, to balance its 
books, depends on foreign investors to bridge the shortfall in the balance of 
payments with the rest of the world.

After the Office for National Statistics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/office-for-national-statistics> revised down 
the gap to 6% of gross domestic product (GDP) from 7%, Britain no longer 
chalked up a record deficit in the final three months of 2015. The downward 
revision continued into 2016.


Carney’s warning was widely seen as an intervention in the Brexit vote and 
revealed his concern that a no vote would worsen an already deteriorating 
situation.

But while the trade deficit was healthier than previously estimated before the 
referendum, the ONS found that a deteriorating picture emerged following the 
Brexit decision, with the figures in the three months to the end of September 
widening from an initial £11.1bn to a record £17bn.

Trade in goods and services is the largest component of a country’s current 
account balance.

“It’s a difficult area of the economy to measure, in fairness to the ONS, but 
these are big revisions and you get this unease in drawing firm conclusions on 
the external position of the UK,” said Investec economist Philip Shaw.

The current account deficit for 2015, while cut from an earlier 5.4% of GDP, 
was still the largest on record at 5%. The gap for the second quarter of 2016 
was revised down to 5.4% from 5.9%.

Former BoE deputy governor Charles Bean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/11/ons-recruit-data-analytics-apprentices-skills-criticism>
 said in a report earlier this year that many UK statistics were “deficient” 
and that the ONS needed to improve its capabilities.

The agency said revisions were due to a “processing error” in how it factored 
in trade in gold, part of a category known aserratics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/11/george-osborne-gets-mixed-economic-news-in-week-before-budget>
 – which also includes precious gems and aircraft – that can sometimes distort 
monthly trade figures due to unpredictable flows.

“Because the ‘erratics’ series is volatile, a total trade series that excludes 
erratics may provide a better guide to the emerging trade picture,” the ONS 
said.
 