
The British government has signalled its determination to stay close to Donald 
Trump’s administration by refusing to send a high-level delegation to the 
Middle East peace conference organised by the French government.

Neither a Foreign Office minister, nor the UK ambassador to France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, will be attending the meeting on 
Sunday.

Most large EU countries have sent their foreign minister, and the British 
approach may hint at future UK policy choices. The French regard the conference 
as a vital chance to reaffirm the case for anegotiated two-state solution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/28/the-two-state-solution-in-the-middle-east-all-you-need-to-know>
 between the Israelis and Palestinians.

Trump’s transition team reportedly told French diplomats they disapproved of 
the conference going ahead, seeing it as an attempt toput unfair pressure on 
Israel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/12/netanyahu-middle-east-peace-conference-rigged-move-against-israel-paris-trump>
 and give an unjustified reward to the Palestinians. The British government 
likely fears that the conference risks becoming a means to circumscribe future 
US policy on Israel before the Trump team has decided this.

White House races to save Middle East peace process before Trump takes office
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/27/obama-and-allies-seek-to-isolate-netanyahu-before-trump-takes-office>
It is a primary tenet of UK foreign policy that the “special relationship” 
with the US iscritical to the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/10/concerns-over-special-relationship-allayed-as-may-speaks-to-trump>
, and with Britain expected to leave the EU within two years, the government 
may feel an even greater need not to alienate Trump.

The US president-elect has promised to be more pro-Israel and disapproved of 
theObama administration’s refusal to veto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/28/kerry-defends-us-decision-to-not-veto-un-condemnation-of-israeli-settlements>
 a groundbreaking UN security council resolution in Decembercondemning illegal 
Israeli settlements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/27/mahmoud-abbas-un-resolution-lays-groundwork-to-end-israeli-settlements>
.

The conference is being attended by the outgoing US secretary of state, John 
Kerry <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/john-kerry>, who travelled from 
Vietnam to be at the meeting, five days before Trump’s inauguration.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fparis-conference-last-gasp-breath-yesterdays-world-netanyahu-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paris%20conference%20is%20%E2%80%98last%20gasp%20for%20breath%20from%20yesterday's%20world%E2%80%99%2C%20says%20Netanyahu%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fparis-conference-last-gasp-breath-yesterdays-world-netanyahu-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paris%20conference%20is%20%E2%80%98last%20gasp%20for%20breath%20from%20yesterday%27s%20world%E2%80%99%2C%20says%20Netanyahu%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fparis-conference-last-gasp-breath-yesterdays-world-netanyahu-video&media=>
Paris conference is ‘last gasp for breath from yesterday’s world’, says 
Netanyahu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2017/jan/15/paris-conference-last-gasp-breath-yesterdays-world-netanyahu-video>
The list of attendees released by the French foreign ministry to the 
long-planned conference includes 36 foreign ministers, as well as Ahmed 
Aboul-Gheit, the secretary general of the Arab League, and the EU foreign 
affairs representative, Federica Mogherini.

The list includes the German foreign minister, Frank-Walter Steinmeier, as 
well as the Irish, Italian, Dutch, Polish, Portuguese, Turkish and Swedish 
foreign ministers. In total, 74 delegations were scheduled to attend the 
conference and hear a speech by the French president, François Hollande.

The UK, according to the list, is represented by Michael Howells, a diplomat 
who heads the Middle East desk at the Foreign Office, and two advisers to the 
UK ambassador to France, Edward Llewellyn.

The Guardian view on Trump and Israel: stick to the script | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/11/the-guardian-view-on-trump-and-israel-stick-to-the-script>
The foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, sidestepped questions in the House of 
Commons last week about whether he would be going to the conference.

Although the UK voted for the UN resolution condemning illegal Israeli 
settlements, andplayed a role in drafting it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/28/uks-key-role-in-brokering-un-resolution-on-israeli-settlements-confirmed>
,Downing Street unusually distanced itself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/29/theresa-may-john-kerry-comments-israel-palestine-un-resolution>
 from Kerry after his subsequent speech criticising the Israeli government for 
being the most rightwing in the country’s history.

The incoming US administration is sending mixed signals about its policy on 
Israel, with Trump supporting the transfer of the US embassyfrom Tel Aviv to 
Jerusalem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/21/us-israel-embassy-jerusalem-peace-process>
, a highly controversial move that would underline the incoming president’s 
belief that Israel has the right to claim the disputed city as its capital. His
nominee as defense secretary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/01/james-mattis-secretary-of-defense-donald-trump>
, James Mattis, has said he sees no case for changing the way in which the US 
is represented in Israel.
 