
The amount spent by shoppers using contactless cards and devices soared by 
164% last year, in another record-breaking year for increasingly popular “touch 
and go” payments.

Half of Britons now pay by contactless payments at least once a month, 
according to the Barclaycard contactless spending index, while one in five 
(21%) are planning to increase their usage next year. The figures relate to 
payments handled byBarclaycard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/29/put-it-plastic-barclaycard-uk-first-credit-card-50-1966>
, which processes £1 of every £3 spent using payment cards in the UK.

Overall, London continues to lead the way for contactless usage, with almost 
half (47%) of all eligible transactions (up to the £30 limit) now being 
contactless – up from three in 10 in 2014. Spending in Manchester rose more 
than any other UK city – climbing 325% – with Glasgow, Blackpool, Hull and 
Edinburgh also seeing significant increases.

The UK’s pubs and bars enjoyed brisk trade with contactless payments surging 
79%, and technology such asBarclaycard’s “Pay @ Pump” self-pouring beer pump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/16/contactless-beer-pump-worlds-first-london-bar>
 is likely to mean more people paying for drinks in this way.

The news comes as the industry body the UK Cards Association (UKCA), reveals 
thatthe number of contactless debit and credit cards 
<http://www.theukcardsassociation.org.uk/news/CESOct2016news.asp> in the UK now 
tops 100m. A total of £2.8bn was spent using contactless cards in October – up 
0.8% on September, with a record monthly spend of £55bn using plastic, the 
majority of which was on debit cards.

Tami Hargreaves, commercial director of digital consumer payments at 
Barclaycard, said: “As our data shows, Brits are turning to these payments for 
all types of purchases, from a supermarket top-up shop to stocking up on 
everyday essentials in discount stores and pharmacies.”

The increasing popularity of mobile payments and wearable devices such as the 
Apple Watch had also contributed to the surge in contactless payments, she 
added.

Contactless payment technology is being trialled for the first time in a scarf 
– by the merchant payment specialist Card Cutters – to help ease the Christmas 
shopping queues this festive period. Working the same way as contactless debit 
or credit cards, the“Swish and Pay” scarf 
<https://www.card-cutters.co.uk/contactless-clothing-making-festive-sales-much-easier/>
 is designed for the consumer already laden with bags at the checkout. Rather 
than rummaging for their wallet or purse, the consumer just drapes their scarf 
over the card terminal to make a swift and easy purchase.

The scarf uses the near field communication (NFC) technology used in debit and 
credit cards built into the material.
 