
Britain is to pay out Â£19.9m in costs and compensation to more than 5,000 
elderly Kenyans who suffered torture and abuse during the Mau Mau uprising in 
the 1950s, the foreign secretary,William Hague 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/williamhague>, has said.

Hague told the House of Commons that the payment was being made in "full and 
final settlement" of a high court action brought by five of the victims who 
suffered under the British colonial administration.

"We understand the pain and the grief felt by those who were involved in the 
events of emergency inKenya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/kenya>. The 
British government recognises that Kenyans were subjected to torture and other 
forms of ill-treatment at the hands of the colonial administration," he said.

"The British government sincerely regrets that these abuses took place and 
that they marred Kenya's progress to independence.Torture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/torture> and ill-treatment are abhorrent 
violations of human dignity which we unreservedly condemn."

Hague said Britain would also support the construction of a memorial in the 
Kenyan capital, Nairobi, to the victims of torture and abuse during the 
colonial era.

Hague told MPs that 5,228 Kenyans would receive compensation under the terms 
of the settlement agreed with their solicitors, Leigh Day.

He stressed that the government continued to deny liability for the actions of 
the colonial administration and indicated it would defend claims brought from 
other former British colonies.

"We do not believe that this settlement establishes a precedent in relation to 
any other former British colonial administration," he said.

The announcement was warmly welcomed by Martyn Day, senior partner at Leigh 
Day.

"I take my hat off to Mr Hague for having the courage to make today's 
statement and to announce this settlement with our clients," he said.

"These crimes were committed by British colonial officials and have gone 
unrecognised and unpunished for decades. They included castration, rape and 
repeated violence of the worst kind. Although they occurred many years ago, the 
physical and mental scars remain.

"The elderly victims of torture now at last have the recognition and justice 
they have sought for many years. For them, the significance of this moment 
cannot be over-emphasised."

The settlement comes after a lengthy legal battle between a number of elderly 
victims and the British government.

The Mau Mau <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mau-mau> movement emerged in 
central Kenya during the 1950s to take back seized land and push for an end to 
colonial rule.

Supporters were detained in camps and thousands were tortured, maimed or 
executed.

Last year the high court ruled that three Kenyans tortured during the unrest 
could pursue their compensation claims against the government.

The Foreign Office had attempted to thwart the bid, claiming the actions were 
brought outside the legal time limit and there were "irredeemable difficulties" 
in relation to the availability of witnesses and documents.

It did not dispute they suffered "torture and other ill-treatment at the hands 
of the colonial administration".

Lawyers for Wambugu Wa Nyingi, Paulo Muoka Nzili and Jane Muthoni Mara argued 
that it was an exceptional case in which the judge should exercise his 
discretion in their favour.
 