
The prospect of ultra-low interest rates persisting for years to come has been 
conjured up by a leadingBank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> policymaker after 
a further fall in oil prices and shares in London sinking to their lowest level 
since late 2012.

Gertjan Vlieghe, one of the nine members of Threadneedle Street’s monetary 
policy committee, the body that sets the official cost of borrowing, said debt, 
demographics and distribution of income could all depress interest rates.


In his first speech 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx> since 
becoming a member of the MPC, Vlieghe said policymakers should not assume “the 
future will look like the past” and must “be prepared for the possibility that 
real interest rates will remain well below their historical average for a very 
long time”.

Global economic turmoil to dominate Davos discussions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/17/global-economic-turmoil-dominate-davos>
The closure of Wall Street for the Martin Luther King public holiday meant a 
quieter day on financial markets before growth news from China overnight. 
London’sFTSE <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ftse> 100 Index fell 24 
points to 5,779.9.

Market expectations that the official lifting of sanctions against Iran will 
lead to an increase in the supply of oil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/18/oil-price-dips-below-28-to-13-year-low-as-markets-brace-for-iranian-supply>
triggered a fresh decline in the cost of crude. At one stage in early trading 
in London, Brent crude fell to $27.67 a barrel before recovering to $28.80 by 
the close.

“Iran’s return to the oil market has been on the agenda for some time and 
therefore does not really come as any great surprise,” a Commerzbank senior 
analyst, Carsten Fritsch, said. “Nonetheless, prices were bound to react 
negatively in the short term in view of the negative market sentiment.”

The oil price has fallen by more than $85 dollars a barrel from its recent 
peak of $115 a barrel in August 2014, leading to lower inflation and less 
pressure on central banks to raise interest rates.

Vlieghe said there were also longer-term factors helping to keep borrowing 
costs low. Higher levels of debt would make interest rates less effective in 
raising spending levels; a longer-living population would be saving more for 
future retirement; and a more unequal distribution of income might amplify the 
effects of rising debt.

The MPC member said it was not hard to imagine a world in which all three Ds 
interacted. “A high debt economy faces headwinds and needs lower interest 
rates. A high debt economy with adverse demographic trends needs even lower 
interest rates. And a high debt economy with adverse demographic trends and 
higher inequality ... well, you get the picture.”

In March, the MPC will have held interest rates unchanged at 0.5% for seven 
years, and with only one member, Ian McCafferty, voting for an increase at its
meeting in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/14/bank-of-england-keeps-interest-rates-hold-mpc>
, the City now believes it will be late 2016 or early 2017 before borrowing 
costs rise.

Mark Carney, the Bank’s governor, will give his views on the state of the 
economy in a speech on Tuesday but Vlieghe made it clear he was in no hurry to 
vote for an increase. “If I were confident that, over the next few years, 
policy rates would have to rise significantly to match historical averages of 
real interest rates, I would be looking for the first possible opportunity to 
raise rates, to avoid having to raise them very sharply in the next few years.

“But I am not confident of that at all. Rather, I think it is plausible that 
the appropriate real interest rate for the economy might be very low for years 
to come. So policy rates, when they rise, may not need to rise by much over the 
coming years. These medium-term considerations make me relatively more patient 
before raising rates.”

The MPC has been expecting the steady decline in the UK’s jobless total to 
start pushing up the level of pay, but Vlieghe said he saw little evidence that 
this was happening. “In order to be confident enough of the medium-term 
inflation outlook to raise the bank rate, I would like to see evidence that 
growth is not slowing further, and that a broad range of indicators related to 
inflation are generally on an upward trajectory from their current low levels,” 
he said.

“I do not see convincing evidence yet of upward momentum in pay pressures. 
With growth still slowing, and inflation pressures either easing outright or 
disappointing relative to forecasts, I do not believe the conditions are in 
place to warrant a rise in the bank rate.”
 