
The head of the UN’s climate fund has hailed a “paradigm shift” as poor 
countries began receiving money to help them tackle global warming, weeks 
before climate talks take place in Paris.

The Green Climate Fund (GCF) is intended to be the major conduit for funding 
to flow from wealthy economies built on fossil fuels to those that willsuffer 
most from climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/mar/31/climate-change-poor-suffer-most-un-report>
 they did not cause.

On Friday at its board meeting in Zambia, the fund released $183m (£122m) for 
eight projects in Asia, Africa and Latin America.

The executive director, Hela Cheikhrouhou, said the symbolic significance of 
getting the fund up and running before the Paris talks outweighed the 
relatively tiny amount released. “It is a very important step forward in the 
global effort to fight climate change,” she said.

Everything you need to know about the Paris climate summit and UN talks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/02/everything-you-need-to-know-about-the-paris-climate-summit-and-un-talks>
Many developing countries have indicated that their commitments to cut 
emissions are conditional on support from wealthy nations. The developed world 
has agreed that poor countries should receive $100bn a year by 2020, but have 
so far pledged just $10.2bn to the GCF.

Saleemul Huq, director of the International Centre for Climate Change and 
Development, said he was disappointed that when the climate finance floodgates 
had finally been thrown open, just a trickle had emerged. “At this pace it will 
take them years to disburse the funds they already have with them, let alone 
$100bn a year in five years from now,” he said.

Cheikhrouhou said assessing projects took time and she was hopeful that 
significantly more funding would be released at the next board meeting in March.

The successful projects had been chosen because they had the potential to be 
“truly transformational”, said the former investment banker. The awards include 
$23.6m to fight water shortages in the low-lying atolls of the Maldives and 
$217m of green bonds (not included in the $183m total) for energy efficiency 
projects in Latin America.

Funding to cut energy use lags far behind clean energy investment, but 
Cheikhrouhou said the bonds could kick start an energy efficiency boom in Latin 
America. “That’s what we mean by paradigm shift. It’s something that has a good 
chance to change the picture of how we invest on a day-to-day basis,” she said.

A key challenge confronting the fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/sep/04/climate-change-western-states-fail-to-fulfil-pledges-to-developing-countries>
 is the refusal of the US Congress to release any of the $3bn promised last 
year by the Obama administration. But Cheikhrouhou said the US delegate to the 
GCF had said talks with congressional Republicans, whose colleagues have 
attacked the GCF as a“slush fund” 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/politics/articles/2014-11-07/election-puts-obama-climate-pledge-at-risk-on-summit-eve>
, were progressing and some money could be released when the budget is 
finalised in December.

Julie Bishop wants to co-chair Green Climate Fund derided by Tony Abbott
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/31/julie-bishop-wants-to-co-chair-green-climate-fund-derided-by-tony-abbott>
The meeting also elected new co-chairs from South Africa and Australia. It is 
the second time the Australian delegate, Ewen McDonald, will co-chair the 
board, despite the former Australian prime minister Tony Abbottpreviously 
deriding the fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/dec/10/green-climate-fund-200m-australia-tony-abbott-about-turn>
.

“This is a continuation of a good engagement by the Australian 
administration,” said Cheikhrouhou, who would not comment on the country’s
widely maligned climate policies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/05/australia-has-forfeited-world-leadership-on-climate-policy-says-kofi-annan-panel>
.

A statement 
<http://foreignminister.gov.au/releases/Pages/2015/jb_mr_151106.aspx> from the 
office of the Australian foreign minister, Julie Bishop, said: “Australia is 
seen as a pragmatic, constructive and results-focused member of the Green 
Climate Fund.” .
 