
The UN’s free speech advocate has warned that British government plans to 
enforce age verification and some censorship of pornographic websites risk 
breaking international human rights law and would contribute to a “significant 
tightening of control over the internet”.

David Kaye, the special rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the 
right to freedom of opinion and expression, called on ministers to conduct a 
comprehensive review of the digital economy bill, which he said facilitated 
state surveillance and lacked judicial oversight.


The bill, intended to regulate a range of issues relating to the internet and 
electronic records, also includes measures to increase data sharing between 
government departments and protect intellectual property.

But it is the measures to control pornography that have sparked an outcry amid 
fears that they will will create a database of internet users’ sexual 
proclivities and roll back Britain’s censorship regime to the pre-internet era. 
If the bill passes it willoutlaw the depiction online of a range of 
legal-to-perform sex acts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/23/censor-non-conventional-sex-acts-online-internet-pornography>
.

Its passage is highly likely, with support in parliament from both Labour and 
the Conservatives, andonly the Liberal Democrats indicating they will oppose it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/28/lib-dems-to-oppose-uk-plan-to-block-porn-sites-without-age-checks>
.

Kaye’s objections focus on the risk posed by age verification requirements to 
individuals’ privacy. In a letter to the UK’s ambassador to the UN, he says he 
is concerned that the new rules “fall short of the standards of international 
human rights law”.

“I am concerned that the age verification provisions give the government 
access to information of viewing habits and citizen data,” Kaye writes, 
pointing out that under rules introduced elsewhere in the bill the data could 
be shared across government and the private sector without consent.

“Identity disclosure requirements in law allow authorities to more easily 
identify persons, eradicating anonymous expression,” he goes on, adding that 
such anonymity has been “one of the most important advances facilitated by the 
internet”.

Kaye says he is also concerned by the lack of judicial oversight given to the 
role of the age verification regulator, which will be empowered to block 
websites it judges to have insufficient adequate age checks or which host 
content that would not be passed for UK DVD release.

“Finally, I express concern at the cumulative effect of the digital economy 
bill and theInvestigatory Powers Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/19/extreme-surveillance-becomes-uk-law-with-barely-a-whimper>
,” Kaye writes. “Together, these two pieces of legislation constitute a 
significant tightening control over the internet in the UK.

“Therefore, while I am cognisant of the need to protect children against 
harmful content, I am concerned that the provisions under the bill are not an 
effective way for achieving this objective as they fall short of the standards 
of international human rights law.

“The bill contains insufficient procedures without adequate oversight, overly 
broad definitions and lack of data-sharing safeguards that unduly interferes 
with the rights of freedom of expression and privacy.”

Jim Killock, the executive director of the Open Rights Group 
<https://www.openrightsgroup.org/>, which has campaigned against the digital 
economy bill, welcomed Kaye’s comments, which come ahead of House of Lords 
committee hearings on the bill expected later this month.

“This bill creates huge problems of surveillance and privacy violations,” he 
said. “We hope the Lords take note of this letter as they try to deal with this 
extremely messy, badly thought out bill. The age verification scheme is almost 
certain to go badly wrong as things stand.”

The Conservative MP Claire Perry accused Kaye of using emotive language and 
said his intervention “really clouds the issue and distracts from an important 
principle”.

A spokesperson for the Department for Culture, Media and Sport, which is 
behind the bill, said: “These measures will ensure children have the same 
protections online as they do offline. There is no question of the government 
collecting data on viewing habits and we are in discussions with the 
Information Commissioner’s Office to make sure data protection standards are 
complied with.”
 