
A global shift towards a vegan diet is vital to save the world from hunger, 
fuel poverty and the worst impacts of climate change,a UN report said today 
<http://www.unep.org/resourcepanel/Portals/24102/PDFs/PriorityProductsAndMaterials_Report.pdf>
.

As the global population surges towards a predicted 9.1 billion people by 
2050, western tastes for diets rich in meat and dairy products are 
unsustainable, says the report from United Nations Environment Programme’s 
(UNEP)international panel of sustainable resource management 
<http://www.uneptie.org/scp/lifecycle/documents/Presentations/The%20Role%20of%20the%20International%20Panel%20on%20Sustainable%20Resource%20Management%20(Janet%20Salem).pdf>
.

It says: “Impacts from agriculture are expected to increase substantially due 
to population growth increasing consumption of animal products. Unlike fossil 
fuels, it is difficult to look for alternatives: people have to eat. A 
substantial reduction of impacts would only be possible with a substantial 
worldwide diet change, away from animal products.”

Professor Edgar Hertwich, the lead author of the report, said: “Animal 
products cause more damage than [producing] construction minerals such as sand 
or cement, plastics or metals. Biomass and crops for animals are as damaging as 
[burning] fossil fuels.”

The recommendation follows advice last year that a vegetarian diet was better 
for the planet from Lord Nicholas Stern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2009/oct/26/palm-oil-initiative-carbon-emissions>
, former adviser to the Labour government on the economics of climate change. 
Dr Rajendra Pachauri, chair of the UN’s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC), has alsourged people to observe one meat-free day a week to curb 
carbon emissions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2008/sep/07/food.foodanddrink>.

The panel of experts ranked products, resources, economic activities and 
transport according to their environmental impacts.Agriculture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/agriculture> was on a par with fossil fuel 
consumption because both rise rapidly with increased economic growth, they said.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Do you have to be a vegan to help fix climate change? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/video/2015/jul/08/vegan-climate-change-video>
Ernst von Weizsaecker, an environmental scientist who co-chaired the panel, 
said: “Rising affluence is triggering a shift in diets towards meat and dairy 
products - livestock now consumes much of the world’s crops and by inference a 
great deal of freshwater, fertilisers and pesticides.”

Both energy and agriculture need to be “decoupled” from economic growth 
because environmental impacts rise roughly 80% with a doubling of income, the 
report found.

Achim Steiner, the UN under-secretary general and executive director of the 
UNEP, said: “Decoupling growth from environmental degradation is the number one 
challenge facing governments in a world of rising numbers of people, rising 
incomes, rising consumption demands and the persistent challenge of poverty 
alleviation.”

The panel, which drew on numerous studies including the Millennium ecosystem 
assessment <http://www.millenniumassessment.org/en/index.aspx>, cites the 
following pressures on the environment as priorities for governments around the 
world: climate change, habitat change, wasteful use of nitrogen and phosphorus 
in fertilisers, over-exploitation of fisheries, forests and other resources, 
invasive species, unsafe drinking water and sanitation, lead exposure, urban 
air pollution and occupational exposure to particulate matter.

Agriculture, particularly meat and dairy products, accounts for 70% of global 
freshwater consumption, 38% of the total land use and 19% of the world’s 
greenhouse gas emissions, says the report, which has been launched to coincide 
with UN World Environment day on Saturday.

Last year the UN’s Food and Agriculture Organisation said that food production 
would have to increase globally by 70% by 2050 
<http://www.fao.org/news/story/en/item/35571/icode/>to feed the world’s surging 
population. The panel says that efficiency gains in agriculture will be 
overwhelmed by the expected population growth.

Prof Hertwich, who is also the director of the industrial ecology programme at 
the Norwegian University of Science and Technology, said that developing 
countries – where much of this population growth will take place – must not 
follow the western world’s pattern of increasing consumption: “Developing 
countries should not follow our model. But it’s up to us to develop the 
technologies in, say, renewable energy or irrigation methods.”
 