
The more you dig into the payday loan industry, the muckier it gets. While 
researching a story on the brokers squeezing poor households for barely-legal 
fees (on top of the absurd interest rates) what has repelled me most is finding 
out about the “ping tree”. It is an anodyne phrase, made up by software 
developers, but behind it lies systematic exploitation of the poorest people 
that is quite breathtakingly rapacious and amoral.

It works like this. Let’s say John is broke and desperate for cash. He has 
probably taken payday loans in the past. He taps “instant cash” or “loan now” 
into Google. Up pop scores of adverts, all offering “money paid to you” in a 
matter of minutes.

But what John doesn’t know, as he fills in his details online, is that the 
site is just a lead generator for other lenders. Now the “ping tree” begins.

John’s details are instantly pinged over to the real lenders. The first bite 
goes to those that have agreed to pay the most commission to the broker, often 
as much as £75.

But maybe these lenders don’t bite (perhaps they already have loans out to 
John) so his details are then passed down the tree, to others prepared to pay, 
say £25, for John’s application.

If none of them take him, the lead generator sells it on to the buyers at the 
bottom of the tree – another bunch of “brokers”. These charge a fee to John, of 
around £50-£75, even if they don’t find him a loan. They then sell on his bank 
details to as many as 200 other sites.

The “ping tree” turns the meaning of “brokerage” on its head. Broking is a 
business where the agent is supposed to try to find you the best deal. Instead, 
the lead generator brokers shove you over to the highest commission payer, 
likely to be the very worst deal in the market.

The likes of uSwitch and Confused have come in for stick, but they are 
paragons of virtue compared to this mob.

I’m told by one of the biggest payday lenders that nearly half of all the 
loans granted come through loan introducers. So we are talking about hundreds 
of thousands, if not millions, of individuals. What’s more, some of the 
“brokers” are just fronts for lenders. The “deal” they find after “searching 
the market” is always the same.

Stella Creasy, who has admirably campaigned against these companies, calls 
payday loan sites the “velociraptors” of the financial services world.

She has been instrumental in forcing lenders to scale back their use of 
“continuous payment authority”, the crucial weapon payday merchants use to raid 
accounts. Once you have given over your bank details and signed the “terms and 
conditions” they are free to bombard the person’s bank account with demands for 
payment – often 10 or 20 times a day. These are always first thing in the 
morning to capture money as it comes into the account from other sources, such 
as welfare benefit payments. Payday lenders are supposed to keep CPA requests 
to a maximum of two a day, although it’s evident from my research this week 
that some brokers are flouting this rule.

Why don’t the banks just cut them off at source? It’s an obvious question, but 
like the “ping tree”, when you delve into the payments system what emerges is a 
very complex picture.

Your bank does not contract directly with a firm trying to take payment from 
you. The payday lender or broker does a deal with a “merchant acquirer” such as 
WorldPay or Barclaycard. They then funnel the request for payment through Visa 
or Mastercard, which pass it on to your bank. NatWest is asking the likes of 
WorldPay to blacklist the worst brokers, but they then simply go overseas and 
find another merchant acquirer.

There is a simple way to blow this industry apart. Make it illegal to charge 
more than 100% APR interest rates, and the entire business model collapses. 
Until the government (astonishingly Labour rejected calls for rate caps) impose 
caps, this most ugly of industries will continue to thrive.

p.collinson@theguardian.com
 