
Some huge reveals this week as the slow-burner hots up. Disparate strands are 
starting to connect as we try to make sense of David Walker’s life – and the 
core four are all put through the wringer as Cassie and Sunny make excellent 
progress in the case of the suitcase Tory.


The investigation

We know David Walker a lot better now after some tenacious excavation work 
from Cassie’s team. Busting his hump working in clubs and nightclubs, David 
enthusiastically frequented sex workers and Conservative party fundraisers in 
the 80s. He also struggled with depression and drinking, likely as a result of 
childhood abuse from a primary school teacher. When he was last seen alive, 
David was on his way to meet a potential party donor. Before he went missing he 
had spoken to his best friend about going to the police to report the crimes 
and perhaps even confront his abuser.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Funforgotten-series-two-episode-two-recap-the-case-of-the-dead-tory-hots-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8bdc3bfe2bc64376e54d3169f62039bc1c2d5645%2F0_0_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Unforgotten%20series%20two%2C%20episode%20two%20recap%20%E2%80%93%20the%20case%20of%20the%20dead%20Tory%20hots%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Funforgotten-series-two-episode-two-recap-the-case-of-the-dead-tory-hots-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Unforgotten%20series%20two%2C%20episode%20two%20recap%20%E2%80%93%20the%20case%20of%20the%20dead%20Tory%20hots%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Funforgotten-series-two-episode-two-recap-the-case-of-the-dead-tory-hots-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8bdc3bfe2bc64376e54d3169f62039bc1c2d5645%2F0_0_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
 Cassie plays an impressive game of pager Hangman. Photograph: ITV 
We also have Colin Osborne appearing in David’s desk diary a few weeks before 
his death, along with the phone number to his swanky flat in Tower Bridge. 
Following an impressive game of pager Hangman, an address in King’s Cross is 
linked to Sara.

Cassie Stuart: mail bandit

Cassie has always struggled to remove her detective hat when she gets home, 
something demonstrated again here when she grills Martin about the train 
tickets to Winchester she finds in his jeans pocket. He denies everything, but 
he’s a terrible liar. All Cassie has to do is illegally open his mail, 
violating the sacred trust between father and daughter, and his laughable 
“pitch-and-putt with Bob and Gem” alibi is dust. Never let this guy undergo 
interrogation.

Seriously though, Cassie needs to back off. What is she playing at?

DI Tessa Nixon

“No we didn’t row about it, the row didn’t get out of hand and I didn’t 
accidentally fucking kill him.”

This is what I like about Tessa – she gets straight to the point. Coppers make 
the worst suspects; they’re forever thinking what you’re thinking.

Tensions are rising at home, with Paul struggling to juggle the demands of 
Tessa and his daughter Becca. At work, Tessa’s boss asks her to accept 
restricted duties. She resents this massively and refuses to take the offer 
voluntarily, risking a formal suspension. As her increasingly agitated son 
Jason threatens to tailspin, the chances of that peaceful retirement are 
looking increasingly remote for Tessa.

Colin Osborne 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Funforgotten-series-two-episode-two-recap-the-case-of-the-dead-tory-hots-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faaa3ac3ec289f122190cd7d7eb1a02b107f9e6ef%2F0_0_6000_4000%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Unforgotten%20series%20two%2C%20episode%20two%20recap%20%E2%80%93%20the%20case%20of%20the%20dead%20Tory%20hots%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Funforgotten-series-two-episode-two-recap-the-case-of-the-dead-tory-hots-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Unforgotten%20series%20two%2C%20episode%20two%20recap%20%E2%80%93%20the%20case%20of%20the%20dead%20Tory%20hots%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Funforgotten-series-two-episode-two-recap-the-case-of-the-dead-tory-hots-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faaa3ac3ec289f122190cd7d7eb1a02b107f9e6ef%2F0_0_6000_4000%2F6000.jpg>
 Is this entire mess Colin’s fault? Photograph: ITV 
The colour drains from Colin’s face as Cassie and Sunny turn up. David’s photo 
prompts a flashback to what looks like an 80s party bursting with ambition, 
cocaine and beautiful people. He gives the least convincing denial since 
Cassie’s father last opened his mouth and claims no recollection of David.

He does level with them over his shameful past as a banker though, something 
he gave up in early 1990, around the time of David’s death. Cassie is 
nonetheless impressed with his pro bono work.

“You obviously have a desire to give something back.”

Well yeah, there’s that £5,000 he’s donating to a struggling addict couple for 
example. He finally confesses all to his husband Simon – Range Rovergate and 
Tyler’s subsequent blackmail.

“I thought your temper issues were in the past now,” says Simon, not realising 
that this isUnforgotten <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/unforgotten> 
where the past is forever catching up with you to key the Range Rover of your 
happiness.

They agree that handing over the money is the least worse option, but Simon 
knows perfectly well that this is a Hail Mary pass and that this entire mess is 
Colin’s fault.

Marion Kelsey

We don’t spend too much time with Marion this week but when we do it’s pretty 
miserable. After getting a mild dressing down from management for her private 
talks with Zoe she takes it out on her husband Tony, suspecting that he gave 
her up. Tony, apparently infinitely patient, is just concerned that her old 
mental health problems are resurfacing. With work, her domineering sister and 
her infertility issues Marion is spinning a lot of plates – and that’s before 
we get to whatever her connection with David Walker is.

Sara Mahmoud
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Funforgotten-series-two-episode-two-recap-the-case-of-the-dead-tory-hots-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F379cdf58806621934464e9d9bc12ee59539430aa%2F0_50_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Unforgotten%20series%20two%2C%20episode%20two%20recap%20%E2%80%93%20the%20case%20of%20the%20dead%20Tory%20hots%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Funforgotten-series-two-episode-two-recap-the-case-of-the-dead-tory-hots-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Unforgotten%20series%20two%2C%20episode%20two%20recap%20%E2%80%93%20the%20case%20of%20the%20dead%20Tory%20hots%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Funforgotten-series-two-episode-two-recap-the-case-of-the-dead-tory-hots-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F379cdf58806621934464e9d9bc12ee59539430aa%2F0_50_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
 We had better pray the mosque regulars never find out what Sara was up to in 
the 80s. Photograph: ITV 
The week starts off promisingly for Sara when she secures a second interview 
for the job at Highbrook school. That’s as good as it gets unfortunately as the 
hits keep on coming for her after that. She butts heads with the patriarchy at 
the mosque as her Make Women’s Prayer Space Equal to Men’s petition is taken 
down.

We had better pray the mosque regulars never find out what she was up to in 
the 80s. Sara’s past as a sex worker is the big revelation of the episode, and 
there’s strong work from Badria Timimi in the scene where Cassie and Sunny 
confront her.

When shown his photo, Sara flashes back to an encounter with David but 
immediately denies all knowledge. It lacks conviction, but it’s still one of 
the more convincing denials this week. She claims to have been travelling when 
David went missing which will count her out as the killer if it checks out.

Sara’s friend Samira remembers her fondly and says she was always too good for 
sex work. It seems clear that something prompted her downward spiral. So what 
put her in the “very dark place” for her year of living dangerously?

Notes and observations
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Funforgotten-series-two-episode-two-recap-the-case-of-the-dead-tory-hots-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2be5e065a9d576d281c49a104750d34c646373d6%2F0_0_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Unforgotten%20series%20two%2C%20episode%20two%20recap%20%E2%80%93%20the%20case%20of%20the%20dead%20Tory%20hots%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Funforgotten-series-two-episode-two-recap-the-case-of-the-dead-tory-hots-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Unforgotten%20series%20two%2C%20episode%20two%20recap%20%E2%80%93%20the%20case%20of%20the%20dead%20Tory%20hots%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Funforgotten-series-two-episode-two-recap-the-case-of-the-dead-tory-hots-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2be5e065a9d576d281c49a104750d34c646373d6%2F0_0_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
 Cassie and Sunny’s back-and-forth is never showy but always authentic. 
Photograph: ITV 
I get the feeling that the excesses of the 1980s will be on trial here in the 
same way the excesses of the 1970s were in series one.

Here’s a theory: Sara and David were abused by the same primary school 
teacher, many years apart. David frequented sex workers and a chance encounter 
with Sara led them to share their experiences. They formulated a plan to 
confront their abuser, Sara went travelling, David couldn’t wait for her 
return, persisted alone and got killed as a result.

The Raglan Way, Highgate address is likely to be Marion’s given that she is 
the only character not currently linked to David.

Are the snatched conversations between Jason and downstairs Cath the basis for 
a future happily-ever-after? She’s the mousy manic pixie dream girl right under 
his nose – if only he would notice her!

Are you buying that Tessa joined the police force because she was so impressed 
with the officers on her husband’s case? It’s not unthinkable but she strikes 
me as the calculating type, one who might have a less inspirational reason for 
joining Team Plod.

Tessa first of all says that David was well-connected and his career was 
successful then later that he left them with only £30,000. So what happened? I 
suspect the answer may be “cocaine is a hell of a drug 
<http://knowyourmeme.com/memes/cocaine-is-a-hell-of-a-drug>”.

“Hardball. Respect!” Cassie’s lack of sympathy for Sunny’s daughter problems 
is pretty funny. I’ve always liked their pleasantly jaded back-and-forth – 
never showy but always authentic.

“I’d be very surprised if your Miss Alazi wasn’t a tart.” This from Sara’s old 
landlord is straight out of Rising Damp.

How is Unforgotten shaping up for you? What’s your take on this week’s 
revelations? Which character do you think had the worst 1980s? And most 
importantly of all: who is the killer and why? Have your say below.
 