
The government is “demonising working men and women” by accusing striking 
staff of having “contempt for ordinary people”, the leader of Britain’s biggest 
union has said.

Don’t complain about the strikers – they’re only doing what we all should in 
2017 | Paul Mason
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/19/dont-complain-about-the-strikers-theyre-only-doing-what-we-all-should-in-2017>
Len McCluskey, the Unite leader, was responding to comments made by a Downing 
Street spokesman about walkouts by rail, air,Post Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/post-office> and Weetabix workers.

Are you taking part in or affected by the UK strikes?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/19/are-you-taking-part-in-or-affected-by-the-uk-strikes>
Industrial action <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/industrial-action> by 
Southern rail conductors in the RMT union and a continuing ban on overtime by 
drivers in the Aslef union were expected to cause further disruption for 
300,000 passengers on Monday and Tuesday.


Post Office staff who are members of the Communication Workers Union are 
striking for five days this week, including Christmas Eve, in protest at job 
losses, the closure of a final salary pension scheme and the franchising of 
crown post offices. The Post Office said fewer than 300 of its branches would 
be affected.

BA and Virgin Atlantic <https://www.theguardian.com/business/virginatlantic> 
also face walkouts over Christmas. Members of Unite are due to take action on 
Christmas Day and Boxing Day in a dispute over pay. BA said it intended to run 
a full service on both days despite the strikes.

Workers at Weetabix have voted to go on strike in the new year in a row over 
shift patterns. Members of Usdaw, the Union of Shop, Distributive and Allied 
Workers, backed industrial action by 9-1 on a turnout of almost 70%.

Asked about the strikes affecting Southern rail, the Post Office and BA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/19/uk-strikes-at-a-glance-why-where-and-when-is-action-taking-place>
, Theresa May’s deputy official spokesman said on Monday: “What the prime 
minister thinks is that the strikes are wrong and that they are causing untold 
misery to hundreds of thousands of people … If [these strikes] have anything in 
common, it is shared contempt for ordinary people trying to go about their 
daily lives.”

The former cabinet ministers Michael Heseltine and Norman Tebbit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lord-tebbit> are among the senior Tory 
figures who have called on May to take a tough line on trade unions, following 
thewave of strikes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/19/wave-of-strikes-could-bring-chaos-to-railways-airports-and-post-offices>
 and threatened walkouts.

In response, McCluskey said: “The government should be looking at positive 
ways to resolve disputes, not demonising working men and women who only 
consider strike action as the very last resort.


“I have never encountered a worker who wants to strike. When they have to take 
industrial action, it is an expression of frustration at not being heard by 
employers. I urge the government to concentrate more on understanding why 
industrial relations break down, not slinging around threats to remove 
fundamental freedoms.”

The shadow transport secretary, Andy McDonald, said the government had the 
power to end the dispute on the rail network and accused ministers of 
“promoting ever more draconian responses” to workers’ grievances.


“We need to take the heat out of the current situation. It’s vital that the 
parties agree to take a breath and there be a moratorium to enable some 
sensible, objective discussions to take place,” he said.

He called on both sides to focus on passengers’ safety. “As Southern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> commuters are well aware, 
services are delayed, cancelled and overcrowded every day regardless of strike 
action. For the sake of passengers, the government must take this opportunity 
to resolve the dispute and sort out Southern’s unacceptable service.”

The CWU, which staged a demonstration outside the headquarters of the 
Department for Business, Innovation and Skills in London, said there was strong 
backing from the public for its campaign.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Funion-leader-len-mccluskey-says-no-10-demonising-working-people-in-strikes-row%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67d0fade898b71a010d01d6676a273669d866ffb%2F0_257_5208_3124%2F5208.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Union%20leader%20says%20No%2010%20demonising%20working%20people%20in%20strikes%20row&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Funion-leader-len-mccluskey-says-no-10-demonising-working-people-in-strikes-row%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Union%20leader%20says%20No%2010%20demonising%20working%20people%20in%20strikes%20row&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Funion-leader-len-mccluskey-says-no-10-demonising-working-people-in-strikes-row%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67d0fade898b71a010d01d6676a273669d866ffb%2F0_257_5208_3124%2F5208.jpg>
 Dave Ward, general secretary of the Communication Workers Union, addresses 
supporters at the London protest. Photograph: Carl Court/Getty Images 
The union’s general secretary, Dave Ward, claimed that the future of the Post 
Office was at risk because of the policy of franchising services from crown 
offices to retail firms such as WHSmith.

The Post Office’s network and sales director, Kevin Gilliland, said: “Any 
action will affect fewer than 300 of our branches, and many of these will be 
open to maintain services for customers preparing for Christmas.

“It will be business as usual in almost all of our network, with over 50,000 
Post Office people on hand to support customers as they make their preparations 
for Christmas.”

The dispute does not involve the Royal Mail, whose workers sort and deliver 
post.

BA cabin crew who belong to the Unite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/unite> union are due to strike on 
Christmas Day and Boxing Day in a row over pay, although talks were being held 
at the conciliation service Acas on Monday.


Talks are also due to take place on Tuesday to try to avert pay strikes later 
in the week by Unite members employed by Swissport as baggage handlers and 
other ground staff at 18 airports.

Alex Cruz, BA’s chief executive and chairman, said: “We are making sure that 
this attempt to ruin Christmas for thousands of our customers fails. Over the 
weekend, we have been working on detailed contingency plans to ensure that we 
are able to operate our normal flight programme from all our airports on both 
Christmas Day and Boxing Day.”

Ed Leach, of Usdaw, said of the Weetabix decision: “Despite long and detailed 
discussions, the company has so far refused to offer a suitable financial 
incentives for employees who have moved shift or will be expected to move on to 
the new 24/7 shift pattern. As a result of the failure to agree, Usdaw 
conducted a ballot for industrial action and members have overwhelmingly backed 
a series of 24-hour strikes.

“It is deeply regrettable that the company has pushed staff to this point and 
we hope that they will look again at their offer, continue to negotiate with us 
and seek a solution that will avoid the industrial action backed by our 
members.”

A spokesman for Weetabix said: “We are disappointed by the ballot result, but 
respect the decision and are keen to continue discussions. We have plans in 
place to minimise any potential disruption to our operations.”
 