
Talks aimed at averting further London Underground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london-underground> strikes in a continuing 
dispute over job losses and ticket office closures are to be held.

Officials from the Rail, Maritime and Transport (RMT) union and Transport 
Salaried Staffs Association will meet LU through conciliation service Acas on 
Monday. Members of the two unions staged a24-hour walkout last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/09/tube-strike-brings-manic-monday-for-commuters-in-gridlocked-london>
, during which the majority of central London tube stations were closed,
affecting millions of commuters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/09/tube-strike-an-hour-long-journey-turned-into-a-three-hour-one>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Flondon-tube-strike-causes-commuter-chaos-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20tube%20strike%20causes%20commuter%20chaos%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Flondon-tube-strike-causes-commuter-chaos-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20tube%20strike%20causes%20commuter%20chaos%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Flondon-tube-strike-causes-commuter-chaos-video&media=>
London tube strike causes commuter chaos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2017/jan/09/london-tube-strike-causes-commuter-chaos-video>
The unions say a programme of hundreds of job cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/03/tfl-managers-disgusting-celebrating-london-underground-tube-ticket-office-closures-rmt>
 agreed by the then London mayor Boris Johnson has gone too far and is 
affecting safety. LU has agreed to hire staff, but the RMT has warned there 
will befurther industrial action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/12/tube-strikes-tfl-unions> after 
6 February if the row is not satisfactorily resolved.

The RMT general secretary, Mick Cash, said: “RMT members on the London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> Underground stations see day in and day 
out the toxic impact of the job cuts programme and they are reporting back that 
it is horrific.

“It has now also been shown that at management level there is agreement with 
the union that the cuts have been a disastrous mistake and that the staff need 
to be put back on the stations.

“We now need a move away from the piecemeal and incremental approach to 
tackling this crisis, and for LU to come forward with a serious package of 
proposals.

“With the constant overcrowding on stations and platforms, it is only a matter 
of time before there is a major tragedy if we don’t act decisively. Our dispute 
is about taking action to haul back the cuts machine and put safety back at the 
top of the agenda.”
 