
If you can hear what sounds like a faint drumroll coming from across the 
Pacific then it’s the sound of millions of jaws dropping on hard surfaces.

President-elect Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> 
is a phrase journalists are regularly typing into their keyboards. That was jaw 
dropping enough, even for some Republicans.

But, adding to that drumroll has been the climate science community, the 
renewable energy industry, the conservation movement, federal environment 
regulators and climate change campaigners.

One Nation senator joins new world order of climate change denial | Graham 
Readfearn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/planet-oz/2016/dec/15/one-nation-senator-joins-new-world-order-of-climate-change-denial>
Trump has been nominating positions to the Environmental Protection Agency and 
other key government agencies and departments. To a man (because they’re almost 
all men), Trump’s picks are climate science deniers. His choice forsecretary of 
state and lead diplomat is ExxonMobil boss Rex Tillerson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/15/rex-tillerson-environmental-record-exxonmobil>
.

Jaws have been dropping all over the place.

In the US, there is a large and well-funded network of so called “free market” 
thinktanks that pumps out manufactured doubt on climate change science with the 
help of funding from the fossil fuel industry.

Trump has been picking many his advisers from these groups, sending in climate 
science deniers to key agencies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/donald-trump-environment-climate-change-skeptics>
 to prepare the ground for his administration.

Many, such as Trump’s pick to lead the EPA, the Oklahoma attorney general, 
Scott Pruitt, have launched multiple lawsuits against the agency they’re going 
to soon be working for.

Trump also refuses to accept the thousands and thousands of scientific papers 
going back decades showing how burning fossil fuels is changing the climate.

He recently said he had an “open mind” on the issue – a position that’s about 
as intellectually redundant as having an open mind on heliocentrism. Sometimes 
minds are so open that the brain is in danger of falling out.

Trump’s chief strategist, Steve Bannon, ran the hyper-partisan Breitbart 
website that runs stories claiming climate change is a hoax and the “biggest 
scam in the history of the world 
<http://www.breitbart.com/london/2016/03/28/climate-change-the-biggest-conspiracy-against-the-taxpayer-in-history/>
” while denouncing people who accept the science as “pure scum 
<http://www.breitbart.com/big-government/2016/01/04/1001-reasons-why-global-warming-is-so-totally-over-in-2016/>
”.

Trump has also appointed a team to prepare the ground in the EPA for the 
incoming administration.

Leading that group is Myron Ebell, of the Competitive Enterprise Agency, 
alongside lawyers such as David Schnare and Christopher Horner – two 
individuals who have used the courts and FOIA laws to try and get access to the 
inboxes of climate scientists and, yes, administrators at the EPA.

Viewing this part-reality show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/14/donald-trump-president-transition-reality-television-the-apprentice>
, part-Shakespearean tragedy from Australia, some might think our own climate 
debate looks relatively sane. It’s not and it hasn’t been for a long time.

For well over a decade now, Australia’s climate policy has been battered, torn 
and held back by climate science denial and a broader antipathy towards 
environmentalism. The same interests and ideologies that have worked for 
decades to reach the current crescendo in the US have been doing the same thing 
here.

Neatly connecting Australia and the US is the One Nation senator Malcolm 
Roberts, whoearlier this week met with a who’s who of the climate science denial
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/planet-oz/2016/dec/15/one-nation-senator-joins-new-world-order-of-climate-change-denial>
 industry in Washington DC, including Ebell.

Think we’re immune to the Trump denialism? You haven’t been paying attention. 

When Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> lost the Liberal 
party leadership to Tony Abbott in 2009, it was Turnbull’s then refusal to back 
away from pricing greenhouse gas emissions that turned the party room against 
him. From that point onward, pricing carbon became a no-go zone for the Liberal 
party.

A chief architect of that leadership coup was the then South Australian 
senator Nick Minchin, who, a month earlier,told ABC’s Four Corners 
<http://www.abc.net.au/4corners/content/2009/s2737676.htm> he didn’t accept 
that humans caused climate change. Rather, Minchin considered the issue a plot 
by the “extreme left” to “deindustrialise the world”.

After the ABC program aired, the journalist Sarah Ferguson said Turnbull had 
refused interview requests because he“didn’t want to face the sceptics” 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/archive/politics/minchin-a-fruit-loop-say-colleagues/news-story/c1b51c2fde11cc507665a6092be59e77>
.

Mathias Cormann refuses to express confidence in Alan Finkel after climate 
criticism
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/11/mathias-cormann-refuses-to-express-confidence-in-alan-finkel-after-climate-criticism>
You might think Turnbull would have learned his lesson. But, from his latest 
meek surrender to the deniers in his party, it seems not. He still won’t take 
them on.

Earlier this month, the energy minister, Josh Frydenberg, said a review of 
Australia’s climate change policy would include a look at an emissions trading 
scheme for the electricity sector – the biggest single source of greenhouse gas 
emissions in the Australia.

Within 24 hours, Frydenberg backed down and, soon after, Turnbull said carbon 
pricing was not party policy and this would not be considered – even though all 
the expert advice tells him that it would be the cheapest way to cut emissions 
and would likely deliver billions of dollars in savings on power prices in 
coming years.

That capitulation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/07/what-an-extraordinary-gutless-capitulation-by-josh-frydenberg>
 was another example ofTurnbull giving in to the deniers in the right of the 
party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/05/malcolm-turnbull-direct-action-carbon-trading-climate-change>
 – in particular, another South Australian senator in the form of Cory Bernardi.

Bernardi, too, refuses to accept the mountains of evidence that burning fossil 
fuels is causing climate change.

The recently appointed chairman of the Coalition’s backbench environment 
committee <http://If you think Australia is immune to the surging power of 
climate science denial, then you haven’t been watching> is the Liberal MP Craig 
Kelly – another climate science denier.

Going further back, Abbott’s position on climate science was heavily 
influenced by the mining industry figure and geologist Ian Plimer’s book Heaven 
and Earth – a tome packed with contradictory arguments, dodgy citations and 
errors too numerous to count (actually,celebrated mathematical physicist Dr Ian 
Enting <http://clisby.net/entingfest/> did count them and found at least 126 
<http://www.complex.org.au/tiki-download_file.php?fileId=91>). 

Cardinal George Pell, Australia’s most senior Roman Catholic, also took his 
lead from Plimer’s book.

And who can forget Abbott’s business adviser Maurice Newman and his claims 
that climate science is fraudulent and acting as cover for the UN to install a 
one-world government – the exact same position taken by Roberts and other fake 
freedom fighters.

Another Coalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> MP 
seen as influential is the Queensland Nationals MP George Christensen.

Like Roberts and Bernardi before him, Christensen has attended US conferences 
of anti-climate science activists hosted by theHeartland Institute 
<https://www.desmogblog.com/heartland-institute> (that group has been heavily 
funded by the family foundation of Robert Mercer, the ultrarich conservative 
hedge fund manager whose millions helped get Trump elected and whose daughter 
Rebekah is a pivotal member of Trump’s transition team).


Just like the US, Australia too has its own “free market” conservative groups 
pushing climate science denial. Look no further than Melbourne’sInstitute of 
Public Affairs <https://www.desmogblog.com/institute-public-affairs> (which 
only last year wascalled in to “balance” a climate science briefing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/planet-oz/2015/oct/23/coalition-committee-tries-to-balance-climate-science-briefings-by-inviting-denialists-from-think-tank>
 to Kelly’s committee).

Fossil fuel divestment is worth $7tn globally yet Australia still clings to 
coal | Blair Palese
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/dec/13/fossil-fuel-divestment-is-worth-7tn-globally-yet-australia-still-clings-to-coal>
How about the media? Rupert Murdoch’s outlets the Wall Street Journal and Fox 
News help to push themes that climate scientists are frauds, that action to cut 
greenhouse gas emissions will wreck the economy and that renewable energy can’t 
keep the lights on.

The stable of flagship commentators working on Murdoch’s News Corp Australia, 
led by the likes of Andrew Bolt, Miranda Devine, Chris Kenny and Terry McCrann, 
are all happy to repeat and embellish those same talking points.

On the radio, the US has popular conservatives such as Glenn Beck and Rush 
Limbaugh pushing climate science denial. In Australia, we have Alan Jones and 
his stable of shouty Macquarie Radio colleagues.

At this point, some will argue Australia and the rest of the world is 
investing heavily in renewables. The US, like Australia, is seeing strong 
growth in the renewable energy sector. That’s all true.

Also true is the progress made through the international agreements made in 
Paris, even though the climate pledges that make up the deal still fall well 
short of averting dangerous climate change.

But there’s little doubt that climate science denial is on the march, backed 
by aconspiracy culture that’s rapidly gaining audiences online 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/planet-oz/2016/dec/06/more-terrifying-than-trump-the-booming-conspiracy-culture-of-climate-science-denial>
.

Trump is climate science denial’s greatest propaganda victory so far. 
Australia is not immune.
 