
Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> looks set to be the first 
part of the UK to pilot a basic income for every citizen, as councils in Fife 
and Glasgow investigate trial schemes in 2017.

The councillor Matt Kerr has been championing the idea through the ornate 
halls of Glasgow City Chambers, and is frank about the challenges it poses.


“Like a lot of people, I was interested in the idea but never completely 
convinced,” he said. But working as Labour’s anti-poverty lead on the council, 
Kerr says that he “kept coming back to the basic income”.

Should we scrap benefits and pay everyone £100 a week?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/13/should-we-scrap-benefits-and-pay-everyone-100-a-week-whether-they-work-or-not>
Kerr sees the basic income as a way of simplifying the UK’s byzantine welfare 
system. “But it is also about solidarity: it says that everyone is valued and 
the government will support you. It changes the relationship between the 
individual and the state.”

The concept of a universal basic income <http://citizensincome.org/> revolves 
around the idea of offering every individual, regardless of existing welfare 
benefits or earned income, a non-conditional flat-rate payment, with any income 
earned above that taxed progressively. The intention is to provide a basic 
economic platform on which people can build their lives, whether they choose to 
earn, learn, care or set up a business.

The shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, has suggested that it is likely to 
appear in his party’s next manifesto, while there has been a groundswell of 
interest among anti-poverty groups who see it as a means of changing not only 
the relationship between people and the state, but between workers and 
increasingly insecure employment in the gig economy.

Kerr accepts that, while he is hopeful of cross-party support in Glasgow, 
there are “months of work ahead”, including first arranging a feasibility study 
in order to present a strong enough evidence base for a pilot. “But if there is 
ever a case to be made then you need to test it in a place like Glasgow, with 
the sheer numbers and levels of health inequality. If you can make it work here 
then it can work anywhere.”

The idea has its roots in 16th-century humanist philosophy, when it was 
developed by the likes of Thomas More, but in its modern incarnation it has 
lately enjoyed successful pilots in India and Africa.


Despite its utopian roots, champions believe that this is an idea whose time 
has come, particularly in Scotland where the governing SNP voted in support of 
a basic income at their spring conference (although the proposal has yet to 
make it into their manifesto).

At the heart of any experiment with basic income is money: how much should 
people get and where will it come from? Kerr says his instinct is to base the 
amount on similar calculations to those made for the living wage.


“It’s about having more than just enough to pay the bills. But part of the 
idea of doing a pilot is to make mistakes and also find out what is acceptable 
to the public. There will be a lot of resistance to this. We shouldn’t kid 
ourselves. Part of the problem is we’re working against a whole discourse of
deserving and undeserving 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/jan/08/strivers-shirkers-language-welfare>
 poor.”

As for where the money comes from, “the funding question is always the big 
one, and really will depend upon the approach a pilot takes,” says Jamie Cooke, 
head ofRSA Scotland 
<https://www.thersa.org/fellowship/in-your-area/areas/scotland>, which has been 
spearheading research on the subject across the UK.


Drawing on the experience of similar projects 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/02/state-handouts-for-all-europe-set-to-pilot-universal-basic-incomes>
 ongoing in Finland, Utrecht in the Netherland andOntario in Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/28/universal-basic-income-ontario-poverty-pilot-project-canada>
, Cooke suggests: “It could be funding from particular trusts, it could be 
individual philanthropic funding, as we have seen in the States, or it could be 
a redirection of the existing welfare spend.” Obviously the latter is much 
harder to do in a pilot, although that will be happening in Finland next year 
where the experiment is being taken forward by the national government.

Universal basic income is not a magic solution, but it could help millions | 
Anthony Painter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/04/universal-basic-income-welfare-employment-scotland-canada-netherlands>
As the Scottish government consults on what it has described as “the biggest 
transfer of powers since devolution began” – the devolution of around £2.7bn, 
or 15% of the total Scottish benefits bill, affecting 1.4 million people – both 
Kerr and Cooke believe that this is an ideal moment to consider the basic 
income seriously. “It’s a time to be testing out new – or rather old – ideas 
for a welfare system that genuinely supports independence,” says Kerr.

Cooke likewise believes that cross-party support is key, pointing to the fact 
that the leader of the Conservative group on Fife council has joined forces 
with the Fairer Fife Commission, the council’s independent poverty advisory 
group which initially recommended the trial, with the aim of designing a pilot 
within the next six months.

Scotland was recently added to the list of “places to watch” for basic income 
activity by theBasic Income Earth Network <http://basicincome.org/>, founded by 
the radical economist Guy Standing, whose hugely influential bookThe Precariat 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/precariat.html> identified an emerging social 
class suffering the worst of job insecurity and most likely to be attracted to 
rightwing populism.

“The thing about Scotland is that they really understand the precariat,” says 
Standing, who recently visited the country to meet civil servants, local 
authorities and campaigners to discuss a basic income. “The sense of 
insecurity, the stagnating living standards, all of those things are clear in 
Scotland and the fact that so many within the SNP are supportive means there’s 
a real opportunity to do a pilot in Scotland.”

The momentum is there, he says, and once it is framed around a desire for 
greater social justice “then you get away from the stale debate about whether 
if you give people the basic income then they will be lazy”.

“People relate to the idea that everyone should have a social dividend. 
Everywhere I go, it’s the communities that feel left behind by globalisation 
that are most interested [in the idea of a basic income]. We have seen a 
sea-change in attitudes.

“This sense of alarm about populist rightwing politics has brought more people 
to thinking we need to do something to provide better security for people. We 
are risking our economic and political stability if we don’t do something about 
it.”
 