
Lots of PhD <https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/phd> 
students find themselves doing long-term fieldwork in unfamiliar environments. 
This is a rewarding experience, but it also involves risk.

There are all sorts of problems students can encounter: they might have 
difficulty dealing with local authorities, witness violence or criminal 
activity, they could even experience physical and mental illness,sexual 
harassment or assault 
<http://www.isca.ox.ac.uk/fileadmin/ISCA/JASO/2015/Clark___Grant_intro.pdf> 
(pdf). The potentially dire implications of such scenarios have gained increased
media attention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/may/13/universities-must-do-more-to-protect-phd-students-working-in-dangerous-countries?CMP=new_1194&CMP=>
 and there have been calls for universities to do more to protect their 
students.


Emma Mawdsley, geography lecturer at the University of Cambridge, says: “Bad 
things will happen, small and large, but there are ways these can be avoided 
and reduced. The university, departments and supervisors have a moral and 
professional duty of care to do everything possible to promote safe, ethical 
research.”


The murder of my friend Giulio Regeni in Egypt was an attack on academic 
freedom | Neil Pyper
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/06/murder-giulio-regeni-egypt-academic-freedom-students>
So what would constructive fieldwork preparation and support – beyond the 
standard risk assessment form – actually look like? Here are a few ideas.


Talk openly about difficulties

Students are rarely told to spend time discussing openly what might go wrong. 
This needs to change. Seasoned researchers should share their experiences of 
handling difficult situations – whether it be contracting dengue fever or 
dealing with state surveillance. Frank conversations – in pre-field training 
seminars, between supervisors and students – could go a long way to preparing 
students to manage their own challenges. As one colleague who recently 
completed his PhD explained: “I needed someone to tell me that things go wrong, 
that you won’t know what you’re doing all the time, and that you’ll get into 
tricky encounters. We should be honest with each other about the challenges and 
tribulations of the process.”


Encourage early visits

Many students only encounter the area they’ll be working in when they arrive 
to begin fieldwork. Ideally, departments should support students to conduct 
short visits in advance (we were both encouraged to do this). This helps new 
researchers build support networks, anticipate potential problems, and as one 
of our supervisors said, “decide whether you’ll actually be able to live there 
for a year”. If time or funding constraints prevent this, supervisors and 
students should make a combined effort to garner as much information as 
possible, including contacting other experienced fieldworkers for advice prior 
to departure. Olivia Barnett-Naghshineh, who did fieldwork in Papua New Guinea, 
adds: “The behaviour of other non-locals before you may well affect how you are 
received – try to learn from other’s mistakes or successes.”


How to find books in authoritarian states: head for dark, dusty corners
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/apr/19/how-to-research-political-dissent-in-a-repressive-state>
Provide alternative support

A good working relationship between PhD fieldworkers and supervisors is 
essential – but this shouldn’t be the only source of support for students.Amy 
Pollard 
<http://www.anthropologymatters.com/index.php/anth_matters/article/view/10/10> 
suggests a mentoring programme in which novice fieldworkers are matched with a 
faculty member other than their supervisor, or a returned student. That 
provides someone else to talk to, particularly about issues students may be 
reluctant to discuss with supervisors, such as sexual harassment. Students 
should also be told about all of the university resources that are available 
before they set off – including emergency travel and medical insurance, 
encryption services, and counselling support.

Make contingency plans

Although it’s impossible to predict all of the possible problems that could 
crop up while completing fieldwork, it can help to think about, and plan for,
worst-case scenarios 
<http://www.anthropologymatters.com/index.php/anth_matters/article/view/10/10http://www.anthropologymatters.com/index.php/anth_matters/article/view/10/10>
. This could include creating communication plans (like telephone trees or text 
messaging alerts), and action plans – for example, how to leave the country in 
the event of a political coup. Before conducting fieldwork in Somaliland, PhD 
student Caroline Ackley developed a communication plan with her supervisor, and 
a back-up field site (Djibouti), should the situation become unstable. During 
fieldwork, regular, scheduled check-ins with her supervisor helped build a 
relationship of trust, and provided peace of mind to family and friends.


Cultivate local networks

I fled Syria for Kent - and regained my life as an academic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jul/15/i-fled-syria-for-kent-and-regained-my-life-as-an-academic>
Providing guidance on how students can develop local support networks when in 
the field is crucial. From locals, to fellow fieldworkers, to formal supports 
such as lawyers and embassies – these will be the first point of call if 
anything does go wrong. Reminding students to “listen to the recommendations of 
local people and do what they do” is another obvious but important point, says 
Barnett-Naghshineh. But knowing when – and how – to end potentially problematic 
relationships can be equally important. As a colleague suggests, students 
should be supported to withdraw from toxic relationships, even if it limits 
their research.

No risk assessment or training course can ever address all fieldwork 
complications. But increased attention to student preparedness and support, and 
a willingness to engage in difficult conversations, will promote safer, and 
ultimately better, research.

Corinna Howland and Christina Woolner are PhD candidates in social 
anthropology at the University of Cambridge, currently on long-term fieldwork 
in Peru and Somaliland.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 