
When Sheffield University emailed and offered Fatemeh Roshan Ray a second 
chance a month before the A-level results were published she couldn’t believe 
her luck. Fatemeh came to London alone three years ago at the age of 18 seeking 
asylum from Iran, and studied furiously for science and maths A-levels at 
Westminster Kingsway College. When Sheffield got in touch she already had an 
unconditional offer to study biomedical science at another big-name university, 
King’s College London. But her dream was to study dentistry, one of the most 
competitive courses to net a place on.

University marketers: try making your message more Snapchatty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/sep/27/university-marketers-try-making-your-message-more-snapchatty>
“Sheffield originally refused me a place for dentistry,” she says. “But one 
month before A-level results day, they contacted me to say they would have some 
spaces in clearing. I had heard dentistry rarely goes through clearing so I 
wasn’t expecting that. I am so happy to have got a place.”

Once the very idea of a Russell Group university such as Sheffield making the 
running to woo a student on a top course might have seemed preposterous. But 
senior figures in the sector say this is becoming much more common, as the 
market in higher education gathers pace and would-be students have more power 
than ever before.

Now that the cap on student numbers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/aug/13/record-number-university-admissions-cap-a-levels>
 has been removed and fees have increased, many Russell Group universities want 
to expand. A limited pot of top-grade students to fish from means competition 
is fierce. The latest Ucas estimates are that there were about 1,000 fewer 
students with A-levels of ABB or higher this year than the year before.

As a result, it seems that more students who dropped a grade or two in their 
A-level results were still able to get into their first-choice university. A 
Russell Group vice-chancellor, who wanted to remain anonymous, says: “There is 
a real game that is going on in many leading universities. The ‘sticker price’ 
may say three As but there is a big difference between that and the actual 
entry grades of many of the students they end up taking.”

A Russell Group spokesperson, while not commenting on this directly, says its 
universities are not lowering standards or compromising on quality, and recruit 
only students who can cope with their courses.

A change that was highly visible this year was that all but a small handful of 
the leading research universities put courses – including some traditionally 
competitive ones – into clearing. But what parents and prospective students did 
not see were the compromises many universities made behind the scenes when they 
found out which of the applicants they made offers to had missed their grades. 
Universities admit privately that such compromises have become much more 
widespread right across the sector. And the “top end” is certainly not immune. 
Ucas data shows that the proportion of applicants with BBB or equivalent at 
A-level being accepted to so-called “higher tariff” universities doubled over 
five years: from 17% in 2011 to 39% in 2015.

Record number of clearing courses available to A-level students
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/18/clearing-courses-record-number-a-level-results-ucas-universities>
As one vice-chancellor says: “The first thing you do once you’ve confirmed all 
those who met the grades is called ‘softening’. You look at the people who have 
missed and decide if you want them anyway. A lot of institutions have been 
picking up a lot of lower-grade candidates through softening and no one knows.”

Philip Bloor, head of admissions at Sheffield Hallam University, explains: 
“Most institutions will have made some decisions previously about what they may 
be prepared to accept. For instance, if you had a maths course and ask for BBB 
you might decide if a student has BCC but the B is in maths you would be 
prepared to take them.” But he adds: “No one is in the business of recruiting 
irresponsibly. Your bottom line is ‘Will this student be able to succeed on the 
course?’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Funiversity-admissions-good-students-offers-a-levels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7fa3269e568f71cd6bcd83d52de3a1c465ad47f1%2F213_51_2655_1593%2F2655.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=University%20admissions%3A%20%E2%80%98Good%20students%20are%20being%20love-bombed%20with%20offers%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Funiversity-admissions-good-students-offers-a-levels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=University%20admissions%3A%20%E2%80%98Good%20students%20are%20being%20love-bombed%20with%20offers%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Funiversity-admissions-good-students-offers-a-levels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7fa3269e568f71cd6bcd83d52de3a1c465ad47f1%2F213_51_2655_1593%2F2655.jpg>
 Mary Curnock Cook, chief executive of Ucas: ‘Prospective students are in a 
stronger position now than five or six years ago.’ Photograph: Alastair 
Johnstone/SWNS.com for the Guardian 
A number of factors have disrupted the university admissions market. The 
population of 18-year-olds is in decline, as is the number of students leaving 
school with A-levels. Previously this drop in the population, which began in 
2009, was balanced by the increase in the number of students wanting to go to 
university. But now this growth seems to be levelling out, with the latest 
statistics from Ucas showing that as of 2 September full-time entry to UK 
universities is only 1% higher than last year.

All this means it is a great time to be applying to university, and if you are 
likely to leave school or college with a reasonable set of A-levels Ucas says 
you will be in huge demand. Mary Curnock Cook, Ucas chief executive, sums it 
up: “Prospective students are in a stronger position now than five or six years 
ago. Good students are being love-bombed with offers as soon as they send in 
their applications.”

And crucially many experts say students should be reacting to this newfound 
power by aiming high.Nick Hillman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/nick-hillman>, director of the Higher 
Education Policy Institute, says: “The smart schools are working out that they 
need to be as ambitious as possible for their pupils. Then someone who gets BBB 
with an AAB offer can get on the phone and negotiate. The question is will the 
university turn a student down when they represent £27,000? It’s unlikely 
unless they are very many grades down or unlikely to complete the course.”

A few years ago Ucas used to warn schools and parents that thousands of 
students were making a mistake in picking an insurance choice with the same 
high grades as their firm choice – potentially leaving them with nowhere to go 
if they missed their grades. But now Curnock Cook encourages good prospective 
students to take a gamble with their first choice. “It’s a pity if students are 
self-censoring,” she says. “For some, putting a ‘stretch’ choice as their firm 
choice is a good strategy as long as they have an insurance choice that 
represents a course they would also be really happy with.”

Hillman says the speed with which Ucas advice has changed is striking. “Two or 
three years ago, they said the opposite of what they now say,” he explains. 
“Now, Ucas urges applicants to be ambitious and to reach out for places that 
might have looked unattainable in the past. The thing that worries me is that 
it often takes time for schools, who have many other priorities, to catch up. 
It’s likely many schools simply don’t know how much things have changed.”

Ucas considers radical changes as clearing rates rise sharply
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/19/ucas-considers-radical-changes-as-clearing-rates-rise-sharply>
Bloor says the opening up of clearing, and a move away from the service being 
seen as a bargain basement, provides students who do take a punt on their 
initial application with a decent back-up plan. Yet he adds: “The one downside 
of going through clearing is that in the first round applicants have done lots 
of research. In clearing you lose that preparation. So we advise applicants 
that even if they think they won’t end up in clearing they should put some 
thought into how they would approach it in advance.”

Although students may have an easier ride when it comes to securing a place, 
Curnock Cook is quick to point out that what happens next is up to them. “I 
loathe the headlines that constantly ask if university is worth it,” she says 
passionately. “The truth is that it is worth it for every student who chooses 
to make it worth it. Success in life and in your career takes hard work and 
determination – a degree will help, but it isn’t a free pass to success just 
because you have a student loan.”
 