
One of the most highly skilled and prestigious professions in Britain, 
university teaching, is now dominated by zero-hours contracts, temp agencies 
and other forms of precarious work, the Guardian can reveal.


New analysis reveals that it is the richest Russell Group institutions that 
rely most heavily on insecure academic workers. The Guardian investigation has 
led trade unionists to accuse vice-chancellors of“importing the Sports Direct 
model” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
 into British universities. It has also prompted the National Union of Students 
to warn that low-paid and overstressed tutors may not be providing quality 
education to undergraduates paying tuition fees of up to £9,000 a year.

Revealed: temp agencies' avoidance scheme costs taxpayers 'hundreds of 
millions'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/15/revealed-temp-agencies-avoidance-scheme-costs-taxpayers-hundreds-of-millions>
Academics teaching or doing research in British universities will typically 
have spent years earning doctorates or other qualifications, yet more than half 
of them – 53% – manage on some form of insecure, non-permanent contract. They 
range from short-term contracts that typically elapse within nine months, to 
those paid by the hour to give classes or mark essays and exams.
Insecure contracts by institution type 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/nov/2016-11-15T11:34:12/embed.html>
Among junior academics – those most likely to be doing frontline teaching – 
three-quarters are on these kinds of precarious contracts. It is highly likely 
that the majority of undergraduates are paying many thousands of pounds to be 
taught by casual workers.

The investigation is part of a series of articles published in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/series/the-new-world-of-work> this week 
about the growing numbers of people in Britain who find themselves in 
precarious work. The figures come from the Higher Education Statistics Agency 
and have been analysed by the University and College Union (UCU). They show 
that within the Russell Group, the Universities of Birmingham and Warwick have 
the largest proportion of frontline teaching staff on short-term or zero-hours 
and other flexible contracts. At Birmingham, 70% of teaching staff are on 
insecure contracts, while at Warwick it is 68%. Yet Birmingham has begun avast 
£500m building project 
<http://www.birmingham.ac.uk/university/building/index.aspx>, including a new 
sports centre costing £55m and student housing.
Precarious employment at Russell Group universities 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/tools/tables/embed/index.html?spreadsheet=1ELXWHjT9lxp8ODsznas_xpI8D7OCwS5wCmXv1aFZWH0>
The analysis suggests that as the university sector charges higher student 
fees and faces further competition, many institutions are getting into 
speculative building and expansion of their business models, even while many of 
their frontline teaching staff are struggling to get by. It also raises the 
prospect of a two-tier academic workforce, with those at the bottom living hand 
to mouth and unable to pursue research, while those at the top are very well 
paid. The vice-chancellor of the University of Birmingham, Sir David Eastwood, 
last year received a pay and performance package of £416,000 – nearly three 
times theprime minister’s salary 
<http://www.parliament.uk/about/faqs/house-of-commons-faqs/members-faq-page2/#jump-link-19>
.

Part-time lecturers on precarious work: 'I don't make enough for rent'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/16/part-time-lecturers-on-precarious-work-i-dont-make-enough-for-rent>
One-year and two-year contracts are an inevitable part of grant-funded 
research. But these figures show temporary and zero-hours contracts are now 
widespread among those teaching undergraduates. University managers typically 
argue that such flexible contracts allow young academics to gain valuable 
experience. But in interviews with the Guardian, academics have disputed that 
argument from their own experience, including:

• A 44-year-old politics lecturer working at three different institutions at 
once but still earning only just over £6,000 a year, relying on benefits to top 
up his poverty pay.

• A 32-year-old linguistics lecturer who has experienced “serious mental 
health issues” and says “unstable work without a network of colleagues and 
without any security is proving really difficult”.

• A 49-year-old English lecturer who says: “I earn such a pathetic amount. I 
feel quite humiliated.”

Academics rarely speak out publicly against their precarious working 
arrangements for fear of being punished by losing hours. Some have spoken to 
the Guardian using a pseudonym while others have said they have “nothing left 
to lose”.

Nottingham academic on casual contract: 'I had more rights as a binman'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/16/nottingham-academic-on-casual-contract-i-had-more-rights-as-a-binman>
Academics on insecure contracts form “a reserve army of precarious and 
exploited labour”, claimed Sally Hunt, general secretary of the UCU. “Many 
universities are hacking up teaching jobs into ever smaller bits and shoving 
people on to the worst contract they can get away with. This is the Sports 
Direct model imported into our universities.”

The Guardian has seen sections of a private survey of academics on casual 
contracts at the University of Nottingham, one of the largest and most renowned 
institutions in the country. The comments include:

• “The lack of value that I feel towards me is passed on in my feelings 
towards the students’ education.”

• “I have heard people complaining about the fact that they are paid 10 
minutes to correct one exam, therefore they will use only 10 minutes to read 
them.”

• “I am definitely much less inclined to go the extra mile in terms of 
preparing for a class.”

Teaching at a university means constant pressure - for about £5 an hour
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/dec/04/phd-student-poor-pay-making-me-want-to-quit>
The NUS warned of the impact this could have on student learning. “When 
academic staff are demoralised and forced to cope with low pay and insecurity, 
the knock-on effect on students is significant,“ said Sorana Vieru, a 
vice-president at the union. “Many students are now taking on unprecedented 
levels of debt to go to university. They deserve good quality teaching and 
anything that damages that is deeply unjust.”

Universities are independent charities, but the Department for Business has 
told the Guardian that conditions for academics will form part of the 
independent review of workers’ rights to be conducted for the governmentby Tony 
Blair’s former head of policy, Matthew Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/01/theresa-may-hires-former-tony-blair-policy-boss-to-review-workers-rights>
.


University lecturers on the breadline: is the UK following in America’s 
footsteps?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/17/university-lecturers-uk-us-casual-posts-food-stamps>
At a few universities such as Edinburgh, the use of zero-hours contracts has 
caused huge controversy 
<http://www.studentnewspaper.org/universities-urged-to-eliminate-zero-hours-contracts/>
 and even led to managers pledging to scrap them. Yet the figures show that 
Edinburgh has shifted many of its teaching staff on to other kinds of insecure 
contract.

But the lobby group for academic employers, the Universities and Colleges 
Employers Association, argued: “It is essential that universities retain the 
ability to operate with part of their workforce in a flexible mode to enable 
them to respond to changes in demand. The variability in student enrolments on 
programmes, and features of academic life such as sabbaticals and research 
leave for permanent staff, mean that fixed-term opportunities to teach, 
generally for a year or a semester, are made available.”

The University of Birmingham said the figures, from the Higher Education 
Statistics Agency, were “extremely misleading”. It added in a statement: “While 
the university recognises that a significant number of individuals engaged in 
teaching are not on standard contracts, they provide only a small fraction of 
teaching (about 7%), because most of them are engaged for a small fraction of a 
full-time equivalent post.


“Many of the people in this category are expert visiting lecturers, from 
commerce, industry and the professions, who provide practical support and 
insight to our students based on their own experience; and others are our own 
research students, who communicate their enthusiasm for scientific endeavour to 
undergraduate students through their work as laboratory demonstrators or 
tutorial assistants, under the supervision of academic staff. We believe these 
individuals enhance the learning experiences of our students.”
 