
New legal guidance for universities on how to deal with alleged student 
misconduct 
<http://www.universitiesuk.ac.uk/policy-and-analysis/reports/Pages/changing-the-culture-final-report.aspx>
– including violence against women, harassment and hate crimes – has been 
issued by Universities UK, the umbrella organisation for sector leaders, and 
it’s a welcome step forward.

University sex abuse report fails to tackle staff attacks on UK students
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/21/university-sex-abuse-report-fails-staff-attacks-students>
For the first time, it recognises that universities themselves can initiate 
disciplinary action for possible criminal offences and can also impose 
precautionary measures, such as the exclusion or suspension of an accused 
student.


The problem is that the guidance applies to a multitude of crimes – and one 
size does not fit all. The issues that arise in relation to allegations of 
theft or criminal damage are very different from those that relate to sexual 
misconduct.

The definition of rape

The guidance states that it is “unreasonable and dangerous” (p10) for a 
university to make a finding of rape, and states that “the alleged ‘offence’ 
will be different” (p12) in a disciplinary process. This is technically 
correct. A university cannot find anyone guilty of the criminal offence of 
rape, as it is not a criminal court. However, the example sets out misconduct 
as “sexual intercourse without consent” (p14), which is in essence the 
definition of rape.

So in determining “whether the alleged facts and matters occurred” (p10), 
albeit to a lower threshold of proof than in a criminal trial, the disciplinary 
panel is in effect called to determine whether it is more likely than not that 
a rape occurred. The facts of the case will be the same whether it is called 
rape or “sexual misconduct”.

Universities are left in the difficult position of having to investigate and 
gather evidence as to whether the rape happened. And they are not given any 
further guidance as to what constitutes appropriate evidence.

Nor are universities guided as to who should gather evidence and exactly what 
training such an investigator should undergo, for example, in order to 
satisfactorily question witnesses.

Myths about victims

Given that in very many rape and sexual assault cases the issue is not if the 
incident occurred but whether or not it was consensual, it is very likely that 
investigators, and then disciplinary panels, will find themselves having to 
assess the credibility of conflicting accounts.

I was being stalked, but my university refused to protect me
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/oct/21/i-was-being-stalked-but-my-university-refused-to-protect-me>
It is here that I think there is most cause for concern. It is well-documented 
in research that sexual offences evoke responses based on societal attitudes 
and beliefs around appropriate sexual behaviour. People make assumptions about 
consent and credibility based on “rape myths” which tend to blame the victim 
and justify the behaviour of the perpetrator. These myths relate to how the 
victim was dressed, her alcohol consumption, whether she flirted or somehow 
“invited” the assault, whether she resisted, how she behaved during and after 
the assault and her general sexual behaviour.

Are university administrators and managers somehow exempt from having such 
attitudes? Particularly worrying in this regard is a reference to “the facts 
and matters leading to an allegation” (p10) which could be interpreted as 
inviting universities to assess exactly these types of factors.

The criminal justice system recognises and makes provision for the 
complexities of decision-making in sexual offence cases: judges must attend 
intensive residential training courses, juries are to be directed about 
reliance on rape myths, and there is a set of rules relating to the 
admissibility of sexual history evidence and the capacity to consent.

Yet the UUK’s guidance for universities is silent on these key issues of rape 
myths and victim-blaming.

Gaps in the guidelines

The guidance suggests that terms such as “consent” – which may need 
interpreting in a disciplinary process – be defined in the university’s code of 
conduct. It recommends that the legal definition of consent be used, yet that 
definition itself has been subject to much academic criticism for its lack of 
clarity. It would be better for the UUK to offer a definition for universities 
to use.

'I was so traumatised': accounts of sexual harassment in UK universities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/07/i-was-so-traumatised-accounts-of-sexual-harassment-in-uk-universities>
There are some very positive recommendations, such as that victims be 
protected in evidence-giving, for example, by use of video link, and that the 
accused student has the right to hear the evidence against them.

But despite the excellence of the steering group in their own fields, the 
absence of sexual offence lawyers has led to some worrying gaps in the 
guidance. I think that the legal guidance should be revisited by UUK. More 
detailed pointers on how to gather and assess evidence, and the appropriate 
training required for investigators and adjudicators, needs to be set out.

Rachel Fenton writes about sexual offences law and is principal investigator 
for The Intervention Initiative, a bystander intervention for the prevention of 
sexual and domestic violence in university settings.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 