
Top British universities may boycott the government’s new league table for 
teaching quality, Education Guardian can reveal. The Teaching Excellence 
Framework, due to be introduced next year, will rank universities asgold, 
silver or bronze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/29/english-universities-ranked-gold-silver-and-bronze>
 based on what they offer students – with top rankers allowed to raise tuition 
fees. But big names, including the London School of Economics, Bristol, King’s 
College London and Liverpool, are predicted to score badly.

The Teaching Excellence Framework: can higher education up its game?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/02/teaching-excellence-framework-university-tef-student-data-higher-education>
Last week, in a Guardian survey, only six of the 20 English Russell Group 
universities said they would definitely take part in the rankings. Four 
confirmed they were debating whether to boycott. The rest declined to comment.

And it is not only universities that could undermine the TEF. Because, from 
2018, the ratings will determine which institutions will be allowed to raise 
fees, the National Union ofStudents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> also plans to oppose them. 
Sorana Vieru, NUS vice-president for higher education, confirmed last week 
that: “NUS will be coordinating a national boycott of the National Student 
Survey unless the government drops its plans for the TEF and the rise in fees.” 
The union hopes that if enough students boycott the survey – a crucial 
component of the TEF – it will make the TEF unworkable.

The TEF is widely expected to crown a very different sort of premier league, 
with universities including Loughborough, De Montfort and Aston predicted to be 
top. There is speculation that even Oxford, famed worldwide for its small 
tutorial-led teaching, may not be guaranteed gold.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Funiversities-nus-boycott-teaching-excellence-framework-tuition-fees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8bfdcbbf5f5249c293506076dd6e110082682d2c%2F2147_590_794_993%2F794.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Universities%20and%20NUS%20plan%20boycott%20of%20flagship%20teaching%20rankings&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Funiversities-nus-boycott-teaching-excellence-framework-tuition-fees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Universities%20and%20NUS%20plan%20boycott%20of%20flagship%20teaching%20rankings&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Funiversities-nus-boycott-teaching-excellence-framework-tuition-fees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8bfdcbbf5f5249c293506076dd6e110082682d2c%2F2147_590_794_993%2F794.jpg>
 Sorana Vieru, NUS vice-president for higher education. Photograph: William 
Bunce 
Vice-chancellors say that a number of universities in the elite Russell Group 
doubt whether the ability to increase tuition fees will outweigh the potential 
damage of taking part in the TEF. Temperatures have been raised further by Home 
Office plans to cut international student numbers, withsome vice-chancellors 
fearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/25/overseas-students-crackdown-lse-kings-soas-universities>
 the government may use the TEF to curtail their right to recruit students from 
abroad. Universities warn this could have shocking consequences –international 
students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/25/overseas-students-crackdown-lse-kings-soas-universities>
 make up 70% of students at the LSE, which is not predicted to do well in the 
TEF.

The rankings, which measure the number of leavers who get graduate-level jobs, 
as well as how many students drop out, will also rely heavily on theNational 
Student Survey <http://www.thestudentsurvey.com>. Some members of the Russell 
Group have not scored well on student satisfaction in the past.

However, Prof Anthony Smith, vice-provost for education and student affairs at 
University College London, says UCL has agreed to take part, despite major 
reservations, in the hope it can help shape the assessment into something more 
satisfactory. He says the National Student Survey has been a “terrific driver” 
in getting universities to focus on the experience their students are having, 
but he has concerns about using it for the TEF. “There is a risk that this is 
going to drive a wedge between students and their institutions. They will feel 
their feedback isn’t being used to improve their experience, but as a vehicle 
to put their fees up. I’m worried about that.”

Will the Teaching Excellence Framework be a licence for universities to raise 
fees?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/22/teaching-excellence-framework-universities-tuition-fees-tef>
He insists resistance to the teaching rankings doesn’t mean that research 
universities don’t care about teaching. “It’s at the heart of UCL’s strategy to 
connect our students with that world of academic research. What we want is not 
just to tell them stuff, but to give them the experience of being involved in 
how new knowledge is created.”

Prof Hugh Brady, vice-chancellor of Bristol University, says: “We welcome the 
government’s focus on the enhancement of teaching quality in principle, and the 
minister has encouraged dialogue.” But he adds: “UK institutions have a superb 
reputation worldwide, and it would be a shame if the government were to damage 
that through an inappropriate use of metrics.”

In its response to the government’s consultation on the TEF, Oxford University 
says it “has always placed the quality of its teaching at the heart of what it 
does”. But it adds: “We are not convinced that, as currently conceived, the TEF 
will improve the quality of teaching across the sector.”

Historically, students in London have tended to be least satisfied with their 
university experience, with accommodation and travel costs thought to colour 
their judgment. One vice-chancellor warned that universities in big cities 
could be judged more harshly, and that London universities risked being 
“decimated” by the new rankings.

Three reasons why the Teaching Excellence Framework won’t work | Peter Scott
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/02/why-teaching-excellence-framework-tef-metrics-university-fees>
Russell Group universities say they are also frustrated about being asked to 
sign up to something that has not yet been clearly defined. Some predict that 
if the TEF is adopted widely by the government, and used in international 
student recruitment, a judicial review is inevitable. “There is just too much 
at stake,” one says.

Sources close to government suggest that universities hoping to strong-arm 
ministers into a U-turn may be disappointed. Jo Johnson, the universities 
minister,has said 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/teaching-excellence-framework-moves-forward>
: “The framework will give students clear, understandable information about 
where the best teaching is on offer and for the first time place teaching 
quality on a par with research at our universities.” Those close to him say he 
is utterly committed to the new exercise, and willing to risk a dent to the 
reputation of a major university.

Nick Hillman, director of the Higher Education Policy Institute thinktank, 
says refusing to be in the TEF is “likely to be an impotent strategy”. He says 
people outside universities, especially parents, are likely to welcome teaching 
rankings. “There may be a few institutions that refuse to play ball, at least 
to begin with. But they could end up cutting off their nose to spite their face 
because they will want the higher fees and they will want to be in the league 
tables that use the TEF results.”
 