
The Higher Education Policy Institute (Hepi) has released a new report 
<http://www.hepi.ac.uk/2016/09/22/3592/> today looking at the issue of mental 
health among students. It notes that they are less happy than the general 
population, that depression and loneliness now affect one in three of them, and 
that the number of suicides among this group is rising.

We spoke to the report’s author Poppy Brown, a third-year psychology and 
philosophy student at the University of Oxford, who outlined some of her 
recommendations for universities.


Conduct a self-review and create an action plan

“Universities can really learn from each other, a lot of them do have good 
schemes,” Brown explains. “The University of York has created a very
comprehensive action plan 
<https://www.york.ac.uk/media/studenthome/features/2016/Student%20Mental%20Ill-health%20Task%20Group%20Report%20Mar%202016.pdf>
 recently. Collecting data on things other than students reports is important; 
they have ambulance callout figures for self harm and suicide attempts, and 
they spoke to students’ GPs. It’s about working out which processes are working 
and which not, and then looking at what else can be done.”

University staff scared to disclose mental health problems
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/feb/13/university-staff-scared-to-disclose-mental-health-problems>
Train all staff on mental health policy and awareness 

“I haven’t found any examples of universities having it fully right on 
training for mental health, but they are definitely starting to realise its 
importance. Imperial College London employed mental first aid trainers and now 
have about 30 or 40 mental health first-aiders on site. There’s also a pilot at 
Nottingham Trent which is training accommodation staff about mental health, 
which is important – if a student is struggling, they may retreat to their 
accommodation.”

Allow students to be registered with doctors at home and at university

“Unfortunately, this is probably one of the hardest things to achieve, but is 
one of the most important. This is a problem for all students, whether it’s a 
physical or a mental problem. I know that if I want to see a GP out of term 
time, it’s going to be a nightmare. You really need that continuity of care, 
which just isn’t there at the moment.”

Increase funding for counselling and support services

“Some universities do spend enough: for the coming year, the University of 
Sussex is due to spend about £465,000, for example. But that’s not all 
universities. The ones who are currently spending the least need to review 
that. The economic advantage is there; Ruth Caleb, the head of counselling at 
Brunel University, estimates that the service says the university about £2.5m a 
year in fees that would otherwise have been lost.”

Provide support for students with a history of mental health problems

“Disclosure is completely up to the student, as far as I’m aware, but 
universities are encouraging them to declare issues upon application or entry. 
But a lot of students still worry about doing that in case it hinders their 
application. It’s difficult; a university can’t force a care plan on a student, 
but there needs to be better communication and clarification of policies.”

Don't treat students as customers when it comes to mental health
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/apr/28/dont-treat-students-as-customers-when-it-comes-to-mental-health>
Nick Hillman, director of Hepi, said: “Going to university can be stressful, 
especially for first-in-family students. Typically, you lose your established 
support networks, move to a new part of the country and take on large debts. 
Occasionally, it even ends in tragedy.


“It is vital that people entering university for the first time know that 
support is available, that any problems can be shared and that asking for help 
is normal. University support services, academic tutors, student unions, other 
students and the NHS can all help. But we must do more if we are to meet 
demand.”


Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 