
Small changes can make a big difference to the lives of staff with 
disabilities, according to Margaret Stone, principal lecturer at the Leicester 
school of pharmacy at De Montfort University. She co-chairs De Montfort’s staff 
disability group, which the university consults when planning new buildings or 
travel policies.

“Often someone introduces a new idea which is wonderful but there might be one 
little thing that they haven’t thought about. It’s really rewarding to be able 
to mend that for other staff,” says Stone, who has repetitive strain injury.

For example, the group has been able to suggest putting push pads on heavy 
doors that some staff struggle to open. “The university does actually take 
account of what we say– it isn’t just lip service.”

Under the Equality Act 2010 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2010/15/contents>, universities, like 
other employers, have to make reasonable adjustments as soon as staff disclose 
a disability, to ensure that they do not face barriers when carrying out their 
jobs.

Margaret Ayers, director of human resources at Queen Mary University of London 
and secretary of the representative bodyUniversities Human Resources 
<http://www.uhr.ac.uk/>, says the strides that have been made in promoting 
gender equality, thanks to the Athena Swan initiative, are making universities 
more attuned to other forms of inequality.

Many have been putting effort into supporting students with disabilities in 
recent years, she says, and now realise that staff need it too.


“There is probably more we need to do to get line managers to realise what 
their responsibilities are,” she says. “Some don’t always understand what they 
can do with reasonable adjustments or what support might be available to help 
people with a disability get back into the workplace. If you are not 
experienced it can be quite overwhelming.”

Many UK universities are members of the Two Ticks scheme (recently replaced by 
theDisability Confident scheme 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/disability-confident-campaign>), 
awarded by the Department for Work and Pensions’ Jobcentre Plus to help job 
applicants identify organisations committed to helping workers with 
disabilities.

Some have also signed up to DisabledGo <http://www.disabledgo.com/>, which 
provides information about accessibility in public places. This can be a 
particular problem for institutions with buildings that are more than 100 years 
old.

Also, making disability “discussable” is particularly important, says Valerie 
Russell Emott, equality and diversity manager at UWE Bristol, because people 
are often worried about declaring a disability or asking for support.

Her university offers training in awareness of different disabilities, runs a 
disability awareness month and records separately absences related to 
disability. It also offers help with applying for governmentAccess to Work 
grants <https://www.gov.uk/access-to-work/overview>. “It is about getting the 
best from everybody we have,” she says.

Mona Patel, equality and diversity specialist at Manchester Metropolitan 
University and co-founder of the National Association of Disabled Staff 
Networks, says addressing disability is no longer considered niche. “It’s not 
just about compliance,” she says.

The IT manager: ‘This job is the perfect fit’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhigher-education-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Funiversities-wise-up-to-the-needs-of-staff-with-disabilities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f4dad135c5f08849c96017bea6af8b9043754c9%2F0_558_960_882%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Universities%20wise%20up%20to%20the%20needs%20of%20staff%20with%20disabilities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhigher-education-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Funiversities-wise-up-to-the-needs-of-staff-with-disabilities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Universities%20wise%20up%20to%20the%20needs%20of%20staff%20with%20disabilities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhigher-education-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Funiversities-wise-up-to-the-needs-of-staff-with-disabilities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f4dad135c5f08849c96017bea6af8b9043754c9%2F0_558_960_882%2F960.jpg>
 “The people interviewing me focused on me and my skills,” says Fay Harrison. 
Photograph: Fabio De Paola 
When Fay Harrison first applied for jobs after qualifying as a professional 
librarian she found it impossible to get an interview. When she stopped 
mentioning her brittle bone condition in the application she would get 
interviews but no job offer.

Then she applied to Nottingham Trent University – at the time known as Trent 
Polytechnic. “The people who interviewed me were fabulous,” she says. “They 
focused on me and my skills and not my disability.”

 Harrison is still there 33 years later and has been promoted in to different 
roles and is now e-systems team manager. “While I’m a librarian by profession, 
I have morphed into IT. It really suits me. It is desk-based but gives me 
contact with a lot of people. It has been the perfect fit.”

Over the years her condition has worsened – she now needs to use a mobility 
scooter – but her changing needs have been accommodated, she says.

For example, the university has allowed her to work full-time hours but four 
days a week, giving her Wednesdays off to “recharge her body batteries” and she 
can also work from home if she is feeling tired, so long as she does not have 
meetings to attend.

Harrison says she has a dedicated parking space and level access to the 
building. She also has a bespoke chair and desk and is given enough space 
around the desk for her to park her scooter. When her and her team have needed 
to move into new buildings occupational health and health and safety officers 
helped to work out whether the new space is likely to raise any problems.

 A network of staff with disabilities has also been established. The network 
is often asked for advice on the implications of new university projects for 
people with disabilities, which means problems can be prevented before they 
arise.

With this support in place, Harrison feels she has been able to work hard and 
progress in her role. “Had I been working with another employer, I wouldn’t 
have progressed in the way I have.”

For more on diversity in the UK’s universities, see the supplement in the 
Guardian newspaper on Tuesday 22 November.

Join the higher education network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/> for more comment, analysis 
and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow us on Twitter@gdnhighered 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an idea for a story, please 
read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 