
Loughborough University, famous for its athletic prowess, has leapfrogged into 
the top five in the newGuardian University Guide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/universityguide>.

While the top three places were retained by Cambridge, Oxford and St Andrews, 
Loughborough jumped seven places to join Surrey in fourth. The university – 
which was Team GB’s preparation HQ in the run-up to the London Olympics – was 
particularly boosted by the success of its engineering department. It ranked 
highly for its fashion and textiles, as well as design and crafts courses.


Cambridge, which held on to the top spot in the Guardian’s main league table 
for the sixth year in a row, increased its dominance across the specialist 
tables, coming top in 12 subject areas.


Other universities rising through the rankings include Leeds (moved from 23 to 
16), Falmouth (31 to 21) and City – which jumped from 37 to 18, making it the 
fastest climber in this year’s top 20.


The Guardian’s league tables rank universities according to: spending per 
student; the student/staff ratio; graduate career prospects; what grades 
applicants need to get a place; a value-added score that compares students’ 
entry qualifications with their final degree results; and how satisfied 
final-year students are with their courses, based on results from the annual 
National Student Survey (NSS). Specialist tables also rank universities by 
subject area.


It was a rise in satisfaction ratings – especially among journalism and 
accounting and finance students – that helped drive City University’s climb 
through the tables.


Professor Sir Paul Curran, vice-chancellor, says the university has focused on 
investing in staff and better facilities.

“It’s about hearing what the students say, making sure we support our staff to 
provide high quality education, and also making sure the routine things are 
done – like students get their work back on time,” he says.


Bob Allison, vice-chancellor of Loughborough University, puts Loughborough’s 
success down to having a clear focus.


“Many university strategies are unbelievably long and very complex. My view is 
there’s little point in doing that. Most people won’t read it and they cannot 
then understand what we are trying to achieve. You can put our university 
strategy on one side of paper. I said, keep it really really simple. Focus on 
no more than three or four things that will make a serious difference.”

Those things are supporting staff, increasing the university’s international 
reach, raising standards – and “recognising that all students who come here are 
making a serious commitment and we have to commit to them”.

Loughborough’s rise
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Funiversity-league-table-loughborough-races-into-top-five%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3d35fd78bfffd348005e7ef4359d81800a6f6d4%2F0_161_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=University%20league%20table%3A%20Loughborough%20races%20into%20top%20five&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Funiversity-league-table-loughborough-races-into-top-five%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=University%20league%20table%3A%20Loughborough%20races%20into%20top%20five&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Funiversity-league-table-loughborough-races-into-top-five%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3d35fd78bfffd348005e7ef4359d81800a6f6d4%2F0_161_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Loughborough is becoming increasingly sought-after among university 
applicants, says its vice-chancellor. Photograph: Loughborough University 
Had Loughborough been a commonwealth country, its athletes would have put it 
11th in the medals table at the 2014 Commonwealth Games. Its alumni include 
sports stars Sebastian Coe, Paula Radcliffe and Tanni Grey-Thompson. Now it is 
concentrating on stepping up the pace academically too.

The university moved into the top spot for fashion and textiles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ng-interactive/2016/may/23/university-guide-2017-league-table-for-fashion-textiles>
 in the Guardian league tables, is second fordesign and crafts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ng-interactive/2016/may/23/university-league-tables-2017#S410>
, third inchemistry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ng-interactive/2016/may/23/university-guide-2017-league-table-for-chemistry>
 and fifth injournalism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ng-interactive/2016/may/23/university-guide-2017-league-table-for-journalism-publishing-and-pr>
. Increased entry tariffs in almost every subject stand out as one reason for 
this impressive performance.


Allison says this is not because the university has a burning desire to 
compete with the elite Russell Group of top research universities. “I want 
Loughborough to be known for Loughborough,” he says. “Not because we are part 
of some group.” But so many students now want to go there that the university 
can afford to be choosy.

Particularly striking is the strong showing of its engineering schools, which 
provide nearly 40% of the university’s student body and together recruit more 
undergraduate engineers than any other UK institution. Loughborough’smechanical 
engineering 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ng-interactive/2016/may/23/university-league-tables-2017#S190>
 is now third in the Guardian’s tables. Itsmaterials engineering 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ng-interactive/2016/may/23/university-league-tables-2017#S180>
 is second. Allison says the number of engineers “sets a bit of an ethos for 
the place. There’s a work ethic that rubs off on all of the students”.

Rachel Thomson, professor of materials engineering and dean of the school of 
aeronautical, automotive, chemical and materials engineering, says engineering 
has benefited from strong partnerships between students, staff, professional 
bodies and employers. “We are building on a long established reputation for 
engineering education,” she says. “I think we do a lot of things to offer 
opportunities for our students.”


More than 1,220 Loughborough students took up work placements last year – 
around 400 of them engineering students. The placements help boost student 
employability: 94% of Loughborough’s graduates go into employment or further 
study, and of those in full-time employment, 90% take up professional or 
managerial roles.


Allison also sees the placements as a way to achieve a diverse student body: 
the promise of a paid placement helps to encourage applications from students 
from disadvantaged backgrounds.


The main challenge now, says Allison, is to maintain Loughborough’s position 
among the pace setters.

“Everyone looks at it from the outside and sees sport,” says Bryn Wilkes, 
vice-president, media, at Loughborough’s students’ union. “But for me, what 
makes the place great is the other things sport can bring – friendly 
competition underpins it. Everyone wants to be as good as they can be.”

 