
The shadow defence secretary, Nia Griffith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nia-griffith>, was said by sources to be 
“absolutely furious” on Wednesday night after a spokesman for Jeremy Corbyn 
appeared to question the recent decision to send British troops to Estonia.

Briefing journalists after prime minister’s questions, in which Corbyn pressed 
Theresa May over the health service, the spokesman suggested both sides, Russia 
andNato <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato>, had to share the blame for 
the recent souring of relations.

Labour will continue to back Trident, shadow defence secretary says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/13/labour-continue-back-trident-shadow-defence-secretary-nia-griffith>
Asked whether Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> supported 
the government’s decision to send 800 troops to Estonia as part of a Nato 
taskforce, he said: “Jeremy has expressed concerns about that being one of the 
escalations of tensions that have taken place.”

Griffith, who has visited the troops in Estonia and had earlier used an 
interview with Forces TV to express staunch support for Nato, was said to be 
“absolutely furious” about the remarks.

In Griffith’s interview, given hours earlier, she said: “I think it’s very, 
very, important that we now play a very strong role in Nato, particularly as we 
are leaving the European union. I think it’s very important for Nato to be 
absolutely clear, following what has happened in Ukraine, that we are standing 
together as Nato nations and there is no way that we would tolerate any attack 
on any one of our member states.”

Nato and Russia playing dangerous game with military build-up
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/27/military-build-up-along-russias-border-no-cause-for-alarm>
Usually regarded as an ally of Corbyn, Griffith was handed the post when Clive 
Lewis was moved to the business brief.

In the briefing Corbyn’s spokesman also said: “Jeremy has said repeatedly that 
he has lots of criticisms of the Russian government, both in relation to what 
has happened in the Middle East and domestically. But what we don’t want to see 
is a ratcheting up of tensions between Russia and the west, as has been taking 
place. We want talks and engagement to wind down military tensions, 
particularly on the Russian/Nato border and in the Middle East.”

The spokesman also appeared to reopen an argument about whether Corbyn 
believed Nato members were bound to offer military support if a fellow member 
were attacked. Asked what would happen if, for example, Russia invaded Estonia, 
the spokesman said the appropriate response could fall short of military action.

He said: “Article 5 [of the Nato treaty] means that if there is an attack on 
another Nato state there has to be a response by Nato members – it doesn’t 
define what that response should be. In practice, if you see from the wording 
of the treaty, that can be a whole range of things. But what we’re looking for 
is a reduction of tension and a negotiated engagement.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Flabour-in-turmoil-as-corbyn-briefing-clashes-with-defence-position%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a65e2c2b612a845808462687614954cd9591d5a%2F0_653_2731_1638%2F2731.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Unrest%20in%20Labour%20ranks%20amid%20mixed%20messages%20over%20Nato%20mission&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Flabour-in-turmoil-as-corbyn-briefing-clashes-with-defence-position%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Unrest%20in%20Labour%20ranks%20amid%20mixed%20messages%20over%20Nato%20mission&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Flabour-in-turmoil-as-corbyn-briefing-clashes-with-defence-position%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a65e2c2b612a845808462687614954cd9591d5a%2F0_653_2731_1638%2F2731.jpg>
 Labour MP Mike Gapes, who has spoken for ‘collective defence’. Photograph: 
John Stilwell/PA 
Some Labour backbenchers also voiced unhappiness. The Ilford South MP, Mike 
Gapes, tweeted: “Labour Attlee established Nato. Under Blair enlarged to Baltic 
States. Article 5 collective defence absolutely essential for all members.”

The fresh row came as Corbyn’s team pronounced themselves pleased with his 
populist new-year relaunch, and said he would continue to promise radical 
action to tackle inequality in the coming weeks. Corbyn had raised the prospect 
of legislating for a “maximum wage”, in apparently unscripted remarks during a 
radio interview Tuesday morning as part of a wave of media appearances. In a 
speech later in the day he floated other proposals, including using government 
contracts to encourage firms to limit the pay ratio between lowest-paid workers 
and chief executives.

Some Labour MPs were left confused about his stance on the issue of 
immigration, on which his party is deeply divided. “People are just in 
despair,” said one sceptical backbencher after the leader appeared to retreat 
from plans to stress he had no objection to immigration controls.

But Corbyn’s advisers believe the details of party policy are less important 
to the public than the general idea that he is ready to challenge vested 
interests, and they hope his strong language on fat cat pay will play well. 
They draw a parallel between the pay ratio plans, and Ed Miliband’s policy of a 
price freeze for energy suppliers, which was criticised by business leaders but 
which sent the message that Labour would be prepared to face down powerful 
corporations.

“It opened up a debate, and the public had to respond,” said one adviser. “The 
water cooler debate in the workplace will be ‘that makes sense to me, it’s 
about fairness’.”

Corbyn’s team hope to play up his unvarnished style and credentials as a 
political outsider to tap into voters’ frustrations about mainstream politics.
 