
US airstrikes have killed three key leaders of the Islamic State group in 
Syria, including two involved in last year’sattacks in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris-attacks>, according to the US defense 
secretary, Ash Carter.

He announced the killings on Tuesday during an address to US airmen at a 
military base in Italy.

“I can confirm today we took out three of Isil’s key leaders in the last 
couple of weeks by one strike. These were guys linked to plots right here in 
Europe … for example with the Paris attacks,” Carter said,referring to the 
November 2015 attacks in Paris that killed 130 people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2015/nov/13/shootings-reported-in-eastern-paris-live>
.

Carter’s spokesman, Peter Cook, said later that the three were killed in an 
airstrike on 4 December in Raqqa.

Cook said the two involved in the Paris attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris-attacks>, Salah Gourmat and Sammy 
Djedou, were close associates of Islamic State external operations leader Abu 
Mohammed al-Adnani, who was killed in August.

He said the third person, Walid Hamman, had been convicted in absentia in 
Belgium for a disrupted 2015 planned attack.

Coalition airstrikes in Iraq and Syria have been taking out an increasing 
number ofIslamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> leaders in 
recent months, aided by improved intelligence gathering from forces on the 
ground and from treasure troves of information collected as Isis has been 
driven out of neighborhoods.

Asked at a news conference later about the Islamic State’s ability to quickly 
replace leaders and operatives who are killed in US airstrikes, Carter said his 
announcement on Tuesday was a reminder that US counter-Isis operations are 
aimed at protecting the American homeland.

Isis loses control of Libyan city of Sirte
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/isis-loses-control-of-libyan-city-of-sirte>
“We remained focused on, and are consistently operating against, those who 
intend to conduct attacks upon the United States,” he said. “That’s an 
important priority. That is the priority the president gives us.”

Carter also said that with the elimination of the final pocket of Isis 
resistance in the Libyan city of Sirte, the US has “concluded” its support to 
the Government of National Accord in its lengthy effort to regain control of 
that coastal city.

“That doesn’t eliminate Isil from Libya,” he said, using an alternative 
acronym for the militant organization. “Sirte was their most important single 
nest and stronghold in Libya, but as it appears other places, we are prepared 
to take action.”
 