
The governments of the US and Ecuador have denied that they conspired to 
silenceJulian Assange <https://www.theguardian.com/media/julian-assange>, after 
the WikiLeaks founder’s internet access was cut off at his London embassy home 
to stop him releasing damaging information aboutHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>’s US election campaign.


Ecuador confirmed late on Tuesday 
<http://www.cancilleria.gob.ec/en/official-communique_2/> that it had 
intervened at the weekend to temporarily restrict Assange’s internet access, 
pointing to a “wealth” ofWikiLeaks <https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks>
 publications “impacting on the US election campaign” as the reason. WikiLeaks 
has released successive dumps of damaging material over recent months from 
inside the Democratic party and the Clinton campaign, which the US government 
has blamed on Russian state hacking.

“The government of Ecuador <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ecuador> 
respects the principle of non-intervention in the internal affairs of other 
states,” Ecuador’s foreign ministry said in a statement. “It does not interfere 
in external electoral processes, nor does it favour any particular candidate.”

The statement, in which Ecuador stressed that it “does not yield to pressure 
from other states”, followed claims by WikiLeaks that John Kerry, the US 
secretary of state, had requested a private meeting with Ecuador last month – 
during a visit to Colombia toshow support for a peace deal with leftwing rebels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/27/colombia-farc-peace-deal-resounds-homeland-uribe>
 – specifically to ask the country to block Assange.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fus-ecuador-deny-conspiring-to-take-julian-assange-wikileaks-offline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb75164caacf5671d307186dc6fc4321764457f02%2F0_0_2670_3987%2F2670.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=US%20and%20Ecuador%20deny%20conspiring%20to%20take%20Julian%20Assange%20offline&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fus-ecuador-deny-conspiring-to-take-julian-assange-wikileaks-offline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=US%20and%20Ecuador%20deny%20conspiring%20to%20take%20Julian%20Assange%20offline&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fus-ecuador-deny-conspiring-to-take-julian-assange-wikileaks-offline%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb75164caacf5671d307186dc6fc4321764457f02%2F0_0_2670_3987%2F2670.jpg>
 Pamela Anderson visited Julian Assange in the embassy on Saturday. Photograph: 
Ben A. Pruchnie/Getty Images 
The US state department also denied the claim, saying reports of the meeting 
were “simply untrue”. “While our concerns about WikiLeaks are longstanding, any 
suggestion that secretary Kerry or the state department were involved in 
shutting downWikiLeaks <https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks> is false,” 
State Department spokesman John Kirby said in a statement. His deputy, Mark 
Toner, added later that Kerry had not even met with the Ecuador delegation 
during the talks. “There just was no meeting,” he said. “They didn’t discuss 
any of this stuff.”

The confirmation that Ecuador had shut down the internet at least put to rest 
one bizarre rumour 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/10/17/conspiracy-theorists-pamela-anderson-poisoned-julian-assange-with-a-vegan-sandwich.html>
, which surfaced after the Baywatch actress Pamela Anderson visited Assange in 
the embassy on Saturday, telling reporters she had brought him a vegan sandwich 
from Pret a Manger.

Three WikiLeaks tweets after her visit, labelled “pre-commitments 
<https://twitter.com/wikileaks/status/787777344740163584>” and containing 
strings of code, led to a brief, feverish conspiracy theory that Assange could 
be dead – with some even pointing to the sandwich as a possible culprit – 
before the site explained its connection had been “intentionally severed by a 
state party”.

Neither WikiLeaks nor Ecuador’s foreign ministry responded to requests for 
comment on Wednesday, and it is unclear whether Assange will have been able to 
restore his internet access independently. The journalist John Pilger, a close 
ally and frequent visitor of Assange in the embassy, told the Guardian that 
Assange “will have a contingency”, and stressed that WikiLeaks was bigger than 
its founder.

“I can’t imagine that the restrictions will stop the leaks or deter WikiLeaks 
and Assange,” he said. “The significance of the action by Ecuador, which is 
clearly under pressure, is to show how frightened the US establishment is of 
further revelations reaching the public about its preferred presidential 
candidate.”

WikiLeaks said it had “activated the appropriate contingency plans”, and has 
continued to tweet links <https://twitter.com/wikileaks> to its stream of 
damaging email leaks, most recently from the personal email account of the 
chairman of Clinton’s election campaign, John Podesta. They included 
transcripts from speeches made to Goldman Sachs bankers in which sheavoided any 
direct criticism of Wall Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/16/wikileaks-hillary-clinton-wall-street-goldman-sachs-speeches>
, raising questions of an overly cosy relationship with the banking 
establishment.

But for a man who cannot move beyond a handful of rooms in what is, in 
essence, a modest apartment, even the temporary loss of his connection with the 
outside world will be a significant blow and troubling development. Ecuador’s 
move to silence him points starkly to frustrations at some of Assange’s 
activities while on diplomatic premises.

Periodic rumours have emerged of strains between Assange and his Ecuadorean 
hosts in the more than four years he has lived in the embassy. Confidential 
embassy documentsleaked to Buzzfeed News 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/jamesball/mr-white-and-mr-blue?utm_term=.drzw9qy5p#.co8Y50zd2>
 last year revealed Assange had a late-night scuffle with a security guard in 
the embassy who said he had found the Australian tampering with security 
equipment in its secure room (Assange said the guard had accosted him).


The documents also showed that embassy staff painstakingly monitor Assange’s 
movements – referring to him as “Mr Guest” – and contained references both to 
the stressful situation in which he lives and his “evident anger” and “feelings 
of superiority”.

From liberal beacon to a prop for Trump: what has happened to WikiLeaks?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/14/wiileaks-from-liberal-beacon-to-a-prop-for-trump-what-has-happened>
Asked about occasional strains to the relationship, Pilger said: “When I met 
Ecuador’s foreign minister and other officials not long ago, they spoke highly 
of Assange and Ecuador’s commitment to protect him. I have always regarded this 
small country’s decision to give him asylum and refuge as a rare example of 
principle and courage.”

For the foreseeable future, US election or not, Assange is unlikely to be 
going anywhere. Sweden is still seeking to extradite him over a rape allegation 
that he denies, and he says that he could face onward extradition to the US, 
where WikiLeaks is being investigated over the Cablegate releases in 2010.

“Ecuador granted political asylum to Julian Assange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/julian-assange> in 2012 based on his 
legitimate fears of political persecution,” the country’s statement said, 
adding that it “reaffirms the asylum granted to [him] and reiterates its 
intention to safeguard his life and physical integrity until he reaches a safe 
place”.
 