
The ACT exam used by colleges across America to test entrance candidates has 
been cancelled for all test-takers in South Korea and Hong Kong inthe latest 
outbreak of suspected cheating by east Asian students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/28/china-nationals-cheating-college-tests>
.


 The cancellation on Saturday marked the first time the high-stakes exam had 
been scrapped for an entire country, according to ACT spokesman Ed Colby.

 ACT, the Iowa-based nonprofit that operates the test, said it halted the test 
after discovering that it had leaked in advance.

 “ACT has just received credible evidence that test materials intended for 
administration in these regions have been compromised,” it said in a statement.

Cuts to public financial aid making it harder than ever to get a college degree
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/us-money-blog/2016/jun/02/college-debt-graduation-government-loans-millennial-finance>
 The cancellation came only hours before students were to take the exam, which 
is used by most US colleges to assess applicants and which is sat by close to 
two million students every year.

 Colby declined to discuss how the test had leaked or where. He said ACT 
discovered evidence of the breach on Friday.

 Colby said the cancellation affected about 5,500 students who were scheduled 
to take the test at 56 different centers. They will receive refunds of 
registration fees. He said it was “not feasible” to reschedule the exam; the 
ACT will not be administered again until September.

 “It impacts innocent students who had no involvement in any kind of wrong 
activities,” he said.

South Korea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-korea> has become 
notorious for standardized-test cheating rings. In May 2013, the College Board, 
which administers the rival SAT college-entrance exam, was forced to cancel its 
test for the country because exam materials had leaked. Tutors and owners of 
private South Korean test-cram companies currently are on trial in Seoul in 
that incident.

 Test security issues are not limited to South Korea. A vibrant industry in 
China 
<http://www.reuters.com/investigates/special-report/college-cheating-iowa/> has 
been exploiting the College Board’s practice of recycling SAT test forms by 
acquiring past exams and feeding their clients test questions in advance.

 Since October 2014, the College Board has delayed issuing test scores in Asia 
six times and cancelled an exam sitting in two locations there – steps that the 
New York-based not-for-profit takes when it has evidence that test materials 
have been compromised.

 Overseas demand for taking the ACT and the SAT is rising as more and more 
foreign students seek entry into American universities. The ACT surpassed the 
SAT in the United States as the most widely taken college entrance test in 
2012. The ACT trails the SAT outside America, but has been growing rapidly 
abroad in recent years, according to ACT officials.
 