
The US government has eased sanctions against Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/sudan>, in a step towards normalising 
relations with a designated terrorism sponsor whose leader has been indicted on 
war crimes charges.


US officials say the change in policy towards the east African state is a 
response to steps taken by the government towards improving humanitarian access 
and lowering violence internally, as well as “cooperation with the United 
States on counterterrorism and addressing regional conflicts”.

The moves come amid a general shift of alliances and diplomatic priorities in 
east Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/13/sudan-men-arrested-saudi-arabia-strikes>
, as major world and regional powers seek influence in an unstable but 
important part of the continent.


“This is definitely a geopolitical decision. It is not about values, democracy 
and human rights,” said Ahmed Soliman, an expert in EastAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> at Chatham House, the London 
thinktank.

President Omar al-Bashir <https://www.theguardian.com/world/omar-al-bashir>, 
who took power in a military coup in 1989, faces genocide charges at the 
international criminal court.

However, the veteran leader has has been welcomed by leaders across Africa and 
there have been intensifying contacts between Khartoum and the European Union 
too, prompted largely by concerns over immigration.

The order signed by Barack Obama 
<https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/Programs/Documents/SSR_amendment.pdf>
 in the last days of his administration will allow US firms to trade in Sudan.

“Treasury’s sanctions are aimed at encouraging a change in behaviour, and in 
the case of Sudan, our sanctions were intended to pressure the Government of
Sudan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/sudan> to change the way it treats its 
people,” said Adam J Szubin, acting under secretary for terrorism and financial 
intelligence, in a statement.

Szubin said the decision aim “to further incentivize the Government of Sudan 
to continue to improve its conduct”.

The new US move is controversial. Amnesty International alleged last year that 
Sudanese government forces used chemical weapons against civilians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/29/sudan-children-babies-alleged-chemical-weapon-attacks-amnesty>
, including babies and young children, in one of the most remote parts of the 
restive Darfur region as recently as September.

The group Human Rights Watch called the decision “inexplicable”, alleging that 
Sudan’s government continued to commit war crimes, while US-based campaigners 
called the new US policy “premature”.

“We will certainly seek to work with the US Congress to see some of these 
sanctions restored, modernised and codified in the coming months,” John 
Prendergast, director of the Washington DC-based anti-genocide group, the 
Enough Project, told Reuters.

Sanctions were initially imposed on Sudan in 1993 due to its role as a host 
and backer of terrorist groups including Osama bin Laden’s al-Qaida, which was 
in effect based in Khartoum between 1991 and 1996. Targets in Sudan, including 
a veterinary medicine factory, were hit by US missiles following the double 
bombing of US embassies in east Africa in 1998.

Sudan, once a pariah state, has gradually shifted away from its role as a 
leader and supporter of Islamist movements over recent decades.

However, sanctions were continued in response to extensive human rights abuses 
perpetrated by Sudanese forces against civilians in Darfur, the western region 
gripped by bloodshed since 2003, when rebels took up arms against the 
government, accusing it of discrimination and neglect. The United Nations says 
300,000 people have died in the conflict and 2.7 million have fled their homes.

US officials say humanitarian access will be monitored and review mechanisms 
allow the easing of sanctions to be reversed.

Khartoum remains, with Syria and Iran, 
<https://www.state.gov/j/ct/list/c14151.htm> one of three states in the world 
designated as a sponsor of terrorism by the US and the White House has stressed 
that a broad set of economic and financial sanctions against Sudan remains in 
place.

The Sudanese economy, which has been hit by low oil prices, the secession of 
South Sudan and continuing internal crises, could receive a boost as a result 
of the US decision.



Magnus Taylor, a Nairobi-based analyst at the International Crisis Group, said 
many international powers had long wanted to work with Sudan but internal 
conflicts there had stymied hopes of improved relations.
“On the migration issue in particular, the international community now wants 
to work with Sudan and it is felt that isolation has not helped come up with 
solutions,” Taylor said.

It is unclear if the new diplomatic outreach – aimed in part at encouraging 
moderate voices – will be continued by the incoming Trump administration, which 
takes office on 20 January.

Officials told the Associated Press the new approach signalled an admission 
that years of limited US engagement with Khartoum had not produced the desired 
result.

 Such an acknowledgement fits with a general pattern under Obama of 
rapprochement with states long seen as “rogue” or “antagonistic”, including 
Cuba, Iran and Myanmar.

It also fits a pattern of the US prioritizing security assistance, 
particularly the fight against Islamic extremism, or short-term contribution to 
stability over democracy when choosing key allies in much of Africa.

The US government hinted at a policy shift last autumn.

In September, the state department issued a statement welcoming Khartoum’s 
cooperation in fighting Islamic extremist groups, without mentioning any 
specific development or reason for the public release.

 It said Sudan had taken “important steps” to take on Islamic State and other 
such organizations, adding that the US would work with the country on security 
matters while pressing it on human rights and democracy.

Sudan shares a border with Libya and Egypt, both troubled by Islamic militant 
activity linked to Isis.

Sudanese men arrested in Saudi Arabia for supporting 'stay-at-home' strikes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/13/sudan-men-arrested-saudi-arabia-strikes>
The Israeli newspaper Haaretz reported last year 
<http://www.haaretz.com/israel-news/.premium-1.740676> that Israel was lobbying 
the US and Europe to improve relations with Sudan after Khartoum cracked down 
on shipments of suspected Iranian weapons to groups hostile to the Jewish state.

Sudan has swapped a relationship with Iran for one with Saudi Arabia and other 
Sunni Muslim monarchies.

The arrests of two Sudanese men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/13/sudan-men-arrested-saudi-arabia-strikes>
 inSaudi Arabia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> after they 
posted about their support for protests in their home country on Facebook 
reflects thewarming of relations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/12/sudan-siding-with-saudi-arabia-long-term-ally-iran>
 between Bashir’s government and the kingdom.

Sudan signed up to join in the Saudi-led airstrike campaign in Yemen in 2015 
and wasone of only three states 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/sudan-saudi-diplomacy-idUSL8N14V2WV20160112> to 
sever ties with Iran when the Saudi embassy in Tehran was torched in 
retaliation for the execution of prominent Shia cleric.

Bashir last week received an invitation from King Abdullah of Jordan to 
participate in the 28th Arab League Summit in Amman in March.



 