
The US military has grounded its fleet of Osprey aircraft in Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> after one crash-landed in the sea 
near Okinawa, in an incident that will fuel further local anger over the US 
deployment on the island.

The Pentagon described the incident on Tuesday night as a “mishap” and said 
the tilt-rotorMV-22 Osprey 
<http://www.marines.com/operating-forces/equipment/aircraft/mv-22-osprey> had 
landed in shallow water 0.6 miles (1km) off the coast of Nago in northern 
Okinawa. Five crew members were injured.

But TV footage suggested it had been more serious, with the main wings of the 
transport aircraft broken in two and the half-submerged fuselage drifting in 
the sea.

The Osprey’s safety record has caused concern among Okinawans since they were 
deployed in 2012 atmarine corps airbase Futenma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/12/us-promises-reduce-military-okinawa-airbase-futenma>
. The failure to date to relocate the base to an offshore site near Nago has 
frustrated US plans to reduce its military footprint in the island.

Okinawa makes up less than 1% of Japan’s total area, but hosts three-quarters 
of US bases and more than half of the 47,000 US troops stationed in the 
country, a burden that has added to anti-base sentiment.

The governor of Okinawa, Takeshi Onaga, is leading a campaign to block 
Futenma’s move 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/14/okinawa-governor-to-block-construction-of-new-us-airbase>
 to an offshore location in theHenoko district of Nago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/11/us-envoy-okinawa-dispute-caroline-kennedy>
. Instead, Onaga wants the base to be moved off the island altogether.

The incident will do little to allay fears that the Osprey is accident-prone. 
The aircraft has been involved in several fatal accidents in other countries, 
including one in Hawaii in May 2015 in whicha crew member died 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/18/us-marine-killed-and-21-injured-after-osprey-aircraft-crashes-in-hawaii>
. Kyodo News reported that a second Osprey had to conduct a belly-landing, in 
which a plane lands without its landing gear fully extended, at Futenma on 
Tuesday night.

The Japanese prime minister, Shinzo Abe, said the crash-landing in the sea was 
“regrettable” and “securing safety is a prerequisite” for the aircraft’s 
deployment inJapan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>.

Onaga described it as “outrageous”, while the mayor of Nago, Susumu Inamine, 
told public broadcaster NHK: “This is what we have feared might happen some 
day. We can never live safely here.”

Japan’s defence minister, Tomomi Inada, called for all Osprey flights to be 
suspended until safety assurances could be given. “It is deplorable that the 
accident occurred at a time when people in Okinawa and other areas in Japan are 
taking a considerable interest in the safety of the Osprey,” she said.

Later, the US military <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-military> said 
the crash appeared to have been caused by an oil duct problem while the 
aircraft was being refuelled in the air.

US marines say Ospreys are vital to their ability to quickly move large 
numbers of troops and equipment to regional flashpoints, such as in response to 
an emergency in theSouth China Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea> or East China Sea.

Each MV-22 Osprey can carry 24 combat-ready marines. The aircraft is able to 
take off like a helicopter, but has the speed and range of a turboprop plane.

The US has two Osprey squadrons in Japan, although military officials refuse 
to reveal the number of aircraft in operation. A squadron typically comprises 
between 12 and 24 aircraft.

Japan’s ground self-defence forces plan to start flying 17 Ospreys from April 
2019, according to local media.

 