
The US military has deliberately conducted an airstrike on a hospital in the 
Iraqi city of Mosul, it said on Wednesday, after saying its Iraqi allies came 
under fire byIslamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> fighters 
from the hospital complex.

US Central Command (Centcom) said it launched a “precision strike” on a 
building within the al-Salem hospital complex from which Isis fighters had for 
more than a day launched “heavy” machine gun and rocket-propelled grenade fire 
on Iraqi forces.

The battle for Mosul stalls: 'we are fighting the devil himself'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/battle-for-mosul-stalls-islamic-state-stronghold-iraq>
The coalition did not say if any patients or civilians were present at the 
scene of the airstrike on the “building on the hospital complex” nor did it 
answer a question about any noncombatants being killed or wounded.

It is also unclear if the strike ended the described threat from Isis fighters 
at al-Salem hospital, on the east side of the besieged city. US and Iraqi 
fighters have for weeksbattled to regain control of Mosul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/17/us-military-troops-on-ground-mosul-iraq-isis-obama>
, Iraq’s second city, Isis’s last major redoubt in the country.

The Iraqis requested the aerial support, Centcom said in a Wednesday 
statement, after taking sustained fire from Isis within the complex following a 
day-plus-long push to take the hospital back.

The Guardian is unable to independently verify Centcom’s account at present. 
Social media accounts havepublished video 
<https://twitter.com/geopolitiquee/status/806206001649225728/video/1> 
purporting to show Isis conducting suicide bombings with explosive-laden 
vehicles at the hospital complex, which Centcom alluded to in its statement.

Over the past two years, airstrikes from a variety of militaries – US, Russian 
and Saudi – have hit hospitals in Afghanistan, Syria, Yemen and nowIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>. Human rights groups have warned that 
the increase in attacks on hospitals threatens to deal a durable blow to the 
recognized concept of sanctuaries in war.

US military admits killing two dozen Syrian civilians in July airstrike
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/01/us-military-syria-civilian-death-bombing-manbij>
In a poll released this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/torture-survey-red-cross-people-on-war-poll>
, the International Committee of the Red Cross found that 82% of people 
surveyed in 16 countries considered it wrong to attack “hospitals, ambulances 
and health-care workers in order to weaken the enemy”. The proportion of people 
agreeing drops to 79% when only residents of the US, Russia, China, UK, France 
and Switzerland are questioned.

In October 2015, a US AC-130 gunship opened fire on a Médecins Sans Frontières 
hospital in Kunduz, Afghanistan, a city the Taliban had overrun. The strike 
left 42 civilians dead.

The US military changed its account 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/06/doctors-without-borders-airstrike-afghanistan-us-account-changes-again>
 of the disaster multiple times in the days after the Kunduz airstrike. 
Critically, it said the strike hit insurgents who were staging attacks on US 
and allied Afghan fighters, only to determine through a subsequent military 
investigation that no enemy fighters operated out of the hospital, and US had 
confused the hospital for a different area used by the Taliban.
 