
An airstrike by the US-led coalition operating against Islamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> militants near the northern Iraqi city 
of Mosul hit a van in a hospital compound parking lot and may have killed 
civilians, the US military said on Thursday.

'A more dangerous long-term threat': Al-Qaida grows as Isis retreats
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/29/a-more-dangerous-long-term-threat-al-qaida-grows-as-isis-retreats>
 A van carrying Isis fighters was targeted and hit in the airstrike, the 
Combined Joint Strike Force said in a statement.

“The van was struck in what was later determined to be a hospital compound 
parking lot resulting in possible civilian casualties,” it said.

Earlier this month, the US said it had targeted a hospital complex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/07/islamic-state-iraq-mosul-hospital-airstrike-us-military>
 in Mosul which was being used by Isis fighters.

In the past two years airstrikes from US, Russian and Saudi planes have hit 
hospitals inAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/06/doctors-without-borders-airstrike-afghanistan-us-account-changes-again>
, Syria, Yemen and Iraq, andcaused many civilian casualties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/01/us-military-syria-civilian-death-bombing-manbij>
.

Fighting continued in eastern Mosul on Thursday, as Iraqi troops backed by 
airstrikes and artillery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/29/iraqi-troops-resume-push-to-take-mosul-from-isis-after-two-week-lull>
 broke a two-week lull in fighting with a multi-pronged assault.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fhow-important-is-mosul-for-isis-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20important%20is%20Mosul%20for%20Isis%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fhow-important-is-mosul-for-isis-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20important%20is%20Mosul%20for%20Isis%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fhow-important-is-mosul-for-isis-video-explainer&media=>
How important is Mosul for Isis? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/oct/25/how-important-is-mosul-for-isis-video-explainer>
Elite special forces pushed into the Karama and Quds neighbourhoods while army 
troops and federal police advanced into the Intisar, Salam and Sumor 
neighbourhoods. Columns of smoke rose overhead as explosions shook the city. 
Heavy machine gun fire echoed through the streets.

Stiff resistance by the militants, civilians trapped inside their houses and 
bad weather have slowed advances in the more than two-month offensive to 
recapture Iraq’s second largest city, the extremist group’s last urban bastion 
in the country.

The fight for Mosul is the biggest Iraqi military operation since the 2003 
US-led invasion.

On Thursday, battle began around 7am on a bright but chilly day and continued 
until shortly before sundown.
 