
A US navy destroyer fired three warning shots at armed Iranian patrol boats as 
they sped toward the warship at the entrance to the Persian Gulf, marring a 
recent period of relatively quiet interactions between US and Iranian forces, 
the Pentagon said on Monday.

Navy Capt Jeff Davis, a Pentagon spokesman, said a group of four fast-attack 
boats of the Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps navy ignored multiple attempts 
by the crew of the USS Mahan to warn them away.

The Mahan used an audible siren, flashing lights and a ship’s whistle to warn 
the Iranians, and managed to establish radio communication. The initial 
warnings were not heeded, prompting the decision to fire three warning shots 
with a .50-caliber machine gun, Davis said.

The Iranian boats then turned away.

The incident happened Sunday inside the Strait of Hormuz, the narrow waterway 
at the entrance to the Gulf.

“This was an unsafe and unprofessional interaction,” Davis said.

White House press secretary Josh Earnest said: “These types of actions are 
certainly concerning and certainly risk escalating tensions.”

US relations with Iran are among the tougher foreign policy issues that 
President-electDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> 
will inherit next week when he succeeds President Barack Obama.

During the campaign, Trump promised to take a harder line on Iran, vowing in 
September that any Iranian vessels that harass the US navy in the Gulfwould be 
“shot out of the water” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/10/donald-trump-calls-clinton-unstable-putin-relationship-russia-florida-pensacola>
.

The incident could be seen as Iranian probing amid uncertainty over how 
quickly and severely Trump will turn away from Obama’s policy of engaging 
diplomatically withIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>.

Revolutionary Guard naval forces have typically acted more aggressively 
against US ships in the Gulf than the conventional Iranian navy, reflecting the 
more hardline side of Iran’s leadership.

Iranian authorities have arrested several Iranian-American dual nationals, and 
there have been various maritime incidents since the 2015 nuclear deal reached 
by the US, Iran and five other nations. American officials often have 
interpreted these as hard-liner efforts to undermine Tehran’s more moderate 
president.

Most confrontations with Iranian naval forces in the Gulf do not reach the 
point of prompting warning shots. The last such incident was on 25 August when 
the USS Squallfired warning shots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/24/uss-nitze-us-navy-encounter> in 
the direction of an Iranian boat in the northern Gulf.

A year ago, Iran detained 10 American soldiers for about 15 hours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/13/iran-releases-us-navy-boat-crews-who-entered-territorial-waters-state-tv>
 after their vessel wandered into Iranian territorial waters in the Persian 
Gulf. The incident, while brief, raised tensions between the two countries 
after Iran published images of the soldiers kneeling with their hands on their 
heads.

Davis said that in 2015 and early 2016 there were many unsafe and 
unprofessional Iranian naval moves in the Gulf, but relatively few lately.

“It’s somewhat out of character, recently anyway, from what we’ve seen from 
Iran,” he said.
 