
The US government has formally accused Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> of hacking the Democratic party’s 
computer networks and said that Moscow was attempting to “interfere” with the 
US presidential election.

Hillary Clinton and US officials have blamed Russian hackers for stealing more 
than 19,000 emails from Democratic party officials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/23/dnc-emails-wikileaks-hillary-bernie-sanders>
, but Friday’s announcement marked the first time that the Obama administration 
has pointed the finger at Moscow.

“We believe, based on the scope and sensitivity of these efforts, that only 
Russia’s senior-most officials could have authorized these activities,” said 
the office of the director of national intelligence and the Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS)in a joint statement 
<https://www.dni.gov/index.php/newsroom/press-releases/215-press-releases-2016/1423-joint-dhs-odni-election-security-statement>
.

The accusation marked a new escalation of tensions with Russia and came 
shortly after the US secretary of state, John Kerry, called for Russia to be 
investigatedfor war crimes in Syria. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/syria-russia-war-crimes-inquiry-john-kerry>

Vladimir Putin’s spokesman dismissed the accusation as “rubbish.” 

“Every day Putin’s website gets attacked by several tens of thousand of 
hackers. A lot of these attacks are traced to the territory of the USA, but we 
do not blame the White House or Langley each time,” he told the Interfax news 
agency.

The Russian foreign ministry said Washington lacked any evidence for its 
accusations, which were an attempt to fan “unprecedented anti-Russian hysteria”.

The deputy foreign minister Sergei Ryabkov said: “This whipping up of emotions 
regarding ‘Russian hackers’ is used in the US election campaign, and the 
current US administration, taking part in this fight, is not averse to using 
dirty tricks.”

He said Moscow reiterated an offer to US officials, first made last year, to 
hold talks on fighting cybercrime together.

The White House declined to say whether the formal attribution would trigger 
sanctions against Russia.


The US agencies said that some US states had detected attempts to breach their 
election systems, and that most of those attempts originated from servers 
operated by a Russian company. “However, we are not now in a position to 
attribute this activity to the Russian Government,” the statement said.

The agencies said that the “decentralized nature” of the US voting systems, as 
well the lack of connectivity between voting machines themselves, would protect 
against Russian-sponsored electoral tampering.

But they urged states across the country to seek additional cybersecurity aid 
from the DHS. On Wednesday, the homeland security secretary, Jeh Johnson, said 
that21 of the 50 states in the US had sought to improve cybersecurity 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/10/dhs-official-half-of-us-states-have-sought-federal-election-help-to-thwart-hackers-229215>
 at the voting booth thus far.

Cozy Bear and Fancy Bear: did Russians hack Democratic party and if so, why?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/29/cozy-bear-fancy-bear-russia-hack-dnc>
US intelligence and the Obama administration had concluded over the summer 
that sophisticated Russian hackers wereresponsible for hacking the servers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/26/russia-hackers-democratic-national-committee-email-leak>
 of the Democratic National Committee (DNC) and leaking emails that embarrassed 
senior Democratic officeholders.

But for months, White House and other US officials have stopped short of 
publicly accusing Putin’s government, a rhetorical reluctance that Republicans 
have criticized and which has intensified a debate about how to deter digital 
attacks.

On Friday, both agencies went further than many expected, calling out not only 
the Russian government but implying the transparency group WikiLeaks and others 
involved in spreading the Democrats’ emails were Kremlin cutouts.

The hack of the DNC’s computer systems was initially claimed by Guccifer 2.0, 
who claimed to be an independent Romanian hacker, but who security analysts 
have concluded was more likely to be the public persona of a Russian hacking 
group.

“The recent disclosures of alleged hacked e-mails on sites like DCLeaks.com 
and WikiLeaks and by the Guccifer 2.0 online persona are consistent with the 
methods and motivations of Russian-directed efforts,” the statement said.

Over the past four months, websites including media outlets and WikiLeaks have 
widely distributed information stolen not just from the campaigns of US 
Democrats but of the World Anti-Doping Agency (Wada) and of the ruling party of 
the Turkish government.

The Wada hack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/22/russian-hackers-world-anti-doping-agency-dnc-hack-fancy-bear>
 was perceived to have been launched in revenge against whistleblowing athletes 
who revealed corruption among Russian anti-doping officials. An internal 
investigation by Wada itself this week found that the leaked information had 
been partially falsified before it was distributed.

Security firms believe a single operation is behind the attacks into the 
closed digital systems. The hacking group has been assigned different shorthand 
names by different analysts – including the flamboyant moniker Fancy Bear – as 
well as Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) 28 and the Sofacy group. Fancy Bear is 
believed to be operating under the aegis of the GRU, Russia’s largest 
intelligence service.

A second group, codenamed Cozy Bear or CozyDuke, appears to have broken into 
the DNC as well, but has not yet distributed whatever information it may have 
retrieved. Cozy Bear is believed to be affiliated to the FSB, the Russian 
intelligence agency most directly descended from the KGB.

Democratic lawmakers had long pushed the administration to lay the blame for 
the digital intrusion on the Kremlin’s doorstep.

“I applaud the administration’s decision to publicly name Russia as the source 
of hacks into US political institutions. We should now work with our European 
allies who have been the victim of similar and even more malicious cyber 
interference by Russia to develop a concerted response that protects our 
institutions and deters further meddling,” said congressman Adam Schiff, the 
senior Democrat on the US House intelligence committee.
 