
Oman has received 10 inmates from the US military prison at Guantánamo Bay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/guantanamo-bay>, in a move to reduce their 
numbers days before the US president, Barack Obama, leaves office.

A statement from the sultanate’s foreign ministry did not disclose the 
nationality of the prisoners who would reside in the Gulf country on a 
temporary basis.

“At the request of Sultan Qaboos and the US government for a solution to the 
question of Guantánamo detainees, 10 of these detainees arrived today in the 
sultanate to reside here temporarily,” the ministry said, quoted by the 
official ONA news agency.

Four Yemenis freed from Guantánamo Bay and transferred to Saudi Arabia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/05/guantanamo-bay-yemen-prisoners-free-saudi-arabia>
The US defense department did not immediately respond to questions about the 
transfer. A US defense official, speaking on condition of anonymity as the 
transfer had yet to be publicly announced by the US, confirmed to the 
Associated Press that the prisoners had been sent toOman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/oman>. The official declined to elaborate.

The latest transfers would leave the number of Guantánamo detainees at 45, 
based on figures the Pentagon issued whenfour Yemenis were sent to Saudi Arabia 
on 6 January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/05/guantanamo-bay-yemen-prisoners-free-saudi-arabia>
.

At the time Obama’s press secretary, Josh Earnest, said he would expect 
“additional transfers” before the Democrat hands power to Donald Trump on 20 
January.

The sultanate of Oman, on the eastern edge of the Arabian peninsula, accepted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/14/guantanamo-bay-yemen-detainees-oman>
 10 Yemeni Guantánamo prisoners in January 2016 and another six in June 2015. 
Oman’s neighbour Saudi Arabia took four prisoners on 5 January, and the United 
Arab Emirates took 15 prisoners in the largest single transfer during Obama’s 
administration on 15 August.

Oman, ruled by Sultan Qaboos bin Said since 1970, has served as an 
interlocutor between the west and Iran. It also has negotiated a number of 
prisoner releases in recent years for western countries.

Yemen, the Arab world’s poorest country, remains in the grip of a civil war, 
with the Saudi-led military offensive against the rebels making returning 
Guantánamo inmates there impossible.


Trump wants to restock Guantánamo. Who’s the ‘worst of the worst’ now? | 
Frankie Boyle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/11/donald-trump-guantanamo> 
Obama vowed to close the Guantánamo detention facility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jan/22/hillary-clinton-diplomatic-foreign-policy>
 in 2009, arguing that detention without trial did not reflect American values.

Faced with Pentagon foot-dragging and stubborn Republican opposition, his 
administration has focused on whittling down the number of inmates. Trump has 
called for a freeze on transfers.

On 3 January he used Twitter to say: “There should be no further releases from 
Gitmo. These are extremely dangerous people and should not be allowed back on 
to the battlefield.”

The US began using its military base on Cuba’s isolated, rocky south-eastern 
coast to hold prisoners captured during the Afghanistan invasion, bringing the 
first planeload on 11 January 2002. At its peak under the administration of 
George W Bush, 18 months later, the facility held nearly 680 detainees.

There were 242 prisoners when Obama took office. A September report released 
by the Office of the Director of National Intelligence said 122 of 693 
detainees transferred out of the prison, or 17.6%, returned to fighting. An 
additional 86 detainees were suspected of having returned to the battlefield.

The majority of Guantánamo prisoners released have been sent to Afghanistan, 
Saudi Arabia and Pakistan.
 