
‘We must remember the richness immigrants have brought’


 * Monica, 51, Vermont, voting for Hillary Clinton 
I live in a tiny rural town in Vermont. The daughter of Peruvian immigrants 
who overstayed visas back when it took just a few months to get a green card; 
I’ve worked hard to feel like I belong anywhere. I found my way to Vermont as a 
young adult and no other place feels like home. I am voting for Hilary Clinton, 
although my preference would have been Bernie Sanders. Hillary’s approach seems 
to be informed by her years of experience and that’s what I want in a president 
– someone who is intelligent and informed about both policy and process. A 
Trump presidency would be a “disaster” as he’s so fond of saying. I get no 
sense that he has any knowledge of, or worse, the desire to learn about, the 
issues at all. That’s truly frightening. Trump would further divide our nation 
– his rhetoric alone has deepened existing divides. We must remember the 
richness immigrants have brought to our country. The first priority of the next 
president must be to unify us, as nothing can be accomplished in the current 
atmosphere. This has been the ugliest campaign I have witnessed in my 51 years. 
Trump’s campaign has been embarrassing and dangerous and it will take a while 
for the nation to recover. One good thing that has come of this cycle is that 
it has woken people up from apathy and encouraged them to make their voices 
heard at the ballot box – for better or worse.

‘We have become a politically correct society to our detriment’


 * Anne-Marie, 69, New Jersey, voting for Donald Trump 
Born in 1946, the first year of the “baby boom”, I am a second-generation 
American. I earned my BA, MEd and MA in, respectively, history, teaching and 
journalism. Most of my working life was in publishing. I have been alone since 
my divorce some 40 years ago. My views do not fit any one party, and my voting 
history is mixed. I have voted for Democrats and Republicans, and I threw away 
a vote on Ralph Nader in 2000 because I could not vote for either of the main 
candidates. I will vote forDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. He might not change this 
country – Congress can obstruct a president, as it has been doing since 2008 – 
but if he could, it would be in directions I support: defeating Isis, 
strict(er) immigration, encouraging businesses to stay or return here, a much 
better relationship with Russia, and the disestablishment of the politically 
correct society we have, to our detriment, become. A president’s priorities 
should be protecting the American land and people, and promoting the general 
welfare – here, stateside. I have found the campaign absolutely horrid. The 
only good thing about election day is that it ends the campaign.

‘Trump’s misogyny, racism and general ignorance astound me’


 * Wendy, 63, California, voting for Hillary Clinton

I’m 63 years old, a Democrat, and a retired registered nurse. My husband of 36 
years is a retired teacher. We live in Panorama City, a working-class suburb in 
the San Fernando Valley. This election is the worst I’ve ever seen, and I lived 
through Watergate and the Vietnam war. Donald Trump’s misogyny, racism and 
general ignorance astound me. I’m worried that Russia’s attempt to influence 
the outcome of this election in Trump’s favor might yet succeed. I don’t know 
who I’m angrier at – Donald Trump for being a compulsive liar – or the press 
for letting him get away with it. Trump’s supporters chanting “Lock her up” are 
the worst. Hillary Clinton is not a criminal! We face serious problems with no 
easy solutions. Over 20% of our children live in poverty. Climate change is 
real. We have too many guns and not enough good jobs. Our son is unemployed – I 
don’t want Obamacare repealed – I want it fixed. Hillary has a plan for that. 
Hillary cares about people, about children and families. She’s a feminist who 
will appoint supreme court justices who will stand up for women’s rights. 
Especially if the Democrats take back the Senate, she can get things done. Even 
Trump conceded that she’s a fighter. This is a historic election and, yeah, I’m 
excited about it. I didn’t think a woman president would happen in my lifetime. 
On November 8th, I hope we will electHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> as the first woman 
president of the United States.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fus-voter-president-2016-campaign-views%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd88c255f6b9784ac704bd2d08318a47aa0ec741a%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=US%20voters%20in%20their%20own%20words%3A%20'This%20campaign%20has%20divided%20us%20in%20ugly%20ways'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fus-voter-president-2016-campaign-views%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=US%20voters%20in%20their%20own%20words%3A%20%27This%20campaign%20has%20divided%20us%20in%20ugly%20ways%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fus-voter-president-2016-campaign-views%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd88c255f6b9784ac704bd2d08318a47aa0ec741a%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Pumpkin portraits of Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump by Disney artist Joseph 
Yakovetic, on Hollywood Blvd, 27 October 2016. Photograph: David 
Livingston/Getty Images 
‘I will remain apprehensive until she is president-elect’

 * Sarah, 28, Florida, voting for Hillary Clinton

I’m a third-year medical student living in Brooklyn, NY, voting by mail as a 
Florida resident. My vote this year is unequivocally going to Hillary Clinton. 
There is a vocal proportion of Clinton voters who make no secret of their 
reluctant support, whether grudging Bernie Sanders advocates, or voters of any 
persuasion who oppose Donald Trump only marginally more than they do Clinton. 
Despite having backed Sanders myself, I take a less noncommittal position: 
Clinton, far from being the “lesser of two evils”, is a remarkably qualified, 
intelligent candidate whose views largely mirror my own, a stark contrast to 
the unsympathetic view of her character that is frustratingly widespread. Her 
proposed policies demonstrate forward thinking that would enable the United 
States to stand upright as a respected model among nations. I anticipate with 
hope the improvement of the Affordable Care Act to make healthcare universally 
affordable, the push to end gun violence, the increase in police 
accountability, the reform of our prison system, and a social promotion that 
advances race relations, LGBT rights and gender equity. None of these changes 
can be expected under the influence of Donald Trump, who sees the truth as 
tractable, promotes his sexism and narcissism as assets, and in the end, is 
excessively volatile and unprincipled. It’s embarrassing that Clinton, whose 
political competence is nigh unparalleled, holds only an uncertain majority 
over his farcical campaign. While the current poll aggregates are tentatively 
reassuring, I will remain apprehensive until she is confirmed as 
president-elect after election day.

‘Washington is offering no choice besides disaster’


 * Geno, 37, Pennsylvania, voting for Jill Stein 
I’m in that middle class suffering from decades of neoliberalism – 
involuntarily in debt, in a dead-end job because of health coverage and few 
options. My household can eat and pay bills most of the time, so we’re luckier 
than some, but doing much more is a rare treat. The nation needs living wages, 
progressive taxation, universal healthcare, renewable energy, an end to US 
aggression, and investment in our future instead of the already-rich. Society 
should support people over profit. The most wretched excuse for a campaign in 
our lifetimes has only promised the opposite. The major parties offer a 
deranged rightwing sociopath provoking global war or a reality-TV buffoon with 
no actual policy, both of them hopelessly corrupt and staggeringly incompetent. 
Reinforcing Bush-Obama corporatism isn’t an option. Libertarianism is 
suicidally shortsighted. We need a progressive administration that’ll keep the 
grassroots engaged in fighting for constructive, sustainable goals. That’s why 
I’m voting Jill Stein. It’s already too late to prevent a president Clinton; 
that’s what the establishment wants and that’s what it’ll get. Of course Trump 
never had a chance – he’s only there to scare us towards Hillary. No thanks. I 
won’t throw my vote away on a felon and war criminal. I’d rather affirm 
policies I actually support. The alternative is staying home, but I’d rather 
send a message rejecting business as usual (hopefully amplified a little in a 
swing state). Washington is offering no choice besides disaster. Our first duty 
is to refuse to be complicit or legitimize it.

‘I’m not so much with her as I am against the fascist Donald Trump’


 * Chris, 50, New York, voting for Hillary Clinton

My name is Christopher; I am a gay African American illustrator and comic book 
artist living in New York City with my husband who is an Episcopal seminarian. 
As a Bernie Sanders supporter, allow me to make my position crystal clear: I’m 
not so much with her as I am against the fascist, racist and misogynist Donald 
Trump. I would love to have another choice, but unfortunately, with Jill Stein 
polling even worse than Gary Johnson I’m forced to be pragmatic and vote for 
Hillary Clinton. Liberal supreme court nominations; banking, healthcare, 
student loan and immigration reform; increasing living wages, honest 
discussions of the true effects of mechanization of labor, infrastructure 
revitalization, climate change, federal enforcement of police reform … these 
should be presidential priorities. Will they be under a centrist Clinton 
administration? Doubtful. Still, it is my sincere hope that the more 
progressive side of the Democratic party will apply the appropriate pressure. 
This entire presidential campaign has been a demoralizing debacle, and I for 
one can’t wait until election day. I’m just going to need a shower or two to 
scrub off the stink after leaving the voting booth.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fus-voter-president-2016-campaign-views%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe80b8e18f28860102232c90c229eda747b769af7%2F0_0_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=US%20voters%20in%20their%20own%20words%3A%20'This%20campaign%20has%20divided%20us%20in%20ugly%20ways'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fus-voter-president-2016-campaign-views%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=US%20voters%20in%20their%20own%20words%3A%20%27This%20campaign%20has%20divided%20us%20in%20ugly%20ways%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fus-voter-president-2016-campaign-views%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe80b8e18f28860102232c90c229eda747b769af7%2F0_0_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Bernie Sanders answers a question about college affordability during a Clinton 
campaign event in Durham, New Hampshire, on 28 September 2016. Photograph: 
Brian Snyder/Reuters 
‘Had Sanders won the primaries, I wouldn’t be writing this’

 * Dan, 59, California, voting for Donald Trump 
My name is Dan and I’m an older, white, middle-class male who intends to vote 
for Donald Trump. But I didn’t start out that way. Although I’ve been a 
Republican since registering to vote at age 18 I switched to the Democratic 
party this year in order to vote for Bernie Sanders in the California primary 
election. Had Sanders won the Democratic primary I wouldn’t be writing this 
little essay and I would most definitelynot be voting for Donald Trump. Let me 
be clear – I’m not voting for Trump because I like him. I’m voting for Trump 
’cause I like Hillary Clinton even less. I don’t think policy positions matter 
much in a presidential election. Presidents don’t actually get to direct much 
policy. What matters most to me is leadership. The ability to lead a large 
organization and inspire those being led. In this respect both candidates have 
serious liabilities. But Hillary’s appear to be the far more serious breaches 
of integrity. From her early days on the Nixon impeachment issue to her 
operation of the state department she has left behind a taint of corruption at 
the highest levels of government. We are already hearing of the rumblings of 
disorganization and discontent in both the state and justice department as a 
result of her corrupting influence. The priority of a president should be to 
manage the immense federal bureaucracy and inspire citizens. Hillary has proven 
herself to be singularly inadequate to the task.

‘I’m a Mormon Republican voting for Clinton’

 * David, 43, Colorado, voting for Hillary Clinton

I’m a westerner, having lived and voted in Utah, Nevada and Colorado. I’m 
educated, with two postgraduate degrees. I’m also religious, having been Mormon 
all my life. I’ve been a registered Republican since my first voting experience 
in 1996. I’m voting for Hillary Clinton. Or, to put it more precisely, I’m 
voting against Donald Trump. The most important factor for me in voting for any 
public office is character, and I think it is obvious that Trump has the worst 
character of any candidate I’ve ever seen. There are many very reasonable 
objections to Clinton, and I’m really not a big fan of hers, but I don’t think 
they come anywhere close to the magnitude of Trump’s deep moral flaws. I think 
Clinton is a very capable politician, and I like her experience in public 
service. I also think she’s quite moderate, which is what I consider myself to 
be. Presidents are important, but they can’t do all the things for which people 
often hold them responsible. I think she’ll do well at foreign relations. I 
think she’ll choose capable but moderate supreme court justices, and I hope 
that Congress will approve them. This has been a miserable campaign, not just 
because of the poor field of candidates and the disgusting rhetoric, but also 
because it has divided the citizenry in very ugly ways. I am voting early, by 
mail, and I look forward to having the whole thing finished.



 