
Read what our selection of voters were thinking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/31/us-voter-president-2016-campaign-views>
 a week before election day

‘In the long run, I have hope’


 * David, 43, Colorado, a lifelong Republican who voted for Hillary Clinton

I am very disappointed about the result, but I can’t be despondent. I am by 
nature an optimistic person. So, as the evening wore on and it became clear 
that Trump was going to win, I started thinking about what is actually going to 
happen after this. In the beginning, there will be dark moments, and things 
will happen that are not good for our country, or for the world. I’m sure that 
the Affordable Care Act won’t survive, for example.

But then, I believe that the Republicans will start to realize that they 
didn’t really get what they wanted. Trump, after all, isn’t a Republican. He 
has made that clear. He just agrees with them on some things, or claims to. I 
think the first half of Trump’s term will go very badly for the Republicans, 
voters will become disillusioned, and the midterm elections in 2018 will be 
disastrous for them. Democrats will probably end up with control of both houses 
of Congress. We’ll get a new supreme court justice, but I’m not worried about 
whether they’ll be too conservative. I would be more worried that they won’t be 
qualified. In the long run, though, I have hope.

‘I believe in checks and balances’

 * Dan, 59, California, voted for Donald Trump 
It’s done! Voted shortly after polls open on Tuesday and I voted for Trump 
–reluctantly. No disrespect intended to the third party candidates, but a vote 
for an alternate candidate is in reality a votefor either Trump or Clinton. So 
I was faced with a vote for an incompetent or a crook. I chose to vote for the 
incompetent. In the end it wasn’t the emails that sealed the deal – it was the 
remaining hope that “checks and balances” would modify the impending chaos. The 
system of checks and balances appears to be in position to better counter Trump 
than Hillary. Trump has already lost substantial support among the GOP. So he 
can’t count on either the existing supreme court or Congress to ignore him.

Then there is the press. What we see is a press overwhelmingly anti-Trump. A 
vote for Hillary means we can not count on the press to honestly and diligently 
keep the public informed of Hillary’s potential malfeasance. Nor at this point 
can we count on the institutions of government to counter Hillary in any 
meaningful way. So I voted for the candidateleast likely to lead us into the 
weeds without opposition.

‘The establishment underestimated the public’s rage’

 * Geno, 37, Pennsylvania, voted for Jill Stein 
Well, I think we’re all astounded. Instead of Bush’s predictable fifth term, 
we’re facing … nobody quite knows what. I never thought this was a serious 
possibility until today, but the establishment apparently made ayuuuuge 
misjudgment in underestimating the public’s rage after decades of being 
impoverished to benefit the 1%. Since the primary was rigged against the only 
semi-progressive major candidate, this was the next prominent way to give the 
Democrats a well-deserved heave. (All else aside, it’s refreshing to see their 
awfulness finally backfire on them.)

I’m not exactly shocked at that, but dismayed that so many of my fellow 
citizens still refused to look outside the two-party duopoly or help the Greens 
reach federal funding levels. The impetus is understandable – this is a 
rejection of the two-party status quo more than an actual endorsement of 
Trump’s racism or anti-intellectualism – but the forces he’s unleashing are 
volatile and damn scary. As always, the bigger struggle starts after voting. 
Positive change only comes from public action, so there’s arguably a better 
chance for it now than under a Democratic president. If there’s no actual 
policy coming from the Oval Office, there’s space for saner voices to shape it. 
It’ll be tough, but at least the citizenry seems ready to seriously push back. 
The campaign got younger voters surprisingly engaged and proved that candidates 
don’t have to be owned by corporate money. If enough 99%-ers remember the power 
lies with us, we may have a fighting chance after all.


‘I am ashamed of how this plays with the rest of the world’


 * Sarah, 28, Florida, voted for Hillary Clinton

Hillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> lost 
this election because sexism enabled voters to perceive the most qualified 
candidate in the world as someone more reprehensible than, bar none, the most 
despicable person who has ever sought the presidency. Because the contingent of 
mostly older, white Americans overlooked empathy for minority groups due to 
their own positions of privilege. Because of voter apathy; because we watched 
Brexit happen and refused to heed its warning.

I am ashamed of how this plays with the rest of the world – ashamed of my 
state in particular – and dread what consequences it will bring. The fallout of 
supreme court turnover alone will last long after his term is done. It should 
go without saying that a president should not threaten the wellbeing of certain 
citizens as a main selling point in his campaign, and my heart goes out to any 
individual who feels unsafe. I know the cold fear you are experiencing. The 
only way we can think to proceed is to brace for a prolonged fight ahead of us.

The man slated to be president has built his platform on harming the 
vulnerable and shouting over the voices of the oppressed. If you find this 
rhetoric deplorable, if you are kind, then seize any opportunity to defy it – 
do not wait to speak out until they come for you. To Clinton, your loss is the 
nation’s loss. I am sorry they were too blind to see.


‘The America I’m waking up to today scares me’


 * Monica, 51, Vermont, voted for Hillary Clinton 
In my wildest dreams I never would have thought the public would swing so 
wildly away from reason as to elect someone like Trump. I grew up in a 
working-class Latino family. I’m a liberal but my father was conservative. I’ve 
been a single mom working multiple jobs to keep a roof over my daughter’s head 
and struggled to make ends meet as long as I can remember. I understand the 
feeling that Washington doesn’t represent the people, but the America I’m 
waking up to today scares me and I’m left with only questions.

What kind of world will my grandson grow up in? What will happen to friends 
and family, people of color who unlike me, weren’t born here – someone once 
called it my “golden ticket”? How could it be a good idea to elect a man who 
treats women so disrespectfully, makes promises he can’t keep, has no interest 
in learning the nuances of diplomacy, and brags about not paying taxes? Why 
does the public react so negatively to a woman taking a role of leadership? 
Where is the critical thinking? Decency and respect have gone out the door in 
this election and we’ve just sold our collective soul to the devil.

‘A country split in two and at rock bottom’


 * Chris, 50, New York, voted for Hillary Clinton 
It’s 3.25am in the morning and I’m sick to my stomach as I type this. The 
racist won. The misogynist won. The xenophobe won. I guess the moral of the 
story is: don’t trust the polls, not even Nate Silver.

Pundits and experts beyond my station will be dissecting this for years to 
come and there will be questions. How did the Republican party allow that 
reprobate to hijack it? Did the media in their quest for sensationalistic 
ratings become unwitting dupes providing thousands of hours of free and 
unfiltered publicity, missing opportunity after opportunity to fact check?

Allow the blame game to commence. And there’s plenty of blame to go around. As 
for me, I blame the Democratic party. I blame Hillary Clinton. I blame Debbie 
Wasserman Schultz. The Republican party has become the party of fascists. The 
Democratic party has become the new Republican party. The faction that Sanders 
represented was the electrified faction, the energized faction. And with good 
reason. Single payer healthcare, raising the minimum wage, climate change, 
tuition free state colleges and a variety of other progressive issues resonated 
with millennials and the working class. It’s unfortunate that Sanders’ version 
of progressive populism never had a opportunity to go to head to head with 
Trump’s regressive cynicism.

Clinton at best personified “it’s my turn”, or at it’s most cynical “at least 
I’m not Trump”. So many voters (myself included) weren’t actuallywith her, they 
wereagainst him. Clearly that wasn’t enough.

And so here we are – the unthinkable for at least half the country has 
happened: a Trump presidency. The severity of this situation can’t be 
understated. A country split in two and at rock bottom. If you’re a woman, if 
you’re Muslim, if you’re Latino, if you’re African American, Asian, if you’re a 
member of LGBTQ community and, yes, if you’re white working class and poor, 
you’ve been put on notice. The next four years will be unkind.
 