
Tristram Hunt’s appointment at the V&A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/13/tristram-hunt-to-quit-as-mp-to-become-va-director>
 is a surprise, particularly since he has no experience running a large 
organisation. But does that matter?

The answer is yes and no. Certainly Hunt will have to be a fast learner in 
getting to grips with the labyrinthine complexities of the world’s largest 
museum of art and design. The V&A’s vast collections are striking in their 
diversity, from a 1,000-year-old Egyptian rock crystal ewer to theoriginal Joey 
puppet from the National Theatre’s production of War Horse 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/blog/network/war-horse>.

He will need to be diplomatic, dynamic and not afraid to make difficult 
decisions quickly.


Tristram Hunt to quit as MP to become V&A director
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/13/tristram-hunt-to-quit-as-mp-to-become-va-director>
But what Hunt also brings is communication and vision, and there is precedent 
for this type of appointment. In 1987 the National Gallery decided to appoint a 
rank outsider to replace Sir Michael Levey as director. They chose a former 
university lecturer and editor of the specialist Burlington magazine, Neil 
MacGregor, who went on to become director of the British Museum and one of the 
finest arts leaders of his or anyone’s generation.

The question of big organisation management experience is not one generally 
asked in other arts areas. Rufus Norris is director of the National Theatre and 
Gregory Doran is director of the Royal Shakespeare Company. Both are leaders 
steeped in the creative process. Doran does not even have a computer in his 
office.


What every good leader needs, of course, are skilled lieutenants and Hunt will 
have that at the V&A, particularly with a very able and highly regarded deputy 
director, Tim Reeve.

V&A trustees have decided to think outside the box for their appointment, but 
look closely at Hunt’s CV and track record and the decision soon seems less of 
a risk.

He is a skilful communicator, able to articulate complex ideas easily. His 
seven years in parliament also stand him in good stead, in that any museum 
director needs to understand and get on with their political paymasters. He 
knows the museums and heritage sector well: he is a former judge for the annual 
Museum of the Year award and a serving trustee of theHeritage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/heritage> Lottery Fund.

The appointment comes at a crucial time in the V&A’s history. This year it 
will open its £49m underground extension, creating a new grand entrance on 
Exhibition Road and temporary exhibition space. TheV&A Museum of Design Dundee 
<http://www.vandadundee.org/> is due to open in 2018, and V&A East, described 
as a museum for the digital age, is expected to open in theformer Olympic park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/nov/05/olympicopolis-east-london-arts-hub-stratford-boris-johnson>
 in east London by 2022.


The V&A is getting bigger, and clearly there are risks in handing the keys to 
someone not steeped in museum management. But any worried trustee can close 
their eyes and think: Neil MacGregor.
 