
To anyone who has taken an unflinching look at the slaughterhouse industry, 
the Bank of England’s belatedadmission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/29/bank-of-england-urged-to-make-new-5-note-vegan-friendly>
 that the new £5 notes contain beef tallow will seem strangely symbolic. Few 
industries are as secretive as the one thatmurders 22m animals each day 
<http://www.viva.org.uk/what-we-do/slaughter/slaughter-farmed-animals-uk> in 
the UK alone, and the driving force for that shiftiness is a lust for profit. 
So the way the Bank of England tried to sneak out money containing animal 
products seems a fitting metaphor for the entire filthy racket.

I’ve converted to veganism to reduce my impact on the living world | George 
Monbiot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/09/vegan-corrupt-food-system-meat-dairy>
The unnecessary presence of tallow in banknotes is problematic for many 
vegetarians and members of several faith groups, including Hindus, for whom the 
cow is a sacred mother. But for vegans it is a further slap in the face.

Veganism, as defined by the Vegan Society 
<https://www.vegansociety.com/go-vegan/definition-veganism>, is a bid “to 
exclude, as far as is possible and practicable, all forms of exploitation of, 
and cruelty to, animals for food, clothing or any other purpose”. It is about 
more than what we put on our plates: it is a meticulous, daily endeavour for 
compassion towards animals in all aspects of our lives. That’s why it is 
crushing to know that the Bank of England has misled us into carrying around 
animal fat in our (leather-free) wallets and purses.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fplastic-fiver-5-pound-note-switched-to-polymer-from-paper-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Plastic%20fiver%3A%20%C2%A35%20note%20switched%20to%20polymer%20from%20paper%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fplastic-fiver-5-pound-note-switched-to-polymer-from-paper-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Plastic%20fiver%3A%20%C2%A35%20note%20switched%20to%20polymer%20from%20paper%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fplastic-fiver-5-pound-note-switched-to-polymer-from-paper-video&media=>
Plastic fiver: £5 note switched to polymer from paper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/video/2016/jun/02/plastic-fiver-5-pound-note-switched-to-polymer-from-paper-video>
As I’ve trodden the path from vegetarianism towards veganism, I’ve often felt 
overwhelmed. Knocking halloumi on the head was hard enough, but then I realised 
that my foot cream includes lamb product, my vitamin capsules are made of 
gelatine, and even some cleaning products are un-vegan. It seems obscene, then, 
that after making thoughtful choices in shops and restaurants, the very cash I 
pay with will nullify the whole project.

And for a growing number of people, this issue is problematic. Veganism is 
soaring. According to asurvey 
<https://www.vegansociety.com/whats-new/news/find-out-how-many-vegans-are-great-britain>
 earlier this year, 542,000 Brits – almost 1% of the population – are vegans, 
up from 150,000 in 2006. The health benefits of a plant-based diet are 
increasingly recognised, and so are theenvironmental and welfare costs of 
consuming animal products <http://www.cowspiracy.com/facts/>.

Some still see us as extremists, but a growing number recognise there is 
nothing more extreme than what animal agriculture is doing to the planet and 
its non-human residents.

Supermarkets stock own-brand vegan products, and restaurants increasingly 
offer meat-product-free dining options. Over the summer Pret a Mangertrialled  
<https://www.pret.co.uk/en-gb/little-veggie-pop-up>a temporary pop-up in 
central London selling only vegan and vegetarian food, and it’s been such a hit 
it has stayed open. We are weeks away fromVeganuary <https://veganuary.com/>, 
when a UK-based charity encourages people to try veganism for the first month 
of the year.

The question is whether as a society we grasp the tallow controversy as an 
opportunity to keep this momentum going, or whether we let it encourage the 
misconception that vegans are a bit weird and self-righteous.

Stop telling me not to eat meat: we should all be flexitarians | Toby Moses
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/12/meat-flexitarians-vegetarians>
In response to news about the fiver, Twitter has been doing a great trade in 
baffled tweets, with vegans dismissed as “morons”, “whiners’ and “fannies”. 
Some have, hilariously, pointed out that one is not actually supposed to eat 
bank notes, while other jokers have offered to take the notes off the hands of 
anyone upset by this bombshell.

We should welcome the humour and the attention it brings to this issue as an 
opportunity to educate people about veganism. Because, just as we didn’t know 
we were handling banknotes containing cow products, most meat-eaters know 
little of the horrors of the industry they are funding: the chicken 
slaughterhouses where workers rip the heads off live birds; the abattoirs where 
cows are alive as their heads are skinned and their legs sawn off; the 
factory-farm workers who systematically attack crate-bound pigs with lead 
pipes. It is from this world that tallow emerges.

When people find out the facts, it can change everything. A recent study 
<http://www.plymouthherald.co.uk/millions-have-8216-no-idea-cows-are-slaughtered-after-milk-yield-drops-8217-study-finds/story-29891282-detail/story.html>
 found that 88% of Britons didn’t realise that most pigs are killed at just six 
months of age, even though their natural lifespan is 15 years. Two-thirds were 
unaware that on egg farms killing all male chicks at a day or two old is 
standard practice. Many were unaware that little piglets routinely have their 
tails amputated and teeth removed without anaesthesia. After becoming aware of 
this reality, one in six said that they would give up meat and dairy entirely.

Our best reaction to the five-pound tallow revelation will be to see it as a 
springboard for discussion on the grand deception that the meat industry pulls 
on us all.
 