
Eating meat could become as socially unacceptable as drink-driving because of 
the impact it has on global warming, according to a senior authority on climate 
change.

Lord Stern of Brentford, former adviser to the government on the economics of 
climate change, said people will have to consider turning vegetarian to help 
reduce global carbon emissions.

"Meat is a wasteful use of water and creates a lot of greenhouse gases. It 
puts enormous pressure on the world's resources. A vegetarian diet is better," 
Stern said.

Farmed ruminant animals, including cattle and sheep, are thought to be 
responsible for up to a quarter of "man-made" methane emissions worldwide.

Stern, whose 2006 Stern Review warned that countries needed to spend 1% of 
their GDP to stop greenhouse gases rising to dangerous levels, said a 
successful deal at the climate change conference in Copenhagen in December 
would massively increase the cost of producing meat.

People's concerns about climate change would lead to meat eating becoming 
unacceptable, he predicted.

"I think it's important that people think about what they are doing and that 
includes what they are eating," he told the Times. "I am 61 now and attitudes 
towards drinking and driving have changed radically since I was a student. 
People change their notion of what is responsible. They will increasingly ask 
about the carbon content of their food."

Stern, a former chief economist at the World Bank and now IG Patel Professor 
of Economics at the London School of Economics, also warned that helping 
developing countries to cope with the adverse effects of global warming would 
cost British taxpayers about Â£3bn a year by 2015.

Meanwhile, an international effort to ensure that biofuel used by Britain and 
other western countries to tackle global warming does not damage the 
environment is on the brink of collapse.

The Roundtable for Sustainable Palm Oil <http://www.rspo.org/> (RSPO), an 
initiative of companies and campaigners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2009/may/21/palm-oil-greenwash>, is 
divided over the need to control carbon emissions and could break up within 
days, insiders say.

Ministers last year introduced a demand on fuel suppliers to replace 2.5% of 
petrol and diesel sold with biofuel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2008/aug/07/biofuels.carbonemissions>, 
at least 8% of which is currently palm oil.

The RSPO was established to set and enforce environmental standards for palm 
oil production, but has run into trouble after palm plantation companies in 
Indonesia and Malaysia blocked efforts to curb their greenhouse gas emissions.

"If this issue is not resolved and greenhouse gas emissions are not included 
in the standard, then I don't see how the RSPO can continue to act as a 
certifying body," said Marcus Silvius of environment groupWetlands International
 <http://www.wetlands.org/>, who sits on the RSPO's working group on greenhouse 
gases.
 