
Ticket resale website Viagogo faces legal action from the governing bodies of 
cricket and an investigation by regulators for advertising tickets that are not 
yet on sale.

Viagogo, an online marketplace that allows people to resell tickets, lists 
hundreds of tickets for next year’s ICC Champions Trophy. But the event is not 
yet on public sale andconsumer protection laws 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/284446/oft979.pdf>
 prohibit companies from advertising products they do not have.

“The ICC Champions Trophy 2017 ballot is open until 30 September and therefore 
no tickets have been allocated yet,” said a spokesman for the England and Wales 
Cricket Board (ECB). “This means that any tickets currently being advertised on 
secondary ticketing sites do not exist and cannot be guaranteed.

What we know about ticket reseller Viagogo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/23/what-we-know-about-ticket-reseller-viagogo>
“The ECB are monitoring this situation with the ICC and are taking the 
appropriate legal measures against these sites. We strongly recommend that 
cricket fans around the world buy their tickets only via the official ballot at
icc-cricket.com/tickets <http://icc-cricket.com/tickets>.”

The threat of legal action against Viagogo, which has a large office in London 
but is technically based in Switzerland, comes amidefforts by the music and 
sports industries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/13/government-urged-help-music-industry-tackle-ticket-touts>
 to crack down on ticket resale sites and thetouts who profit from them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/15/shady-world-of-the-ticket-touts>.

Mike Andrews, who leads the eCrime team at National Trading Standards 
<http://www.nationaltradingstandards.uk/>, confirmed that advertising tickets 
before they were available, with no information about seat numbers or face 
value, breached consumer rights law.

“We increasingly see unofficial ticket vendors offering tickets to major 
events before they have actually gone on sale, which can be tempting for fans 
who want to guarantee their place at a sports tournament or other major event,” 
he said.

“These tickets are usually sold without basic information such as seat number 
or face value, which is prohibited under new laws passed last year and we 
strongly advise fans to avoid purchasing tickets from unofficial sellers.”

Ticket resale websites face new scrutiny over touting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/dec/19/ticket-resale-sites-new-scrutiny-touting-seatwave-viagogo>
Viagogo and rivals such as StubHub and GetMeIn are also understood to be 
facing the prospect of a full-blown investigation by regulators. “Enforcement 
agencies are looking closely at this issue and there is a possibility of 
enforcement action in due course,” said a senior regulatory source.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fviagogo-faces-legal-action-advertising-tickets-icc-champions-trophy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5dd9d14ccc1c0898f5db3905af4d5483583dbfee%2F0_0_2100_3073%2F2100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Viagogo%20faces%20legal%20action%20for%20advertising%20tickets%20not%20yet%20on%20sale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fviagogo-faces-legal-action-advertising-tickets-icc-champions-trophy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Viagogo%20faces%20legal%20action%20for%20advertising%20tickets%20not%20yet%20on%20sale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fviagogo-faces-legal-action-advertising-tickets-icc-champions-trophy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5dd9d14ccc1c0898f5db3905af4d5483583dbfee%2F0_0_2100_3073%2F2100.jpg>
 Viagogo recently listed tickets to the Radio 1Xtra show in Liverpool, 
featuring Sean Paul. Photograph: Brigitte Engl/Redferns 
Viagogo has also come under fire for advertising tickets whose terms and 
conditions explicitly forbid their resale, meaning fans risk being refused 
entry.

The Geneva-based website recently listed tickets to the Radio 1Xtra show in 
Liverpool, featuring artists such as Stormzy and Sean Paul.

“Tickets for 1Xtra Live … are individually barcoded and anyone trying to get 
in with a resold or transferred ticket not purchased legitimately via 1Xtra may 
be refused entry or ejected from the venue,” said 1Xtra.

Secondary ticketing, the name for tickets that are resold as opposed to 
“primary” tickets released at face value, has attracted increasing scrutiny of 
late.

Bands such as Pixies and Mumford and Sons have condemned the industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/10/pixies-lead-battle-against-ticket-touts>
, while fans were left outraged by touts using the sites to advertise tickets 
to theHarry Potter and the Cursed Child play for up to £8,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/13/harry-potter-cursed-child-ticket-resale-prices>
.

However, a government-backed review of the industry by Prof Michael Waterson, 
whichrecommended several measures to curb touting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/26/ticket-touts-review-licensing-enforcement>
, has met with no response from ministers.

Waterson said at a recent music industry event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/13/government-urged-help-music-industry-tackle-ticket-touts>
 that he feared the issue had been “pushed into the long grass”.

The Competition and Markets Authority 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/competition-and-markets-authority> 
is expected to release a report into the industry next month, which could task 
a body such as Trading Standards with launching a dedicated investigation.

Trading Standards has so far struggled to address ticketing because its budget 
for policing rogue traders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/07/trading-standards-institute-consumers-are-no-longer-protected>
 has been slashed.

The secondary ticketing industry is worth an estimated £1bn a year, based on 
transaction details from the four biggest sites.

Reg Walker, of anti-touting consultancy Iridium, said: “What is the point of 
passing consumer protection laws if there’s nobody to enforce it? I would like 
to see HMRC, Trading Standards and police launch a full investigation into 
Viagogo and its activities.

“Why is nobody protecting the consumer? Why are the authorities running scared 
of these big companies?”

FanFair Alliance, an organisation set up to combat touting for music events, 
urged swift action against Viagogo and its rivals.

“We urgently need government action and proper enforcement of the law. British 
music fans are the best in the world, and deserve better than this unregulated 
and dysfunctional market.”

Viagogo did not return the guardian’s requests for comment.
 