
When Victoria Wood was about six, she had an epiphany in Buxton. “It was the 
first time I’d seen anyone stand on their own on stage,” she recalled. “I 
didn’t realise that there were jobs like that before – that one could stand on 
stage and speak, with no props except for a nice frock and people would die 
laughing.” The woman wasJoyce Grenfell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/dec/14/featuresreviews.guardianreview6>
, the great, though perhaps to modern tastes unremittingly genteel, comedian 
and monologist.

Wood, who has died aged 62 of cancer, was a diffident child, but she found 
inspiration in Grenfell. “Stand-up comedy is the ideal place for a shy person 
because you’re completely in control,” she explained later in her career. But 
there was another reason: Grenfell was an interloper in a male preserve. In her 
1980 TV play, Nearly a Happy Ending, Wood played a frumpy character, Maureen, 
who tells her wannabe famous friend Julie that girls can’t stand up and tell 
jokes. “Girls don’t,” says Maureen. ButVictoria Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/victoria-wood> did.

In her teens she plotted a career to become the greatest female entertainer of 
her day. In many respects she succeeded: she was widely adored not just as a 
stand-up comedian but as singer and songwriter, TV dramatist, and to a lesser 
extent actor. Appointed CBE in 2008, she had seven Bafta awards and two South 
Bank Show profiles to prove the point.

She was feted often for acutely skewering some very English neuroses, 
especially suburban ones about sex and grammar. Inher song called Pam 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iKRcm5v30tw>, she impersonated a small-minded 
fascist - a typical Wood anti-heroine:


“I don’t say ‘who’. I do say ‘whom’.
I never use the toilet, just the smallest room.
I don’t say gay. I still say queer.
I think that Mussolini had the right idea.”


She excoriated fools gladly. Some found her comedy cruel. Reviewing the 1996 
stand-up show that won her top female comedy performer at that year’s British
Comedy <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/comedy> Awards, the critic Ben 
Thompson wrote: “There is an uncomfortable suspicion that Wood’s much vaunted 
flair for the everyday might actually be rooted in contempt rather than 
sympathy.” Viewed in this context, her fondly observed sitcom Dinnerladies 
(1998-2000), about canteen workers in a factory, can be seen as an atonement 
for any such comedy crimes.

Not only was Wood a woman in a traditionally male world but she was also a 
northerner loosening the Oxbridge chokehold on comedy at the time. She was very 
alive to southern-centrism. “We’d like to apologise to our viewers in the 
north,” she wrote for the deliciously snooty TV announcer played by Susie 
Blake. “It must be awful for you.”

She was a different proposition from typical northern comics: she was a 
middle-class, sophisticated woman whom critics compared to Noël Coward and Alan 
Bennett. When the Observer interviewer Richard Brooks asked if Wood holidayed 
in Blackpool, she snapped: “What do you take me for? We used to go to Vienna.” 
And they did: the Woods towed their Sprite Musketeer four-berth caravan across 
Europe for their holidays. She was also defiantly unglamorous. “I think what it 
was saying,” Wood said of what she called her “very masculine look” onstage, 
“was that whatever I am just take it and don’t analyse it and just listen to 
the comedy.”

She was born in Bury, Lancashire. “I was brought up in one room with a 
television, a piano and a sandwich,” she recalled. “I just lived on my own. My 
parents were in other rooms. My father and mother didn’t watch television at 
all.” Rather, her father, Stanley, an insurance salesman, spent the evenings 
writing plays – one of them, Clogs!, was staged in 1975, and he later went on 
to write for Coronation Street;her mother, Nellie (nee Helen Mape) 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Nellie_s_Book.html?id=ITCHNwAACAAJ&redir_esc=y>
, was a mature student at Manchester University during her daughter’s childhood.

Victoria was the youngest of four: her brother was much older and her two 
sisters were as outgoing as their sister was, as she put it, ingoing. She found 
few friends at Bury grammar school. “I wasn’t completely unpopular … but I 
didn’t feel I was in the mainstream with people who were really having a 
wonderful time ... I’d look at other girls and wish I could be like them, 
interested in boys, meeting in the Wimpy bar on Saturday mornings and going to 
discos.

“I was also addicted to sugar, which makes you depressed,” she added. “So I 
think I was always slightly depressed as a child and a teenager.” She found 
solace in two things. The first was Pamela Brown’s novel The Swish of the 
Curtain, about a group of children who performed their own theatre productions 
in a disused chapel. (“That’s what I wanted to do,” she said when she read the 
book.) The other was the piano her father bought for her 15th birthday: “I 
played anything, anything I could read. I was very good at sightreading.”

After leaving school she studied drama at the University of Birmingham, and 
while there got her big break. She had already played comic songs in folk clubs 
in Birmingham when she successfully auditioned to appear on the TV talent show 
New Faces. In the first round she beat a unicycling ventriloquist and a couple 
from Bournemouth who sang “an old tyme medley”. But she was eliminated in the 
second round, in which she sang a song called Lorraine about a woman dolefully 
contemplating marriage to a man who washes his Cortina more than his neck.

Even though she didn’t make the New Faces final, she was selected to join the 
comedian Lenny Henry and singer-comedian Marti Caine to appear in The Summer 
Show, a variety series fronted by Leslie Crowther, in which she wore a bustle 
and duetted with the host. She appeared in a revue show devised and written by 
the poet Roger McGough called Wordplay, which transferred from Edinburgh to the 
Hampstead theatre in 1976. The Guardian’s Michael Billington singled out her 
“genial songs”, while the Times’s Irving Wardle highlighted “the deadpan artist 
Victoria Wood” as one of the “drollest personalities”. She went on to become 
the resident pianist for That’s Life, the BBC’s topical TV show presented by 
Esther Rantzen, for which she wrote songs riffing on current events.

In that year, too, she met the love of her life, a former librarian called 
Geoffrey Durham who was to reinvent himself as a conjuror called the Great 
Soprendo. She saw him in Leicester playing Buffalo Bill in a musical. He 
encouraged her to develop a stand-up routine punctuating songs with comedy. 
They later married and had two children, Grace and Henry.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dw5Dz7xcKUyo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dw5Dz7xcKUyo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dw5Dz7xcKUyo&media=>
 Victoria Wood and Julie Walters in At the Hairdressers, from Wood and Walters, 
1981 
But she was not just a stand-up. She wrote sketches for a revue called In at 
the Death at London’s Bush theatre for actors including her great future 
collaboratorJulie Walters <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/julie-walters>. 
While there, she was invited by David Leland, then director at the Crucible 
theatre, Sheffield, to write a play for its 1978 new season. The result was 
Talent, which Wood wrote expressly with Walters in mind, about a woman called 
Julie preparing backstage for a talent show with her friend Maureen, and 
realising that the contest is rigged.

Paul Allen wrote in the Guardian: “It incorporated a wealth of human 
disillusion and more comic one-liners than is altogether fair in a sad, sad 
story.” Its problem, he wrote, was that is was sometimes “too knicker-wettingly 
funny”. No matter: Wood won a Plays and Players award and the Evening 
Standard’s promising new playwright prize. At the party for the latter,her 
biographer, Neil Brandwood 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Victoria_Wood.html?id=TyXqA-FNZ2sC&redir_esc=y>
, claimed she was clutching her bowl-shaped award whenPrincess Margaret 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/feb/11/guardianobituaries.princessmargaret>
 flicked some cigarette ash into it.

The Granada producer Peter Eckersley, impressed at what he saw on stage in 
Sheffield, asked Wood to adapt Talent for television. The resulting film, 
starring Walters for the first time in the role that was written for her, 
proved such a success when shown in 1979 that Eckersley commissioned two more 
TV plays - Nearly a Happy Ending and Happy Since I Met You – and urged her to 
write a sketch show called Wood and Walters (1981-82).

In 1984, Wood moved to the BBC, where she was able to choose the actors who 
performed in her sketches for the series Victoria Wood As Seen on TV (1985-87), 
thereby assembling a repertory of like-minded regulars – Walters, Celia Imrie, 
Duncan Preston and Blake among them. She wrote Acorn Antiques for this series – 
a spoof of low-budget soap opera, based on Crossroads, with wobbly sets, daft 
storylines and actors missing their cues. Perhaps modestly, she saved the best 
role, the Brummie char Mrs Overall, and lines, for Walters, playing the 
relatively minor role of Berta herself. The sketch proved such a hit that, in 
2005, Wood wrote Acorn Antiques: The Musical!, for theTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> Royal, in London.

She went into therapy for a while in the 1990s, emerging with a confidence and 
self-containedness that surprised those who suspected she was doomed to be 
awkward and vulnerable. “I am self-confident and I am self-contained,” she told 
an interviewer. Was she always? “No, not at all. Not as a teenager and not as a 
young woman.” She and her husband attended Quaker meetings. “As I’ve got older, 
I am more interested in having a belief,” she said. “If you don’t it makes 
everything seem pointless. To only think ‘you’re alive, you have acne and then 
you die’ makes you wonder what it’s all for.”

In 1994, she wrote Pat and Margaret, about two sisters, one a star of a US 
soap, the other a motorway service station waitress, who are reunited after 27 
years. Wood admitted that there was more than a little of Pat in her, the woman 
“so determined to get on there’s no room for anything else”, but she wrote that 
role for Walters and instead played disappointed Margaret herself.

“Margaret’s all the people who don’t have a voice and don’t have any way of 
getting themselves up the ladder,” she reflected. But she was also playing 
Margaret as homage to the woman she could have been. “If I’m honest there is 
part of me that feels, or rather felt, very vulnerable and patronised and this 
is my way of showing that side of myself.”

In 2002, her 22-year marriage ended. She told an interviewer in 2011 she had 
not been in another relationship since. “There’s not much of a chance for me 
finding somebody of my age. Gentlemen of my age are dropping down 30 years to 
find girlfriends.” That’s not always the case, the interviewer replied. “You’re 
right. I need to get out of the house.”

Her work in the new millennium diversified beyond funny. As an actor, she 
played Eric Morecambe’s mother in theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>
 drama Eric and Ernie (2011), and starred with Timothy Spall in Sky TV’s 
adaptation of Raymond Briggs’s Fungus the Bogeyman (2015).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DP6yV0V3lza0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DP6yV0V3lza0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DP6yV0V3lza0&media=>
 An episode of Acorn Antiques from Victoria Wood As Seen on TV, 1986 
Her own plays for TV included Housewife, 49 (2006), an adaptation of the real 
diaries of Nella Last for the Mass Observation scheme 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/british/britain_wwtwo/nella_last_01.shtml>, in 
which she played the eponymous role of an introverted middle-aged character who 
discovers new confidence and friendships in Lancashire during the second world 
war; and Loving Miss Hatto (2012), a biopic of the pianist Joyce Hatto,whose 
husband was responsible for a notorious musical fraud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2007/feb/27/musicnews.music>, passing off 
dozens of recordings by other artists as his wife’s work. That Day We Sang,a 
stage show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jan/06/that-day-we-sang-theatre-review> 
that wasadapted for television <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b04w7sp3>, 
explored life in Manchester in 1929 and 1969, starting fromthe celebrated 
recording of Purcell’s Nymphs and Shepherds by a choir of 250 children 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-vkpqHECZtE>.

The critic and writer Clive James said of Wood: “As a TV dramatist alone, she 
is on a par with Alan Bennett, while as a creator of comedy programmes she 
changed the field for women and indeed for everybody, because very few of the 
men were trying hard enough as writers before she came on the scene and showed 
them what penetrating social humour should actually sound like.”

She is survived by her children.

 * Victoria Wood, comedian, playwright and singer-songwriter, born 19 May 
1953; died 20 April 2016  