
Wild weather will continue to cause havoc across Britain with driving snow, 
high winds, coastal flood warnings and the precautionary evacuation of an Essex 
village.

How have you been affected by flooding and snow in the UK?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/12/snowing-where-you-are-send-us-your-photos>
Seafront residents in Jaywick, near Clacton-on-Sea, were moved to temporary 
accommodation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/12/flights-cancelled-as-uk-battered-by-storm>
 as the Environment Agency warned coastal communities in Lincolnshire, Norfolk, 
Suffolk and Essex to prepare for gale-force winds, large waves and possible 
flooding on Friday.


Elsewhere, the Met Office has issued severe weather warnings across England, 
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland for combinations of high winds, snow and 
ice caused by a polar air mass thatoriginated over northern Canada.

As heavy snow settled across northern Britain, travel was disrupted and some 
schools closed. The Ministry of Defence said about 100 soldiers from the 
Catterick army base in Yorkshire had been deployed to Skegness on the 
Lincolnshire coast, where about 3,000 residents were urged to leave their homes 
or move upstairs.


With a forecast of further snow and wind, 80 flights were cancelled at 
Heathrow and four at Gatwick, and passengers were advised to check flight 
status with airlines before travelling to airports.


Snowy weather hits the UK - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/gallery/2017/jan/12/snowy-weather-hits-the-uk-in-pictures>



The east coast was set to bear the brunt. The Environment Agency warned that 
gale-force winds, combined with high tides, could result in large waves 
carrying dangerous debris throughout Friday and into Saturday. The army was on 
standby to assist, and resources and equipment were moved to the coast, the 
agency said.


Parts of Suffolk were identified as being at high risk of flooding on Friday 
night, including Lowestoft seafront and docks, the north bank of Lake Lothing, 
Oulton Broad near Mutford Lock, Snape, Iken and surrounding marshland, and 
Southwold and surrounding marshes.

At about midday on Friday, the Environment Agency is anticipating severe 
flooding in Felixstowe Ferry and Bawdsey Quay, Felixstowe Ferry Hamlet and the 
Deben Marshes, isolated riverside properties on the Deben estuary, and tidal 
Orwell at Ipswich quay.

Mark Sitton-Kent, the national duty manager at the Environment Agency, warned 
photographers and thrillseekers to stay away: “We understand that powerful 
tides can be dramatic, but please do not put yourself at unnecessary risk by 
going to the coast for a thrill or to take pictures.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fwhat-is-thundersnow-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20is%20thundersnow%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fwhat-is-thundersnow-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20is%20thundersnow%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fwhat-is-thundersnow-video-explainer&media=>
What is thundersnow? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2017/jan/12/what-is-thundersnow-video-explainer>
Police officers went from house to house in Jaywick, informing residents of 
the evacuation to a nearby rest centre, due to begin at 7am on Friday. Ch Insp 
Russ Cole of Essex police said: “Acting on all the professional guidance and 
experience of our colleagues at the Environment Agency and the Met Office, a 
partnership decision has been taken to evacuate the homes in Jaywick to ensure 
the safety of all residents.”

The decision had not been taken lightly, he said, but as darkness fell – and a 
flood warning could be heard sounding – some residents said they would not be 
leaving.

Police will use a colour-coded system to identify those staying put and those 
who may be vulnerable, so if flooding occurs they can prioritise who to help.

One man who has lived in Jaywick for nine years and who wished only to be 
identified as Pete, said he thought the flooding “will be worse than two years 
ago” but that “it is part of living by the coast”.


The government’s flood warning information service pinpointed several areas in 
Lincolnshire as being at risk from a large tidal surge moving down the east 
coast on Friday. The areas included sea defences in Cleethorpes.

High tidal levels along the Humber estuary, combined with strong winds, could 
result in large waves overtopping the sea defences, officials said, adding: 
“The public are advised to stay away from the coast for their safety.” A flood 
warning was issued for waterside properties in Boston between Town Bridge and 
Haven Bridge.


Environment Agency teams moved 5,200 metres of temporary barriers and 25 pumps 
to depots and towns including Newcastle upon Tyne, Blyth, Great Yarmouth, 
Chelmsford, Rye, and Trusthorpe and South Ferriby in Lincolnshire. The Hull 
tidal barrier was operated on Thursday evening and all east coast floodgates 
were closed.


The heaviest and most frequent snow showers are expected across northern and 
western Scotland, Northern Ireland and around Irish Sea coasts. There were 
yellow “be aware” warnings of wind and snow for Scotland, with gusts of up to 
60 mph in places, and 10-20cm (4in-8in) of snow on higher ground. The warnings 
extended to northern parts of England and Wales. In Northern Ireland, thick 
snow blanketed Coleraine and Ballymena.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fstorms-bring-snow-high-winds-and-flood-warnings-to-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbcdf08fae55fd0a868c3781d3a826d31a8e40102%2F0_0_3351_2274%2F3351.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Villagers%20evacuated%20as%20snow%2C%20high%20winds%20and%20flooding%20bring%20havoc%20to%20UK&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fstorms-bring-snow-high-winds-and-flood-warnings-to-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Villagers%20evacuated%20as%20snow%2C%20high%20winds%20and%20flooding%20bring%20havoc%20to%20UK&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fstorms-bring-snow-high-winds-and-flood-warnings-to-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbcdf08fae55fd0a868c3781d3a826d31a8e40102%2F0_0_3351_2274%2F3351.jpg>
 People out walking through the snow in Stirling, as blizzard conditions are 
set to sweep in. Photograph: Jane Barlow/PA 
Paul Gundersen, the chief meteorologist at the Met Office, said: “Most 
northern areas are very likely to see snow showers at times over the next few 
days, but the situation over the southern half of England is more complicated. 
Forecasting snow is always challenging and there’s often a fine line between 
whether it will rain or snow in a particular location depending on slight 
changes in air temperature.”

The outlook for the UK over the weekend was for generally dry weather on 
Saturday, with sunny spells across most of England and Scotland and a few 
showers, locally wintry, in Northern Ireland and western and easternmost parts 
of Britain. Sunday will be wetter and milder, with longer spells of rain in the 
south and some mist and fog developing later.


Those at risk of flooding were urged to keep up to date with the latest 
situation in their areas by calling Floodline on 0345 988 1188, or at
www.gov.uk/check-if-youre-at-risk-of-flooding 
<https://www.gov.uk/check-if-youre-at-risk-of-flooding>, or by following 
@EnvAgency and @floodaware on Twitter.

• This article was amended on 15 January 2017 to correct the spelling of Blyth.
 