
5.39pm GMT 17:39  <> 

Afternoon summary

 * Sir Vince Cable, the Lib Dem former business secretary, has become the 
latest prominent pro-European to come out against EU free movement. The party 
as a whole has always been strongly committed to free movement, although 
Theresa May has made to clear that the UK will no longer allow EU workers free 
movement to the UK after Brexit. But, in an article in the New Statesman, 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/uk/2017/01/why-its-time-end-eu-free-movement>
 Cable says there is a liberal case for opposing free movement. Many senior 
Labour figures, including Ed Miliband(here) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/nov/10/may-hails-golden-era-in-relations-with-china-politics-live?page=with:block-58247b08e4b0199b93895806#block-58247b08e4b0199b93895806>
, Yvette Cooper, Andy Burnham, Sir Keir Starmer(here), 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/dec/13/labour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live?page=with:block-584ff809e4b0e02f2b16bac4#block-584ff809e4b0e02f2b16bac4>
 and Emma Reynolds have also said they now believe that controls on immigration 
are required. In his article Cable says:

I have serious doubts that EU free movement is tenable or even desirable. 
First, the freedom is not a universal right, but selective. It does not apply 
to Indians, Jamaicans, Americans or Australians. They face complex and often 
harsh visa restrictions. One uncomfortable feature of the referendum was the 
large Brexit vote among British Asians, many of whom resented the contrast 
between the restrictions they face and the welcome mat laid out for Poles and 
Romanians ...

The economics are ambiguous. Seen globally, more migration is undeniably a 
positive. People moving from high unemployment, low productivity countries to 
areas of labour scarcity and higher productivity produce economic gains. But 
the benefits accrue mainly to migrants themselves (and business owners) ...

There is no great argument of liberal principle for free EU movement; the 
economics is debatable; and the politics is conclusively hostile ...

I do not see much upside in Brexit, but one is the opportunity for a more 
rational immigration policy.

But Cable says there is one argument for free movement: that accepting it 
could keep the UK in the single market.


The argument for free movement has become tactical: it is part of a package 
that also contains the wider economic benefits of the single market. Those 
benefits are real, which is why the government must prioritise single market 
access and shared regulation. Yet that may not be possible to reconcile with 
restrictions on movement. The second-best option is customs union status, 
essential for supply chain industries.

 * The Institute for Fiscal Studies has called for inheritance tax loopholes 
to be closed. (See 4.44pm.) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/05/whitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live?page=with:block-586e5394e4b081b2b4eda588#block-586e5394e4b081b2b4eda588>
 * The Economist has used its front page to brand the “indecisive” premier 
“Theresa Maybe”. (See 2.41pm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/05/whitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live?page=with:block-586e57f4e4b066e57e6db2ad#block-586e57f4e4b066e57e6db2ad>
 and 3.50pm.) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/05/whitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live?page=with:block-586e6425e4b066e57e6db2c9#block-586e6425e4b066e57e6db2c9>
 * The RMT has said it has accepted the offer of direct talks with the 
government in an effort to solve the long-running Southern rail dispute. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/05/southern-rail-rmt-agrees-to-direct-talks-with-government#img-1>
 * A man born in London to German parents has been told he cannot get a 
British passport unless he takes a UK citizenship test because he cannot prove 
his mother was legally in the country when she gave birth. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/05/man-told-to-take-citizenship-test-despite-living-entire-life-in-uk>
That’s all from me for today.

Thanks for the comments.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e7c1de4b0de5081fa2958%23block-586e7c1de4b0de5081fa2958>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vince%20Cable%20becomes%20latest%20pro-European%20to%20come%20out%20against%20free%20movement%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e7c1de4b0de5081fa2958%23block-586e7c1de4b0de5081fa2958>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e7c1de4b0de5081fa2958%23block-586e7c1de4b0de5081fa2958&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e7c1de4b0de5081fa2958%23block-586e7c1de4b0de5081fa2958>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vince%20Cable%20becomes%20latest%20pro-European%20to%20come%20out%20against%20free%20movement%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e7c1de4b0de5081fa2958%23block-586e7c1de4b0de5081fa2958>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e7c1de4b0de5081fa2958%23block-586e7c1de4b0de5081fa2958&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
4.58pm GMT 16:58  <> 

My colleague Polly Toynbee has been writing a good article about the IFS 
report. Here is an extract.

My generation bought cheap homes, and saw them rocket in value, in boom times 
earning more in a day than we earned going out to work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/mar/17/welcome-to-london-where-homes-earn-more-than-their-owners>
. This unearned, unmerited, untaxed wealth needs to be captured in one way or 
another, at some time in people’s lives or deaths.

That soaring bricks-and-mortar wealth damages the economy and still fails to 
encourage more homes to be built. Property wealth needs to be collected and 
redirected to struggling young families with no chance of owning their own 
home. Start with a council tax that genuinely reflects the value of homes: 
currently, with no revaluation of tax bands since 1991, it’s capped very low 
for valuable properties, while squeezing money out of those with nothing. US 
states levy property taxes and so should we, to chill the market and raise 
funds for housing. Time too to look at other ways to tax the elderly wealthy to 
pay for their own social and medical care, so the burden doesn’t fall on a 
poorer younger generation.

This report is yet another brutal reminder that Britain is going backwards. 
The IFS concludes: “Today’s young adults will find it harder to accumulate 
wealth of their own than previous generations did, due to the sharp fall in 
home ownership, the dramatic decline in defined benefit pensions in the private 
sector, and the stagnation in household income.”

And here is here full article.

Inheritance tax is toxic. We need new ways to tackle inequality | Polly Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/05/inheritance-tax-inequality-wealth-theresa-may-social-mobility>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e7a65e4b0de5081fa294c%23block-586e7a65e4b0de5081fa294c>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vince%20Cable%20becomes%20latest%20pro-European%20to%20come%20out%20against%20free%20movement%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e7a65e4b0de5081fa294c%23block-586e7a65e4b0de5081fa294c>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e7a65e4b0de5081fa294c%23block-586e7a65e4b0de5081fa294c&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e7a65e4b0de5081fa294c%23block-586e7a65e4b0de5081fa294c>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vince%20Cable%20becomes%20latest%20pro-European%20to%20come%20out%20against%20free%20movement%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e7a65e4b0de5081fa294c%23block-586e7a65e4b0de5081fa294c>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e7a65e4b0de5081fa294c%23block-586e7a65e4b0de5081fa294c&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
4.44pm GMT 16:44  <> 

IFS urges government to close inheritance tax loopholes

The Institute for Fiscal Studies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/institute-for-fiscal-studies> has called 
for inheritance tax loopholes to be closed.Paul Johnson, the IFS director, said 
this in an interview early this morning on the Today programme.

Johnson was on the programme talking about a report the IFS has published on 
inheritance and inequality. The Guardian’s story about it ishere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/05/richest-young-people-majority-inherited-wealth-uk>
 and the IFS summary ishere.  <https://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/8831>The 
report does not make policy proposals but on the Today programme Johnson argued 
that inheritance tax loopholes should be closed.

The problem with inheritance tax is that it is very hard to make it work for 
the really wealthy. It is the middlingly wealthy who end up paying it because 
it is pretty easy, if you can give money away during your life, or use trusts 
and so on, for people who have got serious money not to pay the full 40% ...

I think there is a case for looking at inheritance tax. There are some really 
absurdly obvious loopholes in it that one might want to sort out.

But he also argued that, if the government wanted to promote equality, 
although increasing inheritance tax might be one option, other options might be 
preferable.

As ever with these things, it does depend on what you want to achieve. If you 
want to do more to ensure that people have a more equal start in life, or more 
equal inheritance, then you need more inheritance tax. But you may well then 
find that a more effective set of policies are policies that support younger 
people, particularly in the housing market. Policies for example that you 
increase council tax and reduce stamp duty, or increase the amount of houses 
that are built, so that the importance of this inheritance becomes less 
significant ...

The more constructive thing in the long run is, part of the real big problem 
here is that the younger generation is doing very badly in terms of pensions, 
very badly in terms of housing, not very well in terms of earnings. If you can 
sort those things out, then inheritance becomes less important proportionately.

Johnson did not say in the interview what inheritance tax loopholes should be 
closed, but this is what the IFS said on the subjectin its green budget in 2015.
 <https://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/7530>

At present, agricultural land and unquoted business assets are exempt from 
inheritance tax, at a cost to the exchequer of £440m and £590m per year 
respectively. While there might conceivably be a case for allowing tax payments 
to be spread over time where assets received are illiquid and are to be 
retained by the recipient, it is hard to see any justification for the 
wholesale exemption of these assets. These reliefs create just the sort of 
non-neutrality the tax system ought to try to avoid, pushing up the price of 
agricultural land and of certain offerings on the AIM market, and providing a 
large incentive to keep businesses going and in the family even if there are 
good financial reasons for disposing of them sooner – as well as providing an 
open invitation for people to buy what might otherwise be wholly inappropriate 
assets purely as a way to avoid inheritance tax (albeit with a minimum holding 
period of the assets to qualify for relief).

The principal reason that inheritance tax is forecast to raise only £4.2bn in 
2015–16 is that it can be circumvented by the simple expedient of passing on 
wealth during one’s lifetime. Transfers in the seven years before death are 
taxed on a sliding scale (from zero for transfers more than seven years before 
death to the full 40% rate for transfers less than three years before death), 
but gifts made before that are not taxed at all. Those who are able – often the 
wealthiest – are encouraged to pass on their wealth at a time dictated by the 
tax system.

A simple option would be to lengthen the seven-year window before death during 
which lifetime transfers are taxable. For example, in 2007, the Liberal 
Democrats proposed that only transfers made more than 15 years before death 
should be exempt, though this was not ultimately adopted for their 2010 general 
election manifesto. Since there are no data on wealth transfers occurring more 
than seven years before death, we cannot know how much this would raise.

Updated at 4.48pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e5394e4b081b2b4eda588%23block-586e5394e4b081b2b4eda588>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vince%20Cable%20becomes%20latest%20pro-European%20to%20come%20out%20against%20free%20movement%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e5394e4b081b2b4eda588%23block-586e5394e4b081b2b4eda588>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e5394e4b081b2b4eda588%23block-586e5394e4b081b2b4eda588&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e5394e4b081b2b4eda588%23block-586e5394e4b081b2b4eda588>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vince%20Cable%20becomes%20latest%20pro-European%20to%20come%20out%20against%20free%20movement%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e5394e4b081b2b4eda588%23block-586e5394e4b081b2b4eda588>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e5394e4b081b2b4eda588%23block-586e5394e4b081b2b4eda588&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.50pm GMT 15:50  <> 

The Economist brands May 'Britain's indecisive premier'

The Economist has published a leader on Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>, and a long briefing about 
her first six months in power. They both come to a similar conclusion; that, 
while it is too early for a final assessment, May’s record so far has been 
disappointing and her failings are starting to resemble Gordon Brown’s.

Here’s an extract from the editorial. 
<http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21713837-after-six-months-what-new-prime-minister-stands-still-unclearperhaps-even>
 It is headlined “Theresa Maybe, Britain’s indecisive premier”.

Yet caution has started to look like indecision. Her most senior official in 
Brussels has just resigned, saying that the government does not have a clear 
Brexit plan. After six months it is hard to name a single signature policy, and 
easy to cite U-turns. Some are welcome: a silly promise to put workers on 
company boards, for instance, was abandoned; a dreadful plan to make firms list 
their foreign employees lasted less than a week; and hints at curbing the Bank 
of England’s independence were quietly forgotten. Selective “grammar” schools 
will be resurrected—but only on a small scale, and perhaps not at all, given 
how many Tory MPs oppose the idea. Other reversals smack of dithering. The 
construction of a new nuclear plant at Hinkley Point was put in doubt, then 
given the go-ahead; a new runway at Heathrow airport was all but agreed on, 
then deferred until a parliamentary vote next year. “Just-about-managing” 
households were the prime minister’s lodestar for a week or so, then dropped. 
So were suggestions that Britain would seek a transitional deal with the EU 
after Brexit—until they were recirculated a few weeks later when Mrs May 
apparently changed her mind once again.

The cause of this disarray could be that Mayism itself is muddled. While 
vowing to make Britain “the strongest global advocate for free markets”, the 
prime minister has also talked of reviving a “proper industrial strategy”. This 
is not about “propping up failing industries or picking winners”, she insists. 
Yet unspecified “support and assurances” to Nissan to persuade the carmaker to 
stay in Sunderland after Brexit amount to more or less that. Her enthusiasm for 
trade often sits uncomfortably with her scepticism of migration. Consider the 
recent trip to India, where her unwillingness to give way on immigration 
blocked progress on a free-trade agreement.

And here’s an extract from the briefing. 
<http://www.economist.com/news/briefing/21713834-understanding-britains-unelected-prime-minister-and-her-prospects-means-grasping-her-background>

Like Mrs Merkel, Mrs May has seen off rivals through canny manoeuvring; she 
bides her time, knowing when to speak up and when (as in the referendum 
campaign) to stay quiet. Like Mr Brown, she is prone to overblown rhetoric, 
irritability and indecisiveness. The biggest worry, though, is that she may 
also share his inability to adapt—the key difference between Mr Brown and Mrs 
Merkel.

Mrs May shows few signs of the ability to assimilate the new that has made Mrs 
Merkel so successful. Her vision of leadership, it seems, is focused on giving 
statements, installing processes, gathering up information and control—and 
little else. This makes it worryingly easy to imagine the Britain of 2018 or 
2019 in disarray: her party in revolt, her ministers and partners alienated, 
her government sclerotic, Brexit talks breaking down, the economy tanking and 
Number 10 in bunker mode.

For there is more to leadership than Mrs May’s procedures. There is also what 
Peter Hennessy, a contemporary historian, calls “the emotional geography” of 
power. This means adapting to events and institutions, building networks 
and—yes—being judiciously informal sometimes: a dose of instinct, a snap 
decision, a deal cut, a risk taken on a wing and a prayer. It means sharing 
information, accepting dissent, seeking alternative opinions, staking out a 
position and persuading people of it. It is this emotional landscape that 
Britain’s geographer prime minister must master, if she can.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e6425e4b066e57e6db2c9%23block-586e6425e4b066e57e6db2c9>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vince%20Cable%20becomes%20latest%20pro-European%20to%20come%20out%20against%20free%20movement%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e6425e4b066e57e6db2c9%23block-586e6425e4b066e57e6db2c9>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e6425e4b066e57e6db2c9%23block-586e6425e4b066e57e6db2c9&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e6425e4b066e57e6db2c9%23block-586e6425e4b066e57e6db2c9>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vince%20Cable%20becomes%20latest%20pro-European%20to%20come%20out%20against%20free%20movement%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e6425e4b066e57e6db2c9%23block-586e6425e4b066e57e6db2c9>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e6425e4b066e57e6db2c9%23block-586e6425e4b066e57e6db2c9&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
2.51pm GMT 14:51  <> 

Here’s the author and former political columnist Robert Harris on that 
Economist cover.
Robert Harris (@Robert___Harris) 
Echoes of the Telegraph's attack on Eden 60 yrs ago, for not providing "the 
smack of firm government". Got under his skin, disastrously
https://t.co/rWmYLjIICh <https://t.co/rWmYLjIICh>
 <https://twitter.com/Robert___Harris/status/817019164204351489> January 5, 
2017 <https://twitter.com/Robert___Harris/status/817019164204351489> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e5d4ee4b081b2b4eda5a2%23block-586e5d4ee4b081b2b4eda5a2>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vince%20Cable%20becomes%20latest%20pro-European%20to%20come%20out%20against%20free%20movement%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e5d4ee4b081b2b4eda5a2%23block-586e5d4ee4b081b2b4eda5a2>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e5d4ee4b081b2b4eda5a2%23block-586e5d4ee4b081b2b4eda5a2&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e5d4ee4b081b2b4eda5a2%23block-586e5d4ee4b081b2b4eda5a2>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vince%20Cable%20becomes%20latest%20pro-European%20to%20come%20out%20against%20free%20movement%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e5d4ee4b081b2b4eda5a2%23block-586e5d4ee4b081b2b4eda5a2>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e5d4ee4b081b2b4eda5a2%23block-586e5d4ee4b081b2b4eda5a2&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
2.41pm GMT 14:41  <> 

When Charlie Whelan was working as Gordon Brown’s spin doctor, he once summed 
up his approach to media management with something to the effect of: “Who cares 
about the Economist? We’ve got the Sun.”

I hope that’s what they still think in Downing Street. Today the Sun has an 
editorial lavishing praise on the prime minister. 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/2539316/the-sun-says-brexit-bitter-remainers-undermine-theresa-may-talks/>
 But Britain’s pre-eminent news magazine (which perversely calls itself a 
newspaper) is less impressed.
The Economist (@TheEconomist) 
Theresa May's problems are stacking up, and she doesn't seem to have a plan. 
Our Britain cover this week:pic.twitter.com/JdXV45zktV <https://t.co/JdXV45zktV>
 <https://twitter.com/TheEconomist/status/817008188201586688> January 5, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/TheEconomist/status/817008188201586688> 
UPDATE: Charlie Whelan tells me that he never said the quote I attributed to 
him. Good to see he hasn’t lost the art of rebuttal.
charlie whelan (@charliewhelan) 
@AndrewSparrow <https://twitter.com/AndrewSparrow> @TheEconomist 
<https://twitter.com/TheEconomist>. Sorry to disappoint you but that's utter 
bo*****s. Never said that.
 <https://twitter.com/charliewhelan/status/817039991859740672> January 5, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/charliewhelan/status/817039991859740672> 
FURTHER UPDATE: Though Whelen now remembers he might have said something 
similar ...
charlie whelan (@charliewhelan) 
@AndrewSparrow <https://twitter.com/AndrewSparrow> I might have said I don't 
care about@TheEconomist <https://twitter.com/TheEconomist> because nobody reads 
it!
 <https://twitter.com/charliewhelan/status/817044131767844864> January 5, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/charliewhelan/status/817044131767844864> 
Updated at 4.53pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e57f4e4b066e57e6db2ad%23block-586e57f4e4b066e57e6db2ad>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vince%20Cable%20becomes%20latest%20pro-European%20to%20come%20out%20against%20free%20movement%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e57f4e4b066e57e6db2ad%23block-586e57f4e4b066e57e6db2ad>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e57f4e4b066e57e6db2ad%23block-586e57f4e4b066e57e6db2ad&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e57f4e4b066e57e6db2ad%23block-586e57f4e4b066e57e6db2ad>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vince%20Cable%20becomes%20latest%20pro-European%20to%20come%20out%20against%20free%20movement%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e57f4e4b066e57e6db2ad%23block-586e57f4e4b066e57e6db2ad>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e57f4e4b066e57e6db2ad%23block-586e57f4e4b066e57e6db2ad&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
2.25pm GMT 14:25  <> 

Lunchtime summary

 * Andy Haldane, the Bank of England’s chief economist, has said that the 
economics profession is “in crisis”. He was speaking at at Institute for 
Government event where he admitted that the Bank did not anticipate how 
resilient the economy would be after Britain voted to leave the EU. But he said 
that he thought the Bank was wrong about timing, not about the fundamentals, 
and that it still expected Brexit to lead to weakened growth. (See1.40pm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/05/whitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live?page=with:block-586e4b07e4b066e57e6db282#block-586e4b07e4b066e57e6db282>
 and2.07pm.) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/05/whitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live?page=with:block-586e4b07e4b066e57e6db282#block-586e4b07e4b066e57e6db282>
 * Theresa Villiers, the former Northern Ireland secretary and a prominent 
leave campaigner, has launched a damning attack on Sir Ivan Rogers following 
his resignation as Britain’s ambassador to the EU. Speaking on Sky News she 
said: 
I thought Sir Ivan’s resignation email was, I don’t know, rambling, a bit 
emotionally needy, not something you would expect from a civil servant of that 
calibre.

Villiers was speaking a day after her Vote Leave colleague Iain Duncan Smith 
accused Rogers of being untrustworthy. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/04/ivan-rogers-brexit-eu-ambassador-ids-couldnt-be-trusted-by-ministers-claims-duncan-smith-politics-live?page=with:block-586cf82fe4b066e57e6dac64#block-586cf82fe4b066e57e6dac64>

 * Brexit will trigger a major reduction in net migration, a Cambridge 
University study has predicted. As the Press Association reports, If 
immigration controls on EU nationals were imposed in mid-2019, there would be 
zero net migration between the UK and the continent as inflows and outflows 
would balance each other out, the university’s Centre for Business Research 
forecast in a report (pdf).  
<http://www.cbr.cam.ac.uk/fileadmin/user_upload/centre-for-business-research/downloads/working-papers/wp483.pdf>
The report said this would reduce overall annual net migration to Britain to 
165,000 from 2020, about half the current figure. However, this would still be 
above the Government target of reducing net migration to the tens of thousands 
level per annum. 
 * Britain’s four-decade membership of the EU has left it lacking experience 
in international negotiations, which will hamper it in trade talks and may lead 
to “a very hard Brexit”, Norway’s prime minister has said. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/05/uks-lack-of-negotiating-experience-may-lead-to-very-hard-brexit>
 * Britain’s services sector grew at the fastest pace for 17 months in 
December, according to a survey that has raised hopes for a strong end to 2016 
for the economy. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/05/uk-services-sector-grows-fastest-pace>
My colleague Larry Elliott has written this article explaining why the economy 
has performed better than expected. 
Why has the UK economy defied predictions of doom?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/05/why-uk-economy-defied-predictions-doom-brexit-vote>
 * Nigel Farage, the former Ukip leader, has announced that he will be hosting 
an hour-long radio talkshow four nights a week on LBC. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/05/nigel-farage-to-host-lbc-radio-talkshow>
 * Union leaders representing thousands of nuclear workers are to discuss 
calling a strike ballot in a row over pensions.As the Press Association 
reports, the unions said 16,000 workers at 19 sites face cuts under plans by 
the Nuclear Decommissioning Authority to make savings of £660m. The workers are 
based at Sellafield (Cumbria), Magnox (Anglesey), Ayrshire, Dorset, 
Dumfriesshire, Essex, Gloucestershire, Gwynedd, Kent, Oxfordshire, Somerset, 
Suffolk, Direct Rail Services (Cumbria), Dounreay Site Restoration Ltd 
(Caithness), Low Level Waste Repository (Cumbria) and International Nuclear 
Services (Cumbria, Warrington).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e41b7e4b0de5081fa287c%23block-586e41b7e4b0de5081fa287c>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vince%20Cable%20becomes%20latest%20pro-European%20to%20come%20out%20against%20free%20movement%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e41b7e4b0de5081fa287c%23block-586e41b7e4b0de5081fa287c>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e41b7e4b0de5081fa287c%23block-586e41b7e4b0de5081fa287c&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e41b7e4b0de5081fa287c%23block-586e41b7e4b0de5081fa287c>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vince%20Cable%20becomes%20latest%20pro-European%20to%20come%20out%20against%20free%20movement%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e41b7e4b0de5081fa287c%23block-586e41b7e4b0de5081fa287c>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e41b7e4b0de5081fa287c%23block-586e41b7e4b0de5081fa287c&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
2.07pm GMT 14:07  <> 

Bank of England still expects Brexit to weaken growth, says Haldane

Earlier in the Q&A Andy Haldane was asked if the Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> was now more 
positive about the prospects for Britain post-Brexit than it was before the 
referendum.

Haldane admitted that the economy had done better than expected in the second 
half of last year. But he said, over the longer term, the Bank of England still 
expected Brexit to harm growth.

Here is his reply in full.

I think near-term the data, the evidence we’ve been accumulating since the 
referendum, has surprised to the upside. [There’s been] greater resilience, in 
particular among consumers and among the housing market, than we had expected. 
Has that led us to fundamentally led us to change our view on the fortunes of 
the economy looking forward over the next several years? Not really.

This is more a question, I think, of timing than of a fundamental reassessment 
of the fortunes of the economy. So back in November we published a forecast for 
inflation which was the highest we’ve ever published. And the forecast for 
growth in the UK economy that was the lowest we have ever published.

So we are still expecting this rather difficult balancing act for monetary 
policy with a slowing, not a huge slowing, but nonetheless a material slowing, 
during the course of next year as the effects of higher prices in the shops 
begin to chew away a little at the spending power of consumers and causes them 
to rein back a little in their spending. That remains our central view, with 
huge amounts of uncertainty around it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e5034e4b0de5081fa28b7%23block-586e5034e4b0de5081fa28b7>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vince%20Cable%20becomes%20latest%20pro-European%20to%20come%20out%20against%20free%20movement%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e5034e4b0de5081fa28b7%23block-586e5034e4b0de5081fa28b7>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e5034e4b0de5081fa28b7%23block-586e5034e4b0de5081fa28b7&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e5034e4b0de5081fa28b7%23block-586e5034e4b0de5081fa28b7>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vince%20Cable%20becomes%20latest%20pro-European%20to%20come%20out%20against%20free%20movement%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e5034e4b0de5081fa28b7%23block-586e5034e4b0de5081fa28b7>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e5034e4b0de5081fa28b7%23block-586e5034e4b0de5081fa28b7&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
1.51pm GMT 13:51  <> 

Haldane is taking questions now.

Q: What scope do you see for more assertive policies to alter the distribution 
of wealth?

Haldane says he would look at the level of the company, not the household. 
There is a lot that could be done to lift the performance of under-performing 
companies, he says.

As one example, he says it is easy to borrow against physical property, but 
much harder to borrow against intellectual property.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e4e0de4b0de5081fa28ad%23block-586e4e0de4b0de5081fa28ad>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vince%20Cable%20becomes%20latest%20pro-European%20to%20come%20out%20against%20free%20movement%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e4e0de4b0de5081fa28ad%23block-586e4e0de4b0de5081fa28ad>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e4e0de4b0de5081fa28ad%23block-586e4e0de4b0de5081fa28ad&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e4e0de4b0de5081fa28ad%23block-586e4e0de4b0de5081fa28ad>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vince%20Cable%20becomes%20latest%20pro-European%20to%20come%20out%20against%20free%20movement%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e4e0de4b0de5081fa28ad%23block-586e4e0de4b0de5081fa28ad>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e4e0de4b0de5081fa28ad%23block-586e4e0de4b0de5081fa28ad&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
1.40pm GMT 13:40  <> 

Economics profession 'is in crisis', says Bank of England's chief economist

Andy Haldane, the chief economist at the Bank of England, is speaking at the 
Institute for Government now. You can watch a live streamhere. 
<https://livestream.com/accounts/5208398/events/6729795>

The BBC’s Kamal Ahmed has been tweeting from it. Here are some of his tweets.
Kamal Ahmed (@bbckamal) 
Andrew Haldane @bankofengland <https://twitter.com/bankofengland> says 
productivity improvement holds the key to building an economy that "works for 
all"@ifgevents <https://twitter.com/ifgevents>
 <https://twitter.com/bbckamal/status/816995619055300609> January 5, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/bbckamal/status/816995619055300609> Kamal Ahmed (@bbckamal)
Haldane on economists: "It's a fair cop to say that the profession is in 
crisis." Cd lead to a rebirth in economics.
 <https://twitter.com/bbckamal/status/816996551855898625> January 5, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/bbckamal/status/816996551855898625> 
 * Haldane says economics profession is “in crisis”. Kamal Ahmed (@bbckamal) 
Haldane: pre financial crisis economic models were "ill-equipped" to deal with 
behaviour which was "deeply irrational"@ifgevents 
<https://twitter.com/ifgevents>
 <https://twitter.com/bbckamal/status/816997043268947968> January 5, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/bbckamal/status/816997043268947968> Kamal Ahmed (@bbckamal)
Haldane @bankofengland <https://twitter.com/bankofengland> "We'd foreseen a 
sharper slow down than happened." Says economy is performing as if Brexit vote 
hadn't taken place
 <https://twitter.com/bbckamal/status/816998814531878912> January 5, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/bbckamal/status/816998814531878912> Kamal Ahmed (@bbckamal)
Haldane @bankofengland <https://twitter.com/bankofengland> says in 2017 
economy could be "somewhat more difficult". Consumers cd "throttle back" 
spending@ifgevents <https://twitter.com/ifgevents>
 <https://twitter.com/bbckamal/status/816999709655044096> January 5, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/bbckamal/status/816999709655044096> 
Chris Giles makes this point in the FT today. See 12.23pm. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/05/whitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live?page=with:block-586e2af6e4b066e57e6db20b#block-586e2af6e4b066e57e6db20b>
Kamal Ahmed (@bbckamal) 
Haldane: "I'm not saying economists should talk like Trump but we need 
different means of conveying our messages." Language matters
 <https://twitter.com/bbckamal/status/817000426876833792> January 5, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/bbckamal/status/817000426876833792> Kamal Ahmed (@bbckamal)
Haldane: "Full implications of Brexit [on the economy] are yet to be known." 
@ifgevents <https://twitter.com/ifgevents>
 <https://twitter.com/bbckamal/status/817001101308399617> January 5, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/bbckamal/status/817001101308399617>  Andy Haldane talking 
to Bronwen Maddox, director of the Institute for Government Photograph: 
IfG/Institute for Government 
Updated at 1.49pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e4b07e4b066e57e6db282%23block-586e4b07e4b066e57e6db282>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vince%20Cable%20becomes%20latest%20pro-European%20to%20come%20out%20against%20free%20movement%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e4b07e4b066e57e6db282%23block-586e4b07e4b066e57e6db282>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e4b07e4b066e57e6db282%23block-586e4b07e4b066e57e6db282&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e4b07e4b066e57e6db282%23block-586e4b07e4b066e57e6db282>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vince%20Cable%20becomes%20latest%20pro-European%20to%20come%20out%20against%20free%20movement%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e4b07e4b066e57e6db282%23block-586e4b07e4b066e57e6db282>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e4b07e4b066e57e6db282%23block-586e4b07e4b066e57e6db282&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
12.23pm GMT 12:23  <> 

You can read all today’s Guardian politics stories here. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/all>

As for the rest of the papers, here is the PoliticsHome list of top 10 
must-reads <https://www.politicshome.com/must-reads>, and here is the 
ConservativeHome round-up of today’s politics stories. 
<http://www.conservativehome.com/frontpage/2017/01/newslinks-for-thursday-5th-january-2017.html>

And here are four articles worth reading.

 * The Times (subscription) says having to deal with Liam Fox and David Davis 
helped to persuade Sir Ivan Rogers to resign. 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/fox-and-davis-drove-our-man-in-europe-to-despair-s5k7rwsj9>
Liam Fox and David Davis’s alleged failure to understand briefings in the 
weeks after their appointment left Sir Ivan Rogers in despair, friends have 
said. Britain’s top diplomat in Brussels, who resigned on Tuesday, considered 
quitting on more than one occasion after the referendum.

Sources said that he was frustrated by his attempts to induct the two Brexit 
cabinet ministers in the details of the single market and customs union ...

Sir Ivan is understood to believe that Mrs May understands the dangers this 
poses. However, he expressed frustration about the fact that Dr Fox, the 
international trade secretary, Mr Davis, the Brexit secretary, and Boris 
Johnson, foreign secretary, did not take the chance or consequences of a 
chaotic outcome seriously enough.

 * Lord Kerslake, the former head of the civil services, says in a letter to 
the Times (subscription) that the government does not have a delivery plan or 
negotiating strategy for Brexit. 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/comment/no-10-and-resignation-of-our-man-in-brussels-2vl3ql67r>
He writes: 
Less than three months away from the government’s self-imposed deadline for 
triggering Article 50, we still do not have a delivery plan, negotiating 
strategy or clear understanding of the resources required to achieve a 
successful Brexit. To say this is neither to be “pessimistic” or “political”, 
nor in denial of the referendum result, but simply make an honest statement 
about the reality of our situation.

Too much of the debate about Brexit starts from a naive view of how we would 
like to world — and Europe in particular — to be rather than how it actually 
is. Nowhere is this more evident than in our insistence that despite all the 
evidence to the contrary, we can have free trade in goods and services with 
Europe but not free movement of labour.

 * The Daily Mail says Tony Blair is “ploughing almost £10million into his new 
crusade against ‘populists’”. 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4089086/Blair-s-10-war-chest-fight-against-populism-Former-PM-winds-secretive-company-start-new-organisation-battle-against-Britain-leaving-EU.html#ixzz4UsuyDDjz>
 * Chris Giles in the Financial Times (subscription) say the main reason 
economists were wrong about the immediate economic impact of Brexit was that 
they expected household spending to go down when instead it went up. 
<https://www.ft.com/content/15837254-d272-11e6-b06b-680c49b4b4c0> 
In fact, we know the predominant source of error. It stemmed from 
underestimating thestrength of household consumption  
<https://www.ft.com/content/c061e51a-c8f5-11e6-9043-7e34c07b46ef>after the vote 
for Brexit. Economists expected a vote to leave would increase household 
savings in the short term, both as precautionary insurance against uncertainty 
and to begin an adjustment to a less prosperous future.

These were reasonable guesses, based on recent household behaviour — for 
example, at the time of huge banking uncertainty early in 2008. But rather than 
rising, household savings fell throughout 2016. The savings ratio dropped to an 
exceptionally low level in the third quarter as consumers went on aborrowing 
and spending <https://www.ft.com/content/e7ccbf80-d264-11e6-9341-7393bb2e1b51> 
binge not seen since before the financial crisis.

The interesting question is why households acted in this way. There are three 
plausible reasons. First, households correctly thought Brexit would improve 
their personal finances and borrowed and spent accordingly. Second, they were 
deceived into expecting economic gains from Brexit and still went out to spend. 
And, third, households watched sterling tumble, understood the likely effect on 
prices and brought forward their consumption, so they were spending in the 
knowledge their money would buy less in future.

Economic analysis allows us to set out these possibilities; it tells us only 
the last of the three options is sustainable; but it does not yet inform us 
which is correct.

By the end of 2017, we will know whether historically low levels of saving 
have persisted through the year, and this will provide a pretty good answer to 
the question of why spending held up so well after the EU referendum. If 
spending was merely brought forward, there will be a nasty jolt in the economy.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e2af6e4b066e57e6db20b%23block-586e2af6e4b066e57e6db20b>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vince%20Cable%20becomes%20latest%20pro-European%20to%20come%20out%20against%20free%20movement%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e2af6e4b066e57e6db20b%23block-586e2af6e4b066e57e6db20b>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e2af6e4b066e57e6db20b%23block-586e2af6e4b066e57e6db20b&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e2af6e4b066e57e6db20b%23block-586e2af6e4b066e57e6db20b>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vince%20Cable%20becomes%20latest%20pro-European%20to%20come%20out%20against%20free%20movement%20-%20as%20it%20happened&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e2af6e4b066e57e6db20b%23block-586e2af6e4b066e57e6db20b>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-586e2af6e4b066e57e6db20b%23block-586e2af6e4b066e57e6db20b&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close  
 * Sir Vince Cable, the Lib Dem former business secretary, has become the 
latest prominent pro-European to come out against EU free movement. The party 
as a whole has always been strongly committed to free movement, although 
Theresa May has made to clear that the UK will no longer allow EU workers free 
movement to the UK after Brexit. But, in an article in the New Statesman, 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/uk/2017/01/why-its-time-end-eu-free-movement>
 Cable says there is a liberal case for opposing free movement. Many senior 
Labour figures, including Ed Miliband(here) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/nov/10/may-hails-golden-era-in-relations-with-china-politics-live?page=with:block-58247b08e4b0199b93895806#block-58247b08e4b0199b93895806>
, Yvette Cooper, Andy Burnham, Sir Keir Starmer(here), 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/dec/13/labour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live?page=with:block-584ff809e4b0e02f2b16bac4#block-584ff809e4b0e02f2b16bac4>
 and Emma Reynolds have also said they now believe that controls on immigration 
are required. In his article Cable says:

I have serious doubts that EU free movement is tenable or even desirable. 
First, the freedom is not a universal right, but selective. It does not apply 
to Indians, Jamaicans, Americans or Australians. They face complex and often 
harsh visa restrictions. One uncomfortable feature of the referendum was the 
large Brexit vote among British Asians, many of whom resented the contrast 
between the restrictions they face and the welcome mat laid out for Poles and 
Romanians ...

The economics are ambiguous. Seen globally, more migration is undeniably a 
positive. People moving from high unemployment, low productivity countries to 
areas of labour scarcity and higher productivity produce economic gains. But 
the benefits accrue mainly to migrants themselves (and business owners) ...

There is no great argument of liberal principle for free EU movement; the 
economics is debatable; and the politics is conclusively hostile ...

I do not see much upside in Brexit, but one is the opportunity for a more 
rational immigration policy.

But Cable says there is one argument for free movement: that accepting it 
could keep the UK in the single market.


The argument for free movement has become tactical: it is part of a package 
that also contains the wider economic benefits of the single market. Those 
benefits are real, which is why the government must prioritise single market 
access and shared regulation. Yet that may not be possible to reconcile with 
restrictions on movement. The second-best option is customs union status, 
essential for supply chain industries.

 * The Institute for Fiscal Studies has called for inheritance tax loopholes 
to be closed. (See 4.44pm.) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/05/whitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live?page=with:block-586e5394e4b081b2b4eda588#block-586e5394e4b081b2b4eda588>
 * The Economist has used its front page to brand the “indecisive” premier 
“Theresa Maybe”. (See 2.41pm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/05/whitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live?page=with:block-586e57f4e4b066e57e6db2ad#block-586e57f4e4b066e57e6db2ad>
 and 3.50pm.) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/05/whitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live?page=with:block-586e6425e4b066e57e6db2c9#block-586e6425e4b066e57e6db2c9>
 * The RMT has said it has accepted the offer of direct talks with the 
government in an effort to solve the long-running Southern rail dispute. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/05/southern-rail-rmt-agrees-to-direct-talks-with-government#img-1>
 * A man born in London to German parents has been told he cannot get a 
British passport unless he takes a UK citizenship test because he cannot prove 
his mother was legally in the country when she gave birth. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/05/man-told-to-take-citizenship-test-despite-living-entire-life-in-uk>
That’s all from me for today.

Thanks for the comments.
 
My colleague Polly Toynbee has been writing a good article about the IFS 
report. Here is an extract.

My generation bought cheap homes, and saw them rocket in value, in boom times 
earning more in a day than we earned going out to work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/mar/17/welcome-to-london-where-homes-earn-more-than-their-owners>
. This unearned, unmerited, untaxed wealth needs to be captured in one way or 
another, at some time in people’s lives or deaths.

That soaring bricks-and-mortar wealth damages the economy and still fails to 
encourage more homes to be built. Property wealth needs to be collected and 
redirected to struggling young families with no chance of owning their own 
home. Start with a council tax that genuinely reflects the value of homes: 
currently, with no revaluation of tax bands since 1991, it’s capped very low 
for valuable properties, while squeezing money out of those with nothing. US 
states levy property taxes and so should we, to chill the market and raise 
funds for housing. Time too to look at other ways to tax the elderly wealthy to 
pay for their own social and medical care, so the burden doesn’t fall on a 
poorer younger generation.

This report is yet another brutal reminder that Britain is going backwards. 
The IFS concludes: “Today’s young adults will find it harder to accumulate 
wealth of their own than previous generations did, due to the sharp fall in 
home ownership, the dramatic decline in defined benefit pensions in the private 
sector, and the stagnation in household income.”

And here is here full article.

Inheritance tax is toxic. We need new ways to tackle inequality | Polly Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/05/inheritance-tax-inequality-wealth-theresa-may-social-mobility> 
The Institute for Fiscal Studies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/institute-for-fiscal-studies> has called 
for inheritance tax loopholes to be closed.Paul Johnson, the IFS director, said 
this in an interview early this morning on the Today programme.

Johnson was on the programme talking about a report the IFS has published on 
inheritance and inequality. The Guardian’s story about it ishere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/05/richest-young-people-majority-inherited-wealth-uk>
 and the IFS summary ishere.  <https://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/8831>The 
report does not make policy proposals but on the Today programme Johnson argued 
that inheritance tax loopholes should be closed.

The problem with inheritance tax is that it is very hard to make it work for 
the really wealthy. It is the middlingly wealthy who end up paying it because 
it is pretty easy, if you can give money away during your life, or use trusts 
and so on, for people who have got serious money not to pay the full 40% ...

I think there is a case for looking at inheritance tax. There are some really 
absurdly obvious loopholes in it that one might want to sort out.

But he also argued that, if the government wanted to promote equality, 
although increasing inheritance tax might be one option, other options might be 
preferable.

As ever with these things, it does depend on what you want to achieve. If you 
want to do more to ensure that people have a more equal start in life, or more 
equal inheritance, then you need more inheritance tax. But you may well then 
find that a more effective set of policies are policies that support younger 
people, particularly in the housing market. Policies for example that you 
increase council tax and reduce stamp duty, or increase the amount of houses 
that are built, so that the importance of this inheritance becomes less 
significant ...

The more constructive thing in the long run is, part of the real big problem 
here is that the younger generation is doing very badly in terms of pensions, 
very badly in terms of housing, not very well in terms of earnings. If you can 
sort those things out, then inheritance becomes less important proportionately.

Johnson did not say in the interview what inheritance tax loopholes should be 
closed, but this is what the IFS said on the subjectin its green budget in 2015.
 <https://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/7530>

At present, agricultural land and unquoted business assets are exempt from 
inheritance tax, at a cost to the exchequer of £440m and £590m per year 
respectively. While there might conceivably be a case for allowing tax payments 
to be spread over time where assets received are illiquid and are to be 
retained by the recipient, it is hard to see any justification for the 
wholesale exemption of these assets. These reliefs create just the sort of 
non-neutrality the tax system ought to try to avoid, pushing up the price of 
agricultural land and of certain offerings on the AIM market, and providing a 
large incentive to keep businesses going and in the family even if there are 
good financial reasons for disposing of them sooner – as well as providing an 
open invitation for people to buy what might otherwise be wholly inappropriate 
assets purely as a way to avoid inheritance tax (albeit with a minimum holding 
period of the assets to qualify for relief).

The principal reason that inheritance tax is forecast to raise only £4.2bn in 
2015–16 is that it can be circumvented by the simple expedient of passing on 
wealth during one’s lifetime. Transfers in the seven years before death are 
taxed on a sliding scale (from zero for transfers more than seven years before 
death to the full 40% rate for transfers less than three years before death), 
but gifts made before that are not taxed at all. Those who are able – often the 
wealthiest – are encouraged to pass on their wealth at a time dictated by the 
tax system.

A simple option would be to lengthen the seven-year window before death during 
which lifetime transfers are taxable. For example, in 2007, the Liberal 
Democrats proposed that only transfers made more than 15 years before death 
should be exempt, though this was not ultimately adopted for their 2010 general 
election manifesto. Since there are no data on wealth transfers occurring more 
than seven years before death, we cannot know how much this would raise.
 
The Economist has published a leader on Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>, and a long briefing about 
her first six months in power. They both come to a similar conclusion; that, 
while it is too early for a final assessment, May’s record so far has been 
disappointing and her failings are starting to resemble Gordon Brown’s.

Here’s an extract from the editorial. 
<http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21713837-after-six-months-what-new-prime-minister-stands-still-unclearperhaps-even>
 It is headlined “Theresa Maybe, Britain’s indecisive premier”.

Yet caution has started to look like indecision. Her most senior official in 
Brussels has just resigned, saying that the government does not have a clear 
Brexit plan. After six months it is hard to name a single signature policy, and 
easy to cite U-turns. Some are welcome: a silly promise to put workers on 
company boards, for instance, was abandoned; a dreadful plan to make firms list 
their foreign employees lasted less than a week; and hints at curbing the Bank 
of England’s independence were quietly forgotten. Selective “grammar” schools 
will be resurrected—but only on a small scale, and perhaps not at all, given 
how many Tory MPs oppose the idea. Other reversals smack of dithering. The 
construction of a new nuclear plant at Hinkley Point was put in doubt, then 
given the go-ahead; a new runway at Heathrow airport was all but agreed on, 
then deferred until a parliamentary vote next year. “Just-about-managing” 
households were the prime minister’s lodestar for a week or so, then dropped. 
So were suggestions that Britain would seek a transitional deal with the EU 
after Brexit—until they were recirculated a few weeks later when Mrs May 
apparently changed her mind once again.

The cause of this disarray could be that Mayism itself is muddled. While 
vowing to make Britain “the strongest global advocate for free markets”, the 
prime minister has also talked of reviving a “proper industrial strategy”. This 
is not about “propping up failing industries or picking winners”, she insists. 
Yet unspecified “support and assurances” to Nissan to persuade the carmaker to 
stay in Sunderland after Brexit amount to more or less that. Her enthusiasm for 
trade often sits uncomfortably with her scepticism of migration. Consider the 
recent trip to India, where her unwillingness to give way on immigration 
blocked progress on a free-trade agreement.

And here’s an extract from the briefing. 
<http://www.economist.com/news/briefing/21713834-understanding-britains-unelected-prime-minister-and-her-prospects-means-grasping-her-background>

Like Mrs Merkel, Mrs May has seen off rivals through canny manoeuvring; she 
bides her time, knowing when to speak up and when (as in the referendum 
campaign) to stay quiet. Like Mr Brown, she is prone to overblown rhetoric, 
irritability and indecisiveness. The biggest worry, though, is that she may 
also share his inability to adapt—the key difference between Mr Brown and Mrs 
Merkel.

Mrs May shows few signs of the ability to assimilate the new that has made Mrs 
Merkel so successful. Her vision of leadership, it seems, is focused on giving 
statements, installing processes, gathering up information and control—and 
little else. This makes it worryingly easy to imagine the Britain of 2018 or 
2019 in disarray: her party in revolt, her ministers and partners alienated, 
her government sclerotic, Brexit talks breaking down, the economy tanking and 
Number 10 in bunker mode.

For there is more to leadership than Mrs May’s procedures. There is also what 
Peter Hennessy, a contemporary historian, calls “the emotional geography” of 
power. This means adapting to events and institutions, building networks 
and—yes—being judiciously informal sometimes: a dose of instinct, a snap 
decision, a deal cut, a risk taken on a wing and a prayer. It means sharing 
information, accepting dissent, seeking alternative opinions, staking out a 
position and persuading people of it. It is this emotional landscape that 
Britain’s geographer prime minister must master, if she can.
 
Here’s the author and former political columnist Robert Harris on that 
Economist cover.
Robert Harris (@Robert___Harris) 
Echoes of the Telegraph's attack on Eden 60 yrs ago, for not providing "the 
smack of firm government". Got under his skin, disastrously
https://t.co/rWmYLjIICh <https://t.co/rWmYLjIICh>
 <https://twitter.com/Robert___Harris/status/817019164204351489> January 5, 
2017 <https://twitter.com/Robert___Harris/status/817019164204351489>  
When Charlie Whelan was working as Gordon Brown’s spin doctor, he once summed 
up his approach to media management with something to the effect of: “Who cares 
about the Economist? We’ve got the Sun.”

I hope that’s what they still think in Downing Street. Today the Sun has an 
editorial lavishing praise on the prime minister. 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/2539316/the-sun-says-brexit-bitter-remainers-undermine-theresa-may-talks/>
 But Britain’s pre-eminent news magazine (which perversely calls itself a 
newspaper) is less impressed.
The Economist (@TheEconomist) 
Theresa May's problems are stacking up, and she doesn't seem to have a plan. 
Our Britain cover this week:pic.twitter.com/JdXV45zktV <https://t.co/JdXV45zktV>
 <https://twitter.com/TheEconomist/status/817008188201586688> January 5, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/TheEconomist/status/817008188201586688> 
UPDATE: Charlie Whelan tells me that he never said the quote I attributed to 
him. Good to see he hasn’t lost the art of rebuttal.
charlie whelan (@charliewhelan) 
@AndrewSparrow <https://twitter.com/AndrewSparrow> @TheEconomist 
<https://twitter.com/TheEconomist>. Sorry to disappoint you but that's utter 
bo*****s. Never said that.
 <https://twitter.com/charliewhelan/status/817039991859740672> January 5, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/charliewhelan/status/817039991859740672> 
FURTHER UPDATE: Though Whelen now remembers he might have said something 
similar ...
charlie whelan (@charliewhelan) 
@AndrewSparrow <https://twitter.com/AndrewSparrow> I might have said I don't 
care about@TheEconomist <https://twitter.com/TheEconomist> because nobody reads 
it!
 <https://twitter.com/charliewhelan/status/817044131767844864> January 5, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/charliewhelan/status/817044131767844864>  
 * Andy Haldane, the Bank of England’s chief economist, has said that the 
economics profession is “in crisis”. He was speaking at at Institute for 
Government event where he admitted that the Bank did not anticipate how 
resilient the economy would be after Britain voted to leave the EU. But he said 
that he thought the Bank was wrong about timing, not about the fundamentals, 
and that it still expected Brexit to lead to weakened growth. (See1.40pm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/05/whitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live?page=with:block-586e4b07e4b066e57e6db282#block-586e4b07e4b066e57e6db282>
 and2.07pm.) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/05/whitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live?page=with:block-586e4b07e4b066e57e6db282#block-586e4b07e4b066e57e6db282>
 * Theresa Villiers, the former Northern Ireland secretary and a prominent 
leave campaigner, has launched a damning attack on Sir Ivan Rogers following 
his resignation as Britain’s ambassador to the EU. Speaking on Sky News she 
said: 
I thought Sir Ivan’s resignation email was, I don’t know, rambling, a bit 
emotionally needy, not something you would expect from a civil servant of that 
calibre.

Villiers was speaking a day after her Vote Leave colleague Iain Duncan Smith 
accused Rogers of being untrustworthy. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/04/ivan-rogers-brexit-eu-ambassador-ids-couldnt-be-trusted-by-ministers-claims-duncan-smith-politics-live?page=with:block-586cf82fe4b066e57e6dac64#block-586cf82fe4b066e57e6dac64>

 * Brexit will trigger a major reduction in net migration, a Cambridge 
University study has predicted. As the Press Association reports, If 
immigration controls on EU nationals were imposed in mid-2019, there would be 
zero net migration between the UK and the continent as inflows and outflows 
would balance each other out, the university’s Centre for Business Research 
forecast in a report (pdf).  
<http://www.cbr.cam.ac.uk/fileadmin/user_upload/centre-for-business-research/downloads/working-papers/wp483.pdf>
The report said this would reduce overall annual net migration to Britain to 
165,000 from 2020, about half the current figure. However, this would still be 
above the Government target of reducing net migration to the tens of thousands 
level per annum. 
 * Britain’s four-decade membership of the EU has left it lacking experience 
in international negotiations, which will hamper it in trade talks and may lead 
to “a very hard Brexit”, Norway’s prime minister has said. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/05/uks-lack-of-negotiating-experience-may-lead-to-very-hard-brexit>
 * Britain’s services sector grew at the fastest pace for 17 months in 
December, according to a survey that has raised hopes for a strong end to 2016 
for the economy. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/05/uk-services-sector-grows-fastest-pace>
My colleague Larry Elliott has written this article explaining why the economy 
has performed better than expected. 
Why has the UK economy defied predictions of doom?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/05/why-uk-economy-defied-predictions-doom-brexit-vote>
 * Nigel Farage, the former Ukip leader, has announced that he will be hosting 
an hour-long radio talkshow four nights a week on LBC. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/05/nigel-farage-to-host-lbc-radio-talkshow>
 * Union leaders representing thousands of nuclear workers are to discuss 
calling a strike ballot in a row over pensions.As the Press Association 
reports, the unions said 16,000 workers at 19 sites face cuts under plans by 
the Nuclear Decommissioning Authority to make savings of £660m. The workers are 
based at Sellafield (Cumbria), Magnox (Anglesey), Ayrshire, Dorset, 
Dumfriesshire, Essex, Gloucestershire, Gwynedd, Kent, Oxfordshire, Somerset, 
Suffolk, Direct Rail Services (Cumbria), Dounreay Site Restoration Ltd 
(Caithness), Low Level Waste Repository (Cumbria) and International Nuclear 
Services (Cumbria, Warrington).
 
Earlier in the Q&A Andy Haldane was asked if the Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> was now more 
positive about the prospects for Britain post-Brexit than it was before the 
referendum.

Haldane admitted that the economy had done better than expected in the second 
half of last year. But he said, over the longer term, the Bank of England still 
expected Brexit to harm growth.

Here is his reply in full.

I think near-term the data, the evidence we’ve been accumulating since the 
referendum, has surprised to the upside. [There’s been] greater resilience, in 
particular among consumers and among the housing market, than we had expected. 
Has that led us to fundamentally led us to change our view on the fortunes of 
the economy looking forward over the next several years? Not really.

This is more a question, I think, of timing than of a fundamental reassessment 
of the fortunes of the economy. So back in November we published a forecast for 
inflation which was the highest we’ve ever published. And the forecast for 
growth in the UK economy that was the lowest we have ever published.

So we are still expecting this rather difficult balancing act for monetary 
policy with a slowing, not a huge slowing, but nonetheless a material slowing, 
during the course of next year as the effects of higher prices in the shops 
begin to chew away a little at the spending power of consumers and causes them 
to rein back a little in their spending. That remains our central view, with 
huge amounts of uncertainty around it.
 
Haldane is taking questions now.

Q: What scope do you see for more assertive policies to alter the distribution 
of wealth?

Haldane says he would look at the level of the company, not the household. 
There is a lot that could be done to lift the performance of under-performing 
companies, he says.

As one example, he says it is easy to borrow against physical property, but 
much harder to borrow against intellectual property.
 
Andy Haldane, the chief economist at the Bank of England, is speaking at the 
Institute for Government now. You can watch a live streamhere. 
<https://livestream.com/accounts/5208398/events/6729795>

The BBC’s Kamal Ahmed has been tweeting from it. Here are some of his tweets.
Kamal Ahmed (@bbckamal) 
Andrew Haldane @bankofengland <https://twitter.com/bankofengland> says 
productivity improvement holds the key to building an economy that "works for 
all"@ifgevents <https://twitter.com/ifgevents>
 <https://twitter.com/bbckamal/status/816995619055300609> January 5, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/bbckamal/status/816995619055300609> Kamal Ahmed (@bbckamal)
Haldane on economists: "It's a fair cop to say that the profession is in 
crisis." Cd lead to a rebirth in economics.
 <https://twitter.com/bbckamal/status/816996551855898625> January 5, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/bbckamal/status/816996551855898625> 
 * Haldane says economics profession is “in crisis”. Kamal Ahmed (@bbckamal) 
Haldane: pre financial crisis economic models were "ill-equipped" to deal with 
behaviour which was "deeply irrational"@ifgevents 
<https://twitter.com/ifgevents>
 <https://twitter.com/bbckamal/status/816997043268947968> January 5, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/bbckamal/status/816997043268947968> Kamal Ahmed (@bbckamal)
Haldane @bankofengland <https://twitter.com/bankofengland> "We'd foreseen a 
sharper slow down than happened." Says economy is performing as if Brexit vote 
hadn't taken place
 <https://twitter.com/bbckamal/status/816998814531878912> January 5, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/bbckamal/status/816998814531878912> Kamal Ahmed (@bbckamal)
Haldane @bankofengland <https://twitter.com/bankofengland> says in 2017 
economy could be "somewhat more difficult". Consumers cd "throttle back" 
spending@ifgevents <https://twitter.com/ifgevents>
 <https://twitter.com/bbckamal/status/816999709655044096> January 5, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/bbckamal/status/816999709655044096> 
Chris Giles makes this point in the FT today. See 12.23pm. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/05/whitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live?page=with:block-586e2af6e4b066e57e6db20b#block-586e2af6e4b066e57e6db20b>
Kamal Ahmed (@bbckamal) 
Haldane: "I'm not saying economists should talk like Trump but we need 
different means of conveying our messages." Language matters
 <https://twitter.com/bbckamal/status/817000426876833792> January 5, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/bbckamal/status/817000426876833792> Kamal Ahmed (@bbckamal)
Haldane: "Full implications of Brexit [on the economy] are yet to be known." 
@ifgevents <https://twitter.com/ifgevents>
 <https://twitter.com/bbckamal/status/817001101308399617> January 5, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/bbckamal/status/817001101308399617>  Andy Haldane talking 
to Bronwen Maddox, director of the Institute for Government Photograph: 
IfG/Institute for Government  
You can read all today’s Guardian politics stories here. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/all>

As for the rest of the papers, here is the PoliticsHome list of top 10 
must-reads <https://www.politicshome.com/must-reads>, and here is the 
ConservativeHome round-up of today’s politics stories. 
<http://www.conservativehome.com/frontpage/2017/01/newslinks-for-thursday-5th-january-2017.html>

And here are four articles worth reading.

 * The Times (subscription) says having to deal with Liam Fox and David Davis 
helped to persuade Sir Ivan Rogers to resign. 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/fox-and-davis-drove-our-man-in-europe-to-despair-s5k7rwsj9>
Liam Fox and David Davis’s alleged failure to understand briefings in the 
weeks after their appointment left Sir Ivan Rogers in despair, friends have 
said. Britain’s top diplomat in Brussels, who resigned on Tuesday, considered 
quitting on more than one occasion after the referendum.

Sources said that he was frustrated by his attempts to induct the two Brexit 
cabinet ministers in the details of the single market and customs union ...

Sir Ivan is understood to believe that Mrs May understands the dangers this 
poses. However, he expressed frustration about the fact that Dr Fox, the 
international trade secretary, Mr Davis, the Brexit secretary, and Boris 
Johnson, foreign secretary, did not take the chance or consequences of a 
chaotic outcome seriously enough.

 * Lord Kerslake, the former head of the civil services, says in a letter to 
the Times (subscription) that the government does not have a delivery plan or 
negotiating strategy for Brexit. 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/comment/no-10-and-resignation-of-our-man-in-brussels-2vl3ql67r>
He writes: 
Less than three months away from the government’s self-imposed deadline for 
triggering Article 50, we still do not have a delivery plan, negotiating 
strategy or clear understanding of the resources required to achieve a 
successful Brexit. To say this is neither to be “pessimistic” or “political”, 
nor in denial of the referendum result, but simply make an honest statement 
about the reality of our situation.

Too much of the debate about Brexit starts from a naive view of how we would 
like to world — and Europe in particular — to be rather than how it actually 
is. Nowhere is this more evident than in our insistence that despite all the 
evidence to the contrary, we can have free trade in goods and services with 
Europe but not free movement of labour.

 * The Daily Mail says Tony Blair is “ploughing almost £10million into his new 
crusade against ‘populists’”. 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4089086/Blair-s-10-war-chest-fight-against-populism-Former-PM-winds-secretive-company-start-new-organisation-battle-against-Britain-leaving-EU.html#ixzz4UsuyDDjz>
 * Chris Giles in the Financial Times (subscription) say the main reason 
economists were wrong about the immediate economic impact of Brexit was that 
they expected household spending to go down when instead it went up. 
<https://www.ft.com/content/15837254-d272-11e6-b06b-680c49b4b4c0> 
In fact, we know the predominant source of error. It stemmed from 
underestimating thestrength of household consumption  
<https://www.ft.com/content/c061e51a-c8f5-11e6-9043-7e34c07b46ef>after the vote 
for Brexit. Economists expected a vote to leave would increase household 
savings in the short term, both as precautionary insurance against uncertainty 
and to begin an adjustment to a less prosperous future.

These were reasonable guesses, based on recent household behaviour — for 
example, at the time of huge banking uncertainty early in 2008. But rather than 
rising, household savings fell throughout 2016. The savings ratio dropped to an 
exceptionally low level in the third quarter as consumers went on aborrowing 
and spending <https://www.ft.com/content/e7ccbf80-d264-11e6-9341-7393bb2e1b51> 
binge not seen since before the financial crisis.

The interesting question is why households acted in this way. There are three 
plausible reasons. First, households correctly thought Brexit would improve 
their personal finances and borrowed and spent accordingly. Second, they were 
deceived into expecting economic gains from Brexit and still went out to spend. 
And, third, households watched sterling tumble, understood the likely effect on 
prices and brought forward their consumption, so they were spending in the 
knowledge their money would buy less in future.

Economic analysis allows us to set out these possibilities; it tells us only 
the last of the three options is sustainable; but it does not yet inform us 
which is correct.

By the end of 2017, we will know whether historically low levels of saving 
have persisted through the year, and this will provide a pretty good answer to 
the question of why spending held up so well after the EU referendum. If 
spending was merely brought forward, there will be a nasty jolt in the economy.
 