
A 26-year-old wildlife ranger has been gunned down by militia operating in the 
Virunga National Park in theDemocratic Republic of the Congo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/congo> (DRC).

According to park authorities, Patrick Prince Muhayirwa was part of a group of 
rangers and DRC army personnel patrolling the huge park to prevent poaching.

Virunga is home to about a quarter of the world’s critically endangered 
mountain gorillas, which poachers target for bushmeat. The elephant population 
in the park has plummeted to less than 400.

On Wednesday, when the group reached the shores of Lake Edward, near the 
Ugandan border, they were ambushed from the front and the back by what 
witnesses described as members of the Mai Mai militia. Muhayirwa was killed in 
the ensuing gunfight. He had only recently joined the rangers service, which is 
tasked with protecting the the park.

Cameroonian ranger killed by wildlife poachers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/10/cameroonian-ranger-killed-wildlife-poachers>
“Ranger Muhayirwa was a young and highly-dedicated ranger and the park is in 
deep mourning for his loss,” said park director Emmanuel de Merode in a 
statement. “We wish to extend our sincerest condolences to his family. His 
death is a tragic loss for Virunga National Park, and we are ever grateful for 
his service to his country.”


Another ranger, Fikos Kavedo, who survived the ambush with a bullet wound to 
the leg killed two rebels before escaping the scene. He is currently receiving 
treatment.

Muhayirwa’s death continues a pattern of ambushes of rangers within the park. 
In March,two rangers were killed 
<https://www.google.com/url?hl=en-GB&q=https://virunga.org/news/rangers-killed-mai-mai-attack-virungas-central-sector/&source=gmail&ust=1481917552824000&usg=AFQjCNGzJXOrnCuaYgAcCE7srW7u61om8g>
 in the line of duty while a third was reported missing during an attack also 
credited to the Mai Mai militia. To date, more than 150 rangers have died in 
service to Virunga National Park.

Worldwide, more than 100 rangers die every year, according to Sean Willmore, 
the president of the International Ranger Federation and the Thin Green Line 
Foundation, in anopinion piece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/10/protect-wildlife-rangers-murder>
 for the Guardian this week. “Surely if a country lost 100 of their soldiers, 
each and every year, we would call it a war,” he said.

In further violence this week 
<http://www.rfa.org/english/news/myanmar/myanmar-journalist-found-dead-in-monywa-12132016162102.html>
, a journalist who had reported on illegal logging in Myanmar was found, 
apparently beaten to death, on the side of a highway on Tuesday.

To support rangers and their families, visit the Thin Green Line Foundation 
website <https://www.thingreenline.org.au/donate/>.

We’re reporting on elephants all year, find out more here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/12/why-the-guardian-is-spending-a-year-reporting-on-the-plight-of-the-worlds-elephant-population>
.
 