
Labor continues to lead the Coalition in two-party-preferred terms but voter 
disapproval ofBill Shorten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten> has grown over the 
summer according to the latest Essential poll.

The poll of 1,017 respondents, conducted from Friday to Monday and released on 
Tuesday, shows Labor steady with 53% of the two-party-preferred vote to the 
Coalition’s 47%.


One Nation is steady with an 8% primary vote, the Greens down one to 9% and 
Nick Xenophon up one to 4% since the last Essential poll in December.

Coalition hits new low and Greens trail One Nation in poll showing Centrelink 
anger
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/16/coalition-hits-new-low-and-greens-trail-one-nation-in-poll-showing-centrelink-anger>
It confirms a growing One Nation vote, up from a nationwide Senate vote of 
4.3% at the July election, and comes aftera ReachTel poll this week showing the 
minor party outpolling the Greens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/16/coalition-hits-new-low-and-greens-trail-one-nation-in-poll-showing-centrelink-anger>
.

Malcolm Turnbull’s approval rating rose from 34% to 37%, although his 
disapproval also increased from 46% to 48% for a net -11 approval rating. 
Approval of Shorten increased from 35% to 37%, but disapproval increased from 
38% to 44%, increasing his net approval from -3 to -7.

The government’s horrific start to the year is fully deserved and completely 
appropriate | Greg Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2017/jan/15/the-governments-horrific-start-to-the-year-is-fully-deserved-and-completely-appropriate>
On preferred prime minister, Turnbull is steady at 39%, Shorten steady at 28%, 
with 33% of voters saying they don’t know who they prefer. Turnbull enjoys 
strong support among men, with 44% saying he makes the better prime minister 
compared with 29% who nominate Shorten.

Among women, 35% prefer Turnbull and 26% prefer Shorten, suggesting they are 
more undecided about both the leaders.

The poll was taken after a week of revelations of taxpayer-funded travel 
claims by ministers and MPs to attend sports events 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/11/mps-havent-sought-to-defraud-says-minister-as-travel-claims-scandal-widens>
 andculminating in Sussan Ley’s resignation as health minister on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/13/sussan-ley-quits-health-minister-turnbull-outlines-reform-expenses>
.

The government also came under attack for its handling of the Centrelink 
automated debt recovery system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/06/centrelinks-debt-recovery-failures-referred-to-auditor-general-by-labor>
, with Labor claiming debts are being issued on anunfair, indiscriminate and 
inaccurate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/30/centrelink-debt-notices-idiotic-big-data-assumptions-expert>
 basis to low-income and vulnerable people.
 