
Anyone who has ever wondered what art students get up to all day can find out 
this week asTate Modern <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tate-modern> 
hosts to a temporary school to which anyone can enrol.


The This Is An Art School project 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-modern/workshop/tate-exchange/art-school> 
has been created by students, staff and alumni of Central Saint Martins on the 
fifth floor of Tate Modern’s new extension.

It is the inaugural event for the Tate Exchange Associates programme, formally 
launched on Monday. Fifty-three associates fromTouretteshero 
<https://www.touretteshero.com/> – which celebrates the creativity and humour 
of Tourette syndrome – to the Open University, are taking part in the programme.

The art school project takes place every day until 16 January and will 
highlight what Saint Martins believes is “a systematic assault on arts 
education in the UK”.

Alex Schady, a programme leader at the college 
<http://www.arts.ac.uk/csm/people/teaching-staff/fine-art/alex-schady/>, said 
art was increasingly being isolated in the school timetable and creativity 
dismissed as peripheral.

“We want to think about what forces are currently impinging on arts education 
and what resistance we can, all of us, offer to that,” he said.

Visitors who enrol at the school can take part in workshops, seminars and 
lectures along with the students and staff. There are more than 100 lesson 
plans and zones that could see people suddenly involved in a performance 
workshop or a life-drawing lesson.

Organisers stressed they were not saying everybody should be an art student or 
artist “but that everyone should experience the arts”.


That is the central thrust of the wider programme, which would focus on 
widening the possibilities of collaboration and participatory art, said Tate.

The projects and events will tackle subjects including migration, 
homelessness, identity and mental health, with the public invited to test ideas 
or consider new perspectives.

The Tate director, Sir Nicholas Serota, said Tate Exchange was a long-term 
commitment to develop “new ways of reaching audiences, new ways of 
collaborating”, representing a change in the way the organisation thought about 
its relationship with its audiences.

 