
The multimillion dollar brain training industry is under attack. In October 
2014, a group of over 100 eminent neuroscientists and psychologists wrote an 
open letter warning that “claims promoting brain games are frequently 
exaggerated and at times misleading”. Earlier this year, industry giantLumosity 
was fined $2m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/06/lumosity-fined-false-claims-brain-training-online-games-mental-health>
, and ordered to refund thousands of customers who were duped by false claims 
that the company’s products improve general mental abilities and slow the 
progression of age-related decline in mental abilities. Anda recent review 
<http://m.psi.sagepub.com/content/17/3/103> examining studies purporting to 
show the benefits of such products found “little evidence ... that training 
improves improves everyday cognitive performance”.

While brain training games and apps may not live up to their hype, it is well 
established that certain otheractivities and lifestyle choices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neurophilosophy/2014/sep/22/the-neuroprotective-lifestyle>
 can have neurological benefits that promote overall brain health and may help 
to keep the mind sharp as we get older. One of these is musical training. 
Research shows that learning to play a musical instrument is beneficial for 
children and adults alike, and may even be helpful to patients recovering from 
brain injuries.

Imagine the journey of the future… and win the latest iPadPro
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/25/journey-of-the-future> 
“Music probably does something unique,” explains neuropsychologist Catherine 
Loveday of the University of Westminster. “It stimulates the brain in a very 
powerful way, because of our emotional connection with it.”

Playing a musical instrument is a rich and complex experience that involves 
integrating information from the senses of vision, hearing, and touch, as well 
as fine movements, and learning to do so can induce long-lasting changes in the 
brain. Professional musicians are highly skilled performers who spend years 
training, and they provide a natural laboratory in which neuroscientists can 
study how such changes – referred to asexperience-dependent plasticity 
<https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/neuroplasticity> – occur across their lifespan 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2996135/>.

Is the internet killing our brains?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/08/is-the-internet-killing-our-brains>
Changes in brain structure


Early brain scanning studies revealed significant differences in brain 
structure between musicians and non-musicians of the same age. For example, the 
corpus callosum, a massive bundle of nerve fibres connecting the two sides of 
the brain, issignificantly larger in musicians 
<http://www.musicianbrain.com/papers/Schlaug_CCallosum_1995b.pdf>. The brain 
areas involved in movement,hearing 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v392/n6678/full/392811a0.html>, and 
visuo-spatial abilities also appear to belarger in professional keyboard players
 <http://www.jneurosci.org/content/23/27/9240.full>. And, the area devoted to 
processing touch sensations from the left hand isincreased in violinists 
<http://public.wsu.edu/~fournier/Teaching/psych592/Readings/Elbert_et_al_2005.pdf>
.

These studies compared data from different groups of people at one point in 
time. As such, they could not determine whether the observed differences were 
actually caused by musical training, or if existing anatomical differences 
predispose some to become musicians. But later, longitudinal studies that track 
people over time have shown that young children who do 14 months of musical 
training exhibit significantstructural 
<http://www.musicianbrain.com/papers/Hyde_MusicTraining_BrainPlasticity_nyas_04852.pdf>
 (pdf) andfunctional brain changes 
<http://www.musicianbrain.com/papers/Schlaug_Music_Child_Brain_NYAS2005.pdf> 
(pdf) compared to those who do not.


Together, these studies show that learning to play a musical instrument not 
only increases grey matter volume in various brain regions, but can also 
strengthen the long-range connections between them. Other research shows that
musical training also enhances verbal memory 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v396/n6707/abs/396128a0.html>, spatial 
reasoning 
<http://www.artsedsearch.org/summaries/learning-to-make-music-enhances-spatial-reasoning>
, andliteracy skills <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4664655/>, 
such that professional musicians usually outperform non-musicians on these 
abilities.

Long-lasting benefits for musicians


Importantly, the brain scanning studies show that the extent of anatomical 
change in musicians’ brains is closely related to the age at which musical 
training began, and the intensity of training. Those who started training at 
the youngest age showed the largest changes when compared to non-musicians.

Music reaches parts of the brain that other things can’t
Catherine Loveday, University of Westminster 
Even short periods of musical training in early childhood can have 
long-lasting benefits. Inone 2013 study 
<http://jneurosci.org/content/33/45/17667.full>, for example, researchers 
recruited 44 older adults and divided them into three groups based on the level 
of formal musical training they had received as children. Participants in one 
group had received no training at all; those in the second had done a little 
training, defined as between one and three years of lessons; and those in the 
third had received moderate levels of training (four to 14 years).

The researchers played recordings of complex speech sounds to the 
participants, and used scalp electrodes to measure the timing of neural 
responses in a part of the auditory brainstem. As we age, the precision of this 
timing deteriorates, making it difficult to understand speech, especially in 
environments with a lot of background noise. Participants who had received 
moderate amounts of musical training exhibitedthe fastest neural responses 
<http://www.jneurosci.org/content/33/45/17667.full>, suggesting that even 
limited training in childhood can preserve sharp processing of speech sounds 
and increase resilience to age-related decline in hearing.

More recently, it has become clear that musical training facilitates the 
rehabilitation of patients recovering from stroke 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17260171> and other forms of brain damage, 
and some researchers now argue that it might alsoboost speech processing and 
learning in children with dyslexia 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4411999/> and other language 
impairments. What’s more, the benefits of musical training seem to persist for 
many years, or even decades, and the picture that emerges from this all 
evidence is that learning to play a musical instrument in childhoodprotects the 
brain against the development of cognitive impairment and dementia 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4269311/>. 


Do our brains have extraordinary untapped powers?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/24/do-our-brains-have-extraordinary-untapped-powers>
Unlike commercial brain training products, which only improve performance on 
the skills involved, musical training has what psychologists refer to as 
transfer effects – in other words, learning to play a musical instrument seems 
to have a far broader effect on the brain and mental function, and improves 
other abilities that are seemingly unrelated.


“Music reaches parts of the brain that other things can’t,” says Loveday. 
“It’s a strong cognitive stimulus that grows the brain in a way that nothing 
else does, and the evidence that musical training enhances things like working 
memory and language is very robust.”


Learning to play a musical instrument, then, seems to be one of the most 
effective forms of brain training there is. Musical training can induce various 
structural and functional changes in the brain, depending on which instrument 
is being learned, and the intensity of the training regime. It’s an example of 
how dramatically life-long experience can alter the brain so that it becomes 
adapted to the idiosyncrasies of its owner’s lifestyle.


Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 