
Cabinet message discipline went awry on Saturday after Theresa May and Boris 
Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> issued Christmas 
statements to the nation that came close to contradicting each other.

The prime minister and her foreign secretary did not disagree on policy, or 
party politics or the intricacies of Brexit, but on something more basic: 
whether 2016 was a good year or a bad one.

May went with an optimistic tone. “This year, the United Kingdom has had much 
to celebrate,” her message started. She went on to cite theOlympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/23/team-gb-return-rio-olympics-victorious-heathrow-champagn-honours>
 and theQueen’s 90th birthday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/11/queens-90th-birthday-celebrated-with-trooping-the-colour-parade>
 as national high points, but not thevote to leave the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/24/eu-referendum-how-britain-voted-for-brexit-video>
.

As a Brexit supporter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/brexit-will-be-titanic-success-says-boris-johnson>
, Johnson might be expected to remember 2016 more fondly. But his opening was 
quite different and, in a video message posted on Twitter, he began: “We come 
now to the end of 2016, and I know that lots of people will be looking back at 
some of the gloomy bits about this year.”

He went on: “We’ve still got a terrible civil war going on in Syria, we are 
seeing terrorist outrages taking place in our European continent.”
Boris Johnson (@BorisJohnson) 
Have a great #Christmas <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Christmas?src=hash> and a 
happy 2017pic.twitter.com/mBwzWw40oC <https://t.co/mBwzWw40oC>
 <https://twitter.com/BorisJohnson/status/812284011422814208> December 23, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/BorisJohnson/status/812284011422814208> 
Johnson, who delivered his message in front of a Christmas tree, assured 
viewers that British diplomats, armed forces andintelligences services were 
working to keep the country safe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/22/the-uk-is-at-high-risk-of-a-terror-attack-but-how-has-it-avoided-one-so-far>
.

The foreign secretary later segued to a more positive tone. “In case you’re 
feeling too downcast this Christmas, don’t forget that overall the people of 
this planet are living longer, they are living in better health, they’re better 
educated than ever before, particularly women, and I can tell you that global 
Britain is leading that effort. So, hope that cheers you up,” he said. “Have a 
greatChristmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> and a happy 
2017.”

What a 2016 of a year. Never again | Peter Lewis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/20/what-a-2016-of-a-year-never-again>
May’s message was sent to journalists at 11am on Friday under embargo, for 
release at midnight. Johnson’s message was posted at Twitter just after 1pm.

May used the annual prime ministerial Christmas message to say that she did 
not want Brexit to divide the country. “As we leave the European Union, we must 
seize an historic opportunity to forge a bold new role for ourselves in the 
world and to unite our country as we move forward into the future,” she said.

Christmas was a time to “proudly celebrate the birth of Christ and the message 
of forgiveness, love and hope that he brings”, she added. “We also think of 
Christians in other parts of the world who face persecution this Christmas and 
re-affirm our determination to stand up for the freedom of people of all 
religions to practise their beliefs in peace and safety.”

She ended her message with a tribute to those working over the holiday period. 
“Having grown up in a vicarage, I know how demanding it can be for those who 
have to work over the Christmas period,” she said.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2F2016-how-do-you-report-a-year-that-changed-the-world-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%3A%20How%20do%20you%20report%20a%20year%20that%20changed%20the%20world%3F%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2F2016-how-do-you-report-a-year-that-changed-the-world-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%3A%20How%20do%20you%20report%20a%20year%20that%20changed%20the%20world%3F%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2F2016-how-do-you-report-a-year-that-changed-the-world-video&media=>
2016: How do you report a year that changed the world? – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/membership/video/2016/dec/22/2016-how-do-you-report-a-year-that-changed-the-world-video>
Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>, the Labour 
leader, focused on homelessness in his Christmas message, saying: “In the sixth 
richest country in the world, no one should be on the streets in the first 
place. But Shelter say that 120,000 children will spend this Christmas without 
a home to call their own.”

He said Labour values were the same as Christmas values. “It’s the goodwill 
and generosity of ordinary people, public service and charity workers who give 
tirelessly to help the most vulnerable and the lonely. They remind us of 
Christmas values: love for your neighbour, working together and hope – hope 
that things can be different. These areLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> values, my values and our values. 
They are values that remind us that together we can and will change our country 
for the better.”

Tim Farron, the Liberal Democrat leader, posted a Christmas video on YouTube 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s2V_48FDhyg>, filmed in a centre for refugee 
children in Paris. He said he was “not at all squeamish about patriotism” and 
wanted Britain to be a country that did the right thing for people fleeing 
persecution.


Charity appeal raising over £1m sends powerful message of compassion | 
Katharine Viner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/21/guardian-observer-charity-appeal-child-refugees-million-pounds-message-compassion>
Calling for the UK to be welcoming to refugees, Farron said people should 
imagine how they would expect other countries to help if Britain were a 
war-torn country and if Britons were fleeing abroad for their own safety.

In her Christmas message, Nicola Sturgeon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon>, Scotland’s first 
minister, also mentioned the plight of refugees. “Scotland has a proud 
reputation as a caring country and I want to thank everyone in the last year 
who has extended a warm welcome to those seeking refuge and comfort here,” she 
said.

She urged people to consider those in need of help or company over Christmas. 
“I would encourage everyone to take the time to check on a friend or neighbour 
who is on their own. It’s important to spend some time over the next few weeks 
giving comfort, companionship and support to those who need it,” she said.
 