
Fear of wasps has always seemed to me irrational 
<http://www.fearof.net/fear-of-wasps-phobia-spheksophobia/>, but since 
inadvertently standing on a waspsâ€™ nest two weeks ago my opinion has been 
revised. Deep in a local wood and stopping to admire a fungus on a log pile, I 
was alerted by a deep buzzing to the fact that both trouser legs were filling 
up with wasps.

Not content with stinging both legs, the workers also attacked my face and 
neck, as well as the dog. They were still stinging both of us when we reached 
the car half a mile away and followed us into the vehicle.

Of mists, mellow fruitfulness, mortality and conkers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/sep/18/autumn-poetry-mists-mellow-fruitfulness-mortality-conkers-weatherwatch>
This alarming and painful experience led to some research. According to most 
literature,worker wasps are benign most of the time 
<https://www.keele.ac.uk/arboretum/articles/wasps/>, but particularly 
aggressive when defending young queen wasps as they are about to set off on the 
annual mating ritual. But the same sources suggest colonies of wasps should 
have done all that and begun to die off by November because of cold weather and 
starvation.

Since the incident there have been some moderate frosts, but observation of 
the nest, from a safer distance, shows a lot of wasps going in and out on 
hunting expeditions as if it is still summer.

It is possible to understand how they have survived the cold weather as the 
nest is deep in a pile of wood and leaves, but they should have starved to 
death by now.

This is because, as part of their complex lifestyle 
<http://www.buzzaboutbees.net/wasp-life-cycle.html>, wasps need to feed from 
their own grubs to survive. But there should not be any left by November. 
Perhaps climate change is lengthening their life cycle.
 