
One year ago in Berlin, Lisa F, a 13-year-old German-Russian girl, disappeared 
for 30 hours. When she returned to her parents, she claimed she had been 
kidnapped and raped by “Arab” men.This was a lie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/31/teenage-girl-made-up-migrant-claim-that-caused-uproar-in-germany>
 – as she later admitted. She had fallen out with her parents and invented the 
whole story. But that did little to stop the episode from becoming the 
centrepiece of a whirlwind Russian disinformation campaign aimed at
destabilising Angela Merkel and German institutions 
<http://www.spiegel.de/international/europe/putin-wages-hybrid-war-on-germany-and-west-a-1075483.html>
.

Related: The leaked Russia-Trump dossier rings frighteningly true | Andrei 
Soldatov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/12/donald-trump-russia-dossier-frighteningly-true>

Russian state media and pro-Russian websites in Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> immediately swirled with reports. 
Merkel was already under pressure for her open-door policy on refugees. Now 
German far-right groups and representatives of Germany’s ethnic Russian 
community held demonstrations. The Russian foreign minister, Sergey Lavrov, 
described Lisa (a dual German-Russian citizen) as “our girl” and accused German 
authorities of a cover-up and “whitewashing reality to make it politically 
correct”.

A diplomatic spat ensued, with the German foreign minister accusing Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> of “political propaganda”. Berlin 
officials struggled to counter the Russian campaign. But Moscow’s overt 
meddling in Germany’s domestic politics seeped into the public consciousness – 
for a while, at least.

Fast-forward to January 2017. The fallout from the Trump-Russia dossier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/donald-trump-russia-dossier-what-happens-next>
 has now placed Vladimir Putin and his power structure at the centre of 
American politics. For Europeans, a question arises: what could this all mean 
for the old continent, as it approaches key elections? This year, voting will 
take place inFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/french-presidential-election-2017>, the 
Netherlands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/10/netherlands-geert-wilders-politics-far-right>
 and in Germany. Remembering the Lisa scandal is important, for it says 
something about what may lie ahead.

Now that Russia’s covert activities are being so intensely discussed in the 
US, it is high timeEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> 
placed as much attention on what it might, in turn, be confronted with – and to 
prepare itself.

This was one of the key messages of the US intelligence agencies’ report 
<https://www.dni.gov/files/documents/ICA_2017_01.pdf> on Russian hacking and 
other activities, which contained a warning that Europe is the next target. “We 
assess [that] Moscow will apply lessons learned from its Putin-ordered campaign 
aimed at the US presidential election to future influence efforts worldwide, 
including against US allies and their election process,” it says. Russian 
cyber-attacks and disinformation have happened in Europe before. But what the 
US briefing suggests is that what matters are the reactions to these – or lack 
of them.

Russia “applies lessons”, write the US intelligence agencies. Russia sends up 
trial balloons, and then takes the next step – or not. “Plausible deniability” 
is a priority. If its actions are exposed, that is a setback. If it registers a 
success, it is emboldened to go further. Russian intelligence services measure 
their success depending on their “perceived ability to impact public 
discussion”.

It is anyone’s guess whether Putin is currently enjoying, or wincing at, the 
fact that so much is now being publicly attributed to the sway of his secret 
services. The Kremlin has chosen blanket denial as a response.

Some western diplomats and Russia- watchers say Putin hates finding himself 
publicly accused on the international stage. Others say the narrative that 
Russia can manipulate western politics helps him domestically. Questions are 
being asked in the US as to why Barack Obama waited so long before his 
administration publicly called out (on October 7) Russia’s responsibility in 
the hacking. Did Obama deliberately choose to let Putin off the hook for a 
period of time? Could that have been a miscalculation?

It is worth remembering that, months earlier, high-ranking German officials 
had named Russia as a culprit in similar operations. On 13 May the head of a 
German intelligence agency, Hans-Georg Maassen, took the unusual step of 
publicly accusing Russia’s secret services of cyber-spying and sabotage 
activities, adding that this had become a“permanent threat” 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-germany-russia-cyber-idUSKCN0Y41FC>. The 
backdrop to the statement was that Germany’s domestic intelligence agency had 
established Russia’s role in the2015 hack of the Bundestag 
<https://www.thelocal.de/20150619/bundestag-hack-lasted-months-longer-than-thought>
, the lower house of the German parliament.

For all the noise understandably surrounding the US hacking, Germany was the 
first large western country to see one of its key political institutions 
targeted by Russian cyber-attacks. It took a while for this to be officially 
acknowledged, but it was a turning point. By the end of 2016, other German 
officials, including Merkel herself, had named Russia as a threat to the 
country’s democratic process. On 8 November she commented that dealing with 
this had become “a daily task 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/08/russian-cyber-attacks-could-influence-german-election-says-merkel>
”.

With this in mind, there is an obvious parallel to be drawn between what has 
unfolded in the US and what is now deemed extremely worrying in Germany – a 
country that has, as a result of Donald Trump’s election, been described as the 
standard-bearer of the west. Germany is expected to be the focal point this 
year of Russia’s efforts to sow confusion, hack, exploit data, spread fake news 
and discredit or blackmail politicians. Germany is Europe’s most powerful 
country, and Russia is intent onbuilding a sphere of influence on the continent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/18/putin-long-game-omens-europe-russia>
.

Just as Hillary Clinton was targeted by Russian activities designed to disrupt 
her electoral chances, Merkel, seeking re-election this year, will be in the 
Kremlin’s line of fire. Both women have strong records of opposing Putin.

Merkel well knows that Putin will try to boost her opponents’ chances. Nothing 
that happened in the US will have entirely surprised her. German officials are 
bracing themselves for more episodes like the “Lisa” operation and the 
Bundestag hacking. And Moscow will be closely following the reactions these 
produce, or fail to produce, among German politicians, media and public 
opinion. Just as it has done in the US.

Related: We need an independent commission on Russia hacking now | Rep Eric 
Swalwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/12/we-need-independent-commission-russia-hacking-now>
 