
Will we see Ed Balls’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/27/ed-balls-exits-stage-left-as-strictly-come-dancing-peoples-champion>
 ooh-er-missus face ever again?The pout he perfected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/video/2016/nov/28/ed-balls-out-strictly-bbc-10-weeks-video>
 over the weeks on Strictly Come Dancing cannot go to waste. Can he do it on 
Newsnight after an analysis of deficit reduction? Can he run his fingers over 
himself on Marr? I worry about these things because ever since Balls revealed 
this side of himself, the world had been a better and much sillier place. 
Silliness has been in short supply this year, though boastful ignorance is 
everywhere.

Ed cavorted and preened and stomped his little legs on Strictly in his 
supremely ridiculous routines and by doing so reinvigorated both himself and us 
grouchy viewers. For those unmoved by politics or politicians because “they are 
all the same”, Balls showed there was no one quite like him. It’s hard to 
imagine an equivalent figure bringing such unhinged abandon to light 
entertainment. Michael Portillo, remember, showed his hinterland witha series 
of sedate train journeys 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_British_Railway_Journeys>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fed-balls-strictly-come-dancing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce4ad018b8140b6b62f1a20090a27c63deb914fc%2F67_299_1831_1097%2F1831.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Watching%20Ed%20Balls%20on%20Strictly%20was%20the%20uncomplicated%20joy%20we%20all%20needed%20%7C%20Suzanne%20Moore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fed-balls-strictly-come-dancing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Watching%20Ed%20Balls%20on%20Strictly%20was%20the%20uncomplicated%20joy%20we%20all%20needed%20%7C%20Suzanne%20Moore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fed-balls-strictly-come-dancing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce4ad018b8140b6b62f1a20090a27c63deb914fc%2F67_299_1831_1097%2F1831.jpg>
 Ed Balls with Katya Jones. Photograph: Kieron McCarron/BBC/PA 
Balls’ evident ability to listen, learn and want to please was utterly 
endearing. And learn he did, to dance and to entertain. He gave himself up and 
went with the flow. From swotty bruiser to hesitant metrosexual in afew short 
weeks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/27/ed-balls-strictly-come-dancing-best-bits>
, his “journey” was a thing of uncomplicated joy. Maybe it wasn’t such a big 
journey.He told Grazia 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/tv/tv-news/ed-balls-first-admit-hes-9243782> that he 
always knew he had this “strong inner camp. I’ve just never quite revealed it 
in this way.” And the reveal was glorious,peaking with Gangnam Style madness 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Czqtjk_iGFU>. That moment, rather than him 
losing his seat in Morley and Outwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2015/may/08/ed-balls-loses-seat-morley-outwood-labour-general-election-2015-video>
 or himbanging on about endogenous growth theory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2004/mar/12/economy.labour>, or him 
sitting opposite George Osborne in the house, looking as though he was going to 
get up and nut him up at any second, is what is now lodged in the public mind.

His image as a tribal enforcer did not come from nowhere. He was at times as 
difficult, as paranoid, as aggressive, as intimidating in the macho New Labour 
way ashis boss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/feb/23/brown-bullying-claims-sarah-defence-pm>
. He and his wife Yvette Cooper seemed simply a driven and power–crazed couple. 
It’s been brilliant to see the horror on her face slipping into laughter as he 
performs – she has also been humanised. But I always thought Balls would do 
well as he is so many women’s secret crush. He just looks so “goatish”, a 
friend sighed to me many years ago.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fed-balls-out-strictly-bbc-10-weeks-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=He%20came%2C%20he%20danced%2C%20he%20pouted%3A%20Ed%20Balls%20out%20of%20Strictly%20after%2010%20weeks%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fed-balls-out-strictly-bbc-10-weeks-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=He%20came%2C%20he%20danced%2C%20he%20pouted%3A%20Ed%20Balls%20out%20of%20Strictly%20after%2010%20weeks%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fed-balls-out-strictly-bbc-10-weeks-video&media=>
He came, he danced, he pouted: Ed Balls out of Strictly after 10 weeks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/video/2016/nov/28/ed-balls-out-strictly-bbc-10-weeks-video>
He was a big success on the Great Sport Relief Bake Off when he made a cake 
with a ski slope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/live/2016/feb/03/the-great-sport-relief-bake-off-episode-two-follow-it-live>
. At a local literary festival he enthralled the audience by reading Judith 
Kerr’s The Tiger Who Came to Tea. The more he flashed his hinterland, the more 
people liked it.

Ed Balls leaves Strictly Come Dancing after 'fabulous three months'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/27/ed-balls-voted-off-strictly-come-dancing>
So Strictly, that oddly regressive and repressive show, made sense. This 
long-time critic of austerity, the architect of many key policies (independence 
for the Bank of England, to give one example) began strutting his stuff with 
abandon. Strictly does neutered high camp in the guise of family entertainment, 
and Balls went with it. Jerking and thrusting and “lifting” and skipping and 
making people remember why they love to dance.

He laid down his inhibitions for the sake of sublime silliness. And for us. 
The nation responded with an affection that most politicians can only dream of. 
This has nothing to do with the current state of Labour, which is so lacking in 
va-va-voom. Instead, in a year when some dreadful men have risen to the top by 
taking themselves incredibly seriously, Balls showed the power of being able to 
let it all go. Utter delight.
 