
The biggest shakeup in the water industry since privatisation nearly 30 years 
ago will begin in April, with business customers for the first time allowed to 
shop around beyond their local supplier for the cheapest deal.

For years, small and medium-sized businesses – along with consumers – have 
demanded the water industry be deregulated to allow them to choose between 
suppliers, as they currently do for energy.

From 1 April, 1.2m eligible businesses, charities and public sector 
organisations in England will for the first time be able to switch water 
supplier, as they already can in Scotland.

The move is seen as the precursor to allow households to similarly shop around 
for a cheaper water supplier. Companies – particularly retailers – operating 
multiple sites around the country are expected to be the biggest beneficiaries, 
as they will be able to contract a single supplier that will in turn send one 
bill to cover all locations.

Under the existing water supply regime set up when the industry was privatised 
in 1989, small and medium businesses – along with domestic consumers – can only 
buy water from their local supplier, such as Yorkshire Water, Severn Trent or 
Thames Water.

The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs has said the change 
could deliver £200m in benefits to customers and the UK economy.

On Thursday, representatives of the water regulator Ofwat will be in London to 
spell out how in greater detail how the new regime will operate. A new national 
awareness campaign to show off the benefits of switching supplier will be also 
be showcased before its launch on 23 January.

The initiative has already had a huge impact on the industry. Last summer the 
UK’s largest supplier, Thames Water, announced it had agreed to sell its book 
of business customers to Scottish supplier Castle Water.

Several other domestic water firms have now set up new separate trading 
divisions, or joint ventures, that will be selling their services to 
business-only customers. So far 14 water companies have applied to become 
licensed retailers, and further applications are pending, according to Ofwat.

The industry has a spent the last year preparing for the changes, and private 
company Market Operator Services Ltd (MOSL) has been set up to create the IT 
infrastructure to enable switching to happen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fwater-everywhere-providers-green-light-sell-outside-regions-deregulation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F057d7ae055712a59cc64400762f6486a9bfddd34%2F0_10_5024_3014%2F5024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Water%2C%20water%20everywhere%3A%20utility%20firms%20get%20green%20light%20to%20sell%20beyond%20local%20regions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fwater-everywhere-providers-green-light-sell-outside-regions-deregulation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Water%2C%20water%20everywhere%3A%20utility%20firms%20get%20green%20light%20to%20sell%20beyond%20local%20regions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fwater-everywhere-providers-green-light-sell-outside-regions-deregulation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F057d7ae055712a59cc64400762f6486a9bfddd34%2F0_10_5024_3014%2F5024.jpg>
 The Claerwen reservoir in Powys, Wales. Photograph: Andrew Chisholm/Alamy 
Stock Photo 
Consumer groups will be hoping that it is a success and encourages the 
government to allow consumers to also switch water suppliers – as has become 
the norm in the energy sector. But householders who expect such a move to 
substantially lower their water bills could be disappointed. Unlike in the 
energy sector, the regulator still sets out what the private water companies 
can charge customers, according to a highly complicated set of formulae.

In September, Ofwat published figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/19/uk-water-regulator-backs-plan-to-open-up-market>
 that suggested the financial benefits from opening the residential market to 
competition could be worth £2.9bn over 30 years, which amounts to just £8 per 
customer per year.

In a feasibility study sent to ministers, Ofwat said a liberated domesticated 
water market would allow several new entrants to come into the market. They 
would buy water in bulk from the existing major suppliers, and sell it on to 
households. In such a market, companies could go a step further and offer 
households a super-package of all their utilities, which could include their 
gas and electricity, and even other services such as telecoms.

Cathryn Ross, Ofwat’s chief executive, has argued greater competition would 
benefit customers by encouraging firms to offer better services, such as 
allowing them to manage their bills with a mobile phone app. “The uncomfortable 
truth is that, when it comes to retail offers, water companies provide an 
analogue service in a digital age,” she said.

Water UK <http://www.water.org.uk/>, which represents the water companies, has 
said extending retail competition to more than 20m households could secure 
potential benefits, but warned it would also be “a major undertaking and so 
deserves to be given very careful consideration”.

In recent years the provision of water has become increasingly politicised. 
The average water bill in the UK is £396 a year; however that masks big 
regional differences. Customers in the south-west pay more than £540 a year, 
while those in the Severn Trent area pay £333.

Many of the UK’s water companies are now owned by private equity or foreign 
investment funds, which bought the businesses because they provide steady 
profits.

In January 2016 Ofwat was heavily criticised by MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/13/uk-households-overpaying-water-regulator-miscalculation>
 on the public accounts committee, who blamed the regulator for allowing water 
bills to rise too much.

The committee said that water firms had gained at least £1.2bn over five years 
to 2015 from bills being higher than necessary.
 