
The students at my lecture were particularly attentive this week. Across the 
audience of some 70 students, not one – that I noticed – checked a smartphone. 
They scribbled notes. After the lecture, I asked them to spend a few moments 
talking to their neighbours about what I’d said about the role of universities 
in meeting the challenges of the 21st century, about the changing dynamics of 
knowledge creation and the implications for university missions.

Overseas student crackdown could hit LSE, King’s College London and Soas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/25/overseas-students-crackdown-lse-kings-soas-universities>
Then I opened the lecture up to questions. The first came from a Bangladeshi 
student. The second came from an Indonesian student. The third came from a 
Ugandan student. The fourth and fifth came from Chinese students.

I wasn’t lecturing in the UK. I was lecturing in the Sino-British College 
(SBC) at the Shanghai University of Science and Technology, to an audience of 
students who had opted, from three continents, to take their degrees at SBC. 
This time last year, I was lecturing at another Shanghai university, to 
students from Asia, Canada, the US and Africa.

The evidence is very clear. The reputations of Asian universities, and Chinese 
universities in particular, areon the rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/sep/21/50-under-50-ranking-the-best-young-universities-in-the-world>
. China’s World Class 2.0 project, announced in August 2015, aims to strengthen 
the research performance of China’s nine top-ranked universities, with the goal 
of having six of those institutions ranked within the world’s top 15 
universities by 2030.

After two decades in which China has been largely an exporter of students to 
Australia, Canada, the US and the UK, it is now increasingly attracting 
international students to study at its universities. And what is true of China 
is true of other countries too.Global flows of students 
<http://www.uis.unesco.org/Education/Pages/international-student-flow-viz.aspx> 
are an increasing feature of the world’s higher education systems.

Myriad benefits

These systems, and the young people choosing to study in them, have understood 
some important things about the power of university education.

Brexit fears may see 15% of UK university staff leave, group warns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/25/brexit-may-force-15-of-staff-at-uk-universities-to-leave-warns-group>
You can see the recruitment of international students as an exercise in soft 
power – the education of the elites who will lead the world’s governments and 
corporates in the future.

You can see the recruitment of international students as an exercise in global 
engagement – widening the perspective of all students as they develop knowledge 
and understanding together.

You can see the recruitment of international students as an exercise in global 
citizenship – building a set of approaches to analysing and solving common 
challenges in natural and social science.

You can see the recruitment of international students as a great exercise in 
language learning – what better way to learn, say, Mandarin, than studying in 
China.

You can see the recruitment of international students as the practical 
application of a challenge thrown down by the great American social 
anthropologist Clifford Geertz. “The next necessary thing,” he wrote “is to 
enlarge the possibility of intelligible discourse between people quite 
different from one another in interest, outlook, wealth, and power, and yet 
contained in a world where tumbled as they are into endless connection, it is 
increasingly difficult to get out of each other’s way”.

No 10 rejects idea that foreign students should not count as immigrants
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/20/students-could-be-left-out-of-immigration-figures-ministers-hint>
But just as the competition intensifies, what it would be ill-advised to do is 
to make it yet more difficult for promising students to come to the UK. To do 
so would be to abandon the field to our competitors, to acquiesce to the rise 
of universities beyond these shores, to see the dynamic excitement of knowledge 
creation move elsewhere.

Our competitors will be overjoyed if we make it easier for them to thrive. 
Certainly, my friends who lead universities in Australia, Canada and New 
Zealand are delighted when they read politicians’ rhetoric about making it 
harder for international students to come to the UK.

My audience in Shanghai was outstanding. The students were engaged, alert, 
thoughtful, challenging and perceptive. Just the sort of people I want to teach 
– in my own university in Sheffield.

Join the higher education network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/> for more comment, analysis 
and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow us on Twitter@gdnhighered 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an idea for a story, please 
read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 