
Poor design, conduct and reporting of animal research is a global issue – and 
the costs are significant. It’s estimated that $28bn (£22bn) a year 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/article?id=10.1371/journal.pbio.1002165> 
is spent on pre-clinical research that cannot be replicated; this wastes 
funding, damages science, causes avoidable animal suffering, andfails patients 
<http://www.thelancet.com/series/research> waiting for the development of new 
treatments.

The reproducibility “crisis”, as it’s been labelled, is recognised by the 
scientific community 
<http://www.nature.com/news/1-500-scientists-lift-the-lid-on-reproducibility-1.19970>
 and has prompted variousinitiatives 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v490/n7419/pdf/nature11556.pdf> [pdf] for 
improvement, but there has beenlittle change 
<http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs11192-016-1964-8> yet. The 
situation would be unacceptable to many; public opinion 
<https://www.ipsos-mori.com/Assets/Docs/Publications/sri-public-attitudes-to-animal-research-2016.pdf>
 [pdf] about animal research includes provisos on the justification and need 
for research that should be taken seriously, as research is ultimately funded 
by the public.

Why is so much research dodgy? Blame the Research Excellence Framework
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/oct/17/why-is-so-much-research-dodgy-blame-the-research-excellence-framework>
These fundamental problems with scientific quality indicate that something is 
going horribly wrong with the education of researchers. Unless real action is 
taken to address this, poor-quality science will only continue. But what is 
missing from training, and how can we improve?

Ethics not included


Research Councils UK (RCUK) invests £3bn of UK taxes annually into research of 
all disciplines. Its recentguidance <http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/media/news/150415/> 
emphasises robust experimental design, stating that students should receive 
training in good research conduct and consider wider societal and ethical 
issues of their research. This seems progressive, since good science, animal 
welfare and ethics are intrinsically linked. But where are the safeguards to 
ensure that students receive this training, reflect on it, and show evidence of 
its application?

Worryingly, many academics consider teaching scientific research ethics to be “
a waste of their time 
<https://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/features/good-science-requires-better-teaching/2014928.article>
” and a “box-ticking exercise” with little reflection on the scientific 
process. This attitude is supported by the details for online graduate 
programmes of 18 universities leading doctoral training partnerships funded by 
the Medical Research Council (MRC) and Biotechnology and Biological Research 
Council (BBSRC).


The courses include ethics as part of research integrity, good research 
practice and clinical research – but not for animal use, save three exceptions. 
Overall, only two universities teach the replacement, reduction and refinement 
of animal use (the 3Rs), animal welfare, and the ethics of using animals in 
research. Just one university mandates its ethics and 3Rs course for all those 
who may be using animals in regulated procedures, or using animal tissues.

The MRC and BBSRC fund hundreds of projects involving animals every year, but 
have no current requirement for students to receive 3Rs training beyond the 
basic modules needed for aHome Office licence 
<https://www.gov.uk/guidance/research-and-testing-using-animals#applying-for-licences>
. The teaching of “research ethics and governance” is a commitment by 
signatories of theconcordat to support research integrity 
<http://www.universitiesuk.ac.uk/highereducation/Pages/Theconcordattosupportresearchintegrity.aspx#.VtWqsPmLTct>
 (including RCUK), but reflection on ethical use of animals is not included.

Some efforts are being made: the National Centre for Replacement, Refinement 
and Reduction of Animals in Research (NC3Rs) provides training for its PhD 
students, and the Fund for the Replacement of Animals in Medical Experiments 
(FRAME) runs an annualsummer school <http://www.frame.org.uk/training-schools/>.

But these two excellent programmes reach fewer than 50 students a year, who 
are already active in 3Rs research, unlike the majority of PhD students in the 
life sciences. In 2013/14, there were117,675 first-year postgraduate students 
studying the life sciences <https://www.hesa.ac.uk/data-and-analysis>, with the 
MRC alonefunding 1,900 studentships at any one time 
<http://www.mrc.ac.uk/skills-careers/studentships/>. Current 3Rs and ethical 
training for doctoral students is therefore grossly inadequate.

Challenging the status quo 


There is an urgent need for comprehensive and focused education in ethical 
decision-making, animal welfare and the 3Rs for postgraduate students. This 
would lead to better science, reductions in animal use and suffering as per the 
government’s delivery plan to reduce the use of animals,“place 3Rs at the 
heart” of research 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/277942/bis-14-589-working-to-reduce-the-use-of_animals-in-research.pdf>
 [pdf], and improved compliance with theAnimals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986
 <http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1986/14/introduction>. It would also 
bring economic benefits through more efficient spending of research funding, 
and increase public trust in science.


Academics aren't lobbyists – so our research changes nothing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/nov/18/academics-arent-lobbyists-so-our-research-changes-nothing>
So how can this be achieved? Steps could include: 

 * research studentships that involve the use of animals, or animal-derived 
material or data, having a clear and enforced requirement for students to 
undergo education in ethical decision-making about whether and how animals are 
used; the 3Rs; animal welfare; robust experimental design and critical analysis 
of prior work; 
 * the output of the student’s work demonstrating reflection on the above; 
 * education of this nature, and evidence of the student’s reflection, 
conditional for awards by the MRC, BBSRC and other funders of life-science 
research. 
These provisos, properly enforced, would also help address legitimate public 
concerns about the impact of science on animals, and benefit patient groups and 
society as a whole, through improving how effectively research (using animals 
or humane alternatives) translates to the clinic.


Maybe the next generation of life-science researchers will become truly 
independent thinkers – conducting research to a genuinely high standard, 
challenging the status quo and making appropriate and ethical choices that 
minimise the suffering of other species while improving the quality of science. 
But for that to happen, we require genuine commitment and resources to provide 
the education that life scientists really need.

Join the higher education network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/> for more comment, analysis 
and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow us on Twitter@gdnhighered 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an idea for a story, please 
read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 