
The world’s largest land animal, the biggest fish, the bird with the greatest 
wingspan, the largest primate: all are sliding towards extinction at astounding 
speed. If we will not protect such magnificent species, what are we prepared to 
do?

In just seven years 30% of Africa’s savannah elephants have been wiped out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/31/poaching-drives-huge-30-decline-in-africas-savannah-elephants>
. The other African subspecies, the forest elephant, hascrashed by more than 60%
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/31/african-forest-elephants-extinction-study>
 since 2002. Perhaps this month’s resolution toban domestic sales of elephant 
tusks <https://portals.iucn.org/congress/motion/007> will make a difference, 
but governments have done so little to restrain the international trade that 
illegal ivory and other wildlife parts are stillsold on the surface web 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/cobi.12707/abstract>, rather than 
the dark web.

Poaching drives huge 30% decline in Africa's savannah elephants
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/31/poaching-drives-huge-30-decline-in-africas-savannah-elephants>
Last month the whale shark was classified as endangered 
<http://www.iucnredlist.org/details/19488/0>. Some are still hunted for their 
meat and fins, and it seems that the revolting practice of live finning – 
slicing off the fins, then dumping the shark overboard to die slowly – 
continues. Most are killed asbycatch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/01/fish-poachers-push-mexicos-endangered-porpoises-to-brink-of-extinction>
, in nets used to catch other species, especially tuna. Some fishing boats use 
whale sharks as markers (tuna tend to congregate under large objects), and
deliberately cast nets around them 
<http://blueplanetsociety.blogspot.co.uk/2016/09/itmay-surprise-you-that-100-million.html>
.

Their decline – whale shark numbers have halved or worse in 75 years – 
reflects the global loss of ocean life. Since 1996 the fish catch hasfallen by 
a million tonnes a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/19/overfishing-causing-global-catches-to-fall-three-times-faster-than-estimated>
, as stocks are exhausted. Sieving the seas for what remains, fishing fleets 
will trigger the collapse of entire ecosystems.

Fishing also accounts for what has happened to the bird with the largest 
wingspan, the wandering albatross – whose population hasfallen by about 30% 
<http://www.birdlife.org/datazone/speciesfactsheet.php?id=3952> in 11 years. 
Again, the tuna fishery is the principal threat, in this case through the use 
of baited longlines. The albatrosses dive for the bait, get hooked and drown.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fextinction-let-others-kill-albatross-gorilla-whale-shark-conumerism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd43bca96dec90434f8396daf815949428bf1a66%2F0_171_5120_3073%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=We%E2%80%99d%20never%20kill%20an%20albatross%20or%20gorilla%3A%20but%20we%20let%20others%20do%20it%20on%20our%20behalf%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fextinction-let-others-kill-albatross-gorilla-whale-shark-conumerism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=We%E2%80%99d%20never%20kill%20an%20albatross%20or%20gorilla%3A%20but%20we%20let%20others%20do%20it%20on%20our%20behalf%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fextinction-let-others-kill-albatross-gorilla-whale-shark-conumerism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd43bca96dec90434f8396daf815949428bf1a66%2F0_171_5120_3073%2F5120.jpg>
 An albatross corpse rotting away to reveal the rubbish it’s consumed. 
Photograph: Alamy 
Another cause is their junk food diet: the plastic they eat, then feed to 
their chicks through regurgitation. The photographs taken by Chris Jordan on 
Midway atoll of thealbatross corpses rotting away to reveal the rubbish they 
contain <http://www.chrisjordan.com/gallery/midway/#CF000313%2018x24> are a 
synopsis of our treatment of the living world. However far we travel, our 
impacts precede us.

A week ago the status of the eastern gorilla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gallery/2016/sep/04/eastern-gorilla-now-critically-endangered-says-to-world-conservation-congress-in-pictures>
, the world’s largest primate, was changed from endangered to critically 
endangered: it has declined by 70% in 20 years. Its habitat, in central Africa, 
has been ripped apart by logging, mining and farming, and the gorillas are 
hunted for meat. All the great apes are now either endangered or critically 
endangered, in the case of orangutans largelyas a result of palm oil production 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/30/indonesia-fires-disaster-21st-century-world-media>
. What does it say about us that we are prepared to drive our closest relatives 
towards extinction?

The great acceleration towards a bare, grey world is also reflected in this 
week’sState of Nature report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/14/one-in-10-uk-wildlife-species-faces-extinction-major-report-shows>
, which shows that over 10% of the remaining species in the UK are now 
threatened with extinction.

Last week we learned that one-tenth of the world’s wild places 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/08/humans-have-destroyed-a-tenth-of-earths-wilderness-in-25-years-study>
, forest and savannahs, and other lands in which human impacts are not obvious, 
have been lost – de-wilded – in the past 25 years. The trajectory suggests that 
there could be almost none left by the end of the century.

These should be among the central issues of our age. Yet we treat these losses 
as sad but peripheral, though we commission them through the things we buy. 
Elephants, rhinos, lions, polar bears, the great sharks, turtles, condors, 
whales, rainforests, wetlands, coral reefs: they are all the bycatch of 
consumerism. We assert both the right to consume – whatever we want, however we 
want – and the right to forget the consequences.

Flying to Bratislava or Bermuda for a stag weekend, shopping trips to New 
York, driving our gas guzzlers 300 metres to school, buying jetskis, leaf 
blowers and patio heaters, furnishing our homes with rare wood, eating tuna, 
prawns and salmon without a thought as to how they were produced: these 
ephemeral satisfactions, to judge by the reactions when you question them, 
occupy a sacred and inviolable space. The wonders of the living world, by 
contrast, are dispensable.

People who would never dream of killing an albatross or a whale shark are 
prepared to let others do so on their behalf, so that they may eat whatever 
fish they fancy. People who could not bring themselves to gut a chicken are 
happy to commission the disposal of entire ecosystems.

Humans have destroyed a tenth of Earth's wilderness in 25 years – study
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/08/humans-have-destroyed-a-tenth-of-earths-wilderness-in-25-years-study>
The act of not seeing is sanctioned and normalised, while attempts to explain 
the consequences are treated as abnormal and impertinent. On the Guardian’s 
website you can read about theglobal collapse of tuna populations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/may/02/overfishing-42bn-tuna-industry-risk-collapse>
 – then, in a recipe published the following day,learn how to prepare a tuna 
salad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/03/nigel-slater-tuna-and-cucumber-salad-recipe>
, without a word about the implications.

Such cultural norms, positioning us as consumers first and moral beings either 
second or not at all, grant the disposal of the living planet its social 
licence. They allow us to compartmentalise, to be conscious of the issues when 
there is little that we can do about them, and to forget them at the moment 
when we have the capacity to act (or to refrain from acting). This is the safe 
space we establish for consumerism.

The costs cannot be computed in financial terms. There is no price that can 
capture the awe aroused by a whale shark, the deep being of an elephant herd, 
the way in which your heart soars with the albatross as it mounts a column of 
air, the gorilla’s fathomless gaze. The albatross hangs around our necks with a 
weight that defies calculation.

We were here: is this how we choose to be remembered? It is true that we 
existed: you can see it in the pulse of extinction. Are we to use our gift of 
life to snuff out other life forms? What will you leave behind, except your
contribution 
<http://nationalgeographic.org/encyclopedia/great-pacific-garbage-patch/> to the
Pacific garbage patch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/23/pacific-ocean-plastic-trash-mapping-mission>
?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fextinction-let-others-kill-albatross-gorilla-whale-shark-conumerism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb129fa07877272f5aad77d3538a20888d5f62840%2F0_117_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=We%E2%80%99d%20never%20kill%20an%20albatross%20or%20gorilla%3A%20but%20we%20let%20others%20do%20it%20on%20our%20behalf%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fextinction-let-others-kill-albatross-gorilla-whale-shark-conumerism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=We%E2%80%99d%20never%20kill%20an%20albatross%20or%20gorilla%3A%20but%20we%20let%20others%20do%20it%20on%20our%20behalf%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fextinction-let-others-kill-albatross-gorilla-whale-shark-conumerism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb129fa07877272f5aad77d3538a20888d5f62840%2F0_117_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 ‘What will you leave behind, except yourcontribution 
<http://nationalgeographic.org/encyclopedia/great-pacific-garbage-patch/> to 
the Pacific garbage patch?’ – a fishing boat works amid garbage in Manila Bay, 
the Phillipines. Photograph: Erik de Castro/Reuters 
I believe we can do better, that we can position ourselves as just one 
participant in a world of wonders, blessed and cursed with higher 
consciousness, but using that capacity to embed ourselves within its limits.

We cannot wait for governments or schools or the media to deliver a new 
environmental ethics. Join the groups trying to defend the living planet; learn 
about the consequences of what you do; demand – from friends, from parents, 
from yourself – a better way of engaging with the world. By living lightly we 
enrich our lives.

• George Monbiot will answer questions on this issue in a live Guardian Q&A on 
Friday, from 10-11am, BST. Post questions now (below), or join us on the day. 
He will answer questions on any aspect of the problem, but is particularly 
interested in opening a discussion on consumerism and its ethics.

• Twitter: @georgemonbiot <https://twitter.com/GeorgeMonbiot>. A fully linked 
version of this article can be found atMonbiot.com <http://www.monbiot.com/>
 