
When I read the headline “Bono named as one of Glamour’s women of the year” I 
wondered if it was a joke. Women often wonder about jokes as we rarely 
understand them. Laughing at anything is also illegal if you are a feminist 
(but tittering isn’t, so I had a titter). Bono is apparentlyGlamour’s first 
male woman of the year <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-37845314>. 
In these days of gender fluidity, this is the smallest of details. But guys, 
really?

The decision to give poor old Bongo an award – ever since I heard Dr John 
Cooper Clarke call him that, I have been unable to think of him as anything but 
Bongo – is apparently some sort of stab at equality. Awards ceremonies of all 
kinds have become increasingly unhinged and self- adulatory. Everyone must have 
prizes, and hopefully goodie bags. too. Everyone must make forgettable speeches 
and be papped on the red carpet. No one ever really knows who else won or why. 
It’s all an absolute nonsense unless you win something yourself, in which case 
you step inside the madness by saying it’s a judgment of one’s peers.

Bono’s peers have given him all sorts: from a knighthood (honorary knight 
commander of the British empire) to a Philadelphia liberty medal, but according 
to the doublethink of Glamour’s editor-in-chief Cindi Leive, giving awards to 
actual women at the actual women of the year ceremony “might be an outdated way 
of looking at things. There are so many men who really are doing wonderful 
things for women these days.”

Finally, men doing things for women! It’s what the struggle has been all 
about. Give that man a round of applause for“babysitting” his own children 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/sexes/archive/2013/01/dads-caring-for-their-kids-its-parenting-not-babysitting/267443/>
. A medal and a paper hat for any man who thinks things should be better for 
girls! I don’t doubt Bono has done loads of charity work that he does like to 
talk about: thePoverty is Sexist campaign 
<https://www.one.org/us/take-action/poverty-is-sexist/>; the work around girls’ 
education and HIV, for instance. He is described onhis Wikipedia page 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bono> not only as a rock star but as a 
philanthropist and venture capitalist. There is, though, controversy both about 
some of his work in Africa and his band’s tax arrangements. U2 have been 
criticised for avoiding their full share of tax by channelling some of their 
income to a finance house in the Netherlands. Since Bono has been vocal about 
big companies such as ExxonMobil not being transparent about their taxes, with 
many African economies suffering as a result, this seems a tad hypocritical. 
But let that go. A lot of people are hypocritical about U2 because they used to 
like them and now it is not cool to do so.

Bono has basically irritated everyone by hanging out with popes and presidents 
but maybe his heart is in the right place even if his taxes are not. Maybe he 
could be offered a daft award and do the right thing: decline to line up with 
the likes of US Olympic gymnastSimone Biles; 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/simone-biles> or Nadia Murad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/oct/10/iraqi-activist-nadia-murad-wins-human-rights-prize-for-yazidi-campaign>
, the Yazidi woman who got away from Isis; or Emily Doe, the student who was 
raped by Brock Turner and wrote a shatteringletter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/11/campus-sexual-assault-university-colorado-austin-wilkerson>
 about her experience. He could have politely declined but carried on his work 
on HIV, as so many of his colleagues do. He could have said that poverty is a 
key feminist issue and passed the prize on to one of the many brilliant female 
campaigners. But no, he said he is very grateful because this is a chance to 
say: “The battle for gender equality can’t be won unless men lead it along with 
women.”

Of course! This must be where women have gone so badly wrong. We need more men 
to show us how to do feminism properly. Bono is not alone in this patronising 
attitude. Most of the male voices on the left continue to see gender as some 
kind of afterthought and are not interested in the bodily politics of flesh and 
blood and women. Thenew UN ambassador for women is Wonder Woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/21/wonder-woman-un-ambassador-staff-protest>
, a bleedin’ cartoon. Everyone fell over themselves to celebrateCaitlyn Jenner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/caitlyn-jenner>’s womanhood, ignoring 
herdubious politics <http://time.com/4268422/caitlyn-jenners-politics/>. The 
misogyny around Hillary Clinton is unmissable. The one bit of sexual politics 
that the “radicals” embrace is often a denial of biological difference. Yet 
some of the most hard-won campaigns have been around rape, FGM, sexual 
violence, childbirth and HIV, where women’s experience is absolutely embodied.

Alongside this strange disappearance of womenhood has been the rolling back of 
tokenism: the assumption that everything is already a level playing field. 
Where many used to feel a public discussion should involve more than just white 
men, we are back to a position where it is now permissible to have all-male 
panels and comedy shows. Formats in which men thrive are too often seen as the 
only way to do things. This is a very simple and easy thing for men to address. 
When asked to take part in something, ask who else is involved. Ask who you 
will sit beside.

Otherwise, we go full circle, into hilarious gong-giving stupidity. Why bother 
with actual women when you can have a cartoon to represent us, or a man? 
Because however extraordinary a manBono <https://www.theguardian.com/music/bono>
 may be, he is not a leader I will follow.
 