
2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2015/jan/16/global-warming-made-2014-record-hot-year>
 and2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/jan/25/record-hot-2015-gave-us-a-glimpse-at-the-future-of-global-warming>
 each set the record for hottest calendar year since we began measuring surface 
temperatures over 150 years ago, and 2016 is almost certain to break the record 
once again. It will be without precedent: the first time that we’ve seen three 
consecutive record-breaking hot years.

But it’s just happenstance that the calendar year begins in January, and so 
it’s also informative to compare all yearlong periods. In doing so, it becomes 
clear that we’re living in astonishingly hot times.

June 2015 through May 2016 was the hottest 12-month period on record. That was 
also true of May 2015 through April 2016, and the 12 months ending in March 
2016. In fact, it’s true for every 12 months going all the way back to the 
period ending in September 2015, according toglobal surface temperature data 
<http://www-users.york.ac.uk/~kdc3/papers/coverage2013/series.html> compiled by 
Kevin Cowtan and Robert Way 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2013/nov/13/global-warming-underestimated-by-half>
. We just set the record for hottest year in each of the past 9 months.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fwe-just-broke-the-record-for-hottest-year-9-straight-times%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc206dbff44b96e3dd38c4eb67c9162ad10c1b707%2F0_0_677_461%2F677.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=We%20just%20broke%20the%20record%20for%20hottest%20year%2C%209%20straight%20times%20%7C%20Dana%20Nuccitelli&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fwe-just-broke-the-record-for-hottest-year-9-straight-times%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=We%20just%20broke%20the%20record%20for%20hottest%20year%2C%209%20straight%20times%20%7C%20Dana%20Nuccitelli&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fwe-just-broke-the-record-for-hottest-year-9-straight-times%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc206dbff44b96e3dd38c4eb67c9162ad10c1b707%2F0_0_677_461%2F677.jpg>
 Running 12-month average global surface temperature using data compiled by 
Kevin Cowtan and Robert Way. Illustration: Dana Nuccitelli 
These record temperatures have been assisted by a very strong El Niño event, 
which brought warm water to the ocean surface, temporarily warming global 
surface temperatures. But today’s temperatures are only record-setting because 
the El Niño was superimposed on top of human-caused global warming.

For comparison, 1997–1998 saw a very similar monster El Niño event. And 
similarly, the 12-month hottest temperature record was set in each month from 
October 1997 through August 1998. That was likewise a case of El Niño and 
global warming teaming up to shatter previous temperature records.

The difference is that while September 1997–August 1998 was the hottest 
12-month period on record at the time; it’s now in 60th place. It’s been 
surpassed by yearlong periods in 2005, 2006, 2007, 2009, 2010, 2014, 2015, and 
2016. Many of those years weren’t even aided by El Niño events; unassisted 
global warming made them hotter than 1998.

Global surface temperatures are now more than 0.3°C hotter than they were in 
1997–1998. That’s a remarkable rise over just 18 years, in comparison to the 
1°C the Earth’s average surface temperatures have risen since the Industrial 
Revolution began.

This has all happened during a time when ‘no significant warming in 18 years’ 
has been one ofthe rallying cries of climate denial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/may/11/coal-made-its-best-case-against-climate-change-and-lost>
. In reality, when we compare apples to apples – El Niño years to El Niño years 
– we’ve seen more than 0.3°C global surface warming over the past 18 years, 
which is in line with climate model predictions. ‘Climate models are wrong’ has 
been anothernow-debunked climate denial rallying cry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/jul/05/new-research-climate-may-be-more-sensitive-and-situation-more-dire>
.

Now that the past year’s El Niño event is over, the streak of record-breaking 
yearlong periods appears to have ended. Nevertheless, 2016 remains on track to 
break that record for the hottest calendar year, for an unprecedented third 
consecutive year, following record years in 2010 and 2005 as well.
Gavin Schmidt (@ClimateOfGavin) 
With Apr update, 2016 still > 99% likely to be a new record (assuming 
historical ytd/ann patterns valid).pic.twitter.com/GTN9sPL2D7 
<https://t.co/GTN9sPL2D7>
 <https://twitter.com/ClimateOfGavin/status/731599988141248512> May 14, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/ClimateOfGavin/status/731599988141248512> 
With the Earth warming dangerously rapidly, at a rate 20–50 times faster than 
the fastest rate of natural global warming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/feb/24/earth-is-warming-is-50x-faster-than-when-it-comes-out-of-an-ice-age>
, one can’t help but wonder when the influence of the small minority of 
disproportionately powerful climate denial groups will wane.

195 countries pledged to curb their carbon pollution in the tremendously 
successful Paris climate negotiations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2015/dec/14/the-paris-agreement-signals-that-deniers-have-lost-the-climate-wars>
, but climate denial is still predominant in one of America’s two political 
parties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/jun/13/the-grand-oil-party-house-republicans-denounce-a-carbon-tax>
, and may be gaining foothold in other regions of the Anglosphere likethe UK 
<http://www.desmog.uk/2016/06/13/mapped-cosy-relationship-climate-euro-sceptic-bubble-55-tufton-street-brexit-less-climate-action>
 andAustralia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/planet-oz/2016/jul/05/pauline-hansons-one-nation-to-bring-climate-science-denial-to-the-senate>
. Fortunately, many other countries likeChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/may/04/scientists-are-figuring-out-the-keys-to-convincing-people-about-global-warming>
,India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/30/india-set-to-unveil-global-solar-alliance-of-120-countries-at-paris-climate-summit>
, andCanada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/10/us-canada-promise-lead-world-low-carbon-economy-obama-trudeau>
 seem to be moving in the right direction with their climate and energy 
policies.

Now that climate denial’s bread and butter arguments are toast, November’s US 
elections will be critical in determining whether the country continues along 
the path ofclimate leadership established by President Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2013/jun/25/climate-change-carbon-emissions-president-obama-epa>
, or allowsthe oil industry’s puppet party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/jun/13/the-grand-oil-party-house-republicans-denounce-a-carbon-tax>
 to continue peddling long-debunked myths in order to delay climate action and
put future generations at risk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/jun/27/the-inter-generational-theft-of-brexit-and-climate-change>
.


With global warming constantly breaking temperature records, and dozens of 
scientific organizations warning policymakers 
<https://insideclimatenews.org/news/28062016/science-organizations-again-urge-congress-take-climate-change-seriously-lamar-smith-science-committee>
 that “To reduce the risk of the most severe impacts of climate change, 
greenhouse gas emissions must be substantially reduced,” we can no longeruse 
ignorance as an excuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2014/oct/28/republican-politicians-arent-climate-scientists-or-responsible-leaders>
.
 