
This week’s Newsnight investigation 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/b07zvq6y/newsnight-20102016> into greedy 
“superheads” of academies coupled with headline claims about other heads 
involved inmoney-grabbing <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-36446144>
 andcronyism 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/educationnews/10042421/Headteacher-under-investigation-by-DfE-over-cronyism-claims.html>
 has thrown a spotlight on to the role of headteachers. Is it right that the 
pushy ones are paid a great deal more than the prime minister? Do they have too 
much power to hire their favourites and sack whistleblowers?

Offer cash rewards to underachievers to boost GCSE results, study says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/21/offer-cash-rewards-to-underachievers-to-boost-gcse-results-study-says>
As a teacher for a quarter of a century, a former governor and now a 
teacher-educator at the University of London, I have seen my fair share of 
heads. When I started in the late 1980s, all the state school headteachers I 
encountered had risen through the ranks and had a crumpled, careworn air: they 
wore dusty suits or crinkled skirts, and were all middle-aged or nearing 
retirement and, while not without their psychological quirks, mostly cared 
about their staff and students. They were adept at navigating through the local 
authority bureaucracy that then ran our schools.

This species of head is dying breed; you might find a smattering in the outer 
reaches of rural counties, but I would hazard that in all our major urban areas 
an “upgraded” model has appeared. This new type of headteacher is not even 
given that sobriquet but is usually dubbed a “principal” – an import from the 
Charter School system in America – and has a distinctly corporate air about him 
or herself.

This creature usually wafts about in designer clothes, and is often not yet 40 
years old. They have not risen through the ranks, but been trained through a 
programme likeTeach First <https://www.teachfirst.org.uk/> (which aims to 
catapult “talent” to the top quickly) and have proved themselves not by having 
years of experience under their belt, but by having devised a high-profile 
scheme which they have shown or “spun” (depending how charitable you feel 
towards them) as being hugely successful.

They are all obsessed by data, spreadsheets, ‘raising levels of attainment', 
and are brilliant networkers

They are all obsessed by data, spreadsheets and “raising levels of 
attainment”, and are brilliant networkers. They are usually great at schmoozing 
with the right people and may well be very well-connected, either developing a 
prominent social media profile or through their contacts. Most, though not all, 
are from socially advantaged backgrounds.

These fresh-faced, suited and booted principals are wily political operators 
who are hideously impressive when you meet them: they have sorted out the 
issues of our country’s educational ills with their mastery of the data and 
implemented “evidence-based interventions 
<https://educationendowmentfoundation.org.uk/>” (they like to use medical 
jargon) to ensure “all the needs of students” are met. They jump on whatever 
bandwagon is going; at the moment it is making sure your school has a “mastery 
curriculum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/oct/01/mastery-differentiation-new-classroom-buzzword>
” and is “knowledge-based 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/nicky-morgan-why-knowledge-matters>” – 
we need to teach children more facts! There is also the obsession with imparting
British values 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/380595/SMSC_Guidance_Maintained_Schools.pdf>
 to “hard-to-reach” children, and much talk of the need for both students and 
staff to “disclose”any information which suggests radicalisation 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/550499/Keeping_children_safe_in_education_Part_1.pdf>
.

I worry though that this type of principal is at best self-serving, and at 
worst corrupt. They have come from theacademisation of schools 
<http://www.localschoolsnetwork.org.uk/2016/03/the-white-paper-justification-for-academy-conversion-is-pathetic>
 which has put enormous power in their hands withvery little genuine 
accountability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/21/schools-academies-democracy-educational-standards-accountability>
.

A little-known fact is that once a school joins a multi-academy trust 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/458632/governance-in-multi-academy-trusts_Sept2015.pdf>
 (a chain of academies), the trustees of the MAT, which normally includes the 
headteacher, have the power to disband the governing body of the existing 
school and replace it with a “local governing body”, which is essentially a 
rubber stamp for whatever the trustees decide. This means that the very 
structures of MATs lend themselves to power-hungry, greedy heads.

Children need to know stress is normal, not necessarily a mental health problem
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/oct/20/mental-health-young-people-schools>
School league tables also promote a culture where you get headteachers 
behaving like football managers, demanding good results no matter what methods 
are used – as long as you don’t get caught ... As a result, I’ve seen 
11-year-olds being drilled to do mock exam papers five years before they 
actually take their GCSEs. It’s so depressing to see this happening but in my 
experience, preparing like this for the test has become the norm for most 
lessons in our schools. Many children lose their love of acquiring knowledge 
and learn less effectively because they becomefixated on their grades 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2010/aug/13/exam-test-results-teaching-style>
 rather than enjoying the processes of learning new things. In our 
test-obsessed times, it’s no surprise thatdepression is sky-rocketing in our 
young people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/may/14/calls-to-childline-over-exam-stress-break-records>
.

To make them joyful arenas of learning, we need to turn down the heat on our 
schools, which are reaching boiling point. We need to radically reform the 
academy system, jettison school league tables and take steps to stop the scum 
rising to the top.
 