
My twins are “studying” Jack and the Beanstalk, and I’ve just packed them off 
to school with my battered copy of Ladybird’sWell-Loved Tales 
<https://www.pinterest.com/vintageladybird/well-loved-tales/>.

I’ve collected a few old Ladybirds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jul/03/why-we-love-the-ladybird-books>
 from car boot sales because they are beautiful and nostalgic, hailing from a 
time when truths were simpler and there was faith in the future. My favourite is
The Story of Newspapers 
<https://www.amazon.com/story-newspapers-ladybird-achievements-book/dp/B0007J8Z4M>
, a Ladybird Achievements Book that is testimony to the speed of terrifying 
technical obsolescence – and welcome progress. A drawing of a newsroom where 
all 14 journalists are men shows the past wasn’t always lovely.

Now our affection for perhaps the most perfectly packaged objects in 
publishing has been reawakened by thesatirical Ladybird series for adults 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/22/ladybird-book-pastiches-become-stocking-filler-hit-of-2015>
. Likemore than a million others 
<https://www.breakingnews.ie/showbiz/more-ladybird-books-for-grown-ups-on-the-way-as-sales-hit-two-million-mark-745857.html>
, I received one –The Dad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/12/ladybird-the-dad-review-zoe-williams>
 – for Christmas. The next Ladybird relaunch sounds like another spoof:Prince 
Charles is co-writing a book explaining climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/15/prince-charles-pens-ladybird-book-on-climate-change>
, the first in a new Expert series.

While Ladybird’s spoofs clock in at about 800 words, the Expert range, 
covering topics from evolution to the Battle of Britain, are 5,000 words. 
Charles’ co-authors are thepolar scientist Emily Shuckburgh 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C8XXM9OzEWg> and the environmental campaigner 
Tony Juniper, and Penguin stresses that their words have been peer-reviewed by 
other scientists.

Hooray for Ladybird’s championing of expertise, but I wonder if it will chime 
with readers reprogrammed to see the books as satire. Perhaps Ladybird should
commission Michael Gove to write The Ladybird Book of Brexit 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GGgiGtJk7MA>. I’m sure there would be a 
readership for a spoof Ladybird called Climate Change Deniers. A few laughs 
might be an effective educational tool too.

Melting into memory
 The Prince Charles Ladybird book inspired by the Uckfield flood of 2000 
Photograph: AP 
The cover of Prince Charles’ book was inspired by the flooding of the Sussex 
town of Uckfield in 2000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2000/oct/14/weather.climatechange>, 
which led him to criticise humanity’s“arrogant disregard of the delicate 
balance of nature” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2000/nov/07/themonarchy.weather>. 
Much-trailed floods failed to materialise along Britain’s east coast this 
weekend, and non-appearing blizzards were much mocked as#snowmageddon 
<https://twitter.com/uberbobs/status/819801764379533313>.

One popular meme of a two-dimensional snowman 
<https://twitter.com/ScottMoffett01/status/819899004427313152> created by 
laying a carrot nose and two twig arms on to two puddles is the sum total of 
the snowmen my children have witnessed during their five years on this warming 
planet.

I recently interviewed Greenland residents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/23/climate-change-in-greenland-adaptation-we-simply-refuse-to-be-victimised>
, for whom adapting to climate changes is part of everyday life. We don’t 
really consider ourselves to be living climate-changed lives in Britain, but my 
childhood 30 years ago was enlivened by two winter blizzards that each shut 
down my village for a week. That snowmaggedon was great for community spirit.

I’m convinced that the gales and sleet that dusted my home with white for an 
hour last Friday would have been a proper blizzard back in the 1980s. I’m 
saddened that those days are unlikely to return for my children, but we needn’t 
mourn any loss of extreme weather-induced community spirit. There’s been plenty 
in evidence during the recent precautionaryevacuations along the east coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/14/storms-and-floods-force-evacuation-of-thousands-on-east-coast>
. And there’ll be plenty more in the future.

Now for the greatest escape

We humans may be hopeless at acting in our long-term interests over climate 
change, but our ingenuity can be boundless when desperate. Take HMP Channings 
Wood, in Devon, where staff have reportedly had to ban sugar and fruit used by 
inmates tobrew homemade booze  
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/prisoners-find-easy-way-to-make-hard-stuff-pdgxwl9n7>
after smoking was banned.

After the Isle of Man’s prison became the first in Europe to ban smoking in 
2008 
<http://www.iomtoday.co.im/news/isle-of-man-news/ex-prisoners-speak-out-on-smoking-ban-1-6171572>
, prisoners improvised roll-ups from pages of Gideons Biblespacked with tumble 
drier lint and pubic hair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/07/guernsey-prison-ban-smoking-unrest>
.

But will we devise something equally clever to stop the planet smoking?
 