
For work <https://www.theguardian.com/money/work-and-careers> in the UK it can 
feel like the best of times and the worst of times. We have a flexible labour 
market, a strong and internationally envied record of job creation and a solid 
framework of individual rights. Yet hardly a day seems to go by without stories 
of workers being unfairly treated, whether in long-established areas of 
employment such as retail orcare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2016/nov/25/care-workers-arent-just-about-managing-its-far-worse-than-that>
, or through new technology-enabled enterprises. Protecting our strengths while 
tackling the weaknesses is the overarching task facing the review of modern 
employment that the government hasasked me to undertake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/01/theresa-may-hires-former-tony-blair-policy-boss-to-review-workers-rights>
. It is a daunting task but the prime minister is right to see it as a priority.

I’ll tell Theresa May what’s wrong with modern work | Matthew Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/01/i-tell-theresa-may-working-lives-review-modern-employment-zero-hours-flexibility>
One of the key issues for the review is ensuring that our system of employment 
rules are fit for the fast-changing world of work. The UK’s framework of 
employment protections and entitlements exists to help correct the inherent 
power imbalance between employers and employees. Rights such as access to paid 
annual leave and protection from discrimination provide the statutory base line 
on to which most employers add further benefits as part of the employment 
contract. Entitlements such as the national minimum wage, employer pension 
contributions and parental leave also contribute to wider public policy goals.

Ensuring that workers get their due protections and entitlements is often an 
issue of enforcement and the review will explore whether we could do better at 
making sure such rules are observed. If one employee wins a claim against an 
employer is there a case to automatically investigate whether colleagues are 
also being short-changed?

As a result of government policy and changes in the labour market, 
self-employed people now make up about15% of those in work 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-35572817> in the UK. The self-employed have 
more flexibility and pay lower taxes in the form of national insurance, but they
do not enjoy the rights or protections of employees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/20/jobs-self-employment-workers-rights-tuc-uk-economy>
. While there are genuine grey areas, sometimes businesses appear to impose the 
expectations and obligations of employees but, by defining workers as 
self-employed, deny them their due rights and entitlements. The review will 
explore how clearer information and better support – including new forms of 
worker representation – might enable people to understand and enforce their 
rights.

Another important issue is the way our employment and tax system interact. 
Arrangements such as self-employment and sole trader incorporation can provide 
flexibility for all parties but there is also a strong financial incentive at 
play. Not only do the self-employed pay lower national insurance contributions, 
but unlike employees their labour isn’t subject to employer’s NI. If two people 
are doing the same task and earning the same basic remuneration on average 
earnings, the total tax paid to the state for the employee is about £2,000 a 
year more than for a self-employed contractor, or as much as £3,000 if they are 
working through their own company. Yet, apart from some particular entitlements 
such as paternity pay, the self-employed access exactly the same share of 
public spending per head as employees. I was pleased that the chancellor said 
in hisautumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/autumn-statement-2016> that there are 
issues here both of fairness between different types of worker and the 
long-term resilience of the tax base – and he set out that the Treasury is 
considering these issues.

Theresa May hires former Blair policy boss to review workers' rights
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/01/theresa-may-hires-former-tony-blair-policy-boss-to-review-workers-rights>
Technology is making it easier to break down jobs into small parcels and to 
engage people in forms of “gig” work. Current employment and tax rules add an 
extra incentive to this process and encourage people to set up their own 
companies. I believe strongly that in achieving a fair, flexible and 
sustainable framework for employment, there are important roles to be played by 
employers, trade unions, consumers and entrepreneurs. In America, for example, 
new business models are combining gig work with employee ownership. As well as 
the challenges, the review will look at the opportunities new forms of work 
create for groups such as older workers and carers, and also the scope for new 
career progression routes.

Work is central to society, to the economy and to our individual lives. There 
is much to be proud of in the UK’s jobs record but our current system has 
weaknesses and is not future-proof. If the review succeeds it will help our 
nation be a leader not just in flexibility and job creation but also in laying 
the basis for a socially just and economically dynamic employment system fit 
for the future.
 