
Imagine a wonderful world, a planet on which there was no threat of climate 
breakdown, no loss of freshwater, no antibiotic resistance, no obesity crisis, 
no terrorism, no war. Surely, then, we would be out of major danger? Sorry. 
Even if everything else were miraculously fixed, we’re finished if we don’t 
address an issue considered so marginal and irrelevant that you can go for 
months without seeing it in a newspaper.

It’s literally and – it seems – metaphorically, beneath us. To judge by its 
absence from the media, most journalists consider it unworthy of consideration. 
But all human life depends on it. We knew this long ago, but somehow it has 
been forgotten. As aSanskrit text  
<http://www.unccd.int/en/programmes/Event-and-campaigns/WDCD/Pages/Proverbs-on-land-and-soil-.aspx>
written in about 1500BC noted: “Upon this handful of soil our survival depends. 
Husband it and it will grow our food, our fuel and our shelter and surround us 
with beauty. Abuse it and the soil will collapse and die, taking humanity with 
it.”

The issue hasn’t changed, but we have. Landowners around the world are now 
engaged in an orgy of soil destruction so intense that, according to the UN’s 
Food and Agriculture Organisation, the world on average has just60 more years 
of growing crops 
<http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/only-60-years-of-farming-left-if-soil-degradation-continues/>
. Even in Britain, which is spared the tropical downpours that so quickly strip 
exposed soil from the land, Farmers Weekly reports,we have “only 100 harvests 
left” 
<http://www.fwi.co.uk/news/only-100-harvests-left-in-uk-farm-soils-scientists-warn.htm>
.

Landowners around the world are now engaged in an orgy of soil destruction

To keep up with global food demand, the UN estimates, 6m hectares (14.8m 
acres) of new farmland will be needed every year 
<http://liquid-investments.com/six-million-hectares-of-additional-farmland-needed-2/>
. Instead,12m hectares a year are lost through soil degradation 
<http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs12571-015-0437-x#page-1>. We wreck 
it, then move on, trashing rainforests and other precious habitats as we go. 
Soil is an almost magical substance, a living system that transforms the 
materials it encounters, making them available to plants. That handful the 
Vedic master showed his disciplescontains more micro-organisms than all the 
people who have ever lived on Earth 
<http://world.time.com/2012/12/14/what-if-the-worlds-soil-runs-out/>. Yet we 
treat it like, well, dirt.

The techniques that were supposed to feed the world threaten us with 
starvation.A paper just published in the journal Anthropocene 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S221330541500003X> analyses 
the undisturbed sediments in an 11th-century French lake. It reveals that the 
intensification of farming over the past century has increased the rate of soil 
erosion sixtyfold.

Another paper, by researchers in the UK, shows that soil in allotments 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1365-2664.12254/full> – the small 
patches in towns and cities that people cultivate by hand – contains a third 
more organic carbon than agricultural soil and 25% more nitrogen. This is one 
of the reasons whyallotment holders produce between four and 11 times  
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1365-2664.12254/full>more food per 
hectare than do farmers.

Whenever I mention this issue, people ask: “But surely farmers have an 
interest in looking after their soil?” They do, and there are many excellent 
cultivators who seek to keep their soil on the land. There are also some 
terrible farmers, often absentees, who allow contractors to rip their fields to 
shreds for the sake of a quick profit. Even the good ones are hampered by an 
economic and political system that could scarcely be better designed to 
frustrate them.


Why are organic farmers across Britain giving up?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/14/why-are-organic-farmers-across-britain-giving-up>
This is the International Year of Soils <http://www.fao.org/soils-2015/en/>, 
but you wouldn’t know it. In January, the Westminster government published a 
new set ofsoil standards 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/397046/CCSoilPS_2015_v1_WEB.pdf>
, marginally better than those they replaced, but wholly unmatched to the scale 
of the problem. There are no penalities for compromising our survival except a 
partial withholding of public subsidies. Yet even this pathetic guidance is 
considered intolerable by theNational Farmers’ Union 
<http://www.fwi.co.uk/news/soil-rules-must-not-unfairly-penalise-farmers-say-nfu.htm>
, which greeted them with bitter complaints. Sometimes the NFU seems to me to 
exist to champion bad practice and block any possibility of positive change.

Few sights are as gruesome as the glee with which the NFU celebrated the death 
last year of the European soil framework directive, the only measure with the 
potential to arrest our soil-erosion crisis. The NFU, supported by successive 
British governments,fought for eight years to destroy it 
<http://www.fwi.co.uk/international-agriculture/nfu-tells-brussels-that-soil-framework-directive-is-unnecessary.htm>
, then crowed like ashedful of cockerels when it won 
<http://www.fwi.co.uk/news/red-tape-victory-as-soils-rules-axed.htm>. Looking 
back on this episode, we will see it as a parable of our times.

Soon after that, the business minister, Matthew Hancock, announced that 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/businesses-get-greater-say-on-how-regulaton-is-enforced>
 he was putting “business in charge of driving reform”: trade associations 
would be able “to review enforcement of regulation in their sectors.” The NFU 
was one the first two bodies granted this privilege. Hancock explained that 
this “is all part of our unambiguously pro-business agenda to increase the 
financial security of the British people.” But it doesn’t increase our 
security, financial or otherwise. It undermines it.

The government’s deregulation bill 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/bills/lbill/2014-2015/0058/lbill_2014-20150058_en_9.htm#pb16-l1g88>
, which has now almost completed its passage through parliament, will force 
regulators – including those charged with protecting the fabric of the land – 
to “have regard to the desirability of promoting economic growth”. But 
short-term growth at the expense of public protection compromises long-term 
survival. This “unambiguously pro-business agenda” is deregulating us to death.

There’s no longer even an appetite for studying the problem. Just one 
university – Aberdeen – 
<http://www.abdn.ac.uk/study/courses/undergraduate/science/plant_soil/>now 
offers a degree in soil science. All the rest have been closed down.

This is what topples civilisations. War and pestilence might kill large 
numbers of people, but in most cases the population recovers. But lose the soil 
and everything goes with it.

Now, globalisation ensures that this disaster is reproduced everywhere. In its 
early stages, globalisation enhances resilience: people are no longer dependent 
on the vagaries of local production. But as it proceeds, spreading the same 
destructive processes to all corners of the Earth, it undermines resilience, as 
it threatens to bring down systems everywhere.

Short-term growth at the expense of public protection compromises long-term 
survival

Almost all other issues are superficial by comparison. What appear to be great 
crises are slight and evanescent when held up against the steady trickling away 
of our subsistence.

The avoidance of this issue is perhaps the greatest social silence of all. Our 
insulation from the forces of nature has encouraged a belief in the 
dematerialisation of our lives, as if we no longer subsist on food and water, 
but on bits and bytes. This is a belief that can be entertained only by people 
who have never experienced serious hardship, and who are therefore unaware of 
the contingency of existence.

It’s not as if we are short of solutions. While it now seems that ploughing of 
any kind isincompatible with the protection of the soil 
<http://www.ucpress.edu/book.php?isbn=9780520272903>, there are plenty of means 
of farming without it. Independently, in several parts of the world, farmers 
have been experimenting with zero-tillage (also known as conservation 
agriculture), often with extraordinary results.

There are dozens of ways of doing it: we need never see bare soil again. But 
in the UK, as in most rich nations, we have scarcely begun to experiment with 
the technique, despite the best efforts of the magazinePractical Farm Ideas. 
<http://www.farmideas.co.uk>

Even better are some of the methods that fall under the heading of permaculture
 <http://permaculturenews.org/> – working with complex natural systems rather 
than seeking to simplify or replace them. Pioneers such asSepp Holzer 
<http://www.seppholzer.at/cms/index.php?id=69> and Geoff Lawton 
<http://www.seppholzer.at/cms/index.php?id=69> have achieved remarkable yields 
of fruit and vegetables in places that seemed unfarmable: 1,100m above sea 
level in the Austrian alps, for example, or in the salt-shrivelled Jordanian 
desert.

But, though every year our government spends £450m on agricultural research 
and development 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/227259/9643-BIS-UK_Agri_Tech_Strategy_Accessible.pdf>
 – much of it on techniques that wreck our soils – there is no mention of 
permaculture either on the websites of the two main funding bodies (NERC and 
BBSRC) or in any other department.

The macho commitment to destructive short-termism appears to resist all 
evidence and all logic. Never mind life on Earth; we’ll plough on regardless.

• A fully referenced version of this article can be found at Monbiot.com 
<http://www.monbiot.com/>
 