
Among the multiple absurdities uttered by those who demanded Britain’s 
departure from the European Union is the claim that, since the sky has not yet 
fallen in, all those gloomy warnings from the remain crowd have been proved 
wrong. Absurd because – and it’s odd that they haven’t spotted this –we have 
not yet left <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>. We remainers 
believed that it was the actual leaving, not a mere vote to leave, that would 
bring economic havoc. That the first few post-referendum months seemed steady 
enough can be attributed to the hope nurtured by some of our trading partners, 
along with the markets, that we might not go ahead with this planned act of 
national self-harm, that we might step back from the brink.

Pound hits another 31-year low as Hammond launches Wall Street charm offensive 
–as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/oct/06/pound-sterling-chancellor-hammond-wall-street-charm-offensive-business-live>
Which is why our currency takes a plunge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/oct/06/pound-sterling-chancellor-hammond-wall-street-charm-offensive-business-live>
 every time Theresa May or her ministers indicate that, no, Brexit really will 
happen. The harder Brexit threatens to be, the deeper the pound tumbles. This 
week sterling has been a veritable Tom Daley,somersaulting downward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/07/confusion-as-pound-falls-10-in-insane-asian-trading-and-no-one-knows-why>
. Next time a leaver cheerily tells you that Brexit has had no economic impact, 
you don’t have to just roll your eyes and remind them we’re still in the EU. 
You can tell them that we’ve endured an involuntary currency devaluationto the 
tune of 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/shortcuts/2016/oct/04/the-pound-is-worth-less-but-what-does-it-mean-for-brits?CMP=share_btn_tw>
 at least 13%. That helps some exporters, but it’s also made Britons poorer.

Of course, the referendum result has to be honoured. But the only instruction 
the British people gave on 23 June was to leave the European Union. They did 
not issue an edict demanding the most extreme rupture possible, one bound to 
imperil our economy and rip away at the fabric of our society.

Yet that’s what our politicians seem bent on. Right now, the government could 
have been devoting itself to a diplomatic offensive aimed at persuading the 
EU’s 27 other members to grant us a Norway-plus arrangement, allowing us to 
enjoy the benefits of single market membership with a degree of flexibility on 
how free movement is implemented. (Bear in mind that not all the four core 
freedoms are applied absolutely: there are exceptions to the free movement of 
services, for example. Recall too that what Europe originally enshrined in 
treaty was free movement of labour, not people: that too could allow for some 
British leeway.) Yes, it would have been a big ask. But with the moral mandate 
of the referendum behind her,Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> would have been hard for the 
EU 27 to refuse outright.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Ffrancois-hollande-uk-must-pay-price-for-brexit-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fran%C3%A7ois%20Hollande%3A%20UK%20must%20pay%20price%20for%20Brexit%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Ffrancois-hollande-uk-must-pay-price-for-brexit-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fran%C3%A7ois%20Hollande%3A%20UK%20must%20pay%20price%20for%20Brexit%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Ffrancois-hollande-uk-must-pay-price-for-brexit-video&media=>
François Hollande: UK must pay price for Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/oct/07/francois-hollande-uk-must-pay-price-for-brexit-video>
Instead, the government keeps slamming its fist on the table and insisting on 
the worst possible deal for Britain. No to the single market, says May.Liam Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liamfox> wants to go further, exiting the 
European customs union as well. Economists warn that if we do that, it won’t 
just be jobs, investment and people that will steer clear of Britain the day 
after we leave: basic food imports won’t be allowed in either. We currently 
lack the basic trade agreements we’d need on day one outside the EU. They will 
not fall into our lap automatically, and will take a lot longer than two years 
to negotiate.

Meanwhile, we are methodically trashing our brand, the very international 
reputation that has made us an attractive place to invest, visit or live. Most 
countries long to bring in the best and the brightest. We seem determined to 
turn them away. This week the government signalled toforeign-born doctors and 
students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/04/jeremy-hunt-accused-devaluing-contribution-foreign-doctors-to-uk>
 that they are no longer wanted here, as well as warning diverse, global 
companies they will benamed and shamed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/05/government-faces-backlash-from-business-leaders-over-foreign-workers>
 for the crime of drawing on a wide, international pool of talent. On Friday the
London School of Economics claimed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/07/lse-brexit-non-uk-experts-foreign-academics>
 the government had told its non-British experts on Europe that their wisdom 
was not wanted. The Foreign Office rejected that claim. But a desire to purge 
ourselves of foreigners does seem to be turning into a fever: hot, irrational 
and ugly.

And all this while telling EU residents who have made their homes in Britain 
that they are to be “one of our main cards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/04/liam-fox-refuses-to-guarantee-right-of-eu-citizens-to-remain-in-uk>
” in future negotiations with the EU – as if, should Britain not get what it 
wants, itmight actually deport 
<http://reaction.life/may-government-making-big-mistake-eu-immigration/> up to 
3 million people who came here legally and in good faith. It’s one thing to 
listen respectfully to those millions of leave voters who want a say over how 
future migration works. It is quite another to demonise, and terrify, those who 
are already here.

To do all this, May has had to rewrite the history of 23 June. No longer the 
winner in a fairly narrow vote of 52% to 48%, leave wasrecast in the PM’s 
conference speech <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-37563510> as a mass 
consensus, the unambiguous stance of the great British public. All that had 
ever stood in their way was a liberal, monied elite, the Davos set of footloose 
globetrotters devoid of national allegiance, citizens of the world and 
therefore citizens of nowhere. Before our very eyes the 48% are being rebranded 
as the 1%.

What’s so odd about this is that it is former remainers who are doing it. 
Recall that May stood – not very visibly, it’s true – alongside those who 
wanted to stay in the EU. Amber Rudd, she of the foreigners’ lists, confronted 
Boris Johnson in a TV debate. Jeremy Hunt, the health secretary now eager to 
denude the NHS of the world’s best medical talent, was a remainer too. They are 
engaged in a collective act of over-compensation,frantically mouthing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/05/birmingham-witnessing-tory-reformation-conservative-conference-brexit>
 the prayers of the new religion now that the old one has been banished as 
heresy.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fthe-far-right-are-coming-brexit-has-helped-them-along-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20far%20right%20are%20coming%3A%20Brexit%20has%20helped%20them%20along%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fthe-far-right-are-coming-brexit-has-helped-them-along-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20far%20right%20are%20coming%3A%20Brexit%20has%20helped%20them%20along%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fthe-far-right-are-coming-brexit-has-helped-them-along-video&media=>
The far right are coming: Brexit has helped them along 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2016/jul/07/the-far-right-are-coming-brexit-has-helped-them-along-video>
So who will speak for the 48%? They – we – are not looking for a champion who 
will pretend that the referendum never happened, but one who will fight for a 
Brexit that does not deprive us of all we cherished in our relationship with 
Europe. It means arguing for a sane, practical deal that serves, rather than 
harms, our national interest – and that could then be put to the British people 
in an election or even, if that’s what it takes, another referendum. It means 
challenging, for instance, Fox’s ludicrous, dogmatic search for commerce with 
every far-flung corner of the planet except the 500 million-strong market on 
our doorstep with whom we currently do nearly half our trade.

The pound is worth less – but what does it mean for Brits?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/shortcuts/2016/oct/04/the-pound-is-worth-less-but-what-does-it-mean-for-brits>
The key arena for this battle will be parliament. Labour has a national duty 
to challenge the government’s every step: thecombination of 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/06/jeremy-corbyns-choices-the-big-roles-in-the-shadow-cabinet>
 Keir Starmer, shadowing the Brexit ministry, and Hilary Benn chairing the 
relevant Commons committee could deliver sharp scrutiny. But they are impaired 
by theLabour leadership’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/01/immigration-brexit-labour-jeremy-corbyn>
 perverse readiness to jettison single market membership, even as it admirably 
defends free movement.

Labour will need allies. The Lib Dems are too few, though on this 
<http://www.libdems.org.uk/clegg_free_trade_deal_with_the_eu_isn_t_possible_in_two_years>
 Nick Clegg is a serious asset. Tory remainers still outnumber leavers in the 
Commons, but they’ve gone quiet, with a few laudable exceptions. They need to 
rediscover their voice – not least because, as our politics currently stands, 
it is the challenge from within that threatens May most.

Those MPs, of all parties, have a solemn responsibility. But it cannot fall on 
them alone. We the 48% have to speak for ourselves – and halt this march into 
madness.

• This article was amended on 11 October 2016. An earlier version said that 
“what Europe has enshrined in treaty is free movement of labour, not people”. 
The original treaties applied only to free movement of labour, but free 
movement of people was established by the Maastricht treaty.
 