
There are any number of ways to illustrate how race relations in Britain have 
changed over the past 40 years. The government can brandish social attitudes 
reports; the police can point to the changes in racially motivated crime. But 
the most revealing indicators can be those omitted from the history books.

The West Brom testimonial when black players took on a team of white players | 
Simon Burnton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/west-brom-len-cantello-testimonial-1979-white-black-players>
One such instance is the sporting fixture staged at the Hawthorns, home to 
West Bromwich Albion football club, on 16 May 1979. Len Cantello, a midfielder, 
was awarded a testimonial match, the traditional pat on the back for long 
service. But he devised a quirk to make his different: the teams would be 
racially based,black players against white 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/west-brom-len-cantello-testimonial-1979-white-black-players>
.

The contest itself, remembered in a BBC documentary 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b084fmgv> on Sunday, was exciting; the black 
team won 3-2 with a late goal. But the more remarkable thing, viewing it from 
this distance, is that the game was played at all, in peaceful and 
good-humoured enthusiasm at a time when racism was vicious, rife and open. 
A match of that kind, good-natured or not, would almost certainly not be played 
today, for it would offend the sensibilities even of those who never saw 
themselves as “politically correct”.

Such crass segregation, along with the racism of a time when 10,000 in a crowd 
could chant, without risk or qualm, “Nigger, nigger, lick my boots” at the West 
Bromwich legendCyrille Regis <http://cyrilleregis.com/>, are seen as relics of 
our past. Rightfully so. And we should feel good about that – good about how 
norms have changed, and how laws have played a critical role here.As Martin 
Luther King observed, <http://www.quotationspage.com/quote/30542.html> a law 
“can’t make a man love me, but it can stop him lynching me.”

But if a blacks v whites match provides a useful yardstick of societal 
progress, we should examine it carefully. Of course we know better than we did 
then but there are necessary caveats. What of the concern expressed by one 
former player,-turned-punditJason Roberts 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jason_Roberts_%28footballer%29>, who says some 
of the abuse black players would suffer in the terraces has simply migrated to 
the anonymity of social media – the Twitter terraces. “People are emboldened,” 
he says. “They are in their rooms, and it is easier to show their true 
feelings.”

Doubtless all footballers, and all figures in the public eye, suffer the 
slings of social media. But there is clearly an enduring phenomenon – a 
hair-trigger racism – that reveals itself when Twitter’s slingshot is loaded. 
When the subject of ire, or mundane irritation, is racialised, a bastard 
becomes a black bastard.

Social media didn’t create those attitudes, it merely facilitates them. It 
allows for the cyber-brutalisation of sports-people of colour, of black 
celebrities, writers, politicians. Of course we are more generally respectful 
of other races than we were then, even amid the post-referendum spike in racist 
incidents. Consider the 70s experience of the pioneering black soccer superstar
Laurie Cunningham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/feb/26/laurie-cunningham-dancing-footballer-richard-williams>
, who had the temerity to fall for Nicky Brown, a white English girl. She tells 
documentary makers how they were pilloried from all sides for racial betrayal. 
And now? According to the 2011 census, there are 2.3 million Britons in mixed 
relationships, up 35% in 10 years.

But discrimination works on many levels. A third of our professional 
footballers are black; yet Les Ferdinand,director of football for Queens Park 
Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/04/qpr-les-ferdinand-director-football-harry-redknapp-tim-sherwood-manager>
, is possibly the only black face in the boardroom of any of our professional 
football clubs. As forblack managers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/14/why-so-few-black-football-managers>
, there have been a few, but when each is fired – an occupational hazard – the 
entire breed comes close to being declared extinct.

Ferdinand says the failure of black players to progress to the manager’s 
office or the boardroom was identified to him by the football’s top brass as a 
matter of regret and a case for urgent treatment. That was 18 years ago.

‘We got off the coach and the National Front was there … People spat at us’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/25/west-brom-three-degrees-book-extract>
But you don’t have to be a footballer to relate to that experience. Talk to 
black doctors, lawyers, police officers, NHS managers, municipal employees, 
teachers, journalists; to those hunting for a job or a flat, or appearing 
before a court. All will say that no one throws bananas or chants abuse, but 
that somehow, in ways they can’t easily see and maybe don’t quite understand, 
they disproportionately suffer adverse outcomes.

In 1999 Sir William Macpherson 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Macpherson_%28judge%29>, passing 
judgment on the Met in the Stephen Lawrence inquiry, flagged this up as 
institutional racism. He even proffered a workable definition: “processes, 
attitudes and behaviour which amount to discrimination through unwitting 
prejudice, thoughtlessness and racist stereotyping which disadvantage minority 
ethnic people”. But this is challenging stuff. Too challenging perhaps. Much 
more difficult than legislating against racial attacks and rednecks who shout 
“nigger”, welcome though action against that is.

Macpherson didn’t get as much support for his assault on institutional racism 
as he would have liked, back then, and there is even less of it now. But he was 
right. And still it is the little acknowledged elephant in the room.

When players from that blacks v whites encounter were traced and reunited, a 
disparity quickly became apparent. The white players, who wore the club’s 
famous blue-and-white striped shirts, could hardly remember anything about the 
match itself; the black players, by contrast, could recall almost everything.

They had been assembled from seven clubs around the country. Some were stars 
(Laurie Cunningham, Cyrille Regis and Brendon Batson,West Brom’s so called 
“Three Degrees” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/25/west-brom-three-degrees-book-extract>
 – with a nod tothe popular US soul singers 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T6fVDAjs9f0> – were idolised locally as 
celebrities and recognised by black fans nationally as pioneers). Others were 
relative journeymen.

For them, it was never a grudge match. It was just an acknowledgement that 
they were different, and they knew that. Still, the result mattered to them. It 
was a chance to show those on the terraces and fellow players that they were 
worthy professionals. It was a rebuke to the myths: that black players couldn’t 
play in the cold, that they were exotic luxury items. They were keen to 
confront the sort of attitudes that endured even as late as 1991, whenRon Noades
 <http://www.azquotes.com/quote/1127664>, the then-chairman of Crystal Palace, 
said: “The black players at this club lend the side a lot of skill and flair, 
but you also need white players to balance things up and give the team some 
brains and common sense.”

Footballers have since made their case for parity a hundred-fold. In that 
respect, they are indeed pioneers. But 37 years on, the mindset on that day is 
one that thousands of black Britons, from all walks of life, will recognise. 
They cannot do otherwise. They carry it into work themselves every day.

• Whites v Blacks … How Football Changed the Nation will be shown on BBC2 at 
9pm on Sunday 27 November
 