
A slowdown in the UK’s already lacklustre productivity growth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/24/why-is-uks-productivity-still-behind-that-of-other-major-economies>
 has prompted fresh warnings that households will face a squeeze on living 
standards this year.

Jobs markets experts said employers will struggle to award pay rises that keep 
pace with mounting inflation unless the country can turn around its poor 
performance on productivity, a measure of what is produced per hour worked.

The Office for National Statistics said output per hour worked grew 0.4% 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/labourproductivity/articles/ukproductivityintroduction/julytosept2016#main-points>
 in the third quarter of 2016, after growing 0.5% in the second quarter.
Separate figures 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/labourproductivity/articles/regionalandsubregionalproductivityintheuk/jan2017>
 for 2015 confirmed huge regional disparities in productivity performance with
London far ahead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/15/economic-output-of-london-more-than-double-rest-of-uk>
 of other parts of the country.

Chief economist of Bank of England admits errors in Brexit forecasting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/05/chief-economist-of-bank-of-england-admits-errors>
Slow but steady growth has finally lifted productivity above its level before 
the 2008 financial crisis, but years of stagnation known as the “productivity 
puzzle” mean it still has much lost ground to make up. The ONS said the latest 
growth figures were weak by pre-crisis standards.


“Quarterly growth of 0.4% is below the 1994 to 2007 average, which even taken 
together with recent stronger quarters, provides little sign of an end to the 
UK’s ‘productivity puzzle,’” the ONS said in its latest productivity update.

Statisticians said that had pre-crisis trends continued, productivity growth 
would have been 18.4% higher than the latest figures.

The ONS’s deputy chief economist, Richard Heys, said: “These estimates of 
productivity show that while labour productivity is improving, particularly in 
the services sector, it is still weak compared to that experienced in the 
recent past, both in terms of the level of productivity and the rate of growth. 
ONS is continuing to explore potential reasons for this.”

New estimates from the ONS on regional productivity performance in 2015 
suggested that output per hour worked was around 32% above the UK average in 
London, but almost 20% below it in Wales and Northern Ireland.

The south-east recorded above average labour productivity, while the east of 
England and Scotland were slightly below the UK average. The north of England 
and Midlands ranged between 10% and 15% below the UK average.

The figures come as signs increase that the pound’s sharp fall since the 
Brexit vote will stoke inflation this year because it raises the costs of 
imports such as food ingredients and fuel.


Sluggish productivity growth will intensify the pressure on workers as they 
face rising living costs, said Ian Brinkley, the acting chief economist at the 
Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development, which represents people 
working in human resources.

“These are disappointing figures overall, with little sign that the persistent 
underperformance on productivity is coming to an end. Many organisations will 
be unable to offer higher wages as a result, meaning significant numbers of 
workers will feel poorer in 2017 if inflation continues to rise as 
anticipated,” he said.


John Philpott, the director of the Jobs Economist consultancy, said that 
taking the first three quarters of 2016 together the news on productivity was 
somewhat better, but not enough to protect living standards.

“Stable low productivity is far from what the economy needs, especially now 
that higher price inflation is eating into pay packets. UK workers need to see 
a much improved productivity performance if they are to enjoy a sustained 
improvement in real pay,” he said.

“This above all requires far stronger business investment in technology and 
skills and much improved management practices.”

Philpott pointed to a separate ONS report 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/labourproductivity/articles/experimentaldataonthemanagementpracticesofmanufacturingbusinessesingreatbritain/experimentalestimatesfor2015>
 on Friday that found evidence of a link between how well UK manufacturing 
businesses are managed and their productivity.

Brinkley at the CIPD said the government’s push to invest in improving 
productivity, announced by chancellor Philip Hammond at the autumn statement, 
must put greater focus on management and skills.

“The government’s productivity plan must correct a serious omission in the 
lack of significant new investment to support adult skills training and 
development if it is to address the underlying reasons for poor productivity 
growth,” he said.
 