
As Gerry Reilly moves from one of his 50-foot mushroom farm units to another, 
he constantly checks the currency tracker xe.com to see if the pound is still 
falling.

Since the Brexit vote in June and sterling’s plunge against the euro, the 
Irish mushroom industry has taken a hammering.

It has lost €7m (£6m) out of the average €120m that mushrooms generate for 
Irish <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> producers every year. Six 
farmers out of 60 have already gone out of business.

In between checking the exchange rates and picking up the snowy white 
mushrooms growing inside a bed of animal manure and thick black Irish peat, 
Reilly predicts that things will get worse before they get better for the 
industry.

“Don’t be surprised if you hear about another producer going out of business 
in the coming weeks. I’m hearing bad things in a few places across the 
country,” he says gloomily.

Reilly points out that 95% of all Irish mushrooms are sold to the British 
market with most of them ending up on the shelves ofTesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco>, Sainsbury’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/j-sainsbury>, Asda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/asda> and other UK supermarkets.

“Brexit has had a disastrous effect on the Irish mushroom industry. Britain 
and particularly England is our market, there is really no other. So if the 
pound falls and our revenue collapses then it will drive more of us out of the 
industry.”

He points to a punnet of the white, uniformly shaped mushrooms. “I think we 
captured the British market because the consumers on the other side of the 
Irish Sea like what we grow. It’s a bit like Irish beef –Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> has a reputation for its food being 
clean, green and fresh. The last thing we need is for uncertainty and 
devaluation of the pound endangering this massively successful product,” Reilly 
says.

Every day 50 tonnes of Irish mushrooms are shipped across the Irish Sea to the 
big supermarket chains in Britain. Reilly’s farm is set on four acres, seven 
miles beyond the town of Athlone on the edge of Ireland’s peat bog land in the 
Irish midlands. He employs 70 workers, all of whom are from Latvia, inside 16 
giant units.

Like all other producers across the Republic, Reilly’s mushrooms are sold via 
contracts renewed at the beginning of each year. When the contracts for this 
year were signed before Brexit it was at 72 pence to the euro. Post-Brexit they 
were trading at 90 pence to the euro.

“Our main worry would be that Polish farms might start to break into the 
British market,” say Reilly. “But we have an advantage on them because it’s 
going to take them two to three days to get their product acrossEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> to the UK. We can guarantee 
that these mushrooms are in British supermarkets tomorrow morning.”

Inside one of the cylinder-shaped mushroom production units, which are painted 
green to blend into the lush Irish countryside, Reilly makes a suggestion to 
help “create a bridge” for farmers under pressure.

“The government could do much more, and that means, for example, they reduce 
PRSI tax [national insurance] on employers like me and take our tax bill down 
to generate enough spare cash for mushroom farmers to survive this dip in 
revenue due to the pound,” he says.

The Irish state’s food agency admits that the weakness of sterling against the 
euro created by Brexit has posed significant challenges to the mushroom 
industry.

A spokesman for the Irish food board, Bord Bia, said: “While the industry has 
been proactive taking certain measures to negate some of the currency impact, 
increased returns from the marketplace are seen as crucial to underpin the 
production base in the current volatile currency environment.

“Since the June referendum result Bord Bia has listened to the concerns of 
food and drink exporters, and worked closely with them, focusing especially on 
those companies most exposed to the weakness of sterling.

“We have tailored supports around managing currency fluctuations and 
negotiating strategies in the short term and last week we launched a market 
intensification programme to support them with consumer research, new product 
development, participation at trade fairs and consumer events.

“In addition we are providing additional resources to deepen our market 
engagement in the UK and we are working with retailers through the current 
difficulties, demonstrating our loyalty to our customers who are keen to 
maintain business relationships.”

Toadstools shine like cat's eyes in the wood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/28/toadstools-cats-eye-woods-country-diary>
During the UK referendum campaign on Europe the remain side claimed that food 
prices would rise if the electorate opted for Brexit.Reilly believes that this 
will not only happen but will in the end be the salvation of the Irish mushroom 
industry.

“The first jobs that have gone won’t be replaced by Irish farms but taken by 
European markets because they are so big now it’s hard for another Irish farm 
to pick up the slack in order to fill the gap. My own business could be taken 
overnight if I am not careful.

“But I have been in mushroom farming since the 1980s. I work off one 
fundamental principle, I believe that the English will pay the higher price for 
the mushrooms, because these are the ones they want. The Irish product. Anyway, 
what’s the alternative? They still love the Irish mushroom … we hope,” Reilly 
adds.
 