
Low paid workers have been handed their biggest pay rise since the 1990s, 
after the introduction of the “national living wage” forced companies to pay 
workers aged 25 and over a minimum £7.20 an hour.

The bottom 10% of earners received a 4.4% increase in the year to April, while 
the boost for the bottom 5% of earners was even bigger at 6.2%, according to 
official data.

Low pay campaigners cheered the figures which also showed that the significant 
rise in low pay was most prominent among women and part-time workers, helping 
to close the gender pay gap at the bottom end of the pay scale.

The Resolution Foundation said the national living wage (NLW) had “well and 
truly made its mark on pay across Britain” and “contributed to a significant 
closing of the gender pay gap and a welcome fall in pay inequality”.

The thinktank said 2016 was the strongest year for pay in over five years but 
warned it may prove to be a high-water mark after recent rises in inflation and 
stagnant growth in average pay levels. “We may not see this level of growth 
again this parliament given the outlook for lower earnings growth and higher 
inflation in the wake of the Brexit vote,” it said.

The jump in pay for earners affected by the national living wage helped push 
Britons’ weekly earnings, once inflation is taken into account, up by 1.9% last 
year. Gross average earnings rose by 2.2% to £539 a week, from £527 in 2015, 
according to the Office for National Statistics.

It said the increase was due to a combination of earnings growth – boosted by 
the NLW 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/12/brexit-will-stunt-national-living-wage-growth-by-10p-an-hour>
– and a low level of inflation at that time. It also reflectsrises in the 
national minimum wage <https://www.gov.uk/national-minimum-wage-rates> for 
younger workers from last October.
Weekly earnings 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/oct/2016-10-26T10:10:27/embed.html>
The CBI business lobby group said the data confirmed a “picture of low but 
robust wage growth across the UK economy before the EU referendum”. Its 
director of people and skills, Neil Carberry, said: “It’s clear that the 
introduction of the national living wage has supported lower earners’ incomes, 
building on several years of higher-than-average increases in the old national 
minimum wage.”

He said the ONS figures showed a higher level of “non-compliance” than seen 
previously but said this was likely to be due to the survey being completed in 
the month that the national living wage was introduced.

The TUC said it was concerned that 362,000 people were paid below the minimum 
wage in the year to April – a 73% increase from the previous year. The ONS said 
the figure was not comparable with 2015 and also noted that there were legal 
exemptions, such as for employees who get accommodation as part of their pay 
package, which can be offset against their pay rate.

The TUC’s general secretary, Frances O’Grady, also said it was disappointing 
that the average gender pay gap was closing at a “snail’s pace”, as the pay gap 
between full-time male and female employees fell to 9.4% from 9.6% in 2015. 
This is the lowest since the survey began in 1997, although the gap has changed 
relatively little over the past six years, the ONS noted.

Gender pay gap graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/oct/2016-10-26T10:26:33/embed.html>
O’Grady, said: “We need a labour market that works better for women. This 
means helping mums get back into well-paid jobs after they have kids. And 
encouraging dads to take on more caring responsibilities. The government should 
also scrap tribunal fees, which stop women getting justice from bad employers 
who have discriminated against them.”


People working full-time in the private sector earned £517 a week on average, 
up 3.4%, while those in the public sector were paid £594, up 0.7% on the 
previous year.

Men working full-time in April earned an average of £578 per week, up 1.9% on 
the previous year, while women were paid £480, up 2.2%. The gap between men and 
women’s pay has remained relatively consistent from 1997 to 2016, at about 
£100, the ONS said.

At a regional level, London came top, at £671 per week for full-time workers. 
This compares with a UK average of £539 per week.
regional 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/oct/2016-10-26T10:10:58/embed.html>
In percentage growth, the regions with the biggest earnings growth in the past 
year were the West Midlands (up 3.7%), the north-west (up 3%) and Wales (up 
2.9%), while those with the slowest growth were the north-east (up 0.7%), the 
East Midlands (up 0.9%) and Scotland (up 1.5%).

The business minister, Margot James, said: “The government is determined to 
build an economy that works for all and it’s encouraging that earnings have 
grown over the last year, with the national living wage driving up the wages of 
the lowest paid.”

James said she was pleased the gender pay gap was closing but admitted there 
was “still more to be done to make sure women are treated equally”.
 