
Wall Street has rediscovered its appetite for Weight Watchers shares after the 
company’s most famous customer and investor,Oprah Winfrey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/oprah-winfrey>, revealed the results 
of her new diet.

Shares in Weight Watchers jumped by almost a fifth on Thursday following the 
news that the broadcasting titan had lost 18kg (40lb) by following the 
company’s latest guidance.

A new advertising campaign 
<http://www.eonline.com/news/817566/oprah-winfrey-lost-over-40-pounds-by-eating-tacos-and-pasta-see-her-weight-watchers-transformation>
 showed Winfrey urging viewers to “take the leap”, as she clinked wine glasses 
with friends over spaghetti and salad.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dd0PppmxtCdM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dd0PppmxtCdM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dd0PppmxtCdM&media=>
 Oprah’s new Weight Watchers adverts 
“Since I started Weight Watchers, I’ve lost over 40lb. I can honestly tell you 
I struggle no more,” declared Winfrey, who bought 10% of the company in October 
2015. “I’ve eaten everything I love, tacos, pasta. I’ve never felt deprived.”

In a second advert, Winfrey insists people can lose weight without giving up 
the foods they love. “Weight Watchers is easier than any other programme I’ve 
ever been on,” she says.

Investors lapped up the message and sent Weight Watchers shares soaring by 18% 
to $12.35, their biggest move in 10 months.

The ads are due to air on US television and social media from 26 December, a 
time when potential customers will be looking to burn off their Christmas 
calories.

Weight Watchers has suffered in recent years as consumers have moved away from 
diet programmes, in favour of healthier eating, calorie-counting apps and 
activity trackers such as FitBit.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Foprah-loses-40lbs-and-weight-watchers-shares-leap-20%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b5b5318ce69d45590eb68fcf9b9ae38270a7056%2F0_0_1220_469%2F1220.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Weight%20Watchers%20gains%2020%25%20as%20Oprah%20loses%2018kg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Foprah-loses-40lbs-and-weight-watchers-shares-leap-20%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Weight%20Watchers%20gains%2020%25%20as%20Oprah%20loses%2018kg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Foprah-loses-40lbs-and-weight-watchers-shares-leap-20%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b5b5318ce69d45590eb68fcf9b9ae38270a7056%2F0_0_1220_469%2F1220.jpg>
 Weight Watchers shares over the last two years Photograph: Thomson Reuters 
Shares hit a one-year low of below $10 in September after the chief executive, 
James Chambers, resigned. They soared to $26 after Winfrey bought her stake in 
the firm 14 months ago.

 