
For the people of Australia’s tropical north, a wary coexistence with 
crocodiles is a fact of life.

Protected for more than four decades after being hunted to near extinction, 
the ancient reptile – on the credible numbers that are available – has staged a 
remarkable recovery.

Rogue crocodiles: Indigenous councils want more power 'before a human life is 
taken'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/17/rogue-crocodiles-indigenous-councils-want-more-power-before-a-human-life-is-taken>
In the Northern Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/northern-territory> there are now 
as many as 100,000 saltwater crocodiles, up from just 3,000 in 1971. There are 
similar estimates in neighbouring Queensland but the true population will not 
be known until the first systematic government survey is completed over the 
next three to five years.

With that resurgence has come inevitable reminders that in natural settings 
people and crocodiles share, the former’s place at the top of the food chain 
can be an illusion.

Keith Saalfeld, a principal scientist with the NT environment and natural 
resources department, says it is worth noting that crocodiles, although deadly, 
are “one of the laziest animals on the planet”.

“Everything for them is about how much energy it costs to do something for 
what it gets in return,” he says.

It’s not uncommon to see one sitting on the banks of a river with its mouth 
open, “waiting literally for a fish to swim inside their mouth”.

“Crocs are a stalk-and-ambush predator … They don’t go chasing things like a 
cheetah. They hide and sneak up very carefully and wait and wait until whatever 
they’re after finally moves within their range of grab.”

Official figures record 29 known deaths across the Top End since hunting was 
outlawed: 21 in the NT since 1974 (including four in 2014) and eight in
Queensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> since 1985.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fwelcome-to-crocodile-country-the-remarkable-comeback-of-australias-jaws-of-the-north%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe70136504f9fee00fd083e36d6bf2c3b3bc061e6%2F0_141_2126_1276%2F2126.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Welcome%20to%20crocodile%20country%3A%20the%20remarkable%20comeback%20of%20Australia's%20Jaws%20of%20the%20north&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fwelcome-to-crocodile-country-the-remarkable-comeback-of-australias-jaws-of-the-north%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Welcome%20to%20crocodile%20country%3A%20the%20remarkable%20comeback%20of%20Australia%27s%20Jaws%20of%20the%20north&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fwelcome-to-crocodile-country-the-remarkable-comeback-of-australias-jaws-of-the-north%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe70136504f9fee00fd083e36d6bf2c3b3bc061e6%2F0_141_2126_1276%2F2126.jpg>
 A crocodile will sit on the banks of a river with its mouth open ‘waiting for 
a fish to swim inside its mouth’. Photograph: Shutterstock/Tim Ezzy 
The impact of fatal crocodile attacks arguably lies as much in their inherent 
horror as their frequency. Highly publicised coronial inquiries into two 
crocodile attacks in the NT last year heightened community fear.

Lanh Van Tran was taken by a 4.5-metre crocodile from the banks of the 
Adelaide river in front of his wife. Two months earlier, a 4.7-metre saltie 
latched on to the outstretched arm of Bill Scott, an experienced fisherman who 
had sought to steady himself after the creature had rocked his boat on a 
billabong.

Crocodiles, although deadly, are one of the laziest animals on the planet
Keith Saalfeld 
Until this year the last fatal attack in Queensland was in 2009 when 
five-year-old Jeremy Doble was taken by a crocodile in front of his older 
brother on the family property on the Daintree river in the state’s north.

Then last May, a tourist, Cindy Waldron, 46, was arm in arm with a friend on a 
moonlight walk through shallow water at Thornton beach, near the Daintree 
rainforest in north Queensland, when a crocodile struck.

Such cases invariably revive calls for protections to be scrapped in favour of 
the old lethal approach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/31/fatal-crocodile-attack-on-woman-in-queensland-revives-calls-to-allow-hunt>
. Culling and evensafari hunting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/24/greg-hunt-says-there-are-no-plans-to-approve-crocodile-hunting-safaris>
 will restore humans’ rightful place as apex predator amid an explosion in 
crocodiles, some argue.

Australian territory minister invites visit by Trump – crocodile insurance 
included
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/australian-territory-minister-invites-visit-from-trump-crocodile-insurance-included>
The NT and federal governments – the latter overseeing laws that protect 
crocodiles – tend to humour these calls and then reject them. They bow to 
expert advice from the likes of Saalfield, who says short of wiping out 
crocodiles entirely waterways could never be considered safe.

“What we currently believe is that a cull is not going to have a great deal of 
impact in terms of making us able to say it’s safe to go swimming in that 
particular area,” he says.


In Queensland, the state opposition flirted briefly with the idea of culling 
beforeruling it out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/21/liberal-national-party-at-odds-with-its-own-mps-over-queensland-crocodile-cull>
 – after being told to “grow a spine” by the environment minister. That was 
immediately afteropposition from the likes of Terri Irwin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/20/terri-irwin-urges-mps-to-rule-out-crocodile-cull-after-katter-suggests-shooting-safaris>
, wife of the late “Crocodile Hunter” Steve, whose famous handle belied his 
staunch support of the species’ protected status.

The most prominent calls for culling can often be traced to the same source. 
Bob Katter <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bob-katter>, the veteran 
independent federal MP from north Queensland, routinely makes a colourful case. 
Last month he accused Terri Irwin of being disconnected from the “world of 
reality”.

“I don’t care if she’s St Gabriel’s mother, we’re being eaten and ripped to 
pieces,” he said.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fwelcome-to-crocodile-country-the-remarkable-comeback-of-australias-jaws-of-the-north%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3f3e181d98274f7aec229c13210cab0ce13a619%2F217_70_2731_1639%2F2731.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Welcome%20to%20crocodile%20country%3A%20the%20remarkable%20comeback%20of%20Australia's%20Jaws%20of%20the%20north&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fwelcome-to-crocodile-country-the-remarkable-comeback-of-australias-jaws-of-the-north%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Welcome%20to%20crocodile%20country%3A%20the%20remarkable%20comeback%20of%20Australia%27s%20Jaws%20of%20the%20north&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fwelcome-to-crocodile-country-the-remarkable-comeback-of-australias-jaws-of-the-north%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3f3e181d98274f7aec229c13210cab0ce13a619%2F217_70_2731_1639%2F2731.jpg>
 Terri Irwin is vehemently opposed to culling crocodiles. Photograph: Matt 
Roberts/Getty Images 
Katter claimed Indigenous Australians had historically kept croc numbers in 
check by harvesting their eggs. “If you are a respected naturalist you would 
know that this was the territory of man, not the territory of crocodiles,” he 
said.

In the closing months of 2016, the Queensland environment department began 
investigating three cases of people in the north reportedlytrying to illegally 
catch crocodiles by baited fishing lines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/22/life-threatening-attempts-to-catch-crocodiles-with-fishing-lines-reported>
.

The environment minister, Steven Miles, slammed the reported behaviour as 
“frankly unbelievable” and “seriously life-risking”.

One of the alleged cases involved someone seemingly trying to bolster their 
social media presence”.

Calls for crocodiles to be killed are notably absent among families of recent 
victims. In a powerful message at a public meeting in Port Douglas last month, 
Steve Doble invoked the deaths of his son and of Waldron to argue against 
crocodile culls.

“I would like everyone to respect the fact that we lost loved ones because of 
a mistake made by human beings,” he said. “Stop always looking at the wildlife 
and saying it’s their fault. We are land-based creatures. If we don’t go in 
their water it won’t happen.”

The family of Waldron had the same attitude after of her death, says Julia 
Leu, the mayor of Douglas shire council.

“It was dreadful and we really felt for them,” she says. “And even they 
weren’t calling for any culls. They just acknowledge it was just a really sad 
event and a lack of judgment.”

Woman shoos away crocodile in Northern Territory as rangers call for safety 
measures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/03/woman-uses-thong-to-scare-off-stalking-crocodile-in-northern-territory>
It is understood Waldron was warned three times about a crocodile that had 
been shadowing a tour boat off the beach on the morning of her death.

It was the third recorded death in the Daintree region, more than anywhere 
else in Queensland in living memory. And yet the idea of “people swanning in 
paying $30,000 just to knock off a few crocs” was equally horrifying to locals, 
Leu says.

“We acknowledge the fact we live in crocodile habitat,” she says. “There are 
classic do’s and don’ts. No one in their right mind would swim in the Daintree 
river. You certainly wouldn’t go dipping late at night in any sort of murky 
waters. For a long time, any parent with children has been very, very wary.”

Still, more can be done to improve safety, with more signs and brochures to 
warn tourists in particular, Leu says. Anecdotal evidence is that more crocs 
are cropping up in places they haven’t been seen before, including popular 
beaches. “We don’t know the reasons,” she says. “Is it hotter? Is it because of 
a change in climate?”

Crocs that pose a danger should be promptly removed, says Leu, which is not 
always the case when environment department officials are responding from more 
than 100km away in Cairns.

Douglas shire council wants the state government to allow trained Indigenous 
rangers and other locals in remote areas to share that responsibility.

The local council also wants to trial “hazing”. It sounds like a school 
bullying ritual, but is the term for strategic harassment of crocs to 
discourage them from haunting populated areas. This could include the use of 
rubber bullets to stun them.

But there is little public appetite in “croc country” for the lethal approach, 
if a Queensland government survey 
<https://www.ehp.qld.gov.au/wildlife/livingwith/pdf/crocodile-management-consultation.pdf>
 serves as a guide.

Fewer than 14% of residents believe treating crocodiles as dangerous animals 
was the key to managing them, and only 3% called for culling, hunting or 
harvesting.

More than a quarter of north Queenslanders supported conserving and protecting 
crocodiles, and most (52%) wanted an approach that balanced human safety and 
crocodile conservation.

The survey concluded that “many in the community would prefer to see all or 
most crocodiles left alone, with public safety being achieved through community 
education to support safe behaviours”.

Authorities in the NT maintain a mosaic of control measures, educational 
campaigns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2015/jun/26/be-crocwise-crocodile-northern-territory-rap-cartoon-safety-video>
 – including specifically for Indigenous communities – and dedicated spotlight 
surveys and monitoring. Traps are set across waterways and Kakadu national park.

In high population areas such as greater Darwin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/darwin>, any reported crocodile is 
considered a problem and rangers attempt to catch and remove it. The animal 
goes straight to a crocodile farm where it may end up as meat, a breeder or an 
accessory.

More than 300 are taken from Darwin Harbour each year and a further 1,200 live 
animals are taken by licensed harvesters annually.

“In that regard, there is actually what you could describe as a targeted 
culling process already happening,” Saalfield says.

Egg harvesting has less of an impact on the population than expected, as more 
than 80% of eggs don’t survive to hatch owing to poor nesting.

Licensed harvesters are allowed to take up to 90,000 eggs from the wild each 
year. It’s a hairy job that often involves one person with a long stick finding 
and distracting the mother while a second person snatches the eggs.

NT crocodile farms supply skins to some of the world’s most sought-after 
high-end brands. Since repopulation is no longer a goal, the growth of the $25m 
industry is now a key driver of crocodile conservation.

It and the tourism value are significant boosts to jobs and the economy in the 
NT, particularly for its Indigenous communities, hundreds of whom are on 
crocodile-inhabited country and waterways.

In the NT, numbers approach the pre-hunting era estimates of up to 140,000, 
where Saalfield expects they will plateau. “That’s what the habitat will 
support,” Saalfield says. “The limit on the size is the available nesting 
habitat, and we’ve got reasonable info that all the available nesting habitat 
is being used.”

This probably also applies across the Top End. No longer endangered but still 
protected, for crocodiles it is now habitat and not human hunters that will 
determine their ultimate numbers.
 