
For obvious reasons, the small hours of last Wednesday turned out to be an 
excellent time to bury bad news. Even so, I was pleased to be awake for a tweet 
emanating from the trade minister Greg Hands,in which he announced 
<https://twitter.com/GregHands/status/796235375509381121>: “In Qatar to open 
our #SportIsGreat conference, supporting Qatar’s 2022 World Cup & offering UK 
to be the partner of choice for delivery.”

Qatar World Cup 2022: Amnesty hits out at UK silence on human rights
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/09/qatar-world-cup-2022-amnesty-hits-out-at-uk-silence-on-human-rights-during-visit-greg-hands>
Ah, so that’s what we’re doing now. Closer inspection reveals that Greg wrote 
an obsequiouscomment piece for the Peninsula 
<https://twitter.com/GregHands/status/796228968714276864>, the Qatari 
English-language daily, in which he widened his focus to include all the 437 
major athletic events to which the … sport-mad, is it? … autocracy has now 
acquired hosting rights. “This is an exciting time for Qatar’s [sporting] 
vision,” he euphemised bravely, “and the UK has the opportunity to be a 
strategic partner to ensure all these events are as successful as possible for 
spectators, competitors and organisers alike. As the UK’s international trade 
secretary, Dr Liam Fox, said on his recent visit to Doha – the UK is open for 
business like never before and nowhere is that more true than with Qatar.”

Nowhere? Well, you can see why the Trump team feel mugged off. Maybe 
democratically elected governments are, to quote a phrase, at the “back of the 
queue”. There is, of course, a rich precedent for this. In the arms sector, 
Britain has long operated an autocracies-first policy, with almost half our 
exports last year going to21 of the Foreign Office’s 30 “human rights priority 
countries” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/28/uk-weapons-sold-countries-poor-human-rights-saudi-arabia>
 – places where “the worst, or greatest number of, human rights violations take 
place”. So if we can live with that, I think we can make our peace with being 
the ethically challenged butler for the globally popular idea that isthe Qatar 
World Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-2022>.

Even so, good to have it made crystal clear. Whatever the exact position of 
Qatar in the queue of countries with whom the charmless, overpromoted GP Dr Fox 
is attempting to ingratiate himself, the sport angle feels like it is evolving. 
Thus far, our chief contribution to the sporting revolution in Qatar has been 
to gift the nation Richard Keys, who now functions as a sort ofLord Haw-Haw for 
the country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/jun/04/richard-keys-world-cup-2022-qatar>
, in between presenting Premier League coverage for a local sports channel with 
his fellow feminazi Andy Gray.

But now, in a clear escalation, the UK has marked itself out as keen to assist 
in Qatar’s creepy project to launder its reputation via the medium of sport. 
Because as almost everyone can see, that’s what’s going on here. There are 
seven-year-old London‑based Manchester City fans who have been sport-mad longer 
than Qatar. This is a country that is having to build a whole new $45bn city 
around one 2022 stadium just to stop it looking like turbo-capitalist mirage 
shimmering out of the desert. Lusail will eventually be a metropolis big enough 
for 450,000 people – which is nearly 200,000 more than the number of citizens of
Qatar <https://www.theguardian.com/world/qatar>. Think of it as Field of 
Screams: if indentured labourers build it, they will come.

Maybe this was what Greg was on about in his big speech to open the Sport is 
Great event. (Incidentally, has there ever been a more phoned-in name for 
something than Sport is Great? It makesRoss Kemp: Middle East 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Ross-Kemp-Middle-East-DVD/dp/B0035FYNNC> look long on 
detail.) “Relations between Qatar and the UK have grown ever stronger over our 
two countries’ rich histories,” Greg declared. “In the field of sports in 
particular, which is integral to both nations’ societies, our cooperation is 
creating a lasting, positive impact.”

Infantino’s jetsetting contrasts grimly with migrant worker’s Fifa case | 
Marina Hyde
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/12/gianni-infantino-migrant-worker-fifa-world-cup-2022-qatar>
Dude, you probably need to tell everyone from the FA to all British football 
fans that. I don’t know if the trade department is watching the sporting news 
of the past six years on a box set, but I have a spoiler for them: the idea of 
the QatarWorld Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> 
has not been generally greeted positively, either by fans or corruption 
investigators.

As for other forms of “lasting, positive impact”, it seems others failed to 
get the memo too. In the wake of Greg’s visit, both Amnesty and Human Rights 
Watch issuedslightly incredulous statements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/09/qatar-world-cup-2022-amnesty-hits-out-at-uk-silence-on-human-rights-during-visit-greg-hands>
 condemning the minister for apparently failing even to raise the abuses
suffered by indentured migrant labourers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/31/migrant-workers-suffer-appalling-treatment-in-qatar-world-cup-stadiums-says-amnesty>
 building the infrastructure for Qatar 2022. As Human Rights Watch put it: 
“It’s understandable that the UK government wants to ensure British companies 
get as many construction and engineering contracts as possible, but Greg Hands 
should be mindful of the fact that Qatar’s construction market poses serious 
legal and reputational risks to UK firms on account of the Qatari government’s 
stubborn refusal to meaningfully reform its labour system or investigate an 
alarming pattern of unexplained migrant worker deaths.”

Mmm. On the plus side, Greg did take the Premier League trophy with him, the 
mere sight of which is proven to make bad stuff stop happening. Let’s just 
chalk this up as another episode in which sport is just an instrument of 
realpolitik, and humanity ends up the winner.
 