
With its elegant late Victorian red brick terraced houses and a fleet of Range 
Rovers, Porsches and BMWs parked outside, Studdridge Street is the epitome of 
leafy west London affluence. A house in this road sold for more than £3.6m four 
months ago, which makes it one of the priciest streets in the borough of 
Hammersmith and Fulham. This is the heart of well-heeled Sloane Ranger 
territory, and a stone’s throw away is the Hurlingham Club, one of Britain’s 
most exclusive private members’ clubs famous for its croquet lawns and glitzy 
balls.

So, all in all, it’s probably not the sort of place you would expect to find a 
food bank. Yet here we are at ChristChurch Fulham on Studdridge Street, Parsons 
Green, and thefood bank <http://hammersmithfulham.foodbank.org.uk> that sets up 
its stall in a room here every Tuesday morning and Friday afternoon seems to be 
doing brisk business (though this is apparently nothing compared with how busy 
it was before Christmas).

However, while there are certainly plenty of takers for the tinned food and 
dried goods being handed out by volunteers – plus a hot drink, slice of cake 
and a chat for those who want it – arguably the person most rushed off his feet 
is the chap sitting behind a desk in a screened-off corner of the room. This is 
Kiril Moskovchuk, a Citizens Advice adviser who is specifically funded by the 
local council to provide financial help and debt advice to users of this food 
bank.

As the morning goes on a steady stream of people enter Moskovchuk’s “office” 
for a chat. It might be about the fact their benefit payments have been delayed 
or stopped altogether, or whether they’re claiming the correct benefits. Or it 
may be a problem with their housing or, if it is a debt issue, how they can 
negotiate with their creditors.

One of those seeking help is Paul, 61, who has been coming here for several 
months for help with a complex set of problems relating to his housing and the 
local social services department. He shares a council flat with his disabled 
ex-partner and two children, one of whom is also registered disabled.

Everyone’s here for the same reason – we’ve all got money problems. It helps 
to speak to someone in that mindset
Jennifer Vallance 
Paul says it has been “fantastic” to be able to speak to someone at the food 
bank about his problems, and adds that while there are still a few hurdles 
ahead of him his situation is “a million times better than it was before”. He 
says: “Looking at what [Moskovchuk] has to do, they could do with having about 
four people here – and he could do with a secretary.”

Another food bank client full of praise for the financial help service is 
mother-of-four Jennifer Vallance, 34, who had a challenging Christmas because 
she’s had to wait several weeks for her first payment under the new universal 
credit regime (see below). “It’s good to have someone professional that can 
help – the ladies here only know so much [about money and finance].”

Food banks have become a lifeline for many, but where is the way out? | 
Patrick Butler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/21/food-banks-a-lifeline-replacing-mainstream-services>
She says that seeking help about an issue such as benefits can sometimes 
involve a lot of queueing and waiting. “Here you can come in and you’re made to 
feel at ease and relaxed. Everyone’s here for the same reason – we’ve all got 
money problems. It helps to be able to speak to someone in that mindset and 
environment.”

Bolting money advice on to an emergency food provision service might seem like 
an odd concept, but it’s an approach that is helping to turn lives around. The 
Hammersmith and Fulham food bank is one of eight thattook part in a pilot scheme
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/aug/12/trussell-trust-finance-debt-advice-food-banks-martin-lewis>
 last year to test the idea of allowing those who are going hungry to connect 
with free financial and debt advice “at the point of crisis”.

The pilot was launched by the Trussell Trust <http://www.trusselltrust.org>, a 
Christian charity that operates 420 food banks around the UK, and was 
predominantly funded by a £100,000 donation from Martin Lewis, the personal 
finance journalist who set up theMoneySavingExpert website 
<http://www.moneysavingexpert.com/> (see below).

We call it ‘money help’. In some places it won’t be financial advice – it will 
be budgeting skills.
David McAuley, Trussell Trust 
The eight food banks partnered with debt and money management charities on the 
scheme, which has been judged a big success.

After seeing the pilot results Lewis decided to donate a further £500,000, 
which will allow the Trussell Trust to roll out the financial advice programme 
to 40 food banks across the UK. The hope is that all of them will be up and 
running by July, and that 4,000 food bank users will receive some form of 
financial help and support via the scheme this year, rising to 7,500 in 2017.

David McAuley, chief executive of the Trussell Trust, says the pilot provided 
vital help to some of its most vulnerable clients. “People struggling with 
housing payments, redundancy or illness while on a low income were helped by 
advisers to have the confidence to tackle their finances and turn their lives 
around.”

At one of the food banks, after two months 90% of the clients receiving advice 
had either resolved their issues or were close to doing so.

As well as helping with problems relating to benefit payments and housing, the 
advisers assisted people with managing their money and dealing with their 
debts. In the future a variety of types of assistance will be offered. McAuley 
says: “We’re calling it ‘money help’. In some places it won’t be financial 
advice – it will be budgeting skills.” That might mean showing people how to 
use switching websites, as some of those in financial difficulty are on 
particularly poor-value energy and mobile phone tariffs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Ffinancial-advice-food-bank-struggling-people-guidance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37334314020d25f543d942a05ad74e0b487ce759%2F0_0_4368_2622%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Welcome%20to%20the%20bank%20where%20financial%20advice%20is%20free%20%E2%80%93%20it%E2%80%99s%20a%20food%20bank&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Ffinancial-advice-food-bank-struggling-people-guidance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Welcome%20to%20the%20bank%20where%20financial%20advice%20is%20free%20%E2%80%93%20it%E2%80%99s%20a%20food%20bank&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Ffinancial-advice-food-bank-struggling-people-guidance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37334314020d25f543d942a05ad74e0b487ce759%2F0_0_4368_2622%2F4368.jpg>
 In 2014-15 the Trussell Trust gave away enough food to feed more than a 
million people 
One of the benefits of this way of providing financial help is that it means 
those in the greatest need are able to see someone instantly and at the same 
location each time, instead of having to travel and then perhaps wait weeks for 
a face-to-face appointment. People see the service as part of the food bank and 
are more open to disclosing all the information the adviser will need.

The ultimate idea is that by dealing with underlying financial issues you will 
reduce the number of people needing an emergency food handout. And the latest 
statistics are fairly shocking: in 2014-15 Trussell Trust food banks 
distributed enough food to feed 1,084,604 people (including 397,997 children) 
for three days, though some of these clients will have received more than one 
handout during the 12-month period.

Back at the Studdridge Street food bank, Kiril says the three main topics that 
people talk to him about are benefits, debt and housing. He has been here twice 
a week since June 2015 – he also does a weekly session at St Simon’s church in 
Shepherds Bush when the food bank is there on Thursday afternoons – and in some 
respects is almost a victim of the scheme’s success – he admits he “could do 
with some help”, while Daphine Aikens, the manager of the food bank, says: “We 
are seeking funding for a second person because Kiril’s so busy. We desperately 
need another person – a debt specialist.”

The idea is that by dealing with underlying financial issues you will reduce 
the number of people needing a food handout

The constant flow of people coming in and out of this dingy but welcoming room 
testifies to the fact that this is a much needed and well used resource, but 
there is something undeniably odd about having a food bank slap bang in the 
middle of a “millionaire’s row”. I can’t help wondering what the neighbours 
must think. Instead I ask one of those who has come here for help about the 
fact that this appears to be a very wealthy area. “It is – you kind of feel 
you’ve got to put your head down when you walk out of here,” she says quietly. 
Like many of the clients she has travelled from one of the less affluent parts 
of the borough.

Of course, London is a place where extreme wealth is often cheek by jowl with 
extreme poverty. In terms of its housing market Hammersmith and Fulham is one 
of London’s more expensive boroughs: the average property price here is nudging 
£800,000, according to the most recentLand Registry 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/land-registry> data. And while 
this neighbourhood is replete with pricey delis, trendy boutiques and organic 
coffee shops, deprivation levels in Hammersmith and Fulham are officially 
“higher than average”, with almost 7,600 children living in poverty, according 
to aPublic Health England document 
<http://www.apho.org.uk/resource/item.aspx?RID=171832> published in June 2015. 
But it’s not just kids: in 2015 this borough wasofficially ranked the 17th most 
deprived district 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/465791/English_Indices_of_Deprivation_2015_-_Statistical_Release.pdf>
 in England (out of 300-plus) when it comes to income deprivation among older 
people.

Paul is in no doubt about the value that this financial assistance service 
offers: “It’s definitely a help – one million per cent. It’s like you’re 
running around inside this tin can trying to find the door. Kiril’s the chap 
who opens the door and tells you which way to go.”

Forced into debt by universal credit delays
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Ffinancial-advice-food-bank-struggling-people-guidance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5865e1ed4768bd9c1024c1a3ceb5ed6672327c7a%2F10_527_3946_2368%2F3946.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Welcome%20to%20the%20bank%20where%20financial%20advice%20is%20free%20%E2%80%93%20it%E2%80%99s%20a%20food%20bank&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Ffinancial-advice-food-bank-struggling-people-guidance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Welcome%20to%20the%20bank%20where%20financial%20advice%20is%20free%20%E2%80%93%20it%E2%80%99s%20a%20food%20bank&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Ffinancial-advice-food-bank-struggling-people-guidance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5865e1ed4768bd9c1024c1a3ceb5ed6672327c7a%2F10_527_3946_2368%2F3946.jpg>
 Jennifer Vallance says all her benefits were stopped as of 19 December 
A report published in November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/18/flaws-universal-credit-system-vulnerable-people-penniless-citizens-advice-study>
 warned that flaws in theuniversal credit 
<https://www.gov.uk/universal-credit/overview> benefit system that is being 
rolled out are leaving vulnerable people in debt and dependent on food banks. 
Jennifer Vallance could have been a case study, as that is exactly what has 
happened to her.

The 34-year-old, who lives with her partner and four children in a two-bedroom 
flat, has been a regular visitor to the Hammersmith and Fulham food bank over 
the past few weeks after the switch to universal credit left them high and dry 
financially. As well as food she has received clothes, hot water bottles and 
hand warmers.“I’ve had to borrow from people in the past few weeks. I also had 
to put my mobile phone into a Cash Converters-type shop.” Christmas, she says, 
was tough: “Thank God for the pound shops and Primark!”

Universal credit rolls six benefits and tax credits (including housing 
benefit, the child and working tax credit, and income-based jobseeker’s 
allowance) into one monthly payment. Vallance appears to be a victim of what 
the November report, issued by a group of Citizens Advice offices, said was a 
built-in delay which requires claimants to wait 42 days or more before 
receiving a payment.

“When you apply for universal credit they stop everything. I made the claim on 
7 December and as of 19 December everything was stopped,” Vallance says, who 
spoke to Guardian Money 48 hours before her first payment was due.

Christmas was tough. Thank God for the pound shops and Primark!

Vallance lives about two miles from the food bank. She worked for a time as a 
chef at the Victoria and Albert Museum, and also at other locations including a 
restaurant in Shepherd’s Bush, and is a certified barista. However, she says 
she has been “forced out of work”. “My partner isn’t well enough to work,” she 
adds. Asked to describe her current financial circumstances, she replies: 
“Below poverty.”

Vallance says that on one of her earlier visits to the food bank she was 
advised to see the in-house Citizens Advice adviser.

“He was brilliant, he was really helpful – though in my case I was already 
getting the help that he could offer.” She firmly supports the idea of having 
someone in the food bank who can assist with financial, debt and benefit 
problems: “You definitely need someone here. It would be good to have a woman 
[as well] – if I brought my mum here I’m not sure whether she would talk to a 
man.”

Vallance says she is taking things one day at a time. “If the past couple of 
weeks have shown me anything, it’s to not think ahead because it can all come 
crashing down.”

The man helping to fund the scheme
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Ffinancial-advice-food-bank-struggling-people-guidance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F713843618caf1db2ea4d325a7a2f8d169a20cd2b%2F36_121_4077_2447%2F4077.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Welcome%20to%20the%20bank%20where%20financial%20advice%20is%20free%20%E2%80%93%20it%E2%80%99s%20a%20food%20bank&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Ffinancial-advice-food-bank-struggling-people-guidance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Welcome%20to%20the%20bank%20where%20financial%20advice%20is%20free%20%E2%80%93%20it%E2%80%99s%20a%20food%20bank&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Ffinancial-advice-food-bank-struggling-people-guidance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F713843618caf1db2ea4d325a7a2f8d169a20cd2b%2F36_121_4077_2447%2F4077.jpg>
 Martin Lewis has donated £600,000 to the food bank scheme 
He has donated millions to charity since selling his MoneySavingExpert website 
to Moneysupermarket.com in 2012. But Martin Lewis says that in some ways the 
donation he is “most unhappy” about is the £600,000 he has given to food bank 
charity the Trussell Trust.

Food bank opens for young people hit by benefit sanctions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/10/food-bank-opens-young-people-benefit-sanctions-liverpool>
“It is of course a disgrace in our society that so many people have to go to 
food banks. But it’s an even bigger disgrace if they have to go twice,” says 
Lewis, who originally gave the charity £100,000 to fund a pilot scheme to test 
the idea of providing financial help to food bank clients, and has donated a 
further £500,000 to finance a wider rollout. “We shouldn’t have food banks in 
our society – or not to the extent we do. You have to question where the divide 
between the third sector and the state should be.”

The scheme is aimed at addressing some of the underlying causes of food 
poverty by helping people manage their finances and household budgets, avoid 
payday lenders and structure their debt in order to prevent their situation 
from getting worse and to help them break out of this crisis.

Lewis says those who go to food banks are already open to asking for help, 
“which means they’re open to help on other things”. The theory is that if debt 
experts are able to intervene and help get people’s financial lives back on 
track, this will cut the number of return visits. On average, people come to a 
Trussell Trust food bank 1.7 times a year; the charity is trying to reduce that 
to 1.3 or 1.2.

Money affects every element of your life. It doesn’t make you happy, but money 
problems certainly make you sad
Martin Lewis 
“Money affects every element of your life,” says Lewis. “It doesn’t make you 
happy, but money problems certainly make you sad and cause stress.”

He, of course, made a great deal of money when he sold his website in June 
2012 for £60m in cash and shares. Last October he received a further £19.2m 
that had been dependent on targets being met. At the time of the sale Lewis 
announced a £10m charity fund, with £1m immediately going to Citizens Advice. 
But last November he revealed that while individual charities and the fund had 
so far received £11m, there was “a lot more left” as a chunk of the original 
donation was in Moneysupermarket shares, which shot up.

So how would he feel about being described as a philanthropist? “That’s not 
something you ever call yourself – it’s something other people call you. I 
wouldn’t make the claim myself.”

And his next big project? Setting up a “mental health and debt policy 
institute” that would be charged with coming up with innovative solutions for 
the prevention (rather than cure) of mental health issues causing debt 
problems, and vice versa.

Food for thought – facts and figures

• Food banks typically provide a minimum of three days’ supply of tinned and 
dried foods that have been donated by the local community.

• What’s in a food parcel? Typically it includes cereal, soup, pasta, rice, 
pasta sauce, beans, tinned meat, tinned vegetables, tea/coffee, sugar and 
biscuits, says theTrussell Trust <https://www.trusselltrust.org>, the charity 
that operates the UK’s biggest food bank network. So no fresh fruit and veg, 
and some people might be concerned about the amount of added sugar and salt. 
However, some food banks are able to provide fresh food.

To accept food banks as part of the solution … is to ignore the reasons why 
people are hungry
Fabian Commission on Food and Poverty 
• If you are organising a collection for your local food bank, check first to 
see which items it wants. For example, the Hammersmith and Fulham food bank has 
put a call-out for items including long-life juice, long-life milk and tinned 
rice pudding, but currently has a “plentiful supply” of baked beans, tinned 
tomatoes and tea bags.

• Some food banks distribute other items such as toilet rolls and hot water 
bottles. Many are becoming more like community hubs, providing emergency food 
and support. Often they offer hot drinks or meals, plus the opportunity to have 
a chat with a volunteer. The Trussell Trust has trained some of its food banks 
to run basic cookery, nutrition and budget management courses. And last 
October, work and pensions secretary Iain Duncan Smith announced that as part 
of a trial,job advisers were being posted in a food bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/28/food-banks-job-benefits-advisers-iain-duncan-smith>
 and were giving advice on claiming benefits and finding work.

• The three main reasons people are referred to food banks are said to be 1) 
benefit delays, 2) low income, and 3) benefit changes.

• Everyone who comes to a food bank is referred by a frontline professional or 
agency, says the trust. “Care professionals such as doctors, health visitors, 
schools and social workers identify people in crisis and issue them with a food 
bank voucher. This entitles them to receive a food bank parcel.”

• Last October, a report from the Fabian Commission on Food and Poverty 
<http://www.fabians.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/Hungry-for-Change-web-27.10.pdf>
 recommended that rather than expand the role of food banks, government policy 
should be directed at phasing them out by 2020. It said charitable food 
provision was only able to address the need for food during a crisis, not the 
origins of that crisis, adding: “Those working in food banks are responding to 
a need from hungry people. But to accept food banks as part of the solution … 
is to ignore the reasons why people are hungry. The aim should be a reduction 
in acute household food insecurity to the extent that food banks cease to 
exist. It should be possible to do this by 2020.”

Between 35% and 45% of people coming to food banks report that the reason … is 
to do with changes to the benefit system
Justin Welby 
• Alternatively, could the UK go the way of America when it comes to food bank 
take-up? In the US, theFeeding America <http://www.feedingamerica.org> 
organisation is a nationwide network of 200 food banks and 60,000 “food 
pantries” (the local distribution arms) and meal programmes which provides food 
and help to more than 46 million people each year, including 12 million 
children and seven million older people. Feeding America provides more than 3bn 
meals to families facing hunger each year. Meanwhile, more than 850,000 
Canadians use a food bank each month, according toFood Banks Canada 
<https://www.foodbankscanada.ca>.

• A Conservative minister, Lord Prior of Brampton, came under fire last 
Novemberwhen he said in parliament 
<https://hansard.digiminster.com/lords/2015-11-26/debates/15112628000541/NHSFoodBanks>
 that it was “a paradox that we have this issue with food banks at a time when 
obesity is one of the biggest threats to the future. It is a strange situation 
around the world when we have both a problem of obesity and an issue of 
nutrition”. In reply, the Archbishop of Canterbury, Justin Welby, appeared to 
criticise the minister’s claims, saying: “Our experience in the Church of 
England, which is involved in the vast majority of food banks across the 
country, is that between 35% and 45% of people coming to get support from food 
banks report that the reason for running out of food is to do with changes to 
the benefit system and sanctions.”
 