
TILBURY, TUESDAY.
What were they thinking, these 492 men from Jamaica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/jamaica> and Trinidad, as the Empire 
Windrush slid upstream with the flood between the closing shores of Kent and 
Essex?

Standing by the rail this morning, high above the landing-stage at Tilbury, 
one of them looked over the unlovely town to the grey-green fields beyond and 
said, “If this is England I like it.” A good omen, perhaps. May he and his 
friends suffer no sharp disappointment.


It was curiously touching to walk along the landing-stage in the grey light of 
early morning and see against the white walls of the ship row upon row of dark, 
pensive faces looking down upon England, most of them for the first time. Had 
they thought England a golden land in a golden age? Some had, with their quaint 
amalgam of American optimism and African innocence. But these had already been 
partially disillusioned by Flight Lieutenant J. H. Smythe, a native of Sierra 
Leone and now a member of the Colonial Office Welfare Department. He travelled 
with them from the West Indies and towards the end had given them a little 
homily.


“I could not honestly paint you,” he said to them, “a very rosy picture of 
your future in Britain.” That was straightforward. Conditions were not so 
favourable as they thought. They would see the scars of war wounds that are 
still bleeding. Were they highly skilled? No – then it would not be easy to 
find a job.


“On the other hand,” he went on, “if you are a serious-minded person and 
prepared to work hard in any vocation, you can make your way. It is left to you 
to win the respect of all those you come across and do your utmost to succeed 
in whatever sphere you may be placed.”


There was no band, certainly, to greet the immigrants at Tilbury, but it was a 
welcome, and, for officialdom, a warm welcome. The men seemed encouraged by it.


Mr. Isaacs said in the House recently, “I consider that those who organised 
the movement of these people to this country did them a disservice in not 
letting us know.” However, one could discover no evidence of “organisation.” 
They had seen the advertisement of the shipping company in their local papers – 
a thousands berths on the troop-decks vacant, £28 each – found the money, and 
in due time embarked with high hopes.


What manner of men are these the Empire Windrush has brought to Britain? This 
morning, on the decks, one spoke with the following: a builder, a carpenter, an 
apprentice accountant, a farm worker, a tailor, a welder, a spray-painter, a 
boxer, a musician, a mechanic, a valet, a calypso singer, and a law student. Or 
thus they described themselves.


And what has made them leave Jamaica? In most cases, lack of work. They spoke 
independently, but unanimously, of a blight that has come upon the West Indies 
since those who served America and Britain during the war returned home. The 
cost of living is high, wages are low. Many can earn no wages. Some had been 
unemployed for two years. One of them considered his chances in Britain (he is 
a builder), and said laconically, “If I survive – so good; if I don’t survive – 
so good.” Another, lacking this philosophy, said with a bitterness unusual in 
the company, “When the situation is desperate you take a chance – you don’t 
wait until you die.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fimmigration-windrush-west-indians-jamaica-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5d435011f972c83301e50920cb0ae0d4c40ea00%2F0_49_3577_2148%2F3577.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=West%20Indians%20arrive%20in%20Britain%20on%20board%20the%20Windrush%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%2023%20June%201948&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fimmigration-windrush-west-indians-jamaica-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=West%20Indians%20arrive%20in%20Britain%20on%20board%20the%20Windrush%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%2023%20June%201948&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fimmigration-windrush-west-indians-jamaica-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5d435011f972c83301e50920cb0ae0d4c40ea00%2F0_49_3577_2148%2F3577.jpg>
 Newly arrived Jamaican immigrants on board the Empire Windrush at Tilbury, 22 
June 1948. Photograph: Douglas Miller/Getty Images 
“WE ARE BRITISH SUBJECTS”
Most of the married men have left their wives and children at home, and hope 
to send for them later. Only five complete families sailed. Two of the wives 
are Englishwomen who followed their husbands to Jamaica and now return with 
them to England. Mrs. Doreen Zayne, formerly, and soon to be once more, of 
Blackpool, confessed that she did not care for Jamaica and was glad to be home 
again.

They are, then, as heterodox a collection of humanity as one might find. Some 
will be good workers, some bad. Many are “serious-minded persons” anxious to 
succeed. No doubt the folk poets will find fit audience somewhere. So will the 
complete dance-band which is journeying to Liverpool at this moment. And the 
boxer, who is going to meet his manager at Birkenhead, will surely find fights 
in plenty. Not all intend to settle in Britain; a 40-year-old tailor, for 
example, hopes to stay here for a year, and then go on and make his home in 
Liberia.


Their arrival has added to the worries of Mr. Isaacs and the trade union 
leaders. But the more worldly-wise among them are conscious of the deeper 
problem posed. Britain has welcomed displaced persons, has given employment to 
Poles who cannot go home. “This is right,” said one of the immigrants. “Surely 
then, there is nothing against our coming, for we are British subjects. If 
there is – is it because we are coloured?”


This is an edited extract, read the full article 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/05/10/Empire_Windrush_23_June_1948.jpeg>
 