
People who lose their homes in one of London’s richest boroughs could be sent 
to live in temporary accommodation as far away asCoventry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/coventry> under new plans announced by the City 
of Westminster.


Westminster council says rising homelessness, coupled with housing benefits 
cuts and government plans to force local authorities to sell off social housing 
gives it no option but to place more families outside the capital.

At the moment, 3% of Westminster’s homeless families are rehoused outside 
GreaterLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, but this is likely to 
increase because of rising cost pressures and shortages of affordable local 
accommodation, it says.

Britain’s shame: the people who are homeless, even though they’re in work | 
Aditya Chakrabortty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/20/working-homeless-britain-economy-minimum-wage-zero-hours>
Westminster’s homeless households would be put into priority bands, with those 
with extensive care and support needs who would be at risk if they were moved 
away prioritised for housing in the borough, together with carers and foster 
carers.

Households with children at key exam stages in local schools and those with 
jobs in Westminster would be in band two, meaning they would qualify for 
temporary accommodation elsewhere in Greater London.

All other households would fall into band three, meaning they would be offered 
private rented homes in south-east England or beyond. The council identified 
urban areas in the West Midlands as presenting the best opportunities, but 
noted that the supply of suitable properties were limited too.

Rehousing homeless families outside the capital has always proved politically 
controversial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/patrick-butler-cuts-blog/2012/nov/13/beyond-cynical-ministers-housing-benefit-cuts-homelessness>
, and London authorities have always been reluctant to advertise the fact that 
they havebeen doing so routinely for some years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/nov/04/london-boroughs-housing-families-outside-capital>
.


Westminster’s cabinet member for housing, councillor Daniel Astaire, said the 
council faced intense challenges around housing affordability and difficult 
choices were inescapable.

“While we always try to provide accommodation for homeless people in 
Westminster, like many other boroughs of all political persuasions we have to 
look at identifying suitable homes beyond the city’s boundaries,” he said.

Labour members said the policy “turbo-charged” a recent trend that had seen 
increasing numbers of people on low incomes driven away from their local 
communities and family support networks.

There is increasing bitterness among local authorities in the south-east that 
they are unable to fulfil their own obligations to house homeless families 
because London councilsoutbid them 
<http://www.insidehousing.co.uk/kent-council-outbid-for-properties-by-london-borough/7015357.article>
 for local temporary accommodation.

Research commissioned by Westminster council found that with limited 
affordable properties available in London, the best opportunities for rehousing 
homeless families in the south-east were to be found in Slough and Maidenhead.

Tenant wins battle to stop Westminster council moving her out of London
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/apr/02/mother-titina-nzolameso-battle-stop-westminster-council-milton-keynes>
Councils are allowed by law to rehouse households outside the local area, but 
only in areas where suitable accommodation takes the full range of household 
members’ needs including health, education and employment into account.

Westminster also says it will seek to make more homeless households the offer 
of a private rented tenancy rather than more expensive temporary accommodation. 
Labour pointed out this would mean homeless families would forfeit their right 
to social housing.

Any properties acquired by the council outside London would be in “more urban 
and diverse areas where there are more likely to be the health, educational, 
social and cultural facilities households from Westminster require” and where 
there were likely to be job opportunities.


The council said it would provide a “wrap-around support service” for families 
moved beyond the capital, including help to enrol children in schools, find 
nursery places and register with GPs.

Westminster said the new policy was essential to the cap the spiralling cost 
of providing temporary accommodation to homeless families, currently £4.3m 
annually and set to rise to nearly £12m by 2020.

Homeless Westminster families can still choose to be housed in temporary 
private rented accommodation, but the council says current average waiting 
times for a social home in the borough range from 10 years for a two-bedroom 
flat to up to 25 years for a four-bedroom house.


Social security cuts, such as the housing benefit freeze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/10/low-income-families-private-housing-rent-benefit-freeze>
 and theextended benefit cap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/26/lower-benefit-cap-to-hit-quarter-of-a-million-poor-children>
 will continue to drive homelessness in the borough, it said. About 60% of its 
homeless acceptances are currently the result of evictions from private rented 
homes.


The council says it is unable to keep pace with demand for social housing in 
central London. It has 4,500 people on its priority list but only between 600 
and 800 rented homes become available each year.


The stock of social homes is likely to reduce further, the council says, 
because it is required under the Housing Act tosell vacant council properties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/19/selling-off-affordable-homes-would-add-4bn-to-housing-benefit-bill>
 to subsidise the sale of an estimated 120 housing association homes each year 
under right-to-buy.

Astaire said: “Our new approach will give those who are homeless more 
certainty over their future by offering secure accommodation sooner. Those with 
the highest needs will of course be prioritised for available properties in 
Westminster while an extensive support package will be provided to those who 
are made private tenancy offers outside.”

Westminster’s Labour opposition leader, councillor Adam Hug, said: “This 
council’s decades-long atrocious record on building social and genuinely 
affordable homes combined with the government’s insidious benefit changes have 
created a perfect storm for Westminster residents in desperate need for 
temporary accommodation.

“This policy formalises and turbo-charges what has happened in recent years 
where Westminster residents in temporary accommodation are being sent further 
and further from home. It is essential that Westminster radically improves its 
council house building plans and challenges the divisive government policies 
that underpin these worrying plans.”
 