
The collapse of the Western Antarctica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/antarctica> ice sheet is already under way 
and is unstoppable, two separate teams of scientists said on Monday.

The glaciers' retreat is being driven by climate change and is already causing 
sea-level rise at a much faster rate than scientists had anticipated.

The loss of the entire western Antarctica ice sheet could eventually cause up 
to 4 metres (13ft) of sea-level rise, devastating low-lying and coastal areas 
around the world. But the researchers said that even though such a rise could 
not be stopped, it is still several centuries off, and potentially up to 1,000 
years away.


The two studies, by Nasa and the University of Washington, looked at the ice 
sheets of western Antarctica over different periods of time.


The Nasa researchers focused on melting over the last 20 years, while the 
scientists at the University of Washington used computer modelling to look into 
the future of the western Antarctic ice sheet.


But both studies came to broadly similar conclusions – that the thinning and 
melting of the Antarctic ice sheet has begun and cannot be halted, even with 
drastic action to cut the greenhouse gas emissions that cause climate change.


They also suggest that recent accumulation of ice in Antarctica was temporary.


“A large sector of the western Antarctic ice sheet has gone into a state of 
irreversible retreat. It has passed the point of no return,” Eric Rignot, a 
glaciologist at Nasa and the University of California, Irvine, told a 
conference call. “This retreat will have major consequences for sea level rise 
worldwide.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdXVWGGmNRiI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdXVWGGmNRiI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdXVWGGmNRiI&media=>
The two studies between them suggest sea-level rise will be far greater than 
envisaged by the United Nations’ IPCC report earlier this year. The IPCC 
forecast on sea-level rise did not factor in the melting of the western 
Antarctica ice sheet.


The Nasa study, to be published in Geophysical Research Letters, studied the 
retreat of six glaciers in western Antarctica that are already the major 
drivers of global sea-level rise.

One of those glaciers, Pine Island, retreated 31km at its centre from 
1992-2011. Rignot said all six glaciers together contained enough ice to add an 
additional 1.2m (4ft) to sea levels around the world.


In the University of Washington study, which will be published in the journal 
Science, researchers used detailed topography maps, airborne radar and computer 
modelling to reach greater certainty about the projected timeline of the ice 
sheet collapse.

The study honed in on the Thwaites glacier – a broad glacier that is part of 
the Amundsen Sea. Scientists have known for years that the Thwaites glacier is 
the soft underbelly of the Antarctic ice sheet, and first found that it was 
unstable decades ago.

The University of Washington researchers said that the fast-moving Thwaites 
glacier could be lost in a matter of centuries. The loss of that glacier alone 
would raise global sea level by nearly 2ft.


Thwaites also acts as a dam that holds back the rest of the ice sheet. Once 
Thwaites goes, researchers said, the remaining ice in the sheet could cause 
another 10 to 13ft (3-4m) of global sea-level rise.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2014%2Fmay%2F12%2Fwestern-antarctic-ice-sheet-collapse-has-already-begun-scientists-warn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F12%2F1399915392567%2Fd3a71265-225b-45f9-9c54-1005a34a3a5f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Western%20Antarctic%20ice%20sheet%20collapse%20has%20already%20begun%2C%20scientists%20warn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2014%2Fmay%2F12%2Fwestern-antarctic-ice-sheet-collapse-has-already-begun-scientists-warn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Western%20Antarctic%20ice%20sheet%20collapse%20has%20already%20begun%2C%20scientists%20warn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2014%2Fmay%2F12%2Fwestern-antarctic-ice-sheet-collapse-has-already-begun-scientists-warn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F12%2F1399915392567%2Fd3a71265-225b-45f9-9c54-1005a34a3a5f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Satellite view of Antarctica with the Thwaites glacier marked in red. 
Photograph: UIG/Getty Images 
“The thinning we are seeing is not just some temporary trend. It is really the 
beginning of a larger scale collapse that is likely to play out over a two to 
10-century range,” Ian Joughin, a University of Washington glaciologist, told 
The Guardian.


He said the retreat would begin slowly, resulting in sea-level rise of less 
than 1mm a year for a couple of hundred years. But “then boom, it just starts 
to really go,” Joughin said.


Even under the worst-case scenario currently envisaged, the collapse of the 
entire ice sheet is about 200 years off – and the collapse could be as far away 
as 1,000 years, depending on future warming.


But collapse is inevitable, the scientists said. Joughin put the most likely 
timeframe at between 200 and 500 years.


The two teams of scientists used airborne radar and satellites to map the 
layers of ice down to the sea bed, and to study the rate of glacier movement. 
The Nasa team also drew on observations stretching back 40 years.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fantarctica-live%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F28%2Ffast-ice-rescue-antarctica-akademik-shokalskiy-documentary-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F2%2F27%2F1393515822007%2FFast-ice-rescue-from-Anta-017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fast%20ice%3A%20rescue%20from%20Antarctica%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fantarctica-live%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F28%2Ffast-ice-rescue-antarctica-akademik-shokalskiy-documentary-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fast%20ice%3A%20rescue%20from%20Antarctica%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fantarctica-live%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F28%2Ffast-ice-rescue-antarctica-akademik-shokalskiy-documentary-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F2%2F27%2F1393515822007%2FFast-ice-rescue-from-Anta-017.jpg>
 This film charts the rescue of passengers stranded on the MV Akademik 
Shokalskiy, which became trapped in heavy ice off the coast of East Antarctica 
in December 2013 
Even so, Rignot said he was taken aback at how fast change was occurring.


“This system, whether Greenland or Antarctica, is changing on a faster time 
scale than we anticipated. We are discovering that every day,” Rignot said.


Scientists are also finding that the causes of the ice loss are highly complex 
– and that it is not just due to warmer temperatures causing surface melting of 
the ice.


Both papers said the contact between the glaciers and the relatively warmer 
water at the ocean depths was the main driver of the slow-motion collapse.


Rignot said that even drastic action to cut greenhouse gas emissions that 
cause climate change could not prevent the collapse.


“We feel this is at the point where even if the ocean is not warming up, is 
not providing additional ocean heat, the system is in a sort of chain reaction 
that is unstoppable,” he told reporters on a conference call.


The only thing that could hold the glaciers back would be a large hill or big 
mountain that could block the retreat, Rignot said. But there is none, he said, 
“So we think it is not going to be stoppable.”
 