
 The world’s whaling watchdog has voted to conduct stricter reviews of whales 
killed under an exemption to a 30-year-old moratorium which Japan’scritics say 
it abuses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/20/japan-to-face-criticism-at-international-summit-for-flouting-whaling-ban-iwc>
 to hunt for meat.

The resolution on Thursday, opposed by Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> and fellow whalers Norway and 
Iceland, was adopted by 34 yes votes to 17 against, at the 66th meeting of the 
International Whaling Commission (IWC).

It is not legally binding on members of the commission, which has no policing 
or penalty function.

Submitted by Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/29/australia-slams-japans-decision-to-resume-antarctic-whaling>
 and New Zealand, the resolution seeks to “improve” the review process for 
scientific whaling programmes – which Japan alone conducts, netting more than 
15,000 of the marine mammals since 1986.

“We welcome this result as an important reaction to Japan unilaterally issuing 
its own permits for so-called scientific whaling,” said Matt Collis of the 
International Fund for Animal Welfare.

“We all know that scientific whaling is sham science, and simply commercial 
whaling by another name.”

Japan defended its annual Southern Ocean whale hunt, saying it was gathering 
scientific data.

The country insisted its actions were in keeping with a 2014 ruling of the 
International Court of Justice (ICJ), which found that permits issued by Japan 
were “not for purposes of scientific research” and instructed the country to 
halt its Jarpa II programme.

“Reports oftentimes say (that) irrespective of the ICJ judgment Japan started 
the research, or in violation of the ICJ judgment ... and that’s not true,” 
Japan’s commissioner to the IWC, Joji Morishita told fellow delegates.

In the judgment of the court itself, “it is clear that the ICJ assumes there 
can be future research activities,” he insisted.

“The ICJ also said ... that the use of lethal sampling per se is not 
unreasonable in relation to the research objectives,” Morishita added.

After the court ruling, Japan cancelled its 2014-15 hunt, only to resume it 
the following year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/29/japan-to-resume-whaling-programme>
 under a new programme called NEWREP-A (New Scientific Whale Research Program 
in the Antarctic Ocean).

It killed 333 minke whales in the Southern Ocean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/17/campaigners-try-halt-japan-whale-hunt-legal-fight>
 – many of them pregnant, according to observers.

The Southern Ocean hosts one of two whale sanctuaries in the world.

The issue is a deeply divisive one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/14/experts-reject-japans-new-whaling-plan>
 at the biennial meetings of the IWC, which turned 70 this year.

The meat from Japan’s hunts ends up on supermarket shelves and in restaurants, 
in line with an IWC stipulation that whales taken for research must be eaten.

Under the IWC moratorium, all whaling other than for aboriginal subsistence, 
or science, is prohibited.

Japan hunts under the science exemption, while Norway and Iceland lodged 
formal objections to the moratorium and continue commercial hunts.

New Zealand’s commissioner Amy Laurenson expressed her country’s “deep 
disappointment” with Japan’s resumption of whaling without IWC approval.

Japan had referred Newrep-A to the IWC’s scientific committee, but started 
whaling before it could complete a review, she said, and accused Tokyo of 
sidelining the commission.

“On the basis of the information the commission has before it, it is clear 
that Newrep-A is not in fact for purposes of scientific research,” the 
commissioner argued, and called on Japan to “cease the lethal component of 
Newrep-A”.

“Japan has still not justified the use of lethal sampling,” she said.

For Kitty Block of the Humane Society International, Thursday’s vote shrank 
the scientific whaling “loophole”.

“With its continued defiance and its unfettered whaling, Japan is not just 
killing whales but making itself a true outlier in the community of nations,” 
she said.
 