
Yanis Varoufakis <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/yanis-varoufakis>: It’s 
not whether Corbyn can be populist – it’s whether he can become popular

The Sun and William Shakespeare are both popular but only one of the two is 
populist.Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> 
cannot be made over into a populist any more than the bard could. The question 
is whether he can become popular. If some form of makeover is necessary, fair 
enough. But it is pure mischief to portray this as a slide toward populism.

When I scored the largest parliamentary majority in Greece’s general election 
two years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/may/26/syriza-european-elections-greece>
, I too was portrayed as a populist. For the establishment, anyone who does 
well electorally by challenging its favourite sons and daughters is dismissed 
as a populist. But this lets populists off too lightly. A populist promises all 
things to all people, while preying on their superstitions and fears. In 
contrast, when I ran for parliament I quoted Winston Churchill in promising 
“blood, sweat and tears” as the price of our liberation from debt bondage and 
from Greece’s oligarchy. In financial terms, I did not promise a single euro to 
anyone making more than €700 monthly. The election outcome proved that 
anti-establishment politicians can gain popularity by eschewing populism.

Labour plans Jeremy Corbyn relaunch to ride anti-establishment wave
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/15/labour-plans-jeremy-corbyn-relaunch-as-a-leftwing-populist>
Populism’s recent rise is due to the establishment’s inane handling of a 
crisis it caused. Populists need the establishment to remain relevant, while 
the establishment depends on the fear of populists to hang on. The real 
opposition is between progressives, such as Corbyn, and the never-ending 
feedback mechanism between the establishment and populism.

The key to success is universal respect for the concerns of those who are 
feeling weak, abandoned, discarded. Poorer white people must not feel that we 
care less for them than we do for ethnic minorities or LGBT people. If we make 
them feel so, we can then convince them that immigration is not the problem and 
xenophobia is not the solution. But this requires also an economic blueprint 
that breaks with austerity and secures the resources necessary to fund not only 
the innovators who will produce the next killer apps but also the unsung 
maintainers who clean sewers, lay down rail tracks and wash our hospitals’ 
dirty sheets.

Maya Goodfellow <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/maya-goodfellow>: 
Crafting a populist message rejecting migrant-bashing won’t be easy

Populism in the UK has become synonymous with the far right and 
anti-immigration politics. As the country lurches towards Brexit, once 
enthusiastically pro-EU MPs are tossing freedom of movement out of the window 
in a desperate bid to show they “understand people’s legitimate concerns” on 
immigration. In this climate, it seems almost impossible to imagine a politics 
that challenges this, but that’s whatLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> has to do.

The term “populism”, regularly bandied about in political commentary, has a 
meaning well beyond Nigel Farage and his xenophobia. It should be about siding 
with the public against the elites. There is no reason why populism should be 
anti-immigrant, particularly when it is the elites (economic, social and 
political), not migrants,who are the cause of this country’s problems 
<http://labourlist.org/2016/12/maya-goodfellow-lets-restore-some-facts-to-the-immigration-debate-and-then-let-labour-push-back-against-prejudice/>
.

One of the reasons xenophobic populism has flourished is because there’s been 
no effective counter-narrative from Labour. Well before Brexit, New Labour 
pursued draconian asylum policies, while Ed Miliband promised to clamp down on
migrants claiming benefits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/oct/11/ed-miliband-toughen-benefit-rules-for-migrants>
, even though the number of people doingso was minuscule 
<http://classonline.org.uk/pubs/item/changing-the-debate-on-migration-brexit-update>
. The party has been echoing parts of the rightwing populist message for too 
long.

It’s a tactic that is a demonstrable failure, only validating anti-immigrant 
politics. Instead, Labour should tackle head on the issues that immigration is 
used as a proxy for: anxieties about an insecure labour market, unaffordable 
housing and a declining sense of community. That means directing blame away 
from migrants and outlining an explicit anti-racist strategy, because 
anti-migrant feeling cannot simply be reduced to economics.

Crafting a populist message that rejects any form of migrant-bashing won’t be 
easy. But given the sharp rise in hate crimes and the severe economic cost of 
cutting migration, any other strategy would be deeply irresponsible.

Mark Seddon <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/markseddon>: Use Corbyn’s 
authenticity to catch the zeitgeist

Jeremy Corbyn’s greatest attribute is his authenticity. Millennials can see 
that, even if sections of a myopic parliamentary Labour party and the 
Westminster lobby can’t. So it would be pointless to “relaunch” him as though 
Corbyn were some kind of product, but there is every point in getting more 
people to hear and see him, along with many of the impressive, new members of 
the shadow cabinet.

I would urge Corbyn and his team to closely observe the brilliant social media 
campaign of another authentic leader:Bernie Sanders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bernie-sanders>. He came within a breath 
of being the Democratic party’s presidential candidate, and who knows what 
might have happened had he done so.

Corbyn, like Sanders, can catch the zeitgeist. There should be a focus on a 
few key issues: saving the NHS from perfidious Tory privatisation; building 
500,000 affordable homes with rent controls; a wealth tax; a basic universal 
income; restoring student grants; a huge programme of investment in 
infrastructure and job creation and an unremitting attack on an economic system 
that is impoverishing millions and is being used by the right to encourage the 
deprived to turn upon the even more deprived.

Jeremy Corbyn may be unassailable, but he is not leading Labour | Rafael Behr
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/14/jeremy-corbyn-unassailable-not-leading-labour>
And I would add “security”. The idea that President Trump should have any say 
over Trident nuclear weapons is anathema, as is the idea that we have to leap 
into virtually every foreign war as some kind of superannuated global policeman.

Under Corbyn, Labour has become a mass party, with hundreds of thousands of 
people with hope and enthusiasm, prepared to turn the tide. And if Theresa May 
attempts to cut and run with an early Brexit-focused election, Labour should 
firmly fight on its ground. The referendum result was a howl of protest. Voters 
by and large have moved on, having done what was asked of them.

Now, surely is the time for all good Labour people to come to the aid of the 
party. Oh yes, and its leader. With no apologies to Trump: “Let’s Make Britain 
Fair Again!”

Aditya Chakrabortty <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/adityachakrabortty>: 
Playing at populism is laughable

Jeremy Corbyn must do more than play at populism. To see why, read a recent 
essay by one of the great authorities 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v38/n23/jan-werner-muller/capitalism-in-one-family> on 
populism, Jan-Werner Müller.

Writing in the London Review of Books, Müller makes the fundamental point 
that, while all populists declaim the elites, not all anti-elitists are 
populist. “Those who draw a lazy equivalence between Bernie Sanders and Donald 
Trump fail to recognise that populists don’t stop at protesting against Wall 
Street or ‘globalism’. Rather, populists claim that they and they alone speak 
in the name of what they tend to call the ‘real people’ or the ‘silent 
majority’ … Populists accuse all other political contenders of being 
illegitimate … They make it personal.” Trump promised to jail “crooked 
Hillary”, even while lining up a cabinet in which the 17 members so far 
announced havemore money than a third of all American households put together 
<http://qz.com/862412/trumps-16-cabinet-level-picks-have-more-money-tha.n-a-third-of-american-households-combined/>
. Populism, American-style.

So what’s populism in the hands of our Little Englanders? It means to keep 
schtum while the Daily Mail calls independent judges “enemies of the people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/04/enemies-of-the-people-british-newspapers-react-judges-brexit-ruling>
”. It is to ape Nigel Farage and claim that leave voters are the “decent 
people”. It is to send round vans telling immigrants to “Go Home”.

Fantasists might pretend a leftwing populism would be “oh-so-different”; 
recent history tells us otherwise. I bet somewhere in your bank of cringe you 
too recall Gordon Brown banging on about “British jobs for British workers”,Ed 
Miliband flogging anti-immigration mugs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/29/diane-abbott-labour-immigration-controls-mugs-shameful>
 and, yes, an Oxford- and Harvard-educated intellectual protesting plummily 
that he felt nothing but“respect” for drivers of white vans 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-30148768>. Which only proved that he’d 
never seen one actually driving.

Such attempts at a populist style never touched the problem that still dogs 
Labour. Like so many social-democratic parties in the 90s and 00s, it embraced 
the inequality that marks neoliberalism – only to find that it blew apart its 
electoral base.

Playing at populism is laughable when the existential threat to Labour is how 
to represented a shattered working class and a middle class that is fast 
dissolving. A mainstream left party that breaks with the dumb centrism of the 
past 20 years? I’m all for it. An opposition that finally accepts our bust 
economic model is bust? Excellent. But a Labour leader playing the same 
rhetorical and tactical game as a Trump or a Farage? Give me a break. Both 
Britain and Labour are in too big a hole for such nonsense.

Chantal Mouffe <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/chantal-mouffe>: A 
left-populist approach is the only way to renew radical politics

Social democracy is in crisis all over Europe. In France, Spain, Italy, 
Germany and Sweden, the leaders of the centre-left parties have suffered 
serious defeats. They have lost the support of the popular sectors, which are 
increasingly attracted by rightwing populist parties.

Could social democratic parties survive this crisis or should we come to the 
conclusion that they are beyond repair? This is what I was inclined to think 
until very recently, but the election of Jeremy Corbyn as leader of the Labour 
party has brought me hope that things could be different in Britain. And the 
recent announcement that Corbyn is going to adopt a left-populist approach 
indicates that he has understood that this is the only way to renew radical 
politics.

Why Ernesto Laclau is the intellectual figurehead for Syriza and Podemos | Dan 
Hancox
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/09/ernesto-laclau-intellectual-figurehead-syriza-podemos>
We are experiencing a “populist moment” in which the traditional form of left 
politics is inadequate to meet the challenge that we are facing. The popular 
sectors feel that they have been abandoned by the very party that was supposed 
to defend their interests. Once the dogma has been accepted that there is no 
alternative to neoliberal globalisation, the demands of those who are 
negatively affected by its consequences can only be seen as archaic and 
obsolete.

Refusing to acknowledge the democratic character of those demands and the need 
to address them has given the possibility to rightwing populists to formulate 
them in a xenophobic language. The only way to stop their rise is by offering a 
discourse able to give a progressive answer to those demands, articulating them 
to the other democratic demands existing in society. The aim is the creation of 
a “collective will” that could mobilise collective efforts towards equality and 
social justice. Such is the nature of a leftwing populist project and if Corbyn 
is able to move Labour in that direction, the consequences for the whole 
European left will be incalculable.

Ayesha Hazarika <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/ayesha-hazarika>: Focus 
on the things really annoying voters

Given the rise of populism that is sweeping the world, Jeremy Corbyn and 
Labour could seize the moment and ride the political wave. But he needs to 
listen to what people are saying and tap into their hopes, fears and anxieties.

Much of Corbyn’s appeal is a leftwing populism. But he and his team need to 
ruthlessly focus on the things that the public really care about. That doesn’t 
mean abandoning his principles at all. It means following theLynton Crosby 
strategy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/20/lynton-crosby-and-dead-cat-won-election-conservatives-labour-intellectually-lazy>
 – get the barnacles off the boat. Populism is about defining yourself against 
the establishment, which is what Corbyn excels at.

But if Corbyn wants his leftwing brand of populism to become popular he should 
focus on the things that are really annoying people up and down the country; 
not get distracted by hobby horses but focus on the key bread-and-butter issues 
that make people tear their hair out. Corbyn was right to focus onsocial care 
at PMQs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/dec/14/theresa-may-and-jeremy-corbyn-clash-over-social-care-at-pmqs-video>
 last week. More of that, please. Caring for older relatives is a major 
headache. Getting time off to take older parents to hospital appointments is 
also stressful.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fmay-and-corbyn-clash-over-nhs-and-social-care-funding-at-pmqs-video-highlights&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=May%20and%20Corbyn%20clash%20over%20NHS%20and%20social%20care%20funding%20at%20PMQs%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fmay-and-corbyn-clash-over-nhs-and-social-care-funding-at-pmqs-video-highlights>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=May%20and%20Corbyn%20clash%20over%20NHS%20and%20social%20care%20funding%20at%20PMQs%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fmay-and-corbyn-clash-over-nhs-and-social-care-funding-at-pmqs-video-highlights&media=>
May and Corbyn clash over NHS and social care funding at PMQs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/nov/30/may-and-corbyn-clash-over-nhs-and-social-care-funding-at-pmqs-video-highlights>
And childcare remains one of the biggest challenges for parents – not only 
finding care that is good quality and affordable but the drama of how to cope 
when your kid gets ill and the fear of asking your employer if you can have a 
day off or work from home. Transport is another massive headache for people, 
especially with the horror ofSouthern rail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/16/southern-rail-strikes-driver-says-lifesaver-guards-have-to-stay>
. Labour should focus on a radical rail policy to bring down ticket prices and 
drive up standards.

These are the kind of basic policy ideas that Corbyn should have a laser-like 
focus on, because they tell the stories of people’s lives.

Rafael Behr <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/rafaelbehr>: The challenge to 
transform Corbyn’s image is huge

Relaunches are mostly futile in politics. Candidates who don’t fly the first 
time tend to sustain too much damage in the crash landing for public opinion to 
give them a second go. Ed Miliband was relaunched a couple of times in the last 
parliament. So was Nick Clegg. Jeremy Corbyn’s team think the leftwing populist 
framework – the Labour leader as maverick outsider fighting an unjust 
establishment – is radical enough to defy the usual patterns of political 
gravity.

There is a certain logic: the Brexit vote indicated frustration with the 
political and economic status quo, for which EU membership happened to be the 
proxy. In theory, that anger could be mobilised behind a more inclusive, 
egalitarian agenda. But how? It isn’t obvious that a public mood so far 
expressed as reactionary nationalism, preoccupied with immigration, can be 
harnessed to a party that is widely associated with open borders and led by a 
man who is perceived to be squeamish around traditional symbols of patriotism. 
Perhaps it can be done. But the challenge in terms of transforming Corbyn’s 
image is huge. And that task must precede policymaking because all the evidence 
suggests people tend not to heed messages if they have no confidence in the 
messenger.

But aside from that practical obstacle, there are principled reasons to avoid 
populism of any kind. The premise is flawed and dangerous. It posits a 
homogeneous, corrupt political class and a unified mass whose abiding common 
interest is the overthrow of their rulers. The truth of pluralist, democratic 
politics is that there is no single, easily aligned “will of the people” but 
rather a complex bundle of competing interests.

A responsible democrat recognises the need to balance those interests, making 
difficult choices, negotiating compromises. The populist imagines – or 
cynically pretends – that no compromise is required because everyone’s desires 
can be satisfied once the wicked “establishment” is overthrown. As Brexit has 
shown, a populist agenda quickly unravels on the acquisition of power. It turns 
out there are no simple answers. Populism is a platform for endless, 
irresponsible opposition, not government and, as such, it is a con. Rightwing 
populism has coarsened and degraded British politics. It is doubtful that a 
left equivalent is the antidote.
 