
I thought we all knew why independent school students do better than those in 
the state sector. They have more money, more funding and better resources and 
they don’t have the more challenging students we get in the state sector.


Is competition between schools restricting collaboration?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/oct/31/is-competition-between-schools-restricting-collaboration>
That was before I became a teacher-researcher in a two-year project 
<http://www.ctksfc.ac.uk/218/lsef-research-project> led by my college, Christ 
the King Sixth Form College <http://www.ctksfc.ac.uk/>, aiming to find the best 
way to support high-ability students. With funding from the London Schools 
Excellence Fund, we teamed up with some of the country’s top private schools, 
like Eton and St Paul’s, as well as a number of state schools, to find out how 
to bring the knowledge-rich learning that characterises independent schools 
into the state sector.

Before the project, I’d never been inside an independent school and hadn’t had 
much contact with people who had been educated there. But the first thing I 
found when I visited was that teachers are the same. In the independent sector, 
they have challenges too – just different ones.

At St Paul’s, one of the things I really enjoyed was spending time with other 
physics teachers and just talking about the subject. I’ve always been the only 
physics teacher at the schools I’ve taught in, and chatting about it reminded 
me of why I had gone into teaching in the first place. The students, too, were 
inspiring. I wanted to bring that culture to myclasses.

After two years, our research project has produced a huge set of findings, 
pinpointing the factors that help high-ability students achieve top grades and 
get in to leading universities.

For example, it highlighted the importance of teachers having strong subject 
knowledge, and being able to convey this confidently and unapologetically. 
Subject learning should go beyond the syllabus, with top GCSE students tackling 
A-level questions, for instance.

Should universities take control of schools? The government thinks so
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/nov/30/should-universities-take-control-of-schools-the-government-thinks-so>
Our collaboration also revealed the power of challenging students in the right 
way. Teachers should question students in a way that provides intellectual 
stimulus to explore the subject more deeply. Academic, subject-specific 
language should be the norm in the classroom: we found that lower academic 
language skills often hold back top students in the state sector who struggle 
to use subject terminology.

One of the most useful findings I took away from our collaboration was the 
importance of independent learning and developing appropriate study habits 
outside the classroom. I decided to research this further, thanks to a new 
bursary scheme set up by my college to support staff, and soon started to see 
how my teaching could develop. I realised that although I was always telling 
students that they needed to do four to five hours of private study a week, 
they didn’t have a clear idea of what this could look like beyond making notes. 
So I set them a range of different activities including reading articles, doing 
activities and completing booklets of examination questions.

I started to put much more emphasis on activities outside the classroom, like 
researching relevant topics beyond the syllabus or discussing things in the 
news. And I praised anyone who asked questions in class, so we created a 
culture where students were proud to ask a question rather than seeing it as a 
way of flagging up the fact they hadn’t understood something.

Want your students to love learning? Get them to the library
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/nov/16/library-home-books-schools-partner-reading-cuts>
My research is beginning to have a real impact. My students now come to class 
and tell me what they want to know about. But they no longer expect me to do 
the research – they want to find out for themselves. At the end of the year I 
gave students a questionnaire on independent learning to find out if there had 
been a change in attitude. One wrote: “Independent learning is something I 
didn’t do a lot of. My view was that it would restrict the help I got from my 
peers. Now I see it as something that unlocks your potential and helps you to 
think for yourself.”

I wasn’t in school one day last week. When I saw my A2 students in the next 
lesson, I mentioned that we would look into cryogenics, which hadbeen in the 
news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/nov/18/teenage-girls-wish-for-preservation-after-death-agreed-to-by-court>
 because of a court case. They said they’d already covered the topic. When I 
asked who had taken the lesson they said that they had researched and discussed 
the topic themselves in my absence.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
 