
This week, the Guardian reported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/11/nhs-england-anorexic-patients-scotland-mental-health>
 that NHS England is sending patients who are seriously ill with eating 
disorders toScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> for treatment. 
Chronic bed shortages mean there is nowhere for them to get help closer to home.

Mental health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/mental-health> experts have 
expressed concern about this, saying it’s compromising the quality of care for 
those in need.


NHS England sending anorexic patients to Scotland for treatment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/11/nhs-england-anorexic-patients-scotland-mental-health>
It’s not the first time there have been reports of mental health patients 
being sent miles from home for treatment. Earlier this year,research by 
Community Care and BBC News 
<http://www.communitycare.co.uk/2016/05/20/mental-health-beds-crisis-thousands-acutely-ill-patients-sent-area-care/>
 found that in 2015 more than 5,400 mental health patients had to travel out of 
area for a psychiatric bed.


There are also reports of specialist mental health services turning away 
almost a quarter (23%) of children and young people seeking help 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/health-and-families/health-news/young-people-mental-health-care-turned-away-specialist-services-a7417306.html>
. The Education Policy Institute Independent Commission on Children and Young 
People’s Mental Health, which did the report, said it is often because there 
are “high thresholds” for accessing services.

Research suggests that cultural factors can make it harder to get help too. 
Professors at Brighton and Sussex Medical School foundblack and minority ethnic 
groups struggle to access services 
<http://www.voice-online.co.uk/article/bme-groups-struggling-access-mental-health-services>
, partly because of a communication breakdown between healthcare users and 
providers.


What are your experiences of accessing mental health services? We want to hear 
from people of all ages and backgrounds, across the UK, about any challenges 
you faced or help you received. Were you able to access help as soon as it was 
necessary, or was there a waiting period? If you had to wait, how did this 
affect you? Were your concerns met by your GP? Were you moved miles from home 
for treatment? Or perhaps you want to thank professionals for looking after 
you. What were the best aspects of your care? Share your stories and 
experiences with us in the form below.
 