
Last week, a paper out of NOAA 
<http://www.sciencemag.org/content/early/2015/06/05/science.aaa5632.abstract> 
concluded that contrary tothe popular myth 
<http://skepticalscience.com/global-warming-stopped-in-1998-intermediate.htm>, 
there’s been no pause in global warming. The study made headlines across the 
world, including widely-read Guardian stories byJohn Abraham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2015/jun/04/new-research-suggests-global-warming-is-accelerating>
 andKarl Mathiesen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/04/global-warming-hasnt-paused-study-finds>
. In fact, there may have been information overload associated with the paper, 
but the key points are relatively straightforward and important.

1. Rapid Global Warming Continues

Arguments about short-term temperature changes only deal with the Earth’s 
surface temperatures, which account for just 1–2% of the overall warming of the 
planet. More than 90% of that heat goes into the oceans, and as my colleagues 
and I noted ina paper published 3 years ago 
<http://skepticalscience.com/nuccitelli-et-al-2012.html>, if anything that 
warming is accelerating, building up heat at a ratefaster than 4 atomic bomb 
detonations per second <http://4hiroshimas.com/>.

If you carefully cherry pick start and end dates, you can find a period around 
1998–2012 during which the warming of surface temperatures slowed a bit due to 
temporary natural cooling factors (like more La Niñas), just like it sped up a 
bit during the 1990s due to temporary natural warming factors (like more El 
Niños). But these are justwiggles on top of the long-term human-caused global 
warming trend <http://www.skepticalscience.com/graphics.php?g=47>. As Michael 
Mann put it 
<http://ecowatch.com/2015/06/05/michael-mann-noaa-no-hiatus-global-warming/>, 

there never was any “pause” or “hiatus” in global warming 
<http://www.livescience.com/39957-climate-change-deniers-must-stop-distorting-the-evidence.html>
. There is evidence, however, for a modest, temporary slowdown in surface 
warming through the early part of this decade.

2. The Surface Warming Slowdown is Probably Over

This is a tough pill to swallow for those who have misused the short-term 
slowdown in global surface warming to argue against climate policies, but it’s 
likely over. 2014 was the hottest year on record, and 2015 looks likely to 
break the record again.

These slowdown-based anti-policy arguments have been made by everyone from 
Republican presidential candidates 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2015/mar/20/ted-cruz/ted-cruzs-worlds-fire-not-last-17-years/>
 topolitical think tanks 
<http://www.thegwpf.com/warming-pause-threatens-climate-science-green-energy-funding/>
 toscience-denying blogs 
<http://blog.hotwhopper.com/2015/06/no-pause-in-frenzy-of-denial-at-wuwt.html>. 
It’s a simple argument – if we pretend the surface warming slowdown can 
continue indefinitely, then global warming is less of a concern and we don’t 
need policies to stop it.

Since we’ve always known the slowdown was temporary, these were never credible 
arguments, but they nevertheless helped to delay efforts to curb global 
warming. After the publication of this NOAA paper, and possibly two consecutive 
record hot years, it seems unlikely that these arguments will be considered 
credible any longer.


3. The Most Common Denial Response: Conspiracy Theories 

Social science research has shown that conspiracy theorists are more likely to 
reject scientists’ conclusions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2014/mar/21/contrarians-bully-climate-change-journal-retraction>
 about climate change. It’s a logical connection – given that97% of climate 
scientists 
<http://www.skepticalscience.com/global-warming-scientific-consensus-intermediate.htm>
 andtheir research <http://iopscience.iop.org/1748-9326/8/2/024024> agree on 
human-caused global warming, the easiest way to deny that reality is to accuse 
all those scientists of being part of a vast conspiracy. Otherwise it’s 
difficult to justify rejecting the conclusions of 97% of experts.

Thus it’s not surprising that those in denial are accusing the NOAA scientists 
of conspiring to fudge the data to make the slowdown disappear. For example,
Anthony Watts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2014/oct/13/dinner-with-global-warming-contrarians-disaster-for-dessert>
, who runs a climate science denial blog, wrote an email to one of the authors 
of the NOAA paper,telling him 
<http://blog.hotwhopper.com/2015/06/more-perversity-from-anthony-watts.html>,

In my last telephone conversation with you, I stated (paraphrasing) that “I 
believe you folks aren’t doing anything fraudulent, but you are doing what you 
feel is correct science in what you believe is a correct way”.

After seeing the desperate tricks pulled in Karl 2015 to erase “the pause” via 
data manipulation, I no longer hold that opinion. You needed it to go away, so 
you prostituted yourselves, perhaps at the direction of higher ups.

In fact, accusing the NOAA scientists of fraudulently ‘manipulating data’ for 
the benefit of the Obama administration was a common theme in the climate 
science-denying 
<http://www.bishop-hill.net/blog/2015/6/4/obamas-housekarls-dance-to-his-warming-tune.html>
blogosphere 
<http://judithcurry.com/2015/06/04/has-noaa-busted-the-pause-in-global-warming/#comment-708499>
. But there’s a glaring flaw in this particular conspiracy theory.

4. The Adjustments Reduce Global Warming Estimates!

This is clear from the bottom frame in this figure in the NOAA paper.
 NOAA global surface temperature changes with new analysis, old analysis, and 
with and without time-dependent bias corrections. (A) The new analysis (solid 
black) compared to the old analysis (red). (B) The new analysis (solid black) 
versus no corrections for time-dependent biases (cyan). Source: Science; Karl 
et al. (2015) Source: Science; Karl et al. (2015) 
According to the raw, unadjusted data, global surface temperatures warmed 
about 0.9°C from 1880 to 2014. According to the new NOAA analysis, they warmed 
about 0.8°C during that time. That’s a bit more than in the previous version of 
NOAA’s data set (0.75°C), but the net effect of these adjustments is toreduce 
the overall estimated warming as compared to the raw data!

5. The Adjustments are Important

Contrary to the conspiracy theories, climate scientists process the raw 
temperature data for an important reason – to remove biases that don’t 
represent real temperature changes. The big one in the new NOAA analysis deals 
with changes in the ways ocean temperatures have been measured. They’ve been 
measured from water samples in insulated buckets, uninsulated buckets, from 
valves in ships’ hulls, and from instruments on buoys.As Zeke Hausfather 
explains 
<http://www.yaleclimateconnections.org/2015/06/new-noaa-reports-shows-no-recent-warming-slowdown-or-pause/>
,

A number of studies have found that buoys tend to measure temperatures that 
are about 0.12°C colder than is found by ships at the same time and same 
location. As the number of automated buoy instruments has dramatically expanded 
in the past two decades, failing to account for the fact that buoys read colder 
temperatures ended up adding a negative bias in the resulting ocean record. 
This change is by far the largest single factor responsible for changing global 
temperatures in the past 17 years compared to temperatures found in the prior 
NOAA record.

While this adjustment happens to have reduced estimates of the 1998–2012 
surface warming slowdown, it’s important to account for changes in the way 
ocean temperatures have been measured. It’s not a conspiracy, it’s science.

6. The Slowdown and Anti-Policy Arguments are Fragile

The latest changes to the NOAA data set were quite small (compare the black 
and red lines in the top frame of the figure above). As NASA GISS directorGavin 
Schmidt noted at RealClimate 
<http://www.realclimate.org/index.php/archives/2015/06/noaa-temperature-record-updates-and-the-hiatus/>
, if such minor changes are all it takes to make the so-called ‘hiatus’ go 
away, then it was really quite fragile to begin with. As were any hiatus-based 
anti-policy arguments.

The bottom line is that the Earth continues to warm dangerously rapidly, and 
short-term wiggles in global surface temperatures are no reason for 
complacency. When those who believe otherwise are forced to resort to baseless 
accusations of fraud and conspiracy theories, it’s time to stop listening to 
them.

 