
After five years of false starts and delays, 2017 will see exploratory 
fracking for shale gas begin in earnest in England. The first wells will likely 
be drilled in Lancashire and Yorkshire by the summer, and Cuadrilla,Third Energy
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/20/fracking-to-go-ahead-in-north-yorkshire-after-high-court-ruling>
 and other companies will hope to confirm commercially viable quantities of the 
gas by the end of the year. Withonly 17% of people in Britain in favour of 
fracking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/27/uk-public-support-for-fracking-falls-to-lowest-level>
, local and national protests are certain.

Brexit negotiations will affect farming subsidies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/14/post-brexit-farming-subsidies-must-protect-nature-84-groups-say>
 and possibly all Europeannature protection laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/25/british-wildlife-needs-new-laws-to-protect-it-post-brexit-poll-shows>
, including those for birds and habitats, air andwater pollution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/damian-carrington-blog/2016/jun/24/uks-out-vote-is-a-red-alert-for-the-environment>
, GM foods andanimal welfare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/27/brexit-disastrous-britains-farm-animals-eu-laws-cruel>
. If ministers attempt to roll back or trade off decades of environmental 
regulation, as some have threatened, they are likely to meet the most intense 
opposition.

Lancashire readers on the Cuadrilla fracking decision one month on
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/07/lancashire-readers-on-the-cuadrilla-fracking-decision-one-month-on>
Air pollution, now known to kill nearly 40-50,000 people a year in Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/27/uk-air-pollution-public-health-emergency-crisis-diesel-cars>
, will be high on the political agenda in the spring with the government under 
court orders to publish a new plan to meet EU legal limits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/21/high-court-ministers-deadline-air-quality-pollution-plan>
. The draft, to be published in April, is almost certain to propose more fully 
funded clean-air zones in major cities, tighter restrictions on some vehicles 
and fuels, and further measures to encourage walking and cycling.

London will also come under pressure to join Paris, Madrid, Athens, and Mexico 
City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/02/four-of-worlds-biggest-cities-to-ban-diesel-cars-from-their-centres>
 in pledging to ban diesel vehicles in the city centre within a few years. The 
movement of world cities signing up to be fossil-free within 30 years is 
expected to grow too.


The global climate debate will be dominated by whether the president-elect 
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> withdraws the US 
from the Paris global agreement to reduce emissions.

He has appointed climate sceptics to head all the key agencies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/donald-trump-environment-climate-change-skeptics>
 responsible for either monitoring or dealing with climate change and is known 
to want to increase oil, gas and coal production. If he pulls the US out of the 
Paris deal, it would gift China climate leadership, set back efforts to brake 
emissions and do untold diplomatic damage withhundreds of countries who 
followed Obama’s leadership in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/12/paris-climate-deal-200-nations-sign-finish-fossil-fuel-era>
. Insiders expect him to ignore the voluntary commitments the US has made and 
to increase fossil fuel emissions. Many US climate scientists expect to lose 
research grants in what some expect to become a witch-hunt.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fwhat-will-be-the-big-environment-events-in-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61504e2d9c6f600477ac860d80bc4e388d0b6626%2F0_6_3459_2076%2F3459.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20will%20be%20the%20big%20environment%20events%20in%202017%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fwhat-will-be-the-big-environment-events-in-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20will%20be%20the%20big%20environment%20events%20in%202017%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fwhat-will-be-the-big-environment-events-in-2017%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61504e2d9c6f600477ac860d80bc4e388d0b6626%2F0_6_3459_2076%2F3459.jpg>
 Donald Trump has appointed sceptics to head key agencies responsible for 
monitoring climate change and has said he wants to increase coal production. 
Photograph: Steve Helber/AP 
2016 saw the tail end of El Niño 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/05/what-is-el-nino>, a 
naturally occurring warming of the Pacific, bring droughts, searing 
temperatures and food shortages to much of Africa, Latin America and south-east 
Asia. In 2017, we can expect a weak La Niña, a natural cooling of Pacific Ocean 
waters. This is likely to bring above average rainfall and cooler temperatures 
across much of the globe.

IUCN updates 'red list' of endangered species - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gallery/2016/sep/04/eastern-gorilla-now-critically-endangered-says-to-world-conservation-congress-in-pictures>


Wildlife losses are expected to continue through 2017, despite more and more 
animals having been put on theIUCN’s red list 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/iucn-red-list> of threatened species 
and action to tackle the illegal trade. Candidates for effective extinction in 
2017 include the Bornean orangutan, the South China tiger, the giant otter, the 
Amur leopard, the black-footed ferret and Darwin’s fox.

The Eurasian lynx 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/24/eurasian-lynx-reintroduce-england-scotland-consultation-lynx-uk-trust>
 could be reintroduced in small numbers to the Kielder forest in 
Northumberland, and to remote areas of southern Scotland. The last time this 
wild cat was seen in what is now the UK was in about AD700. Other provisional 
sites have been selected including Cumbria, Aberdeenshire, the Kintyre 
pensinsula and Thetford forest in Norfolk.

Marine protection will be raised up the political agenda with the first UN 
oceans conference in June 
<http://www.un.org/pga/71/2016/11/16/june-2017-united-nations-oceans-conference-announced-at-cop22/>
. This will focus on the increasing quantities of plastics polluting the 
oceans, overfishing, the effects of climate change, and the need for more 
marine national parks.
 