
The perceived wisdom is that Uber <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber>
 has disrupted taxis and that private automobiles are next, but what if we’ve 
misread what is happening in our cities?

Traditional thinking would suggest that UberPool, which allows users to split 
the cost of trips with other Uber riders heading in the same direction, will 
always be inferior to public transport. Sitting in the backseat of a Prius may 
be more comfortable than standing on a crowded bus or train, continues this 
reasoning, but carpooling can’t substitute for mass transit at rush hours 
without massively increasing congestion.


This is wrong. In the last six months, Uber has begun offering shared rides 
for as little as $1 
<https://newsroom.uber.com/us-dc/introducing-the-uberpool-monthly-ride-pass/> 
(81p), introducedoptimised pickup points 
<https://www.cnet.com/news/uber-app-update-radical-redesign-travis-kalanick/> 
that algorithmically recreate bus stops, and started testing semi-autonomous 
vehicles it hopes will solve itsincreasingly contentious 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/14/uber-appeals-against-ruling-that-its-uk-drivers-are-employees>
 labour issues.

Never mind the black cabs; Uber is out to disrupt the bus.


From loss-making to profitable monopoly

Its principal weapon is not renegade AVs 
<http://www.recode.net/2016/12/14/13962698/uber-dmv-self-driving-cars-stop-order>
 or all-knowing algorithms; it’s cash. Back-of-the-envelopecalculations 
<http://www.nakedcapitalism.com/2016/11/can-uber-ever-deliver-part-one-understanding-ubers-bleak-operating-economics.html>
 suggest Uber’s passengers pay only 41% of the true cost of each ride – a 
figure sincechallenged 
<https://twitter.com/EricNewcomer/status/804470167899996160> for mistakenly 
including now-staunched losses in China.


Still, the figures raise red flags about Uber’s strategy: is losing $3bn 
annually 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-12-20/uber-s-loss-exceeds-800-million-in-third-quarter-on-1-7-billion-in-net-revenue>
 the sign of a sustainable business, or the product of predatory pricing? “Uber 
is wildly unprofitable,” tweeted the economist Justin Wolfers, “[which] suggest 
that prices will rise once they’ve succeeded at monopolising the industry.” 
Perhaps to his credit, Uber CEO Travis Kalanick has never denied this.

Uber appeals against ruling that its UK drivers are workers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/14/uber-appeals-against-ruling-that-its-uk-drivers-are-employees>
The most important question surrounding Uber is not whether it is a platform 
or a transportation company, or whether its drivers are employees. It’s whether 
it can only recoup its investors’ billions by building a monopoly (or at least 
duopoly with Lyft) on the ruins of public transportation – and it may not take 
much to tear it all down.

In Washington DC a vicious cycle of declining ridership and service on the 
city’s Metro culminated in last spring’s “Metropocalypse” – a system-wide 
shutdown followed by a year’s worth of emergency repairs requiring the closure 
of entire lines for weeks at a time.

Stranded commuters abandoned transit in droves while Uber, Lyft and other 
services pounced, offering shared rides priced below the cost of a Metro 
ticket. Unsurprisingly, Metroridership has plunged 
<http://patch.com/district-columbia/washingtondc/dc-metro-ridership-takes-huge-plunge-2016-wmata-31-million-rides>
, creating a $67m shortfall in its budget.


London’s fare surge

This week’s London tube strike was a harbinger of what comes next, with 
stranded riders reporting Uber fare surcharges ashigh as 450% 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/saraspary/uber-defends-charging-customers-500-more-for-cars?utm_term=.iu7EQGX7OM#.ueE2y9lq4E>
. As a spokesperson explained, “without this pricing, there would simply be no 
cars available”. Meanwhile, the number of licensed private-hire vehicles in 
London has nearly doubled from 59,000 in 2010 to more than 110,000 by the 
middle of 2016.


Ride-sharing and autonomous vehicles could prove to be an especially 
combustible mix if and when the technology is perfected. The Boston Consulting 
Grouppredicts 
<https://www.bcgperspectives.com/content/articles/transportation-travel-tourism-automotive-will-autonomous-vehicles-derail-trains/>
 a shared AV carrying three people could cost operators less on a per-mile 
basis than rail.

Passengers at the edge of the network would presumably be the first to defect 
for convenience, triggering shocks throughout the balance sheet. Even a modest 
decline in numbers, BCG argues, could tip well-managed transit systems into the 
red.

Support for public transport

So what are cities to do about the would-be disruptors tunnelling 
<http://arstechnica.com/cars/2016/12/elon-musk-hates-sitting-in-traffic-so-now-hes-going-to-build-tunnels/>
 into their transit systems? First, do no harm. As the US magazine Slate
recently noted 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/business/metropolis/2016/12/cities_are_cutting_transportation_service_because_they_think_uber_will_fill.html>
, cities across America are partnering with Uber to strengthen weak transport 
links and then using its looming inevitability as an excuse to not improve 
their own service. Diverting funds to pay for blanket subsidies will only 
hasten the public system’s implosion.

That said, one of the rich ironies on US election day was voters’ embrace 
<https://nextcity.org/daily/entry/vote-transit-bills-2016-election> of public 
transport in sprawling cities such as Atlanta, Seattle and Los Angeles.

While LA Metro builds new rail lines, the city’s Department of Transportation 
has commissioned its owntrip-planning app <http://golaapp.com> from Xerox, 
receives traffic snapshots from Waze andis exploring 
<http://www.urbanmobilityla.com/strategy/> how best to combine various modes 
such as buses, bike-sharing and electric car-sharing to build a seamless system 
greater than the sum of its parts.


Los Angeles’ efforts trail more ambitious experiments in Helsinki, Hanover, 
Manchester and Birmingham, all of which are dabbling with 
“mobility-as-a-service” – monthly transport subscriptions combining car-sharing 
and taxi rides, for example, with unlimited public transport. The hope is to 
retain riders and woo residents away from their cars (and Uber) by making the 
whole of these services greater than the sum of their parts.


My own recommendations <http://bit.ly/NCFConnectedMobility> [pdf] are that 
simply banning Uber won’t work, and neither will battling its labour practices 
in court. Staving off disruption will require leveraging every tool at cities’ 
disposal, including lane access, parking regulations and incentives to shift 
the peak of rush hours commutes, to create communities that are at their best 
when served by mass transit – and could never be built around a million Ubers.

Sign up to be a Guardian Sustainable Business 
<https://register.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/> member and get more 
stories like this direct to your inbox every week. You can alsof 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>ollow us on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>.
 