
Donald Trump, <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> with over 16 
million followers on Twitter, famously follows only 40 people himself. If you 
take a look athis list, <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/following> it’s 
like your dad joined Twitter to find out what all the fuss was about, followed 
his direct relatives and everyone in his book club, then got bored.

It has a sudden, inorganic feel, as if it were built in a day; nearly a 
quarter of the follows are for his own hotels and golf clubs, so a lot of the 
timeline is filled with pictures of diced vegetables and there are as many 
links as hyperlinks.

The Trumps junior use Twitter like regular people use Facebook, for animals, 
babies, palm trees and high-value consumer items. Donald follows barely any 
politicians – none of the Republicans who routinely go out to bat for him 
(Giuliani, Chris Christie): exceptMike Pence, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mike-pence> Indiana Governor and now 
vice-president elect, whose tweets, breathy and banal, read like a bot-generated
Enid Blyton <https://www.theguardian.com/books/enid-blyton> character. “Back to 
work at Trump Tower. Busy morning with important announcements already & more 
to come.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ftrump-twittersphere-social-media-piers-morgan-rudy-guliani-mike-pence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4881c40dbe84ed32d579e8cb6377c2227a342bce%2F0_0_3328_4161%2F3328.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20do%20Donald%20Trump's%20Twitter%20tastes%20tell%20us%20about%20him%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ftrump-twittersphere-social-media-piers-morgan-rudy-guliani-mike-pence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20do%20Donald%20Trump%27s%20Twitter%20tastes%20tell%20us%20about%20him%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ftrump-twittersphere-social-media-piers-morgan-rudy-guliani-mike-pence%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4881c40dbe84ed32d579e8cb6377c2227a342bce%2F0_0_3328_4161%2F3328.jpg>
 Piers Morgan is the only British tv personality Trump follows. Photograph: Ken 
McKay/ITV/REX/Shutterstock 
There is method to it though, once you strip out the figures that are probably 
intended to be “humanising”; it’s a tight little list of conservative 
commentators, marching to the same insistent beat, iterating and reiterating, 
linking to each other and back again, clustering around words and phrases to 
give a neologism the ring of a saying, niche positions the status of common 
sense.


They are Laura Ingraham, a primmer version of Ann Coulter, and Coulter herself;
Piers Morgan, <https://www.theguardian.com/media/piersmorgan> who needs no 
explaining to British audiences except to maybe explain that if you haven’t 
been keeping track of his output, it has got a lot worse, and 
broadcasters/shock jocks Joe Scarborough, Mika Brzezinski, Bill O’Reilly and 
Sean Hannity. A couple are members of Trump’s campaign team – Katrina Pierson, 
Dan Scavino – but overwhelmingly, they are either media organisations (Fox), 
platforms (Drudge Report), or media people who, as they would have it, are 
beleaguered and persecuted outsiders.

There is one account of two genuine unknowns – DiamondandSilk, women of colour 
who say things like “Rosie [O’Donnell] better keep Barron’s name out her mouth 
and concentrate on her own children”, then will have a few tweets flogging 
their special edition Christmas baubles. There is a surprising amount of 
merchandise and product placement in the mix, a dire warning aboutISIS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> followed by a paean to a turkey 
deep-frying machine.

If social media generally – and Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> in particular – is known as an 
echo chamber, the place you go to hear people exactly like you tell you they 
agree, this is more of a hall of mirrors. Trump’s timeline looks a lot like a 
succession of pictures of himself, as the hallowed tweet one another’s articles 
back and forth. The Drudge report often flags a link to a story with the simple 
caption AMERICAN TRUMP.

Ann Coulter links to her column in Breitbart where she helpfully spells out 
the extent of what Trump stands for, masking her kite-flying with a pugilistic 
frame. “Most of his promises can be kept with little trouble: He will appoint 
good judges, cut regulations, replace Obamacare and renegotiate trade deals. In 
other words, he’ll do all the things anyRepublican 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> president would do – plus the 
trade deals. But the moment Trump attempts to make good on his central promise 
– to remove troublesome immigrants and give us our country back – every major 
institution in America will declare war on him.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ftrump-twittersphere-social-media-piers-morgan-rudy-guliani-mike-pence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F953d12e0f60350cce3b74e55c8324e2d6edd2ddb%2F0_0_2721_1633%2F2721.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20do%20Donald%20Trump's%20Twitter%20tastes%20tell%20us%20about%20him%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ftrump-twittersphere-social-media-piers-morgan-rudy-guliani-mike-pence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20do%20Donald%20Trump%27s%20Twitter%20tastes%20tell%20us%20about%20him%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ftrump-twittersphere-social-media-piers-morgan-rudy-guliani-mike-pence%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F953d12e0f60350cce3b74e55c8324e2d6edd2ddb%2F0_0_2721_1633%2F2721.jpg>
 Fox News personality Sean Hannity, one of Trump’s biggest supporters, is 
followed by the president elect. Photograph: Rick Scuteri/AP 
These are the two policy themes: the threat of Muslims, and American jobs for 
American people. The hatred of immigrants in general, and Muslims in 
particular, is relentless, and international:one in four British Muslims wants 
Sharia law; 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/11/british-muslims-strong-sense-of-belonging-poll-homosexuality-sharia-law>
 one in three immigrants in Vienna is wanted for a crime; a Muslim in Slovenia 
gets his comeuppance when he’s handed a ten-year prison sentence for throwing a 
rock at a policeman; Barack Obama presided over an influx of Somalian refugees 
comprising 90% Muslims. All pretence at a differentiation between moderate and 
extreme Islam has been dropped; the religion is a priori a threat to western 
civilisation – witness theGerman <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> 
refugee camp where the children hateChristianity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/christianity> – and every gathering of 
Muslims acquires the status of an army. The geographical scope gives the 
striking impression of a global conspiracy. Breitbart and Fox links feature 
prominently and circularly, but the predominant sources are actually British 
tabloids and the Telegraph.

The American jobs theme is unabashed triumphalism; Trump’s recent deal with 
Carrier, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/01/donald-trump-carrier-deal-manufacturing-jobs-mexico>
 in which 1,100 jobs were supposedly saved by the promise of a $7m (£5.5m) tax 
break, is hailed as emblematic of a nation saved.

'I will be leaving my …': Trump tweet triggers fill-in-the-blank challenge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/30/donald-trump-tweet-fill-in-the-blank-business-interests>
The third leg on the stool is a rather contradictory attack on liberals. On 
the one hand, everybody – “Occupy, Move on,Black Lives Matter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/black-lives-matter-movement> and Obama” – 
is “alt radical left” according to Hannity. On the other, and this is a 
particular bugbear of Ingraham but is held in common to them all, the left are 
unendurably pathetic, weak and infantile. “For the Pajama Boy Generation, every 
time they don’t get their way, they need a “grief counsellor.” They’re 
snowflakes, they need colouring books and cry-rooms, their prizes-for-all 
culture has left them unable to lose; all of this often illustrated with a 
picture of a spoilt-looking child crying. It is a pronounced and textured 
scorn, and underlines the porousness between the British and American right. 
It’s very common now when you argue with a Brexiter on TVto get a lot of 
Twitter traffic calling you a snowflake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/nov/28/snowflake-insult-disdain-young-people>
 illustrated with a crying child. I didn’t understand it, since “snowflake” was 
devised to convey someone who melts at the first criticism; in debating, one 
plainly isn’t melting. Yet as part of a cross-Atlantic narrative, in which to 
hold a liberal view is to be a spoilt child who needs a spanking, it does make 
sense, albeit atmospherically and not rationally.

The word that keeps coming to me, inhabiting this rhetorical community, is 
unfettered: unfettered by proportionality, consensus, accuracy, restraint, 
desire for unity. The gloves are off.
 