
Consumers saddled with credit card debt built up over the festive period are 
being targeted by an array ofbalance transfer deals offering 0% interest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/dec/31/credit-card-halifax-lloyds-zeron-interest-transfer>
 for more than three years.

Halifax and Sainsbury’s Bank were among those to launch their “longest ever” 
interest-free deals last week, just in time for the first round of 
post-Christmas bills to hit doormats.

Providers claim these 0% cards can save consumers hundreds of pounds in 
interest payments by transferring balances from a card with a high rate. 
However, they are only useful if you repay what you owe before the interest- 
free period ends. You pay a percentage fee on the balance to switch, but then 
you can pay just the minimum due each month and get a grip on your debt without 
worrying about it growing.

Halifax is offering a deal at 0% for 38 months with a 2.75% transfer fee. 
Sainsbury’s is offering 0% interest on balance transfer for 37 months, with a 
three-month interest-free period on purchases and a 2.89% fee. Customers can 
also earn Nectar points.

After the deal ends, borrowers pay interest at the card’s standard rate, 
currently 18.9% for both cards.

However, these cards have not succeeded in taking the best-buy spot. There are 
cards with longer interest-free periods on the market, with MBNA launching a 
39-month one just before Christmas. This is the longest balance transfer deal 
and has a fee starting at 2.98%. After the interest-free period ends rates rise 
to MBNA’s standard, at 20.9% for balance transfers and 22.9% on other debts. To 
access the most attractive deals you will often need a clean credit rating.

A borrower with £2,000 on a credit card at 18.9% would pay £32.10 a month, 
saving a whopping £1,192.30 over 39 months on an interest-free deal. This 
includes a one-off 2.98% balance transfer fee of £59.60.

Andrew Hagger from MoneyComms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lloyds-money-mindfulness/2015/dec/18/the-psychology-of-christmas-shopping>
 says: “January is often the busiest month for switching as people look to 
rejig their borrowing following the Christmas excesses.” He adds that the 
average 0% balance transfer term now stands at a record 22.5 months, up from 
17.3 months two years ago: “The fact that card companies still seem to be able 
to make these 0% deals work is in no doubt due in part to the number of people 
who ‘fall off the wagon’ by missing a payment or exceeding their limit and 
suddenly find themselves paying interest at 18.9% or more.”

There are plenty of cards on the market offering 0% interest on these debt 
switches for a set period. Santander’s 123 credit card will give you 23 months 
of 0% on balance transfers and purchases with no fee at all, with the added 
advantage of cashback on spending.
 