
Have you got one of the best paid jobs in the UK? The Office of National 
Statistics (ONS) has released its Annual Survey of Hours and Earnings 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/26/weekly-uk-earnings-rose-2015-biggest-increase-since-financial-crash>
, and we’ve looked at the top 10 highest paid jobs in the country and what you 
need to do to get one of them.

To obtain the data, the ONS surveyed a random sample of 1% of all the workers 
who carry out each occupation, using 2015/2016 pay-as-you-earn (PAYE) tax 
records.

This means bonuses are included, but self-employed workers and celebrities who 
don’t appear on company payrolls are excluded. Information about niche 
occupations – for example, salaried professional footballers or TV presenters – 
has also been suppressed by the ONS to avoid identifying individual pay packets.

So which jobs have made it into the Top 10 this year? Who got the biggest pay 
rise? And how does the pay of the highest earners in the land compare with the 
average pay of all full-time employees in the UK, who, according to the ONS, 
earned £34,414 and typically received a 2.3% pay rise this year?

1. Brokers
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhighest-paid-jobs-2016-ons-annual-survey-hours-earnings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8519809d35e51bf1350d11838b7aceb0a02beb3%2F0_258_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20are%20the%20highest%20paid%20jobs%20of%202016%20in%20the%20UK%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhighest-paid-jobs-2016-ons-annual-survey-hours-earnings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20are%20the%20highest%20paid%20jobs%20of%202016%20in%20the%20UK%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhighest-paid-jobs-2016-ons-annual-survey-hours-earnings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8519809d35e51bf1350d11838b7aceb0a02beb3%2F0_258_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Pay for stockmarket traders and other brokers has risen by 6.2% this year. 
Photograph: Daniel Leal-Olivas/AFP/Getty Images 
 Includes: Stockbrokers, traders on the stock exchange, foreign exchange 
dealers, insurance brokers.

Average pay before tax: £133,868.

Pay range: Data about the lower, middle and upper pay range of brokers was not 
deemed reliable enough to be published this year, due to the relatively small 
number of brokers in the PAYE system.

Annual change: Up by 6.2% (£8,300). The Wealth Management Association, which 
represents small firms of stockbrokers, says the remuneration of stockbrokers 
is “a market issue”. It declined to offer any reason for the above-average 
increase in pay.

Entry requirements: There are no formal academic requirements, although many 
employers will require you to possess a degree or equivalent qualification. 
Training is typically undertaken in-house.

2. Chief executives

 Includes: Vice-presidents, chief medical officers, civil servants (grade 5 
and above).

Average pay before tax: £123,577.

Pay range: £41,875 (10th percentile) to £142,686 (75th percentile). Median is 
£89,932.

Annual change: Down by 0.6% (£741). Shareholders can take the credit for this, 
a spokesperson for the Confederation of British Industry says. “Shareholders 
now have a binding vote on executive pay policies and, encouragingly, we are 
seeing them become more active in this area. High remuneration at executive 
level must always be squarely linked to outstanding performance.”

Entry requirements: Years of relevant experience and a strong track record of 
good business decisions. An MBA and/or a financial qualification might help.

3. Marketing directors

Includes: Sales directors.

Average pay before tax: £87,890.

Pay range: £44,654 (20th percentile) to £110,010 (80th percentile). Median is 
£74,994.

Annual change: Down by 2.5% (£2,197). Tim Bourne, chairman of the Marketing 
Agencies Association, says businesses are making efficiency cuts in response to 
increased competition from rival brands and pricing pressure from retailers.

Entry requirements: A degree, and years of experience as a marketing or sales 
manager. You may also need a qualification from the Chartered Institute of 
Marketing.

4. Aircraft pilots 

Includes: First officers of airlines, flight engineers, flying instructors, 
helicopter pilots.

Average pay before tax: £86,915.

Pay range: £68,354 (30th percentile) to £89,928 (60th percentile). Median is 
£86,855.

Annual change: Down by 0.6% (£521), which is reflective of the increase in 
budget airlines, says Brian Strutton, general secretary of the British Airline 
Pilots Association (BALPA). “Wages in these companies tend to be lower, 
therefore this reduces the average pilot wage across the board.”

Entry requirements: BALPA recommends good GCSE passes in maths, English, 
science and a second language and at least two good A-levels. With a Class 1 
medical certificate and a private pilot licence with 170 hours of flight time 
under your belt, you can then obtain a commercial pilot licence, which 
typically costs more than £100,000 and takes two years. You must build up 1,500 
flying hours to fully qualify as a commercial pilot.

5. Financial managers and directors 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhighest-paid-jobs-2016-ons-annual-survey-hours-earnings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7437ad8be3b975fc173fad2faf93e95e358381cc%2F0_155_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20are%20the%20highest%20paid%20jobs%20of%202016%20in%20the%20UK%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhighest-paid-jobs-2016-ons-annual-survey-hours-earnings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20are%20the%20highest%20paid%20jobs%20of%202016%20in%20the%20UK%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhighest-paid-jobs-2016-ons-annual-survey-hours-earnings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7437ad8be3b975fc173fad2faf93e95e358381cc%2F0_155_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
 Financial managers’ pay has risen due to the concerns of businesses around the 
Brexit vote. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
Includes: Investment bankers, Treasury managers.

Average pay before tax: £84,675.

Pay range: £29,793 (10th percentile) to £104,849 (80th percentile). Median is 
£64,432.

Annual change: Up by 2.4% (£2,032), reflecting the concerns of businesses 
before the Brexit vote. “Demand has risen for candidates with the right 
financial skills – it’s not just about the bottom line and balancing the books 
now, it’s about looking ahead and identifying risks and opportunities,” says 
Anthony Walters, spokesperson for the Association of Chartered Certified 
Accountants (ACCA).

Entry requirements: A relevant degree typically, and a recognised accountancy 
or corporate finance qualification from a professional accountancy body, such 
as the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales, or the ACCA.

Does good UK jobs data mask an impending low pay problem? | Larry Elliott
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/19/does-good-uk-jobs-data-mask-an-impending-low-pay-problem>
6. In-house lawyers

 Includes: Attorneys, legal consultants.

Average pay before tax: £80,210.

Pay range: £36,610 (10th percentile) to £94,458 (75th percentile). Median is 
£69,058.

Annual change: Down by 1.1% (£882), following a decline in the number of 
in-house vacancies in the run-up to the EU referendum. “Candidates are more 
aware that to make the move from private practice to in-house they do have to 
take a cut on their basic salary,” says Rebecca Garland, spokesperson for 
in-house legal recruitment agency Barclay Simpson. “In-house legal departments 
have also been more inclined to stick rigidly to their salary budgets.”

Entry requirements: A law degree or postgraduate diploma. You will then need 
to complete a legal practice course (LPC) and win a two-year training contract.

7. Air traffic controllers

 Includes: Air traffic service assistants, flight planners. 

Average pay before tax: £81,132.


Pay range: £84,877 (median) to £88,645 (60th percentile). No other data about 
the pay range of air traffic controllers was available this year.

Annual change: Up by 3.8% (£3,045). A spokesperson for NATS, the main air 
navigation service provider in the UK, says salaries are high because 
individual controllers have responsibility for thousands of lives at one time. 
“It’s important we’re able to attract the best people.” However, he says the 
pay rise NATS offered to its own employees was “definitely lower” than 3.8%.

Entry requirements: Five GCSEs and a valid air traffic controller’s licence, 
which typically means passing the NATS vocational course. Fewer than 0.5% of 
applicants (15 out of 3,300) are successful each year.

8. Medical practitioners
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhighest-paid-jobs-2016-ons-annual-survey-hours-earnings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda50cee527970ba8c182229d75f4180a31116fd7%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20are%20the%20highest%20paid%20jobs%20of%202016%20in%20the%20UK%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhighest-paid-jobs-2016-ons-annual-survey-hours-earnings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20are%20the%20highest%20paid%20jobs%20of%202016%20in%20the%20UK%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhighest-paid-jobs-2016-ons-annual-survey-hours-earnings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda50cee527970ba8c182229d75f4180a31116fd7%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 The British Medical Council says many doctors will not receive the salaries 
outlined by the ONS in their career. Photograph: BSIP/UIG via Getty Images 
 Includes: Anaesthetists, hospital consultants, GPs, paediatricians, 
psychiatrists, radiologists, surgeons.

Average pay before tax: £78,386.

Pay range: £30,291 (10th percentile) to £132,613 (90th percentile). Median pay 
is £74,885.

Annual change: Down by 2.5% (£1,960). “The pay of all doctors has been 
steadily squeezed by successive pay freezes and cuts, with salaries falling 
back to levels seen around 10 years ago – despite rising patient demand and 
declining budgets for patient services,” a spokesperson for the British Medical 
Association says. “The starting salary for the vast majority of doctors is 
around £23,000. Many will not receive the salaries outlined by the ONS at any 
point in their career.”

Six surprisingly well-paid jobs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/aug/07/six-well-paid-jobs-careers> 
Entry requirements: A university degree from a medical school recognised by 
the General Medical Council. The British Medical Association then says to 
become a doctor you must undertake two years of foundation training, then 
another two years of core medical training, then between four and six years of 
specialty training or three years of training as a GP. To stay registered with 
the GMC, all doctors are expected to demonstrate their fitness to practise 
through gaining continuing professional development points every year.

9. IT and telecommunications directors
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhighest-paid-jobs-2016-ons-annual-survey-hours-earnings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b5dd19af5ade4e69dfa362e274a33f0aa1aeb6d%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20are%20the%20highest%20paid%20jobs%20of%202016%20in%20the%20UK%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhighest-paid-jobs-2016-ons-annual-survey-hours-earnings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20are%20the%20highest%20paid%20jobs%20of%202016%20in%20the%20UK%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhighest-paid-jobs-2016-ons-annual-survey-hours-earnings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b5dd19af5ade4e69dfa362e274a33f0aa1aeb6d%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 IT professionals are in short supply, says Geoff Smith of Experis. Photograph: 
Andrew Rich/Getty Images 
Includes: Technical directors of computer services.

Average pay before tax: £78,071.

Pay range: £42,471 (10th percentile) to £84,306 (75th percentile). Median is 
£71,161.

Annual change: Up by a huge 9.1% (£7,104), which Geoff Smith, managing 
director of IT workforce solutions provider Experis, says is no surprise. “IT 
professionals are in short supply, and with competition for top talent at an 
all-time high, companies are increasingly willing to pay more to bring in 
individuals with the right skills.”

Entry requirements: A degree (typically in programming, computer science or a 
related field) and several years of relevant experience.

10. Financial institution managers and directors 

Includes: Bank manager, insurance manager.


Average pay before tax: £75,169.

Pay range: £29,530 (10th percentile) to £91,543 (80th percentile). Median is 
£53,322.

Annual change: Down by 8.2% (£6,164). “All banks are frantically trying to cut 
costs,” says Sarah Butcher, editor-at-large of eFinancialCareers.com. “A 
combination of low interest rates, political uncertainty and the need to make 
big investments in technology infrastructure has been eating away at banks’ 
bottom lines.”

Entry requirements: You do not necessarily need a degree, just years of 
experience in the banking or the financial sector. You must also be an 
“approved person” to control a bank. That means passing the Financial Conduct 
Authority’s “fit and proper” test.

The average salary shown is the mean. Only full-time employed workers who 
stayed in the same job over the course of the entire 2015/2016 tax year were 
included. Reliable data was not consistently collected by the ONS for the 10th 
and 90th percentiles, so the pay range stated is the broadest available.

• This article was amended on 4 November 2016 to clarify details of the entry 
requirements for medical practitioners.
 