
The Financial Conduct Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/financial-conduct-authority> has studied 
a sample of spread-betting customers and found that 82% lost money on products 
offered by the industry called contracts for difference (CFDs). Is the 
regulator correct?

The FCA’s figure is broadly accurate, but it is not a new development. The 
ratio of losers to winners – about 80% of customers have always lost money – 
has long been financial spread betting’sdirty little secret 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/06/spread-betting-industry-loses-1bn-after-city-watchdog-steps-in>
.

That might not be a problem if their products were being sold as a form of 
leisure, in the same way that you may have an occasional flutter on the Grand 
National. But watching financial markets is nowhere near as much fun as 
watching sport and its complexity makes cricket’sDuckworth-Lewis method 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/ci/content/page/409991.html> seem like a GCSE 
maths question.

Spread-betting industry loses £1bn after City watchdog steps in
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/06/spread-betting-industry-loses-1bn-after-city-watchdog-steps-in>
So financial spread betting has to be marketed as an investment product. For 
the vast majority – the dentists and teachers dabbling with the equity and 
currency markets – it has never been anything close to that.

Why do most customers lose?

There are a few reasons, but the main one is that predicting the future is 
really difficult, even for professionals. It is rare to get a City fund manager 
who consistently outperforms the market over the long run, so what chance has 
the dentist from Dumbarton or the teacher from Truro got?

Secondly, the way these bets are structured puts the gambler at a 
disadvantage. For example, while there are no fees on a trade, you buy and sell 
shares depending on a “spread” around the actual price.

A share trading at 100p may need to be bought at 101p, from which your 
winnings and losses are calculated. If the share goes up by 1p, you would win 
nothing. If it goes down by a penny, you would lose 2p a share – or two times 
your stake.

Thirdly, buying shares in the traditional manner may provide an investor with 
an income via a dividend, which would need to be factored into any profit 
calculation. There are no dividends with spread betting.

Why do so many financial spread-betting companies sponsor football and rugby 
clubs?

It is not just sporting teams. The industry advertises heavily in all sorts of 
areas, especially the financial media, and runs educational courses to help 
improve its clients’ trading (which a cynic would say are really marketing 
events to tempt punters into betting for longer).

The reason for this effort stems from the ratio of losers to winners. If you 
are betting on a football match and lose, there is still a chance that you 
enjoyed the game (and the bet might have enhanced the entertainment).

The same has never been true of the financial markets, so if you are not 
winning, the betting soon becomes extremely tiresome. That means there are 
always a huge amount of spread-betting customers who quit, forcing companies to 
continually search for new customers.

But if people stop spread betting as soon as they realise they are losing 
money, is it really that dangerous?

That depends. You can lose a little over a long period of time, get bored of 
it and quit, and that should not be hugely damaging.

However, because spread betting can cause a customer to lose a lot more than 
their stake, they can end up with large debts if a market moves swiftly against 
them.

That is what happened in January 2015, when the Swiss national bank scrapped 
the €1.20 ceiling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/sep/06/switzerland-pegs-swiss-franc-euro>
 for the Swiss franc against the euro, which had been introduced in September 
2011 to prevent the “Swissie” from surging in value. Amateur traders ended up 
with five-figure debts.

How can you lose more than you stake?

This is because spread betting is a leveraged product: you borrow money to 
make larger bets than you could otherwise afford.

Let’s take shares in a fictional airline called Speedy Jet, which trade at 
about £1 each. With conventional share buying, if you want to own £1,000 of the 
airline’s shares, you need to buy 1,000 of them and pay the money upfront.

On a spread bet, you would place a bet of £10 per point to give you the same 
exposure. So if Speedy Jet shares rise by a penny – equivalent to a point – you 
would win £10, just as on the share trade.

However, the difference with a spread bet is that you would only need a 
fraction of £1,000 to take this position. So, for example, opening a £10 per 
point spread bet on Speedy Jet may require an initial deposit of £50 (at a 5% 
deposit rate), rather than the £1,000 upfront if you had bought the shares.

That allows customers to make larger bets than they might, which can work both 
ways. If Speedy Jet shares go up by 20p, you have risked £50 to win £200 (20 
points x £10). But the reverse is also true. If the shares lose 20p, you will 
have lost £200 – four times your stake.

The FCA said people were sometimes able to have leverage of 200 times, meaning 
they can take a £20,000 position with a £100 deposit.
 