
Like so many Parisians on 13 November, my friends and I stayed up the whole 
night, watching the news. We followed thetragedy of the terrorist attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/13/eyewitness-accounts-paris-attacks>
 online and checked in with all our friends on social media, while sirens 
blared down the boulevards outside. Paris was different when we woke up. The 
few people who had ventured out onto the empty streets seemed tense, which was 
understandable; everyone knew of someone who had died or been injured.

By Sunday, Paris <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> seemed to have 
returned to normal. My friend and I walked by Notre Dame, surrounded by 
Parisians and tourists, like on any other weekend. But as the several false 
alarms since have shown, an undercurrent of fear remains.

These brave faces displayed resilience among Parisians that didn’t surprise 
me. The attacks shocked Paris because they targeted a way of life. It’s a way 
of life that Parisians are (rightly) proud of, and one that continues to set 
the city apart from its rivals.

This year, the city topped the QS ranking of the best student cities in the 
world <http://www.topuniversities.com/best-student-cities>. Paris, which boasts 
18 universities that can compete on a world stage (and often find themselves at 
thetop end of league tables), is an especially great place for students. I 
recently moved here to study French language and culture at the Sorbonne, and 
though I am only two months in, I have not been disappointed.

Paris rated best student city in the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/dec/01/paris-rated-best-student-city-in-the-world>
Anna Greenburgh, an Oxford University graduate who is studying for a master’s 
degree in economics and psychology at the Sorbonne, says studying in Paris was 
“a dream opportunity”. The chance to improve her French and the Sorbonne’s 
reputable course was a perfect fit.


Because of its world-class institutions, Paris attracts an international 
audience. In my class, there are students from America, China and Brazil. This 
means French is our common language, and I can’t fall back on English.

Greenburgh also enjoys the international scope of her course: “I’m getting 
more perspectives on issues than I did at Oxford, where the majority of people 
on my course were raised in England.”

Students <https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> flock to Parisian 
universities for both their quality and good value. Tuition fees in Paris 
averaged just $2,400 (£1,594) in 2014. Experiencing a world-class education at 
a low cost comes at a price, though; international students are often surprised 
by French universities’ lack of resources.

Yannick Slade-Caffarel, a University of Sydney graduate who is studying for a 
master’s in political theory at Sciences Po, has found some of the university’s 
research facilities disappointing, though he admits that “the prestige is nice”.

Unfortunately, what you save on education, you might spend on accommodation. 
Expensive rent is unavoidable and, as Slade-Caffarel jokes, you may have to 
adjust “what one believes to be an appropriate amount of room for a human being 
to exist in”.

But as Paris is smaller than London, it is much easier to live centrally and 
my friends save money through flat shares. The internet is a student’s best 
friend;Appartager <http://www.appartager.com/> and La Carte des Colocs 
<http://www.lacartedescolocs.fr/> provide hundreds of student accommodation 
listings.

Excluding accommodation, student life in Paris comes chic and cheap. Even 
French haute cuisine is tailored to low student prices.Crous Paris 
<http://www.crous-paris.fr/>, an organisation that aims to improve the living 
conditions of students in Paris, has 15restaurants 
<https://www.sorbonne.fr/en/student-life-in-paris-and-in-the-ile-de-france-2/student-life-in-paris-and-in-the-ile-de-france/les-restaurants-universitaires-dans-paris-les-crous/>
 and 30 university cafeterias across the city. I regularly eat a remarkably 
good two-course meal for just over three euros.

For most students, Paris’s main draw is its cultural cache. “You can see world 
famous bands for 10 euros,” says Slade-Caffarel. The theatre is also good value 
for young people and the quality is world class.

Any day after class, I can walk in Hemingway’s footsteps through the Jardin du 
Luxembourg, drink coffee at the same cafés as Simone de Beauvoir and Sartre, 
and venture to Shakespeare and Company, the legendary bookshop established by 
Sylvia Beach. That unconquerable way of living makes up Paris’s charm – 
something that cannot be calculated into a ranking.

The 10 best cities in the world to be a student in 2016 – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/gallery/2015/dec/01/10-best-cities-in-the-world-to-be-a-student-2016-in-pictures>
Although Jean Jullien’s image of the Eiffel tower in a peace sign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/14/eiffel-tower-peace-sign-solidarity-paris-artwork>
 was re-posted throughout the world last month, a more intimately Parisian 
sentiment emerged with the hashtag#JeSuisEnTerrasse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/17/paris-rally-cafes-bars-memory-victims-defiance-isis-terror-attacks>
 (“I am on the terrace”). It was a joyful rebuttal to the attacks: no matter 
what you’ll do, we’ll still be Parisians. After the attacks, eating outside at 
a restaurant isn’t just a seating choice; it’s a gesture of defiance.

Almost two weeks on from the attacks, I was en terrasse with three friends. 
Everything had mostly returned to normal. We talked about classmates and 
colleagues, our rent costs and how we really ought to attend more art 
exhibitions. There was still fallout in our conversation; my friend’s train to 
the airport had been evacuated because of a bomb scare. But fear has mostly 
been replaced by Paris’s charm; we’re already talking about how we’d do 
anything to stay out here.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.

 