
One month to go

Sat in the centrally heated school Christmas concert, I sang, like countless 
others, In the Bleak Midwinter, not knowing the half of it. Christina 
Rossetti’s mournful, yearning poem, later set to music byGustav Holst 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/01/from-the-classical-archive-holst-conducts-planets-review-1920>
, was written in 1872, but speaks of a “bleak midwinter, long ago”, relocating 
the nativity to a chill northern landscape where, “Earth stood hard as iron, 
water like a stone.”

If Rossetti conjures a folk memory, the best candidate for that bleak history 
is the decade from 1430-1440, according toa new paper 
<http://www.clim-past.net/12/2107/2016/cp-12-2107-2016.pdf> published in 
Climate of the Past <http://www.climate-of-the-past.net/>, the open access 
journal of the European Geosciences Union. It was a period of “exceptional 
cold” driven by “chaotic internal variability within the climate system”. Crops 
failed, food and fuel prices rose. Malnutrition and famine struck many parts of 
Europe. Weakened populations fell prey to disease and pestilence, themselves 
worsened by environmental and living conditions.

It was such a threat to the medieval order that authorities responded by 
changing trade policy, banning food exports and introducing new approaches to 
protect people from hunger, such as communal granaries for storage.

In a warming world today, we are more used to rising temperatures leading to 
weather extremes and crop failures 
<http://www.foodsecurity.ac.uk/assets/pdfs/frp-severe-weather-uk-food-chain-resilience.pdf>
. In both 2007-2008 and 2010-2011, extreme climatic conditions led to food 
shortages and price rises globally. Drought and wildfires in Russia and Ukraine 
led to controls on wheat exports.

There is a huge amount we can learn from our own past and ability to engineer 
rapid change

A long-suspected irony of global warming is that Arctic ice-melt will slow or 
even switch off the Gulf Stream that warms Europe. An extraordinarily high
Arctic temperature anomaly 
<http://blog.ucsusa.org/erika-spanger-siegfried/global-warming-in-the-arctic-a-sensitive-climate-gone-off-the-rails>
 was one of 2016’s most alarming climate stories, with the freak temperature 
referred to as “insane” by theWashington Post 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/energy-environment/wp/2016/11/17/the-north-pole-is-an-insane-36-degrees-warmer-than-normal-as-winter-descends/?utm_term=.2d3c64bd81e2>
.

It now seems more likely that, rather than being plunged back into a medieval 
deep-freeze, consequential changes in the Gulf Stream will merelyslow the 
warming <https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2016/07/160711100940.htm> of 
Europe. But others have pointed out that this, linked to the sheer volatility 
and unpredictability of a warming climate, could still produce more severe 
winter weather patterns, such assnowfall and blizzards. 
<https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/did-a-slow-gulf-stream-make-the-east-coast-blizzard-worse/>

One thing Europe’s bleakest decade reminds us, is that even without two 
centuries of being destabilised by industrial pollution, as is the case today, 
the climate can flip rapidly and dramatically. For that reason, and to prevent 
loading nature’s environmental dice even more heavily against us, the 
obligation has fallen on the world’s wealthiest countries to change themselves 
as rapidly as the climate is capable of changing.

One of the most tenacious notions is that we are stuck with broadly the 
lifestyle choices and economy that we have. Yet 2016 has demonstrated how 
quickly politics can change. And there is a huge amount we can learn from our 
own past and ability to engineer rapid change, whether the uptake of new energy 
sources and technologies, the building of transport infrastructures and cities, 
or new social contracts to guarantee the health, education, freedom and rights 
of populations.

To grow the conversation on rapid transition, several organisations ranging 
from the New Weather Institute, toSteps 
<http://www.ids.ac.uk/project/social-technological-and-environmental-pathways-to-sustainability-steps-centre>
 at Sussex University, the Manchester Tyndall Centre for Climate Change 
Research, the Centre for Alternative Technology, and energy researchers at 
Leeds University and have beenworking together 
<http://steps-centre.org/events/transformations-events/> over the last year. In 
2017 they hope to push against a counsel of despair that the world will not 
live up tothe climate commitments made in Paris in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/12/paris-climate-deal-200-nations-sign-finish-fossil-fuel-era>
, and demonstrate how rapid change is not only possible but has happened before.

The next in this particular series of articles will be the last. It began 100 
months ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2008/aug/01/climatechange.carbonemissions>
 with the objective of charting action in a crucial period to address 
potentially catastrophic climate change.

Back then, we proposed that with conservative estimates, this was the period 
of time before it was no longer “likely” that we would stay below a temperature 
rise of 2C. For the last of the series I will be asking a range of people what 
our chances are now, and what it will take to stay the right side of that line, 
and go further to meet the Paris commitment of keeping to a maximum 1.5C rise.

Just as the climate can flip suddenly from cold to warm, there is every chance 
of a thaw in our frozen incapacity to accept the need for rapid change and act.
 