
NHS

The NHS in England enters 2017 with a familiar but worrying vortex of 
inter-linked problems causing acute concern. That the service does not have the 
money it needs, despite record levels of investment, is so obvious as to not 
need restatement. It is chronically short of human resources, too; not just 
GPs, nurses and paramedics but also radiologists, anaesthetists, occupational 
therapists and many others. And this at a time when more patients are seeking 
more care. Poor staff morale and early retirement are real worries. And the now 
routine breach of once-vital waiting-time targets in A&E, planned operations 
and cancer treatment belies government claims that theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> “is performing well”. All this makes 
Prof Chris Ham, the King’s Fund’s usually calm and measured chief executive, 
refer to “a health service on the brink”.

There are several reasons to believe that 2017 could see the NHS visibly wilt 
or even fall over in the face of ever-rising demand.

First, a service that in early December ran out of intensive care beds for 
children who might die, forcing some to be cared for miles from home, and which 
regularly has to send young people with eating disorders to Scotland to be 
treated, is clearly struggling at the outer limits of its ability to do what 
patients need and ministers expect. There will be more of the same shortages in 
coming months in other areas of specialist care.

Second, NHS bosses are increasingly worried that quality and/or safety of care 
could become impossible to maintain. There is particular concern that the lack 
of ambulances, exacerbated by record numbers of them being stuck outside 
hospital because the A&E unit there is too busy to accept their patient, could 
result in tragedies.

Third, 2017 is the year when NHS England’s chief executive, Simon Stevens, has 
to make significant progress with transforming how the NHS delivers care 
through the Sustainability and Transformation plans (STPs) in 44 areas of 
England. But this under-the-counter massive reorganisation of the NHS could 
blow up into a huge political stink, fuelled by protests against A&E and 
maternity unit closures. That Theresa May voiced alarm at the potential impact 
of STPs to Stevens when they first met on 8 Septembersuggests the clinical 
evidence for reform may be jettisoned for short-term political ends.

May’s determination not to give the NHS any more than the £8bn already pledged 
and her insistence that it cracks on with making what most experts (and 
Stevens) regard as undeliverable levels of efficiency savings and her 
repetition of bogus claims about health funding all bode ill not just for the 
service, its staff, patients and for Stevens, a potential whipping boy if the 
NHS becomes toxic, but also for herself. Curiously, she seems not to have 
realised that – yet.

Denis Campbell

Welfare

During 2017, we might expect the prime minister to add policy substance to the 
words she delivered 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/statement-from-the-new-prime-minister-theresa-may>
on the steps of No 10 last summer, when she promised to fight for the “just 
about managing” families for whom “life is a struggle”, and to create a country 
“that works for everyone”. A green paper on social justice setting out her 
broad ambitions is expected in late February; whether this will seriously 
address the urgent issues of rising poverty and inequality fuelled by the 
austerity policies that she inherited (and indeed, as a cabinet minister, voted 
for) remains to be seen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fsociety-2017-prisons-homelessness-welfare-reforms-nhs-social-care%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2663109cd704d395ba716ad5634af174dde093a%2F0_146_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20does%202017%20hold%20for%20public%20services%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fsociety-2017-prisons-homelessness-welfare-reforms-nhs-social-care%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20does%202017%20hold%20for%20public%20services%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fsociety-2017-prisons-homelessness-welfare-reforms-nhs-social-care%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2663109cd704d395ba716ad5634af174dde093a%2F0_146_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 Further benefit cuts will keep food banks in business. Photograph: Martin 
Godwin for the Guardian 
May has promised no more new benefit cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/18/no-more-welfare-cuts-under-theresa-may-says-minister-damian-green-end-to-austerity>
 in this parliament, but thecombined effect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/20/just-about-managing-families-to-be-2500-a-year-worse-off-by-2020-study>
 of existing and planned ones will continue to cause havoc, whilebenefit 
sanctions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/30/benefits-sanctions-a-policy-based-on-zeal-not-evidence>
 and failures to tacklebenefit payment delays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/14/spike-food-bank-usage-blamed-delays-benefit-claims-frank-field>
 will keep food banks busy. The first of the new “old” cuts is thetwo-child 
policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/21/two-child-cap-child-benefit-un-snp>
, arriving in April. This limits tax credits and universal credit to the first 
two children in a household. By 2020-21, 600,000 more children will be in 
poverty; all of them in families with three or more children,according to the 
Institute for Fiscal Studies <https://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/8171>; the 
two-child policy alone will account for a third of this increase.

Other poverty drivers include the April introduction of £30-a-week cuts to 
Employment and Support Allowance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/27/lords-defeat-tories-esa?CMP=share_btn_tw>
 payments to new sick and disabled claimants who have been judged unfit to 
work. By then, the extended benefit cap will be fully rolled out,impoverishing 
tens of thousands of households 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/01/extended-benefit-cap-hit-116000-families-housing-experts>
 and putting many at risk of eviction.

Less visible but equally pernicious will be the impact of the ongoing freeze 
to benefit levels, currently running through to 2020. This will leave the 
poorest struggling to keep up with the rising cost of basics such as food and 
energy, and willwiden the gap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/10/low-income-families-private-housing-rent-benefit-freeze>
 between rising rents and housing benefit support.

The modest adjustments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/21/millions-affected-by-universal-credit-cuts-to-be-partly-compensated-by-chancellor>
 benefits of the Tories’ flagship welfare reform, universal credit (UC), for 
most just about managing families are slender or non-existent, as Tory MPs are
beginning to notice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/21/theresa-may-tory-backlash-cuts-in-work-benefits-universal-credit>
. This year will be a moment of truth for UC, reckons the Child Poverty Action 
Group. Its chief executive, Alison Garnham, asks: “Will it be fit for families? 
Or simply an elaborate way to leave families worse off?”

Patrick Butler

Housing

Part way through 2016, all seemed lost with the housing bill, before a change 
of government admitted what campaigners and housing experts had said all along: 
the Conservatives’ housing planswere unworkable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/22/death-pay-to-stay-government-housing-act-crumbling>
. The scrapping of pay to stay, the policy that planned to charge working yet 
low-earning tenants extra rent, and the U-turn on extending the right to buy to 
housing associations were welcomed by housing campaigners in 2016, but two big 
policy issues remain.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fsociety-2017-prisons-homelessness-welfare-reforms-nhs-social-care%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa36579df1428fc34cc193930d6e701a783249508%2F0_294_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20does%202017%20hold%20for%20public%20services%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fsociety-2017-prisons-homelessness-welfare-reforms-nhs-social-care%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20does%202017%20hold%20for%20public%20services%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fsociety-2017-prisons-homelessness-welfare-reforms-nhs-social-care%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa36579df1428fc34cc193930d6e701a783249508%2F0_294_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 A homeless woman known as Mary who sleeps opposite New Street station in 
Birmingham. The number of rough sleepers has soared. Photograph: Fabio De Paola 
for the Guardian 
The Local Housing Allowance cap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/dec/07/rent-gap-local-housing-allowance>
, which limits the amount of housing benefit households can receive to a third 
of local market rents, will cause increased poverty, misery and evictions. And
the 1% cut 
<https://www.gov.uk/guidance/welfare-reform-and-work-act-2016-social-rent-reduction>
 in the maximum housing benefit a social housing tenant can receive, which came 
in last April, will result in most households who claim it facing a shortfall 
between the housing benefit they are given and the rent their landlord expects. 
It also means councils can expect their revenues from rent to plummet, having a 
knock-on effect on their ability to build urgently needed new, affordable homes.

Street homelessness has rocketed 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/homelessness-statistics#rough-sleeping>
 andhundreds of thousands 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistical-data-sets/live-tables-on-homelessness>
 of people now live in temporary accommodation. May’s government needs to 
invest in social housing and prevent homelessness, rather than making noises 
about boosting home ownership. But the prospect of the government doing just 
that in 2017 seems highly unlikely.

Dawn Foster 

Social care

What everyone in social care is wondering is whether the recent long-awaited 
focus on the sector’s crisis is sustained into the new year, or proves yet 
another false dawn.

Ministers were shamed into cobbling together a belated funding package for 
social care via English councils, after neglecting it completely in the autumn 
statement three weeks before. That the cash is nowhere near enough, nor new 
money for local government, is in that respect not the main point.

The key strategic challenge for the sector in 2017 will be to develop the 
momentum needed to ensure that political and public pressure makes social care 
a top agenda item for the next comprehensive spending review in 2020.

The day-to-day challenge will remain keeping the show on the road. The extra 
£900m that ministers say they are bringing forward for social care over the 
next two years, if all councils opt to put 3% on council tax specifically for 
care and support 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/15/council-tax-bills-can-rise-by-3-for-two-years-to-help-fund-social-care-says-javid>
, compares with a£1.9m shortfall 
<https://www.kingsfund.org.uk/press/press-releases/autumn- statement-2016> next 
year alone on the joint calculations of leading thinktanks. It is hard to see 
anything other than a continued screwing down of prices paid by councils for 
social care services and a continued tightening of eligibility for those 
services.

Will a big care home chain collapse next year? Unlikely. As long as the chains 
have empty beds, they will benefit from the closures of small operators that 
account for the current fall in overall capacity. Much more worrying is the 
state of the home care market, where leading providers have been scrambling for 
the exit.

As Simon Stevens, NHS England’s chief executive, told MPs, urging a 
fundamental rethink of spending priorities, a free bus pass is of little use to 
an older person if they can’t get out of the house for want of home help. May 
has said the government is starting internally to look atlong-term funding 
reform for social care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/dec/21/theresa-may-recognises-social-care-crisis-but-solution-seems-far-off>
, but even if it ever comes to pass, there is a lot more pain to endure along 
the way.

David Brindle

Criminal justice

The prisons crisis and the changing priorities for the police that come from 
rises in reports of sexual violence, child abuse and sexual exploitation will 
continue to dominate criminal justice. Within the prison system the crisis will 
manifest itself in continued volatility, including disturbances, escapes and 
suicides.

The new justice secretary, Liz Truss, will produce her prisons and courts bill 
in the new year. It will attempt to stabilise the situation with extra staff 
and a reform programme of budgetary freedom for individual governors, combined 
with performance league tables. A high-profile prison closure, such as that of 
the Victorian Pentonville, is likely to be combined with the opening of new 
supersized jails, but without serious sentencing reform the record 85,000 jail 
population will continue to blight a system in meltdown.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fsociety-2017-prisons-homelessness-welfare-reforms-nhs-social-care%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F181fac446d30490e3904d5d0c77fd8384ebb83d9%2F0_142_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20does%202017%20hold%20for%20public%20services%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fsociety-2017-prisons-homelessness-welfare-reforms-nhs-social-care%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20does%202017%20hold%20for%20public%20services%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fsociety-2017-prisons-homelessness-welfare-reforms-nhs-social-care%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F181fac446d30490e3904d5d0c77fd8384ebb83d9%2F0_142_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Riot police outside HMP Birmingham after riots broke out in December 2016. 
Photograph: Joe Giddens/PA 
The instability in the prison system will overshadow an equally acute crisis 
in probation, where the fragmentation and the poor performance of the 21 new 
community rehabilitation companies will finally be held to account. Truss can 
be expected to produce a similarly robust reform plan to mitigate the worst 
impact of Chris Grayling’s part-privatisation of the probation service when a 
review reports in April.

In policing, , after Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe announced he would retire in 
February, the first female commissioner could be appointed to the job of 
running the biggest force in the country, the Metropolitan police, but whoever 
takes on the role will be faced with the continuing impact of crimes relating 
to public protection – child abuse, rape, sexual violence and child sexual 
exploitation. The number of rapes on adults recorded by police has doubled in 
the past four years from 10,160 reports in 2011-12 to 23,851 in 2015-16. 
Meanwhile, the post-Jimmy Savile effect of a huge rise in reports of child 
sexual abuse, both historical and recent, will continue.

Sandra Laville 

Disability

When it comes to the key policy matters set to affect disabled people in 2017, 
the signs suggest it will be a case of “political boiling point”. Central is 
likely to be the government’s handling of its ongoing pledge to halve the 
disability employment gap (read, perhaps, reduce benefits spending). The 
government’sconsultation on disability, health and work 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/work-health-and-disability-improving-lives>
 will close in February and a white paper is expected by the end of the year. 
From what waspreviewed in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/31/government-aims-to-halve-disability-employment-gap-in-uk>
, we can expect anything from a review of the system of statutory sick pay to 
an overhaul of the much criticised work capability assessment.

Crucially, a long touted – and also widely criticised – cut to out-of-work 
sickness benefits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/17/tory-mps-call-for-welfare-cuts-rethink-after-pause-motion-passed>
 will finallycome into force in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/29/employment-and-support-allowance-the-disability-benefit-cuts-you-have-not-heard-about>
, taking £30 a week from all new claimants assigned to the work-related 
activity group of ESA because they are deemed well enough to “prepare for a 
job” but are currently unable to work.

Following Brexit, disability charity Scope fears disabled people will be 
particularly at risk from losingEU employment rights protection 
<http://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?catId=82&langId=en> (for example, the 
right not to be discriminated against at work), as well as the specialist 
employment services currently backed by theEuropean Social Fund 
<http://ec.europa.eu/esf/main.jsp?catId=381>. 

Frances Ryan

Local government

Will several large English councils warn the government next year that they 
are close to bankruptcy as unprecedented funding pressures bear down on them? 
That is the burning question after six years of severe austerity, when support 
for many services has been cut by 50%. Unlike Whitehall departments and NHS 
trusts, local councils have a legal duty to balance their books.

Rob Whiteman, chief executive of the normally cautious Chartered Institute of 
Public Finance and Accountancy (Cipfa), which represents senior finance staff, 
warns insolvency is looming for some.

“There is a law of financial gravity here that no matter how hard they try – 
after Herculean efforts over six years – a force is bearing down on them which 
they cannot control,” he says. “Some are close to the brink.”

Fears are growing that two large councils may be forced to set in motion 
emergency procedures, such as issuing a special notice to the government 
warning of looming financial catastrophe and freezing all spending –measures 
previously undertaken in the London borough of Hackney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2002/jan/19/society.politics> early in the last 
decade – as a prelude to more drastic action. With authorities facing a£5.8bn 
funding gap 
<http://www.local.gov.uk/web/guest/media-releases/-/journal_content/56/10180/8106439/NEWS>
 by 2020 – when, ominously, they are all supposed to become self-financing – 
Gary Porter, Conservative leader of the Local Government Association,has warned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/25/local-government-councils-funding-gap-critical-budget-cuts-social-care-spending-review>
 that even if councils abandoned road repairs, stopped maintaining parks and 
open spaces, closed all libraries and children’s centres, and halted funding 
bus services, they still could not plug the hole.

By 2020, all councils will be able to keep revenues from business rates – 
currently distributed nationally according to a formula based on the needs of 
individual areas – in what the government has called a significant measure of 
decentralisation. Many poorer areas in the north and Midlands with low tax 
bases risk losing significant funds, while richer areas, mainly in London and 
the south-east, could be significant gainers. With the first contests for 
directly elected mayors likely in eight areas of England under so-called 
devolution deals, the Commons Public Accounts Committee has flagged up another 
problem:how will these new city-regions be held financially accountable? 
<https://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/public-accounts-committee/news-parliament-2015/local-enterprise-partnerships-devolution-england-report-published-16-17/>
 Meg Hillier MP, the committee chair, said serious questions needed answering 
by ministers at a time when public concern over the survival of basic council 
services was growing. But Whiteman is sure of one thing: if councils had taken 
the advice of the former local government secretary, Eric Pickles, and raided 
multibillion-pound reserves, some would now be bankrupt.

Peter Hetherington 

Refugees

Two years after David Cameron, as prime minister, announced that 20,000 of the 
most vulnerable Syrians would be resettled here by 2020, less than a quarter of 
that number have arrived. The long-awaited programme to bring in unaccompanied 
children from refugee camps across Europe who have family ties to Britain was 
stopped after around 750 were admitted from Calais.

Court cases are planned by campaigners, who claim the UK is breaking its own 
rules.

The impact of cutbacks in Britain means that in 2017 charities are supporting 
refugees with little or no state support.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fsociety-2017-prisons-homelessness-welfare-reforms-nhs-social-care%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb93837514a4ca71243c2621426057526a5818fc%2F0_117_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20does%202017%20hold%20for%20public%20services%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fsociety-2017-prisons-homelessness-welfare-reforms-nhs-social-care%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20does%202017%20hold%20for%20public%20services%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fsociety-2017-prisons-homelessness-welfare-reforms-nhs-social-care%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb93837514a4ca71243c2621426057526a5818fc%2F0_117_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 Citizens UK hold an event to welcome refugees in Croydon in October. 
Photograph: Martin Godwin for the Guardian 
There could be more focus on Britain’s controversial use of its detention 
facilities – half of all asylum seekers, including children, find themselves
locked up in the UK’s nine detention centres at some point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/19/child-refugees-asylum-seekers-detained-adult>
. Yarls Wood in Bedfordshire has become the focus for human rights campaigners’ 
anger over how the Home Office is perceived to treat asylum cases – harshly. 
Dogged with allegations of harassment and abuse, Yarls Wood sees regular 
protests outside, which are growing in size.

The number of migrants living rough on Britain’s streets is likely to grow. 
East Europeans as well as refused asylum seekers. Refused asylum seekers – only 
41% of applications are accepted in Britain, one of the lowest rates in Europe 
– will cause an extra issue because as we head for Brexit, EU deals on forcible 
returns will no longer apply here, which could make the UK the place to go for 
migrants who have been turned away by other states. They will swell our 
underclass of illegal immigrants, many destitute or working and living in 
terrible conditions in the black economy.

Tracy McVeigh

Civil service

One word will continue to dominate the outlook for the civil service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/oct/28/brexit-civil-service-tough-negotiations-careers>
 in 2017: Brexit. There will be no other game in town. Brexit will dictate 
departmental priorities and policies, shaping or scuppering civil service 
careers, as the negotiations to leave the European Union hoover up talent and 
resources across Whitehall.

Former head of the civil service Bob Kerslake has already warned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/22/civil-service-unable-to-cope-with-brexit-bob-kerslake>
 that the civil service may not be able to cope with the Brexit workload. Some 
policies will have to take a back seat, and Whitehall’s bosses, the 
departmental permanent secretaries, will have to fight hard for their own 
priorities, given the£122bn black hole  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/nov/23/autumn-statement-2016-philip-hammond-brexit-growth-deficit-housing-jams-universal-credit-minimum-wage-live>
in public finances, half of which is directly due to Brexit, according to the 
Office for Budget Responsibility.

Austerity in public spending may be over officially, but in practice ministers 
will be looking for more cuts in civil service departments, in partto be seen 
to be putting money into the NHS and social care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/28/brexit-means-only-major-crisis-will-focus-ministers-on-to-nhs>
 following dire warnings that both could lose out as Brexit dominates the 
agenda.

Is the civil service in good shape to face these challenges? It depends who 
you ask. At a recentevent 
<https://www.instituteforgovernment.org.uk/events/100-years-cabinet-secretaries-six-conversation>
 held by the Institute for Government thinktank, the cabinet secretary, Sir 
Jeremy Heywood, said that if the civil service was “so cowed that it can’t put 
its own advice forward, unadulterated, then I think you’ve got a problem”.

Heywood added that his own experience had been that the political side of the 
No 10 operation and the civil service side do work hand-in-hand in a 
cooperative way.

Heywood and the civil service chief executive, former BP boss John Manzoni, 
have stressed the need for a more flexible, efficient and responsive civil 
service, with better commercial skills, to deal with the challenges ahead. But 
the cumulative impact of six years of cuts, which have seen a20% fall in civil 
service staffing <http://www.civilservant.org.uk/information-numbers.html> from 
481,000 in 2010 to 385,000 in September 2016, has taken its toll. Brexit will 
provide some civil servants with opportunities to shine, but many more are 
going to find 2017 a strain.

Jane Dudman
 