
What is Safe Schools?


Safe Schools is an $8m four-year federally funded national program that began 
in 2013 with bipartisan support. It grew out of a Victorian scheme to create 
safe and supportive schools for same sex-attracted, gender diverse and intersex 
young people. Schools can voluntarily join the Safe Schools Coalition in their 
state, which mostly provides training for teachers and other staff. An 
eight-part All of Us lesson plan may be taught in part or in full to students 
at the school’s discretion – theSafe Schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/safe-schools> staff do not teach 
this course.

What are the federally mandated changes to Safe Schools?

Daniel Andrews says he won't take advice 'from bigots' on Safe Schools
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/15/australia-daniel-andrews-says-he-wont-take-advice-from-bigots-at-safe-schools-launch>
After controversy this year, the federal government commissioned the Louden 
review <https://docs.education.gov.au/node/40001>. It largely supported the 
content of Safe Schools as educationally sound and robust but made minor 
suggestions for changes. The government’schanges announced in March 
<http://www.senatorbirmingham.com.au/Latest-News/ID/2997/Statement-on-Safe-Schools-Coalition>
 went beyond these recommendations, including restricting it to secondary 
schools, requiring parental consent for students to take part in lessons, and 
parental bodies to agree to a school’s participation in Safe Schools. Federal 
funding expires next year and the government has said it will not renew it.


What about Victoria <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria>?

Victoria rejected the federal changes and will continue with the original 
program – it is no longer part of the national coalition. The Australian 
Capital Territory has said it will also self-fund the original program.

State by state

Victoria

The Andrews Labor government rejected the federal overhaul, and will continue 
with the original program, forgoing federal funding and contributing $1m to 
cover costs. The Liberal opposition wants the program scrapped and replaced 
with an anti-bullying program that avoids a “fringe ideological agenda”.

 School involved: 284 school names are listed publicly. From the end of 2017, 
it will be mandatory for all government schools to be involved. Independent 
schools can choose to do so.

Australian Capital Territory

Along with Victoria, has rejected federal changes, and announced it will 
contribute $100,000 to continue the program as it is.

 Schools involved: 24, listed publicly.*

New South Wales

The Baird government supports federal reforms, with the premier calling them 
“sensible and reasonable”, but several Liberal MPs continue to oppose the 
program, with one calling it a“Trojan horse for far-left extremists” 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-09-22/liberal-mp-calls-for-safe-schools-program-to-be-scrapped-in-nsw/7870046>
. The Labor opposition supports the program.

'She’s just a happy little girl now': the Safe Schools effect on students
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/14/shes-just-a-happy-little-girl-now-the-safe-schools-effect-on-students>
 Schools involved: 128, names withheld.

South Australia

The Labor government has criticised federal reforms, and called on Canberra to 
continue funding the program, but has not announced that it will do so itself. 
The Liberal opposition says it will not continue funding Safe Schools if it 
wins the next election.

 Schools involved: 70, listed publicly.

Queensland

 There have been calls for Safe Schools to be mandatory in Queensland schools 
afterthe death of a 13-year-old boy in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/25/teenager-killed-himself-after-constant-bullying-about-his-sexuality>
 following years of homophobic bullying. The Palaszczuk Labor governmentsays it 
will remain voluntary for schools to participate 
<http://www.couriermail.com.au/news/queensland/tyrone-unsworth-protesters-call-for-safe-schools-program-in-queensland-schools/news-story/e5ec502f0f5589e33a4db3b129223b42>
. The Liberal National party opposition this year called for an “urgent” review 
of the program, saying it had been “hijacked” by activists.

 Schools involved: 29, no public register after some schools reportedly 
harassed.

Western Australia 

The Barnett government faces an election in March and has announced it will 
not continue funding Safe Schools after federal money runs out –schools can 
fund it themselves out of existing budgets. 
<http://www.perthnow.com.au/news/western-australia/wa-state-election-mp-peter-abetz-bags-out-safe-schools-to-win-votes/news-story/a2119a85258643107d834f18283f9f32>
 The Labor opposition says that, if it wins the election, it will provide 
$350,000 over four years to continue the program for public secondary schools 
that want it.

Caving in to the right on Safe Schools could undermine Turnbull's greatest 
asset | Lenore Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/17/caving-in-to-the-right-on-safe-schools-could-undermine-turnbulls-greatest-asset>
 Schools involved: 26, publicly listed

Tasmania

The Liberal government has supported the federal reforms and has indicated the 
program may be overtaken by a state-wide anti-bullying program in schools next 
year. Labor has criticised the federal reforms.

 Schools involved: 20, publicly listed

Northern Territory

Schools involved: none 

• All figures as of end of September 2016
 