
The NHS reported last week that 12.6% of women in England aged 16 to 24 
screened positive for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/29/self-harm-ptsd-and-mental-illness-soaring-among-young-women-in-england-survey>
 in a national study, compared with just 3.6% of their male peers. These 
findings were especially alarming as only 4.2% of women in this age bracket 
were identified as having PTSD in 2007. Although the assessments carried out in 
the two surveys differed somewhat, the new data seemingly implies a rising 
epidemic of PTSD among young women in England today.

The principal cause of PTSD is exposure to an extremely stressful, often 
life-threatening, event. Stressors that are unpredictable, uncontrollable and 
especially terrifying are those most likely to produce the disorder. 
Interpersonal violence, such as combat, rape, torture and domestic abuse, 
usually triggers PTSD more often than accidents, natural disasters, and events 
not involving deliberate intent to harm.

PTSD is a disorder of vivid memory. Sufferers do not merely remember their 
trauma; they re-experience it emotionally in the form of involuntary, 
distressing thoughts; nightmares about the trauma; and sudden sensory 
“flashbacks” of sights, sounds and odours that produce the illusion that it is 
happening once again.
 ‘A psychological debriefing group consisting of firefighters or employees of 
a recently robbed bank was typical, although it was also used for individual 
survivors.’ Firefighters in Scotland. Photograph: Alamy 
Yet the mind does not operate like a video recorder, infallibly encoding our 
experiences, traumatic or otherwise. And recollection is not like a replay of 
one’s experience. Rather, autobiographical recall entails reassembly of encoded 
elements of the event distributed throughout the brain.

Terror during trauma focuses one’s attention, strengthening memory for the 
most salient features of the experience, and occasionally at the expense of 
less salient ones as the phenomenon of “weapon focus” illustrates. Victims of 
armed robbery often encode and thus can recall details about the weapon, but 
sometimes fail to encode information such as the clothing worn by the 
assailant. Likewise, traumatised refugees seeking asylum who provide vivid 
accounts of an assault sometimes misremember the precise date that it took 
place. The upshot is that intense emotion at the time of an experience tends to 
produce robust memories of it. Hence, PTSD sufferers remember their trauma all 
too well.

Understandably, people with PTSD tend to steer clear of reminders of their 
trauma as best as they can. Activities, places, people and thoughts associated 
with the experience are avoided as much as possible lest intrusive memories 
become triggered. Sufferers are hypervigilant for potential threats, startle 
easily and are often irritable. Their sleep is disturbed, and their ability to 
concentrate in everyday life becomes difficult. They often lose interest in 
previously enjoyed activities, become disconnected from other people, and feel 
as if their capacity to experience positive emotions has disappeared. Finally, 
they can develop problematic beliefs, such as losing the capacity to trust 
other people and believing the world is an unpredictably dangerous place.

Mental illness soars among young women in England – survey
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/29/self-harm-ptsd-and-mental-illness-soaring-among-young-women-in-england-survey>
Acute symptoms of PTSD are common in the days following a trauma. But these 
must persist for at least one month before PTSD becomes diagnosable. Short-term 
stress reactions can be normal responses to an abnormal stressor, but the 
persistence of symptoms long after the stressor has passed is the hallmark of 
PTSD. For example, the clinical psychologist Barbara Rothbaum and her associates
assessed 95 survivors of rape or attempted rape 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jts.2490050309/abstract>. They 
found that 94% of them met symptomatic criteria for PTSD within the first two 
weeks following the assault. The rate dropped to 65% and then to 47% 
approximately one and three months, post-assault, respectively. About half 
recovered naturally, whereas the others failed to remit.

Although exposure to one or more traumatic events is by definition essential 
for PTSD to develop, most people exposed to such events never develop the 
disorder. One representative survey of American adults conducted by the 
epidemiologists Naomi Breslau and Ronald Kessler found that 89.6% of the 
general population had experienced at least one traumatic stressor such as a 
serious accident, natural disaster, rape or the unexpected death of a loved 
one, yet only 9.2% developed PTSD. Such findings indicate that trauma is 
common, but PTSD is relatively rare, hence implying that risk and resilience 
variables influence the psychological impact of traumatic events.

Yet for years the study of risk factors for PTSD was de facto taboo for many 
working in the field of traumatic stress studies. After the diagnosisfirst 
appeared in 1980 
<http://www.ptsd.va.gov/professional/PTSD-overview/ptsd-overview.asp>in the 
third edition of the American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, or DSM-III, some warned that research 
on risk factors amounts to blaming victims for their plight. But identifying 
statistical predictors of PTSD among trauma survivors no more blames victims 
than identifying predictors of other psychological or medical conditions. 
Indeed, progress continues as researchers pinpoint risk and resilience 
variables. For example, having a personal or family history of anxiety or mood 
disorders increases risk of PTSD, whereas above-average cognitive ability and 
good social support decreases it.

The evidence suggests many trauma survivors may prefer to rely on family, 
friends and clergy rather than counsellors

The recent NHS study underscores the urgency of taking steps to prevent PTSD, 
and to treat it effectively when it does develop. Primary prevention entails 
decreasing the frequency of events likely to trigger the disorder. Secondary 
prevention targets people who have recently experienced trauma.

A once-popular approach called “psychological debriefing” involved trained 
counsellors conducting a single session with trauma-exposed individuals shortly 
after their horrific experience. For example, a group consisting of 
firefighters or employees of a recently robbed bank was typical, although it 
was also used for individual survivors. The purpose was to prevent the 
emergence of chronic, post-traumatic reactions by having survivors describe 
aloud their thoughts and feelings during the trauma, reliving it while 
processing their emotions in the session.

Although debriefed individuals expressed gratitude for the efforts of their 
counsellors, dissemination of the method was premature. Indeed, most randomised 
controlled trials (RCTs) indicated that debriefed and non-debriefed trauma 
survivors did not differ in terms of symptoms at follow-up, whereas in other 
RCTs debriefing actually impeded natural recovery from trauma; non-debriefed 
survivors were doing better psychologically at follow-up than the debriefed 
ones.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fwhat-is-post-traumatic-stress-disorder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3872af5e245b1030ee9550897cfd0b93cf068e97%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20is%20PTSD%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Richard%20J%20McNally&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fwhat-is-post-traumatic-stress-disorder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20is%20PTSD%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Richard%20J%20McNally&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fwhat-is-post-traumatic-stress-disorder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3872af5e245b1030ee9550897cfd0b93cf068e97%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Veterans work in the gardens and greenhouses at the charity Gardening Leave in 
Ayrshire, Scotland. Photograph: Murdo MacLeod for the Guardian 
Taken together, this evidence suggests that many trauma survivors may prefer 
to rely on family, friends and clergy rather than professional counsellors. 
Having professional counsellors available is important, but compelling 
survivors to undergo psychological debriefing is not.

The story of the rise and fall of psychological debriefing makes an essential 
point. We must not rely on clinical intuition alone when treating survivors of 
trauma. They deserve better. Furthermore, the methods we devise must undergo 
rigorous evaluation in RCTs. This is precisely what leading clinical 
researchers have been doing. There are effective cognitive-behavioural 
therapies developed and tested by clinicians, such as Edna Foa and Patricia 
Resick in the US, Metin Başoğlu and Anke Ehlers in the UK, and Richard Bryant 
in Australia, among others.

An important element of these evidence-based therapies is the gradual, 
systematic exposure to traumatic memories until their capacity to trigger 
distress diminishes. Although most PTSD patients benefit from these treatments, 
others terminate treatment prematurely or fail to recover. We need to continue 
to explore and evaluate new interventions to help those who continue to suffer.
 