
What are credit unions?

A credit union is a co-operative offering current accounts, savings accounts 
and loans to its members. Traditionally, members have had to share something in 
common, such as a locality, industry or workplace. This is known as a common 
bond. In 2012, the law changed so that credit unions can offer membership to 
people who don’t share that common bond.

How long have they existed?

The first credit unions were formed in Germany in the 19th century, and the 
idea later spread to the US and elsewhere. The UK was late to the party: one of 
the first credit unions in Britain was the Hornsey co-operative, formed in 1964 
by West Indian immigrants who couldn’t get access to loans from banks.

What is the advantage of joining a credit union? 

Credit unions <https://www.theguardian.com/money/credit-unions> are run for 
the benefit of their members, not for shareholders, so there are no management 
charges on savings or loans.

They are a particularly good option for people who are on low incomes. Credit 
unions tend to be more more flexible than traditional lenders, says Lindsey 
Appleyard, a research fellow at Coventry University. “They respond to people’s 
needs; so if they need to wait an extra couple of days for their loan to be 
repaid or if they need to make the payments lower for a longer period of time, 
they have the facility to do so.”

Poverty premium: why it costs so much more to be poor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/nov/10/poverty-premium-costs-poor-energy-phone-tariffs-councils>
Is the UK credit union movement growing? 

Yes. Growth was slow at first, and it took 40 years for credit unions to reach 
half a million members. In the last 10 years, however, that membership has 
doubled:new figures <http://www.abcul.org/media-and-research/news/view/621> 
from the Bank of England show that there are now 1.1 million adult members of 
credit unions, which haveassets of £1.2bn 
<http://www.birmingham.ac.uk/Documents/college-social-sciences/social-policy/CHASM/briefing-papers/2015/bp9-2015-credit-unions-uk(2).pdf>
.

The Association of British Credit Unions Limited <http://www.abcul.org> 
(ABCUL) hopes that membership will reach 2 million by 2020. The movement has 
been helped to grow by £38m offunding from central government 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/further-investment-to-secure-future-of-credit-unions>
 in the last two years.

What are the challenges facing credit unions?

Not everyone is aware of credit unions – they don’t have the capacity of 
payday lenders to advertise their services.

To be sustainable, credit unions have to attract better-off people to save 
with them. Making lots of small loans is expensive, so credit unions also have 
to attract more credit-worthy members who want to take out larger, long-term 
loans. Frank McKillop, policy manager at ABCUL Scotland, says they face 
competition from other lenders: “People who are good for a loan are constantly 
being offered by credit.”

Many payday lenders offer their services over the internet, and are often 
prepared to make instant loans. Credit unions, traditionally offering a 
face-to-face service, have been left behind, but increasingly, says Appleyard, 
they are moving online in order to compete.

Are they markedly better than payday lenders? 

Yes – hugely so. Credit unions cannot charge more than 3% interest a month, 
which works out at 42.6% APR. Since January 2015, there has beena cap on payday 
lenders <https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/nov/11/payday-loans-caps-fca>, 
imposed by UK watchdog the Financial Conduct Authority, with interest and fees 
capped at 0.8% a day and the total cost of a loan limited to 100% of the 
original sum. As experts point out that still means payday lenders are far more 
expensive. “The cap for payday lenders is eight times more expensive than the 
most expensive credit union loan,” says McKillop.

Why are councils getting involved with credit unions? 

If local people are borrowing from local credit unions rather than payday 
lenders, the money stays within the community, boosting the local economy. 
Councils also want to prevent poorer residents from falling heavily into debt 
to high-interest lenders. Finally, councils benefit if their employees join 
credit unions –research 
<http://www.payandbenefitsmagazine.co.uk/article/money-worries-are-affecting-productivity>
 shows that money worries have an impact on productivity.

How are they getting involved?

Many encourage their employees to join credit unions. Others offer funding to 
credit unions or work in partnership with them. Leeds city council, for 
example, has helped increase membership of the Leeds City Credit Union from 
11,000 to 31,000 in 10 years. The council provides access to the credit union 
services through its own one-stop shops and community hubs.

Councils want to help people in financial crisis, but reality is bleak – on 
both sides
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/oct/27/councils-financial-crisis-budget-cuts-money-advice>
Which councils have the strongest links to credit unions?

Glasgow has very strong historic links. About 25% of the city’s population 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/sep/22/glasgow-credit-unions-payday-lenders>
 belongs to a credit union, and that is in part due to support from the city 
council. None of the city’s 34 credit unions is charged rates, says McKillop, 
and council officers provide the unions with guidance. Council employees can 
save in a credit union through their payroll, and also take out and pay back 
loans through payroll.

Earlier this year, Sheffield city council set up Sheffield Money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/aug/08/sheffield-money-payday-loans-rates-poverty>
 in response to research showing that that 50,000 people in the city were 
borrowing a total of £40m a year from high-cost lenders. It acts as a one-stop 
shop bringing together credit unions and other organisations, such asFive Lamps 
<http://www.fivelamps.org.uk/>, a charity providing loans, and white-goods 
providers willing to sell products with low-interest repayments. It’s a model 
that has attracted a lot of interest from other councils.

The service offers an initial triage to assess people’s needs – whether, for 
example, they need a loan or help managing their utility bills. Mazher Iqbal, 
cabinet member for public health and equality at Sheffield city council, who 
helped establish Sheffield Money, wants to make the service as accessible as 
possible: “If we can’t respond to what’s out there on the high street, we’ve 
lost the battle.”

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 