
A few years back, I got my knuckles rapped by a government minister. In 
public. It was 2010: David Cameron had just come to power, and he was about to 
thrust university students into a new regime of higher tuition fees and debt.

Against that backdrop, I’d written a column 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2010/aug/24/degrees-willy-nilly-not-helped-economy>
 criticising the way in which both Labour and Conservative governments marketed 
degrees as being some kind of social-mobility jetpack, zooming their wearers to 
more money and high-powered jobs. It was no such guarantee, I said, citing 
among other things Whitehall’s ownplunging estimates of how much more graduates 
earn over a lifetime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/21/students-i-lied-to-you-desperation-graduate-premium>
. Graduates, I said, would “probably end up doing similar work to their 
school-leaver parents – only with a debilitatingly large debt around their 
necks”.

For David Willetts <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidwilletts>, then 
universities minister, this was sheer and unpalatable sauce. In a speech to the 
annual conference ofUniversities UK 
<http://www.universitiesuk.ac.uk/Pages/default.aspx>, representing the top 
management of higher education, he named me – then tried to shame me. I was 
“wrong”, he claimed. Previous governments had indeed claimed that a graduate 
could expect to pull in £400,000 more over their lifetime than someone who 
hadn’t been to university. And, yes, his officials had knocked that estimate 
down to £100,000. But the difference, you see, was nothing to do with the 
increase in graduates – but “an improved methodology”. So I was “not comparing 
like with like”.Two Brains 
<http://www.totalpolitics.com/articles/313767/willetts-id-rather-be-twobrains-than-twochins.thtml>
, one slap!

Willetts has since left parliament and gone to a far, far better place: the 
Resolution Foundation <https://twitter.com/resfoundation>, an inequality 
thinktank that does much better work than the coalition government ever 
managed. But looking back, I shouldn’t have been surprised by either the 
reproof or the forum in which it was made. Tosprinkle even a little doubt over 
the instrumental value of a degree 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/sep/23/freshers-failed-experiment-higher-education>
 is to take on both thewell-paid managers of our universities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/03/new-breed-fat-cats-university-boss-vice-chancellors>
, and Whitehall orthodoxy.

Higher education is “a phenomenal investment”, Conservative ministers tell us 
– even withtuition fees at nine grand a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jun/22/9000-tuition-fee-graduates-focused-pay-high-fliers>
. Repayments are only theequivalent of one “posh coffee” a day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/feb/03/student-loan-repayments-same-posh-coffee-universities-minister-greg-clark>
, according to the then universities minister Greg Clark (who is now 
communities secretary). “I think people recognise that that is a phenomenal 
investment,” he said. “It’s not just a good investment for the student, but 
actually it’s a good investment for the taxpayer.” I’ve seen ads on daytime TV 
for loans that do a softer sell than that.

Anyone who still thinks Britain is a meritocracy must be deluded | Rhiannon 
Lucy Coslett
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/14/britain-meritocracy-graduate-earnings-social-mobility>
And the marketing is still wrong. Take a look at research published last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/13/richer-students-have-higher-graduate-income-study-finds>
 by a team of economists from Cambridge, Harvard and the Institute for Fiscal 
Studies. They found that at 23 universities men typically earned less even 10 
years after graduating than their counterparts who’d never been. The 
disparities are so yawningly wide that it makes a nonsense of talking about the 
“graduate premium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2011/aug/24/value-of-degree-shrinks-for-graduates>
”.

A student of economics at the LSE may walk into a City job and very soon be 
earning six figures. Their life and career will be utterly different from 
someone doing business studies, say, at apost-1992 university 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/sep/03/polytechnics-became-universities-1992-differentiation>
 close to home in the north-east, and then chooses to work in the same area. 
Yet both are deluged with the official and industrial marketing that a mortar 
board and gown is worth an extra £100,000 over a lifetime.

Both New Labour and the dwindling band of Cameronian Conservatives have 
peddled the line that higher education breaks down class barriers. Again, 
untrue: last week’s research shows that students from the richest families did 
better than everyone else in the graduate job market – and earned far more than 
even those who’d done the same course at the same university at the same time.

Ministers needed to sell universities to teenagers and their families – and in 
the process they have mis-sold them. In this new world of tuition fees and 
debt, children and their parents have been assured that degrees earn big 
salaries. At the same time, voters have been told that higher education brings 
social mobility. Both claims have been made far too broadly – and the losers 
are those now coming out of university with50 grand owing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/aug/15/students-say-no-50000-debt-uk-universities>
 to the student loan company, a socking great overdraft and the discovery that 
internships and coffee shops are the only prospects.

I and others have argued down the years that there is no point in creating 
more graduates unless you have more graduate-level jobs. Such a position 
strikes me as being so obvious as to be crass, but it has been ignored by 
successive governments.

The result can be seen in research published last August 
<http://www.cipd.co.uk/binaries/over-qualification-and-skills-mismatch-graduate-labour-market.pdf>
 by the Oxford economists Ken Mayhew and Craig Holmes. They found that the UK 
now has proportionately more graduates than any other rich country bar Iceland 
– yet uses their brains much less than most other countries: the 
“underutilisation” of graduates – at work but not using their skills – is 
higher in the UK than anywhere in the EU bar Romania, Greece, Croatia, Latvia 
and Slovenia.

So what are our graduates doing? Jobs that previously didn’t need a degree. 
Over one in 10 childminders (11.5%, according to the2014 Labour Force Survey 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/labour-force-survey-employment-status-by-occupation-april-to-june-2014>
) are graduates. One in six call-centre staff have degrees, as do about one in 
four of all air cabin crew and theme-park attendants. In a labour market 
flooded with graduates, picky employers are now able to take the CVs boasting a 
university education. And so any young person who didn’t go to university now 
stands to be treated as a second-class employee.

And universities – with the connivance of their vice-chancellors and marketing 
departments – have allowed themselves to be sold to the public largely as 
CV-finishing schools. It is a gross act of vandalism to have committed on a 
higher education system that the rest of the world once admired. And it has 
displaced all the other values that accrue both to the individual and to 
society from education. Critical thinking, public knowledge? You won’t get much 
change for those from a government that plans togag academics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/20/scientists-attack-muzzling-government-state-funded-cabinet-office>
 from using their publicly funded research to question public policy and hold 
politicians to account.

As for Willetts, he owes me an apology. But nothing like as big as the one he 
and his colleagues owe to tens of thousands of university graduates, stuck in 
low-paying jobs that don’t use their expensively acquired skills and certainly 
don’t pay off their vast debts.
 