
I have a 10-year-old Acer Aspire T660 
<http://acersupport.com/acerpanam/desktop/0000/Acer/AspireT660/AspireT660sp2.shtml>
 desktop with 640MB of memory and Windows Vista Premium installed. The whole 
system is getting slower and slower, including the instruction to print 
documents and/or photos to my HP printer/copier/scanner.

I use the PC for email, online banking, word processing and spreadsheets 
(Microsoft Office), Skype and some games. Broadband here to the house is poor.

Should I get another desktop PC or a laptop? How much do I need to pay for a 
faster replacement which gives me the facilities I have now?

I am retired (I’m 78) so I probably have a limited number of years ahead to 
enjoy a good replacement.John

You must have an enormous amount of patience to run Windows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/windows> Vista in 640MB or even 2GB of 
memory, and your best investment would have been to add as much memory as your 
PC could handle – in this case, 4GB. Sadly, it’s too late for that: it’s not 
worth spending money on a machine that is at the end of its useful life. On the 
plus side, almost anything will be a huge improvement.

Desktop or laptop?

You already have a desktop PC so you have the space, and you might be able to 
reuse your existing keyboard, mouse and screen.

Desktops have more space inside for cooling so they can run hotter, faster, 
cheaper processors than laptops. They are also much easier to upgrade and to 
repair. As a result, desktop PCs last up to twice as long as laptops – in my 
recent experience, eight to 10 years rather than four or five years – so they 
are much better value.

Desktop PCs also have better ergonomics – you can use them without hunching 
over – and usually have better keyboards and bigger screens. All of those are 
particularly beneficial to older users like us.

Different types of desktop

There are many different types of desktop PC. The traditional tower system is 
the most flexible, but there are dozens of smaller towers, including slimline 
and small form factor (SFF) versions.

There are also lots of mini-and micro-desktops that are not very expandable, 
and may use the same chips you would find in a laptop. They have their uses, 
but they sacrifice functionality for what they save in space.

Then there are all-in-one PCs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/askjack/2016/oct/20/which-all-in-one-pc-should-i-buy-for-home-use>
, where the computer electronics are behind the screen. With these, again, you 
may lose the chance to do easy upgrades and repairs. Also, if either the PC or 
the screen fails, you lose the whole machine.

Specification

Today’s standard mid-range desktops have 8GB of memory, a 1TB hard drive, a 
DVD/RW optical drive and MicrosoftWindows 10 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/windows-10>. Many also have built-in 
card readers and Wi-Fi, though you’ll get much better performance with the 
Ethernet cable you’re using with your Acer.

All mid-range desktops should therefore cost pretty much the same. The biggest 
variation comes from the price of the processor.

Intel has two main designs: Atom and Core. The Core chips are the fastest, and 
usually, the higher the code number, the better – and the costlier. The Atom 
chips are variously branded Atom, Celeron and Pentium. The Pentium versions are 
generally, but not always, better.

Other things being equal, go for the fastest CPU, because it will last longer. 
You can compare speeds by using Notebookcheck’sComparison of Mobile Processors 
(CPU Benchmarks) 
<http://www.notebookcheck.net/Mobile-Processors-Benchmark-List.2436.0.html>. 
You don’t need to bother with the numbers: the higher up the table, the better. 
Anything in the top 200 is good. (My own 2011-vintage desktop is still in the 
top 100.) I’d have doubts about anything that didn’t make the top 500, with the 
quad-core Pentium N3700 (519th) or J3710 being as low as I’d go.

Possible desktops

My current cheap recommendation is the Lenovo Ideacentre 510S 
<http://shop.lenovo.com/gb/en/desktops/ideacentre/510s/>. This is a traditional 
tower available in a vast range of specifications, with plenty of useful ports 
on the front. John Lewis has a version with an Intel Core i3-6100 processor, 
8GB of memory, 1TB hard drive and DVD/RW for£299.95 
<http://www.johnlewis.com/lenovo-ideacentre-510s-tower-pc-intel-core-i3-8gb-1tb-black/p2877309>
.

The 3.7GHz Intel Core i3-6100 is remarkably quick for an i3 chip, and can be 
almost as fast as a Core i5-6200U. (Of course, it runs much hotter, but that 
doesn’t matter in a desktop.)

PC World has the same Ideacentre 510S with 4GB of memory instead of 8GB for 
£259.99 
<http://www.pcworld.co.uk/gbuk/computing/desktop-pcs/desktop-pcs/lenovo-ideacentre-510s-desktop-pc-10146051-pdt.html>
. This has a much cheaper Celeron G3900 processor, which isslower than the Core 
i3-6100 
<http://www.cpu-world.com/Compare/269/Intel_Celeron_Dual-Core_G3900_vs_Intel_Core_i3_i3-6100.html>
 but still a good performer. Even if it had the same CPU, you’d be giving up 
£50-worth of memory to save £40.

HP’s Slimline 411 
<http://store.hp.com/UKStore/Merch/Product.aspx?id=T1J34EA&opt=ABU&sel=DTP> 
range of desktops offers cheaper but much less powerful options. For example, 
you could get one with a Pentium N3700, 4GB of memory, 1TB hard drive and 
DVD/RW for£229.95 
<http://www.johnlewis.com/hp-slimline-411-a020na-desktop-pc-intel-pentium-4gb-ram-1tb/p2509179>
 from John Lewis, or with 8GB for£299.99 
<http://www.argos.co.uk/product/5481710> from Argos.

If you buy direct from HP, you can add 3 years of “pickup and return” service 
for only £29, which is a bargain.

But the Pentium N3700 and (almost identical) J3710 really belong in cheap 
netbooks and Chromebooks, not in desktops. There are plenty of smartphones with 
faster processors than the Celeron N3050.

You can certainly get fantastic value for money if you spend £180 to £230 on a 
desktop, but you can get much better performance for £299.99.

Screen

As mentioned, you could use your existing monitor with your new desktop PC. 
However, I would strongly recommend buying a new one: screens have improved a 
lot in the past decade. Look for something in the 22-24in range with a 
resolution of 1920 x 1080 pixels, which is Full HD.

The 21.5in AOC e2270Swhn 
<http://www.pcworld.co.uk/gbuk/computing/pc-monitors/pc-monitors/aoc-e2270swhn-full-hd-21-5-led-monitor-10141924-pdt.html>
 would be a good choice if you want something cheap – it’s £79.99 at PC World – 
or try Amazon UK’s best seller, theBenQ GL2250HM 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/BenQ-GL2250HM-Widescreen-Multimedia-Speakers/dp/B00B7ZE0G2/>
, at £89.99 (21.5in) or £119.99 (24in).

Even better, you could get a 22in Samsung S22F350 for £89.95 at John Lewis 
<http://www.johnlewis.com/samsung-s22f350fhu-full-hd-led-monitor-22-/p3043718> 
or£99.99 at Argos <http://www.argos.co.uk/product/5318931>. Alternatively, go 
for the 24in Samsung S24F350 for£116.95 at John Lewis 
<http://www.johnlewis.com/samsung-s24f350fhu-full-hd-led-monitor-24-/p3044058>, 
or the S24F356 for£129.99 at PC World 
<http://www.pcworld.co.uk/gbuk/computing/pc-monitors/pc-monitors/samsung-s24f356-full-hd-24-led-monitor-10146160-pdt.html>
. (You won’t be surprised to hear that John Lewis is currently out of stock of 
both Samsungs.)

Software 

If you have software on DVD, such as Microsoft Office, you can install it on 
your new PC. It’s a good idea to uninstall it from your old PC first. Windows 
10 PCs also tend to come with a trial version of the current Microsoft Office, 
so uninstall that before you install your old copy.

You can also uninstall whichever anti-virus product comes pre-installed on 
your new PC. Windows 10’s built-in Defender is good enough for most people, as 
long as you don’t turn off the SmartScreen filter or the cloud integration. Of 
course, you can always install a free alternative such as Avast, Avira, 
BitDefender, Sophos or a similar product.

The major worry is your HP printer/copier/scanner. Windows 10 will install 
basic drivers that should work, but you will probably need todownload a 
model-specific driver from HP’s website 
<http://support.hp.com/gb-en/document/c04658195>. If HP doesn’t provide a “full 
feature” driver, you will probably lose some scanning features, and possibly 
copy/fax features as well.

If so, Hamrick’s VueScan <https://www.hamrick.com/> is a third-party solution 
that works with a lot of old scanners. It’s not free, but there’s a free trial 
version.

Have you got another question for Jack? Email it to Ask.Jack@theguardian.com 
<mailto:Ask.Jack@theguardian.com>
 