
The modern transport bill is the UK’s push to be at the forefront of the 
internationaltransport technology revolution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/15/queens-speech-driverless-cars-drones-uk-spaceport>
: developing driverless cars and launching a commercial spaceport.

All these initiatives were announced in the Queen’s speech in May 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/18/queens-speech-2016-the-key-points-explained>
 and continue to be pursued by Theresa May’s government, which also wants the 
UK to play a part in drone production, an industryworth $4bn a year globally 
and estimated to rise to $414bn over the next 10 years. 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/524040/Queen_s_Speech_2016_background_notes_.pdf>

When will we see cars driving themselves?

Ministers want driverless cars to be on the roads within four years. There are 
pilots in Bristol, Greenwich, Milton Keynes and Coventry. Insuring these cars 
is a challenge, but former transport secretaryPatrick McLoughlin said in May 
2016 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/queens-speech-debate-transport-and-infrastructure>
 that they will come under new legislation so they can be covered in ordinary 
policies.

What about flying in space?

The Queen’s speech also mentioned a commercial spaceport, which would launch 
tourists into space. Eight sites are already under consideration – six in 
Scotland and one each in England and Wales. The government wants to make sure 
British entrepreneurs are involved, to help revenues grow from £12bn currently 
to £40bn by 2030 – around 10% of the global space economy.

The driverless car revolution isn’t just about technology – it’s about society 
too | Jackie Ashley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/01/driverless-cars-boon-bane-coming-down-fast-lane>
McLoughlin said: “Driverless cars and commercial space flight might seem like 
something science fiction, but the economic potential of the new technology is 
huge and I am determined the UK gets maximum benefit.”

This is all very exciting, but what about traffic jams? 

The bill also aims to reduce congestion, which is estimated to cost the UK 
£20bn a year 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/524040/Queen_s_Speech_2016_background_notes_.pdf>
, and aims to make “much more efficient use” of roads, railways and airspace.

Will the bill reduce exhaust emissions from cars? 

The government wants all cars and vans to be “zero emission” by 2050, and the 
Department for Transport has alsosought views 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/562370/ulev-modern-tranport-bill-consultation.pdf>
 (pdf) from those in the ultra-low emission vehicles industry for inclusion in 
the proposals for the bill (the deadline was 23 November 2015). This would seem 
most urgent for London, which breached itsannual air pollution limit for 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/06/london-breaches-toxic-air-pollution-limit-for-2017-in-just-five-days>
 in just five days.

Could the bill legislate against transport strikes, such as the Southern rail 
actionplanned for this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/04/southern-rail-drivers-split-planned-six-day-strike-in-two>
?

That’s unclear at the moment. Former transport minister Stephen Hammond told 
the Financial Times in December that it would be “reasonable for the government 
to examine no-strike regulation 
<https://www.ft.com/content/0b2b9da2-c608-11e6-8f29-9445cac8966f>,” while 
Conservative MPChris Philp has submitted a private member’s bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/20/tories-pressure-theresa-may-hardline-anti-strike-legislation-southern>
 calling for services to run at a 50% level during a dispute, as they do in 
Spain, Italy and Canada. However,a Downing Street source told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/19/downing-street-distances-itself-from-calls-for-new-anti-strike-laws>
 that there were no plans to change current union laws, which remain under 
review.

How will the bill contribute to the UK’s economy?

The Queen’s speech did not give specifics, but the UK exported 1.2m 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/524040/Queen_s_Speech_2016_background_notes_.pdf>
 cars in 2015 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/524040/Queen_s_Speech_2016_background_notes_.pdf>
 and the bill “would put the UK at the forefront of autonomous and driverless 
vehicles ownership and use”.

Going driverless: can self-driving cars gain public trust or will they be 
derailed?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/nov/14/can-self-driving-cars-gain-public-trust>
At the Conservative party conference in October 2016, transport secretary 
Chris Grayling <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/chrisgrayling> encouraged 
manufacturers to develop their technology in the UK. “Britain is open and this 
government will support you,” he said.


Anything else?

Travel legislation will be made relevant for an online world. The Atol scheme, 
which protects UK holidaymakers if their tour operator goes bust, will be 
updated, “by clarifying the 1992 legislation that predates people booking their 
holidays on the internet”.

When is the bill due to be published?

In due course.

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday. Follow us on Twitter via@Guardianpublic 
<https://twitter.com/guardianpublic>

 