
The first benefits <https://www.theguardian.com/society/benefits> “fauxtrage” 
of 2017 is upon us, barely a week in. Harrumpher-in-chief Phillip Schofield 
decided that the best use of his time was toshake his head patronisingly 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/tv/tv-news/phillip-schofield-blasts-benefit-scounger--9561308>
 at a woman who had the gall to buy two bottles of prosecco on her “Christmas 
bonus” – a pittance added to her benefits payments. This leaves the tabloids 
free to engage in their ceremonial monstering of someone who bought a tenner’s 
worth of fizzy wine while not being currently retained by an employer.

Universal basic income is not a magic solution, but it could help millions | 
Anthony Painter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/04/universal-basic-income-welfare-employment-scotland-canada-netherlands>
Moaning about the fecklessness of the poor is a national sport that predates 
the introduction of the chip shop – the patronage of which (“withmy tax 
money!”) is likewise cause for public tut-tutting. “Would it not be better,” 
asked George Orwell in 1937, “if they spent more money on wholesome things like 
oranges and wholemeal bread or if they even … saved on fuel and ate their 
carrots raw? Yes, it would, but the point is that no ordinary human being is 
ever going to do such a thing.”

“Unemployment,” he continues, “is an endless misery that has got to be 
constantly palliated.” The disagreement on this issue is not on the misery of 
poverty and unemployment, but on the idea that alleviating that misery is a 
good thing. If the unemployed do not earn their money through hard labour, then 
they should be expected to earn through suffering.

Anything can be used as an example of the unemployed worker’s fecklessness. 
Fridges and microwaves can be used to suggest the poor aren’t “really” poor. 
The screed against the “massive flatscreen TV” is positively ubiquitous, which 
is one of those things that really demonstrates the kind of alienation from the 
realities of the consumer electronics market you only get among the middle 
class. I don’t even know where to go to buy a cathode ray tube TV these days, 
but I do know you can get a 43” flatscreen for under £250 at Tesco.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fspending-benefits-prosecco-feckless-poor-phillip-schofield%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd36400fdad7c2f934a6bb25e65c3e82c5ea71810%2F0_153_5866_3521%2F5866.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%E2%80%99s%20wrong%20with%20spending%20your%20benefits%20on%20prosecco%3F%20Nothing%20%7C%20Phil%20McDuff&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fspending-benefits-prosecco-feckless-poor-phillip-schofield%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%E2%80%99s%20wrong%20with%20spending%20your%20benefits%20on%20prosecco%3F%20Nothing%20%7C%20Phil%20McDuff&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fspending-benefits-prosecco-feckless-poor-phillip-schofield%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd36400fdad7c2f934a6bb25e65c3e82c5ea71810%2F0_153_5866_3521%2F5866.jpg>
 ‘The danger to the Tories of a benefits system that enables people to live 
with some semblance of humanity is that it provides a lower bound to how much 
they can extract from their workforce.’ Photograph: Manuta/Getty 
Images/iStockphoto 
Back in 1844, Marx 
<https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1844/manuscripts/needs.htm> 
pointed out that “every luxury of the worker seems to be reprehensible, and 
everything that goes beyond the most abstract need seems a luxury”. We pretend 
to ourselves that our indignation at the poor buying tobacco or alcohol is 
rooted in our compassion, the same as Orwell’s contemporaries who insisted that 
they would be better off eating brown bread and raw carrots. But in reality it 
is a vicious reaction against the poor’s presumptuous insistence on 
experiencing life as if they were as fully human as the rest of us.

Some would say here that I have missed the most important thing. The woman 
Schofield excoriated on daytime TV was using “taxpayer’s money” for her 
luxuries. The poor, one might argue, should be as frugal as possible because, 
as Margaret Thatcher once said: “Sooner or later you run out of other people’s 
money.”

Such analysis is as ubiquitous as it is wholly incorrect. We are not still 
living in the time of Joseph and his seven fat and seven lean years, where 
taxes were gathered in the form of bushels of grain and bolts of linen. That is 
simply not how an economy like ours in the 21st century works. When government 
restricts the flow of money through the economy this causes us material harm by 
stifling economic consumption and thus robbing us all of income.

Punitive benefits systems designed to force people to endlessly hunt for work 
that does not exist give the whip hand to employers. It pits those in work 
against the competition of those doing the rounds, photocopied CVs in hand, 
between every employer in town. The sub-inflation pay rises, wage theft and 
abusive conditions that plague many of the low-waged precariat – many of whom 
need to access the benefits system themselves to afford heat and shelter – must 
be endured without complaint or resistance because to do so would mark you out 
as a troublemaker who should be replaced from the swollen pool of reserve 
labour.

Workfare <http://www.kvv.org.uk/about-workfare> can see job vacancies that 
would otherwise have paid at least minimum wage being occupied by someone on 
benefits. The moral hazard in such situations is not that unemployed people may 
become accustomed to the luxury of being able to buy two bottles of prosecco a 
year, but that employers can use the constant threat of a miserable life on 
unemployment to keep wages and conditions nailed down to the floor.

A worker who can choose the dole is a worker with the power to say “no” to his 
boss, and such a sin cannot be tolerated

It is hard not to suspect that this is intentional. The Tories have never been 
a party particularly in favour of paying wages to people. The danger to them of 
a benefits system that enables people to live with some semblance of humanity 
is that it provides a lower bound to how much they can extract from their 
workforce. A worker who can choose the dole is a worker with the power to say 
“no” to his boss, and such a sin cannot be tolerated.

Such miserliness creates a race to the bottom, a country where the standards 
of what constitutes a decent, human life are subject to constant erosion. 
Orwell, again, pointed out that it is the very performance of poverty that we 
expect from our underclass. “Our unemployment allowances, miserable though they 
are, are framed to suit a population with very high standards and not much 
notion of economy. If the unemployed learned to be better managers they would 
be visibly better off, and I fancy it would not be long before the dole was 
docked correspondingly.”

In other words, even if they hung old sacks at their window in lieu of 
curtains and ate cold beans by the light of recycled candles, if by this 
process they managed to save any money for a birthday present or a trip to the 
theatre this in itself would be considered frivolous waste. Such frugality 
would remain virtuous only if it demonstrated how much less they could get in 
benefits, how much more debasement a human body could tolerate before it gave 
up the ghost completely.

We are robbed as a society not by someone spending “taxpayer’s money” on fizzy 
wine at Christmas, but by the spirit of Ebeneezer Scrooge, begrudging every 
ha’penny that might reduce the immiseration of the poor and, in so doing, 
sucking sales out of our economy and bargaining down our wages. Our posturing 
about the feckless poor may well make us feel virtuous, but that is all it is 
good for.
 