
The US government is heavily invested in an internal surveillance program that 
is unsustainable, ineffective, morally reprehensible, inherently dangerous and 
ultimately counterproductive.


In the months following the US government’s initial charges against me over 
the release of government records in 2010, the current administration formed the
National Insider Threat Task Force 
<http://www.ncsc.gov/nittf/docs/National_Insider_Threat_Task_Force_Fact_Sheet.pdf>
 under the authority of the Office of the Director of National Intelligence 
(ODNI), the Department of Justice, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and 
several other US government agencies.

The mission of this taskforce is breathtakingly broad. It aims at deterring 
threats to national security by anyone “who misuses or betrays, wittingly or 
unwittingly, his or her authorized access to any US Government resource”. 
Unfortunately, the methods it outlines amount to thousands of government 
personnel being effectively undertotal surveillance 
<https://shadowproof.com/2016/01/07/insider-threat-program-hundred-thousand-pentagon-personnel-under-total-surveillance/>
.

These kinds of operations usually result in doing more harm than good. As 
articulated by James Detert and Ethan Burris in a recentHarvard Business Review 
article <https://hbr.org/2016/01/can-your-employees-really-speak-freely>, such 
training and surveillance programs greatly diminish productive and innovative 
capabilities within organizations. They have a tendency to “promote fear of 
embarrassment, isolation, low performance ratings, lost promotions, and even 
firing”. When your employer is the US government, that fear – of surveillance, 
public humiliation, warrants, arrest, trial, exorbitant legal fees and 
imprisonment – is orders of magnitude higher.

Flaws in the program exacerbate these problems. There is a reliance on 
“anonymous feedback” which can create endless witch-hunts, “general 
invitations” to report or file complaints through so-called open door policies, 
and vagueness about what feedback is expected. According to Deter and Burris, 
the program creates a perfect storm of conditions against innovation, 
creativity and whistleblowing.

The implementation of the Insider Threat program has shown predictably 
troubling results. For example, an ODNI webinar, entitled Simple Steps and 
Guidance to Secure Classified Networks, describes excessive surveillance 
protocols and invasive secret investigations by the US government and military 
into their own officials. In its early stages, it has become clear that this 
program conflates any attempt to seek redress, transparency or the promotion of 
legitimate public interests with grave threats to national security.

The program will have tangible effects on the lives of many officials. For 
instance, over the period of several years, a former senior government 
official, Thomas Drake, repeatedly attempted through many official and internal 
channels – including inspectors general and the US congressional intelligence 
committees – to prompt scrutiny of some questionable NSA programs. After 
getting nowhere, he finallycommunicated his unclassified concerns to a reporter 
<http://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/leaks-and-the-law-the-story-of-thomas-drake-14796786/?no-ist>
. Drake was then investigated for nearly half a decade, and charged with 
violations under the broadly interpreted Espionage Act of 1917. In 2011 he pled 
guilty to a federal misdemeanor after accruing hundreds of thousands of dollars 
in legal defense fees.

However, the Insider Threat program wasn’t done with Drake, nor others like 
him. Late last year, the ODNI released internal training material that 
characterized Drake, and other government officials, asthreats 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2015/11/18/government-compares-nsa-whistleblower-to-ft-hood-shooter-soviet-spies.html>
 akin to the Fort Hood and Navy Yard mass shooters. When this revelation was 
made public, a letter from22 civil liberties and press freedom organizations 
<http://www.pogo.org/our-work/letters/2016/22-organizations-ask-the-ic-ig-to-investigate.html>
 decried the government’s “wanton misuse of the term ‘threat’” and their 
failure to “understand the distinction between a whistleblower and a genuine 
threat”.

As evidenced by a slideshow obtained in February 2016 through a Foia request 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/18/chelsea-manning-insider-threat-surveillance-government-employees>
, internal training material based on my own psychological profile and history 
– using male pronouns and my old name, despite it being legally changed in 
April 2014 – has been widely published and presented. The program alleges that 
I am “disgruntled” based on my perceived sexual orientation and gender 
identity, questioning my “self-image as a man” while acknowledging that “he 
[sic] wanted to be an openly accepted female”. It describes me as “an advocate 
for homosexuals openly serving” in the military, and my concern and advocacy of 
queer and trans rights as being expressed “obsessively”.

The broad sweep of the program means officials have been given a blank check 
for surveillance. Agencies implementing the Insider Threat program could 
examine anyone who has motives of “greed”, “financial difficulties”, is 
“disgruntled”, has “an ideology” a “divided loyalty”, an “ego” or “self-image”, 
or “any family/personal issues” – the words used to describe my motives. Such 
subjective labelling could easily be applied to virtuallyevery single person 
currently holding a security clearance 
<https://shadowproof.com/2014/06/19/senators-seek-answers-from-clapper-about-plans-for-total-surveillance-of-security-clearance-holders/>
.

This lack of focus has already led to the program becoming industrialized. In 
anApril 2015 report <http://www.fas.org/sgp/othergov/dod/ce-2015.pdf> to the US 
House armed services committee, the US Department of Defense revealed the 
existence of “continuing evaluation” of 100,000 personnel on and off the job.

The Insider Threat program works against innovation, creativity and the 
prevention of institutional corruption. Perhaps this is the real intent of the 
intelligence community and the Insider Threat Task Force – to instill fear and 
project dominance throughout the intelligence community, the military, and 
among government employees and contractors at large.

Perhaps a better approach for the government would be to create a Transparency 
and Accountability Task Force, comprising different government agencies and 
departments, the inspectors general, the National Archives and Office of 
Government Information Services, and a committee or other body that can work 
directly with current and former government employees, service members, 
veterans and journalists.

Such a taskforce could focus on advocating for and protecting employees who 
have concerns. It would help to send a message to employees, military service 
members, contractors and department and agency heads that even if the official 
channels fail, those who raise concerns will still be protected, listened to 
and given the chance to speak out in a meaningful forum. It would encourage 
dissent. It would allow dirty laundry, drama and corruption to be aired out 
rather than allowed to fester.

We could all – citizens, the government and its employees – benefit from that.

 