
No trains are running at all 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/12/southern-train-drivers-strike-tuesday-court-of-appeal>
 on Southern’s network on Tuesday morning, leaving hundreds of thousands of 
passengers in Sussex, Surrey and beyond stranded. It is the biggest strike on 
the railways since privatisation in 1994, as drivers from the Aslef union have 
followed conductors from the RMT in taking industrial action in the 
long-running dispute on Britain’s biggest commuter franchise.

When are the strikes?

The drivers’ strikes – which have the biggest effect, stopping all Southern 
trains –started  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/dec/13/southern-rail-strike-after-court-rejects-appeal-live-updates>
on Tuesday and will continue on Wednesday 14 December and Friday 16 December.

Another six-day walkout is scheduled from Monday 9 January. Conductors will 
strike on Monday 19 and Tuesday 20 December and from New Year’s Eve until 
Monday 2 January. Drivers have also voted for an indefinite overtime ban, which 
will severely disrupt services every day, even without strikes.

Southern rail strike begins after court rejects appeal – live updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/dec/13/southern-rail-strike-after-court-rejects-appeal-live-updates>
Why are the latest strikes taking place?

The dispute is over driver-only operation of trains on the franchise. That 
means changes to the role of conductors, who are now being rebranded as 
“onboard supervisors”. They will no longer close the doors on new trains being 
brought into operation.

Unions claim that this practice is unsafe, and fear that once the 
safety-critical tasks of the conductor are removed, jobs will be at risk. 
Although Southern’s owner, Govia Thameslink Railway (GTR), has promised not to 
axe jobs, and says it will normally run trains with a second staff member 
aboard, it wants to retain the right to run trains with one.

Aslef had attempted to join the RMT strikes from the beginning of the dispute 
in spring, but was blocked by a court injunction won by GTR.

Is driver-only operation of trains unsafe?

GTR, the Rail Safety and Standards Board and most of the industry says it is 
safe, and points out that it is longstanding practice in some parts of the rail 
network, including in Southern’s sister Thameslink services in the wider GTR 
franchise.

Unions question the independence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/10/southern-rail-in-court-bid-to-stop-rmt-strike>
 of the safety board, whose directors include GTR’s chief executive, and argue 
that the conditions of modern railways – with longer trains and far more 
passengers – are not comparable to the days when they accepted the principle of 
one crew member on board. Drivers’ union Aslef argues that CCTV does not give 
the same level of oversight as a conductor would have in closing the doors.

What other factors are causing disruption on Southern?

As commuters are well aware, problems long pre-date the strikes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/08/southern-trains-crisis-seven-factors-that-threw-services-off-the-rails>
. Management admitted to staff shortages when its franchise started, but the 
poor situation has been made worse by the need to take out more drivers to act 
as trainers, or to be trained themselves on the new rolling stock.

Higher than usual levels of sickness – labelled by Southern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> and the government as 
unofficial industrial action, to the fury of unions – has further worsened the 
situation.

Much of the network, including the Brighton mainline, is regarded as having 
insufficient capacity to run enough trains for the demand. Large-scale 
engineering works, including the overhaul of London Bridge 
<http://www.networkrail.co.uk/aspx/12179.aspx>, have been another source of 
major disruption.

Random events such as breakdowns, flooding and sinkholes have also struck the 
luckless Southern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/23/its-the-hope-that-gets-you-commuter-diaries-of-the-southern-rail-nightmare>
, and with resources stretched to the limit and staff goodwill broken down, the 
knock-on effects of such incidents can be more extreme.

Is there an end in sight to the dispute?

Only the scale of the disruption and the public outcry would suggest action is 
imminent – otherwise, the rift between unions and the train company and the 
government is wider than ever.

GTR have in theory offered talks at Acas on Tuesday, but only on condition 
that unions abandon their strikes. But Aslef said that the company had been 
unwilling to negotiate until the strikes were reality.Previous talks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/12/southern-rail-dispute-talks-break-down-without-agreement>
 between the RMT and GTR have collapsed. Both sides haveclaimed talks are 
pointless 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/12/southern-rail-dispute-talks-break-down-without-agreement>
 because neither will come without preconditions.

Chris Grayling, the transport secretary, has only offered a meeting if unions 
commit to abandoning strike action – but has also said he will not get involved 
in direct talks.

In any case, after Grayling told MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/12/southern-train-drivers-strike-tuesday-court-of-appeal>
 on Monday that Mick Whelan, Aslef’s general secretary, had “promised 10 years 
of strikes”, Whelan responded that Grayling was lying and betraying a private 
meeting – and said the breakdown in trust was now total, and extended to the 
government. Unions say that overwhelming votes to strike reflect widespread 
anger at management practices on the franchise.

One possible reason for optimism is that unions recently reached a negotiated 
settlement with Scotrail in a similar dispute, albeit in a very different 
political environment.

Who is to blame?

Most commuters think neither the RMT nor the management are blameless. Unions 
are seeking guarantees over future roles that appear to be untenable. Southern 
has clearly had some management problems.

Meanwhile ,Grayling – who was revealed last week to have suggested blocking 
Transport for London taking over more rail commuter services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/07/chris-grayling-accused-of-putting-politics-over-people-in-rail-letter-leak>
 in the capital, a move supported by all parties, because it would come under 
the control of a Labour mayor – certainlyisn’t making industrial relations any 
easier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/08/chris-grayling-ideology-southern-rail-leaked-letter-london-mayor>
.

But the broader context is that government has been looking to cut costs and 
bring in more automation on the rail network. Trains have been ordered with a 
view to driver-only operation, and franchises structured on the basis such 
changes are made.

Speeches by senior rail officials  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/dec/13/southern-rail-strike-after-court-rejects-appeal-live-updates?page=with:block-584fb053e4b025760cee44ee#block-584fb053e4b025760cee44ee>
 at the Department for Transport have further exposed the government’s wider 
agenda, which unions fear will spread across the country. That may be a path to 
cheaper railways, but unions fear it will mean job losses, and that – for all 
the assurances on Southern now – future franchises will not have a second crew 
member on board.
 