
Every winter, it seems, we see pictures in the press and on TV of St Mark’s 
Square looking like a lake. People wading through thigh-high water. Boats 
bobbing outside the famous cafes. Venice is sinking rapidly, these images imply.

The pictures are misleading, however. St Mark’s Square does indeed get 
flooded, dozens of times every year, but in all except the worst floods more 
than 90% of the rest of the city remains above water. And though many buildings 
in Venice are subsiding, the city as a whole isn’t sinking – rather, parts of 
it are becoming submerged.

The major floods are destructive, of course. Whenever water breaks through the 
stone damp-courses that protect most Venetian buildings, it seeps into the 
porous brickwork. All over Venice, walls are dissolving. And if, with global 
warming, sea levels riseas they are projected to 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/aug/10/climate-scientists-make-a-bold-prediction-about-sea-level-rise>
, the situation is going to get a lot worse. Having an average depth of little 
over one metre, the Venetian lagoon is particularly vulnerable to the vagaries 
of the climate.

Which is why the construction of a movable barrier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jun/16/inside-venice-bid-hold-back-tide-sea-level-rise>
 across the entrances to the lagoon seems to many people the obvious way of 
averting calamity. Mose, as Venice’s flood barrier is known, consists of 80 
huge steel flaps that lie on the bed of the lagoon, forming a submerged barrage 
that will be raised whenever the water rises dangerously. It might appear to be 
an obvious solution to the crisis. Yet Mose is a project that makes many 
Venetians despair, for various reasons.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fwhen-will-venice-sink-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5dddc81537a0ad0162ab9c83c0670d035efe5d34%2F0_199_3000_1464%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20will%20Venice%20sink%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Buckley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fwhen-will-venice-sink-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20will%20Venice%20sink%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Buckley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fwhen-will-venice-sink-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5dddc81537a0ad0162ab9c83c0670d035efe5d34%2F0_199_3000_1464%2F3000.jpg>
 Visitors take pictures in St Mark’s square in December 2008, after it had been 
hit by one of the highest tides in the city’s history. Photograph: Andrea 
Merola/EPA 
For one thing, it’s way behind schedule. Work began in 2003, more than 20 
years after the scheme was submitted to central government, and is still 
incomplete. Corruption, inevitably,is partly to blame 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/13/venice-mayor-giorgio-orsoni-resigns-corruption-scandal>
. Many opponents of Mose alleged from the start that the scheme would be a 
gigantic palm-greasing exercise, and so it has proved. In 2014, Giorgio Orsoni, 
the incumbent mayor of Venice,was arrested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/13/venice-mayor-giorgio-orsoni-resigns-corruption-scandal>
 in connection with investigations into the funding of the barrier. It appears 
that as much as €1bn has gone astray in a labyrinth of shady deals. We are now 
told that Mose will finally be functional next year.

That sinking feeling: will this soulless tunnel spell the death of Venice? | 
Peter Bradshaw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/31/tunnel-death-venice-city-tourist>
Many locals are not so sure. In 2014, the Nuova Venezia newspaper published 
photos that showed that the steel flaps had already suffered more corrosion 
than the builders had anticipated. In August this year, a test-run of the 
floodgates was a fiasco. But let’s assume that, eventually, Mose will work as 
intended. Will it be Venice’s salvation? To answer that question, we need to 
look at why the water spills into the city’s streets so often.

The acqua alta, as the seasonal flooding is known, is caused by a combination 
of high tides, fluctuations in atmospheric pressure and southeasterly winds. 
It’s always been a feature of Venetian life. But the frequency and severity of 
flooding has increased markedly since the middle of the 20th century. Between 
2000 and 2013 there were eight highest-category floods recorded – more than in 
the preceding 50 years. This phenomenon is not explained by subsidence or any 
rise in sea level. It’s the result of changes in the way the lagoon has been 
managed.

One factor has been the reclamation of large areas of land, for Marco Polo 
airport and the industrial sites of Marghera, and in central Venice itself – 
notably around the docks and the Tronchetto car parks. The marshes and mudflats 
of the lagoon play a crucial role in dissipating the energy of the incoming 
water, so their reduction has led to an increase in the destructiveness of the 
tides. Even worse has been the impact of shipping. When the refineries and 
factories of Marghera were developed in the interwar years, deep channels were 
carved out of the lagoon bed to allow tankers to get into the port. The result: 
too much sea water gets into the lagoon, and it’s moving too quickly.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fwhen-will-venice-sink-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7982fe1571756a570e3b4c9c1c8bfaca08a71ed5%2F0_119_2098_1259%2F2098.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20will%20Venice%20sink%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Buckley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fwhen-will-venice-sink-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20will%20Venice%20sink%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Buckley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fwhen-will-venice-sink-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7982fe1571756a570e3b4c9c1c8bfaca08a71ed5%2F0_119_2098_1259%2F2098.jpg>
 A cruise ship makes its way through the Canale Della Giudecca during the 65th 
Venice Film Festival in 2008. Photograph: Dan Kitwood/Getty Images 
All over the city, foundations are being scoured out by the quick-flowing 
tides. And disruption of the lagoon’s long-established equilibrium has resulted 
in an increase in the number of extremely low tides as well as the number of 
floods. Most buildings in Venice are built on wooden pilings driven deep into 
the mudbanks. They’ll last for centuries as long as they stay underwater, but 
now the water level sometimes drops so far that air gets at the pilings, 
causing them to rot.

Don’t look now, Venice tourists – the locals are sick of you
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/shortcuts/2016/sep/27/dont-look-now-venice-tourists-locals-sick-of-you-cruise-liners>
And there’s another source of erosion. In the past two decades, the volume of 
motor-powered traffic on Venice’s canals has doubled. The foundations of more 
than 60% of the buildings on the Grand Canal have been damaged by the wash from 
the waterbuses and barges, and the situation has worsened since Venice became 
one of the Mediterranean’sbiggest ports for cruise ships 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/20/venice-residents-canal-protests-cruise-ships>
. These monstrous vessels – most of which plough right through the Giudecca 
canal, past the Doge’s Palace, on their way to the docks – are the most 
contentious issue in the city at the moment. So far, there has been no serious 
assessment ofthe damage they are causing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/20/venice-perilous-times>, 
though it’s known that the turbulence the ships create goes on for hours after 
they have passed.

In 2015 the biggest ships were banned from the Giudecca canal. This was widely 
hailed as good news, but there was an under-reported catch: the ruling applied 
only to vessels of more than 95,000 tonnes. To put this in perspective, the 
Titanic was nowhere near that size. And the ban was soon overturned anyway. 
Depressingly, Luigi Brugnaro, the businessman who became Venice’s mayor in June 
2015,does not see much of a problem here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/15/venice-mayoral-poll-cruise-ships-luigi-brugnaro>
. He’s in favour of a scheme that will divert the mega-cruisers to the docks 
via the southern lagoon. This would entail large-scale redredging that critics 
say will damage the ecosystem even more than the cruise ships do at the moment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fwhen-will-venice-sink-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02bc7573e266a3a522159d48bb1a83e33e9010fc%2F0_33_3997_2398%2F3997.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20will%20Venice%20sink%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Buckley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fwhen-will-venice-sink-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20will%20Venice%20sink%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Buckley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fwhen-will-venice-sink-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02bc7573e266a3a522159d48bb1a83e33e9010fc%2F0_33_3997_2398%2F3997.jpg>
 A demonstration against the negative environmental impact of cruise ships in 
January 2012. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
So it seems that the mega-cruisers will continue to bring in tens of thousands 
of people who spend very little time – or cash – in the city itself. Which 
brings us to the other issue that’s giving rise to increasingly vehement 
protests in Venice: mass tourism. The population of central Venice and the 
lagoon islands has now dropped below 55,000. The number of visitors, annually, 
is approaching 7 million. Around half of those don’t even stay for one night, 
and thus contribute almost nothing to the local economy.

Venice’s financial situation is dire: the town hall has a shortfall of tens of 
millions of euros in its operating budget, and its debts exceed €400m. In 
effect, the place is bankrupt. And with nearly all of Venice’s special funding 
for maintenance of the historic centre having been diverted into the money pit 
of the flood barrier, much of the city’s fabric is in need of urgent repair.

That said, the churches and palazzi should continue to stand for many more 
decades. Long before the water overwhelms Venice, however,it could die of 
tourism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/31/tunnel-death-venice-city-tourist>
. As short-stay rentals push the cost of living in Venice higher with every 
passing year, the native population is being driven out. Venice is becoming a 
ghost-city, a high-culture holiday resort. It’s in that sense that it’s really 
sinking – and fast.
 