
I was 13 years old with a red ribbon cascading on my oiled hair when I got my 
first period. I thought I had dysentery. When I asked my mother about it, she 
slammed a bunch of rags in my hand and said “nani ta nachune bhais” – my 
daughter, you become untouchable [you are menstruating]. She pulled me inside 
my brother’s room. I remember it was dark and creepy.

Then came a list of restrictions: “Do not touch the kitchen and worshiping 
area”, and “Stay away from your father and other relatives”. I had to stay 
alone in brother’s room for a week. What hurt the most was not able to see my 
father or any male members of my family during those days.

The practice of isolating women during their period exists across the country 
in differing forms

I asked my mother several times: “Why can’t I go outside the room?” But she 
stayed silent. The crippling sensation running deep in my entire body, the red 
blood was a sin. The same red blood that represents me as a woman. In a fit of 
rage, I would enter the kitchen and touch everything that my mother restricted. 
I would eat pickles from refrigerator, singing and touching everything.

The second time I menstruated I kept it a secret. It was just a normal day for 
me. I woke up, went to the kitchen and did whatever I liked. Then when 
everybody knew I was on my period and touching everything it turned into a 
heated debate. I was lucky enough that my father was progressive and supported 
my move.

But women around the country are not as lucky as me. The situation of women 
living at the rural areas ofNepal <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nepal> is 
terrible. The practice of isolating women during their period exists across the 
country in differing forms. In some places, women cannot be in their own homes. 
While in others, women can be in the house but not in the kitchen and worship 
room. They are also forbidden from touching other people (especially male 
members of the family), cattle and growing fruit and vegetables.

11 ways to stop periods from disrupting girls' education
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/oct/19/11-ways-to-stop-periods-from-disrupting-girls-education>
The most extreme form of seclusion is practised in the western part of the 
country.Chhaupadi banishes menstruating women to live in sheds outside the 
houses. Recently, two young women died in menstrual huts in Achham, a hilly 
district in far-west Nepal, in less than a month. On 18 November,Dambara 
Upadhyay, 21 from 
<http://thehimalayantimes.com/nepal/chhaupadi-takes-toll-women-achham/>Timilsen 
village was discovered dead 
<http://thehimalayantimes.com/nepal/chhaupadi-takes-toll-women-achham/> in the 
shed while a fifteen-year-old girlRoshani Tiruwa of Gajra died 
<http://www.myrepublica.com/news/11387> on 17 December. They are not the first 
and sadly we can’t say for sure that they will be the last. The exact numbers 
are not available but it is believed that dozens of women die every year in the 
name of tradition, as if menstruating women do not deserve basic human rights.

Chhaupadi was outlawed 
<http://kathmandupost.ekantipur.com/news/2016-12-02/reform-begins-at-home.html> 
by the supreme court of Nepal in 2005. But the police often see menstruation as 
a private family issue. The government’s indifference is taking toll on women’s 
lives. How many more women must die before taboos and stigmas surrounding 
menstruation come to an end?

Further, little attention has been paid to the other severe health impacts 
associated with menstrual taboos and stigmas.Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> suffer from pneumonia, 
diarrhoea, suffocation and respiratory tract infections while they are in 
seclusion. During my visits to remote areas of the country, women tell me they 
are not looked after properly by family during menstruation.

Speaking up against menstrual taboos is not easy. There are many initiatives 
across the country but the tradition is deeply rooted. For example, the 
villages where young women recently died had been declared a menstrual-hut free 
area. Families had pledged todiscontinue the practice after shed-demolishing 
campaigns <http://www.myrepublica.com/news/11156>. But they resorted back to 
the practice and the newly-built sheds were found to be even worse than the 
previous ones.

Having a period is unaffordable in Kenya, yet no one wants to talk about it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2017/jan/05/having-a-period-is-unaffordable-in-kenya-yet-no-one-wants-to-talk-about-it>
Another challenge is that women themselves believe the traditions. A 
schoolgirl in Udaypur, eastern Nepal, once told me that God will curse her if 
she doesn’t follow the rules of seclusion during her period. Girls continue the 
practice because they fear God will be angry with them and they will bring 
misfortune on the family.

The government needs to take a new approach to this issue. Legal initiative 
and awareness campaigns must go hand-in-hand. I have long beenadvocating 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/goatsandsoda/2015/11/14/455464719/what-our-reporters-learned-from-the-worlds-teenage-girls-15girls>
 that it is not cultural issue. It is a human rights issue. It is not a part of 
religion but part of superstition. It is against women’s rights. It is also a 
legal issue.

But it’s not a matter for Nepal only, smashing menstrual taboos should be part 
of international initiatives. Women’s right are ensured by theConvention on the 
Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women 
<http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/cedaw/> and the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights <http://www.un.org/en/universal-declaration-human-rights/>. As the 
UN and countries around the world agreed to the2030 agenda 
<https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/transformingourworld> and 
sustainable development goals 
<http://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sustainable-development-goals/>, it 
is a matter of concern for the whole world. It is time to ensure a world where 
women are entitled the right to live with dignity and respect.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. Join the conversation with the 
hashtag#SheMatters <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23SheMatters&src=typd>.
 