
Ed Atherton knows he has a fight on his hands every time he renews his annual 
motor insurance. With a job as a finance and administration assistant and a 
five-year no claims bonus, he should be a good risk. That he wants to cover a 
six-year-old VW Passat – a “bog standard family car” – should mean that his 
premium is unremarkable. The problem Atherton and his wife Jenny have is that 
they live in Salford, Manchester. When insurers discover this they start 
ramping up their premium quotes.

Like thousands of motorists across the UK, they are being punished purely 
because of where their home is – even if they rarely claim on their policy. 
This isn’t just a problem for drivers: households in high-crime areas also face 
higher household insurance premiums, while those in flood-prone districts 
struggle to get cover at all, turning certain postcodes into insurance 
blackspots.

Atherton admits that his area has its problems – but they are nowhere near as 
bad as its reputation suggests. This argument cuts little ice with insurers 
whose risk calculator tools show theManchester M27 postcode 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/14/18-arrested-organised-crime-raids-salford>
 is high-risk.

AA reports rise in car insurance premiums
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/27/aa-car-insurance-premiums-rise-annual-policy-costs>
“We pay £750 a year to cover our old Passat, whereas friends who live in more 
rural parts of Lancashire pay a third of that,” Atherton says.

The couple also own a 1957 Land Rover, which poses even more problems. Last 
year a search on uSwitch.com produced quotes ranging from £5,000 to a “frankly 
ridiculous” £10,000 for one year’s comprehensive cover.

“After a lot of effort I finally covered both cars through specialist brokers 
Adrian Flux <https://www.adrianflux.co.uk/>, with the Land Rover costing £175, 
but that still means we spend more than £900 a year,” he said.

The high prices for certain postcodes are a reflection of a system which 
sometimes does not adapt to improvements in an area. Mark Rigby, managing 
director of Insurance Revolution, says insurers take personal factors such as 
your credit score, driving history and vehicle type into account, but “your
postcode can still drive up the price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2004/jul/03/motorinsurance.insurance>, even 
if everything else checks out OK.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fwrong-postcode-puts-insurance-out-of-reach%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2be9d30bca7b6d912f01dc0bb505527e3f7b81d1%2F0_151_5308_3186%2F5308.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20the%20wrong%20postcode%20puts%20insurance%20out%20of%20your%20reach&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fwrong-postcode-puts-insurance-out-of-reach%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20the%20wrong%20postcode%20puts%20insurance%20out%20of%20your%20reach&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fwrong-postcode-puts-insurance-out-of-reach%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2be9d30bca7b6d912f01dc0bb505527e3f7b81d1%2F0_151_5308_3186%2F5308.jpg>
 The high prices for certain postcodes, such as those in Salford, Manchester, 
are a reflection of a system which sometimes does not adapt to improvements in 
an area. Photograph: Christopher Furlong/Getty Images 
Historical insurance company data may not always reflect the fact that an area 
has improved through regeneration, perhaps. So what price a postcode? For 
Justin Smith, who runs an aerials and TV shop in Hillsborough,Sheffield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/sheffield>, it is around £100 on his motor 
cover.

He recently moved to Oughtibridge and his postcode registration changed from 
S6 to S35, slashing the annual premium on his Ford Focus from £313 to £220. “I 
am the same person, with the same driving history and the same car, but the 
premiums are very different.”

Car importer and exporter Simon Manis, 47, moved out of central Bradford 
because high motor and household insurance premiums in the area made it too 
expensive to live there. “I now live in Menston, Ilkley, a leafy suburb of 
Leeds. It was only on the other side of theBradford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/bradford> border, but thanks to its low-risk 
LS29 postcode my premiums fell sharply,” he says.

Figures from Confused.com show a 40-year-old male motorist with a five-year no 
claims discount driving 15,000 miles a year in a Ford Focus would typically pay 
£1,265 for insurance in high-risk Bradford BD1, against an average of just £395 
in low-risk Aberdeen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fwrong-postcode-puts-insurance-out-of-reach%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa5f79d11306ee5d7a6dd60b57b380ad6bd733ed%2F0_226_5214_3128%2F5214.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20the%20wrong%20postcode%20puts%20insurance%20out%20of%20your%20reach&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fwrong-postcode-puts-insurance-out-of-reach%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20the%20wrong%20postcode%20puts%20insurance%20out%20of%20your%20reach&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fwrong-postcode-puts-insurance-out-of-reach%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa5f79d11306ee5d7a6dd60b57b380ad6bd733ed%2F0_226_5214_3128%2F5214.jpg>
 Aberdeen is regarded as low risk by insurers. Photograph: Jeff J 
Mitchell/Getty Images 
The loading which comes with different postcodes adds to the bills of drivers. 
Motor insurance premiums have leapt 17% over the past year, due to rising 
insurance fraud, costlier repair bills and two hikes in insurance premium tax. 
Unsuprisingly, London is the priciest city, with average premiums of £1,330, 
against just £350 in Truro, Cornwall – one of the cheapest.

Ian Crowder at AA Insurance says higher premiums  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2009/jan/10/car-insurance-price-rise>in some 
urban areas reflect the greater risk of collision, car crime, uninsured driving 
and “crash-for-cash” fraud. “Whiplash claims are also a problem, particularly 
in the north-west, north-east and Midlands; we are disappointed that the 
government seems to have kicked reform into the long grass.”

Complex road systems, heavy traffic, junctions, traffic lights, cycle lanes 
and roundabouts all contribute to higher accident rates and costlier insurance 
in urban areas, pushing up premiums.

However, insurance company models can frequently be a blunt instrument 
according to Paul Sykes, of insurance data specialists Audatex: “You may live 
on the safest, nicest street, but if your town is seen as risky your quote will 
still be high.”

We were paying £250 a year for contents cover at one postcode. At our new 
postcode, a minute away, it was £470

The effect is that honest motorists in some postcodes are effectively priced 
out of insurance. Many of these will be low income families who simply cannot 
afford the premiums they are being asked to pay, and will go without.

The Motor Insurance <https://www.theguardian.com/money/insurance> Bureau 
estimates that 2.8% of all UK motorists drive without insurance, which adds up 
to about 1m vehicles on the road.

One broker in Bradford contacted by The Observer, who asked not to be named, 
says local insurance premiums have spiralled out of control: “You can tell how 
bad it is – we don’t even bother doing quotes as the premiums are too expensive 
and many insurers don’t offer cover.”

The postcode problem is not limited to motor insurance.

David and Laura Henderson [not their real names] saw their household cover 
premiums go through the roof after they moved from an apartment in Stratford, 
east London, to an adjacent block. The couple contacted a well-known national 
insurance broker and was told none of its underwriters would even give them a 
quote. “We were paying £250 a year for contents cover at one postcode. Our new 
postcode was just one minute away, but our premium had leapt to £470,” said 
David.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fwrong-postcode-puts-insurance-out-of-reach%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9c6694b28d7d216424efb66ebd54d734c0f5ec9%2F0_86_3750_2250%2F3750.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20the%20wrong%20postcode%20puts%20insurance%20out%20of%20your%20reach&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fwrong-postcode-puts-insurance-out-of-reach%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20the%20wrong%20postcode%20puts%20insurance%20out%20of%20your%20reach&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fwrong-postcode-puts-insurance-out-of-reach%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9c6694b28d7d216424efb66ebd54d734c0f5ec9%2F0_86_3750_2250%2F3750.jpg>
 Installing a burglar alarm can lower your premiums, Photograph: Alamy 
When he explained the flats were virtually identical, the operator blamed the 
price hike on their new postcode. “It might be down to the new Westfield 
shopping centre, which has attracted petty crime, but we don’t know for sure.” 
David and Laura have decided to take their chances and do without contents 
insurance.

James Walker, founder of consumer rights platform Resolver.co.uk, argues that 
postcodes are an arbitrary way of setting insurance premiums. “It is unfair to 
be penalised just because of where you live.” The danger is that many people 
are priced out of cover. “If, say, somebody is burgled, the cost of replacing 
their possessions is going to hit them hard,” Walker says.

Steve Chelton, product expert at Swinton Insurance, says other factors affect 
your home insurance premiums, as well as postcodes: “Age, occupation, claims 
history, property type and contents value all have an impact.”

He says there are things you can do to lower your premium aside from moving 
house, such as installing a burglar alarm and five-lever mortice door locks and 
two-bolt window locks, and joining your local Neighbourhood Watch.

Flood damage
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fwrong-postcode-puts-insurance-out-of-reach%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e6d91e6b146c6016104bb98cb556c88c10055a4%2F0_162_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20the%20wrong%20postcode%20puts%20insurance%20out%20of%20your%20reach&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fwrong-postcode-puts-insurance-out-of-reach%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20the%20wrong%20postcode%20puts%20insurance%20out%20of%20your%20reach&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fwrong-postcode-puts-insurance-out-of-reach%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e6d91e6b146c6016104bb98cb556c88c10055a4%2F0_162_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Last winter’s floods cost insurers £1.3bn. Photograph: Daniel Berehulak/Getty 
Images 
Living in a flood-prone postcode can mean getting household insurance is a 
stormy affair. Around one in six homes in England and Wales are in danger of 
flooding, with last winter’s stormsDesmond, Eva and Frank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/12/uk-storms-direct-line-expects-insurance-claims-to-reach-up-to-140m-pounds>
 costing insurers £1.3bn in total - an average of £50,000 per home, according 
to the Association of British Insurers.

Retired couple Keith and Pam Dawson of Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire, 
struggled to get buildings and contents insurance after suffering £60,000 of
flood damage in February 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/feb/07/severe-uk-weather-and-floods-to-continue-and-spread-live-updates>
. “This was despite subsequently constructing a new perimeter wall and carrying 
out other risk improvement work at our own expense,” Keith Dawson says.

Mainstream insurers either turned them down flat or would only offer cover 
with flood exclusion. The couple contacted specialist broker Fairweather 
Insurance, which negotiated cover costing £633 a year with a £10,000 excess on 
any claims.

Kevin Roberts, broker and affinity director at Legal & General, says 
increasingly “granular” insurance company data should allow insurers to risk 
assess individual houses with greater accuracy.

“Historically it wasn’t possible to drill down so precisely and some houses 
that were never prone to flooding were priced the same as those that were 
almost guaranteed to flood.”
 