
There’s a scene in BBC2’s A World Without Down’s Syndrome? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/01/do-we-really-want-a-world-without-downs-syndrome-ds-prenatal-test>
, which airs tonight, in whichSally Phillips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/sally-phillips>, Bridget Jones’s 
Diary actor and mother of a son with Down’s, shows a video of a disabled girl 
competing at a gymnastics competition to a woman who chose to end her own 
pregnancy. The interaction isn’t designed to guilt-trip the woman who made a 
different decision – Phillips is an empathetic presenter and describes herself 
as pro-choice – but it is a snapshot of how the conversation around disability 
and abortion is routinely set up: one woman’s choice versus another’s.

We see this in articles praising women 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2262242/Mother-took-heartbreaking-decision-severely-disabled-baby-aborted-seeing-smile-3D-scan-picture.html>
 who choose to have their child despite the fact a foetal abnormality has been 
detected, often asking other female readers:what would you do? 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-1388475/Abortion-baby-born-disability-What-choice-make.html>
 Or the tone of news items in which women express doubts or fears about raising 
a disabled child. Katie Price was described as having“confessed” 
<http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/katie-price-abortion-confession-loose-women-panel-support-stars-confession-about-disabled-son-1547181>
when she said she probably would have had an abortion if she’d known her son 
Harvey was going to be severely disabled, as if the thought, let alone the act, 
was a heinous crime.

On the other hand, I’ve seen women with disabled children – and disabled 
people themselves – be asked incredulously (often by complete strangers) why an 
abortion wasn’t chosen. Such attitudes are particularly alarming in a climate 
where disabled people are increasingly perceived as a costly burden to the 
state.

When it comes to disability and pregnancy, we are routinely stuck in this sort 
of black-and-white dichotomy: having a disabled child is said to be a tragedy 
or inconvenience that should always be avoided, while women who do choose to 
abort a foetus with abnormalities are vilified as “shallow” and “selfish”. 
Neither is accurate nor addresses the issues that really matter.

The truth is there is still considerable prejudice around disability. We live 
in a culture where disabled people’s lives are often said to be worth less, and 
difference is equated with failure or negativity. Even Paralympians are 
described in some media reports as“suffering” 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/schoolreport/19360516> from their disability. It’s not 
alarmist to accept that the way as a society we understand disability can 
directly impact on how individuals feel about bringing up a disabled child.

Medical professionals – the very people pregnant women rely on – are not 
exempt from spreading such attitudes. Phillips has spoken of the way that, 
after her son was born with Down’s, her doctorbroke the “bad news” and the 
nurse cried 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/women/family/sally-phillips-my-son-has-downs-syndrome---but-i-wouldnt-want-to/>
. (Her child’s disability wasn’t detected during pregnancy.) As the NHS looks 
set to introduce amore effective screening for Down’s syndrome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/15/non-invasive-test-for-downs-syndrome-recommended-for-high-risk-women>
, it’s a valid moment to question how we view disability as a society, and to 
accept that women, and of course men, deserve accurate information in order to 
make an informed decision.

But in doing so, we should be vigilant of how quickly this conversation can be 
derailed. It is an ongoing strategy of anti-choice groups tohijack disability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/oct/30/how-prolifers-hijacked-paralympics>
, generally as a way to reduce women’s reproductive rights. This sort of faux 
concern tends to be less about disabled people’s equality and more about 
women’s inequality. (And though we’re often cut out from the discussion, 
disabled women can be the ones who are pregnant.) Days before Phillips’ 
documentary was even set to air, the Mail used it as an opportunity torun an 
article 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3809953/Sally-Phillips-says-pregnant-women-pressured-abort-babies-s-syndrome.html#ixzz4LbW1TllV>
 claiming women “are being pressured to abort babies” with Down’s.

And yet anti-choice campaigners and media organisations who purport to wish to 
“protect” disabled foetuses tend to be very quiet – or in the Mail’s case,very 
vocal 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2247290/Disability-handouts-cut-stopped-330-000-claimants-Government-aims-end-welfare-life.html>
 – about the support disabled people should receive once they are out of the 
womb. Raising a child with a severe disability can be exhausting and difficult, 
as well as wonderful, and this is much harder when the state cuts play centres 
for disabled children, respite care and transport. Phillips herself admits she 
was lucky to be able to afford to hire a live-in nanny to help with her 
disabled child, an advantage women on low incomes struggling alone can only 
imagine.

And we need to talk about that too, if we are going to really have this 
discussion. We need to admit that things such as economic and gender 
inequality, as well as perceptions of disability, impact on our supposedly free 
choices. And we need to argue for positive change, such as more government 
support for disabled children (and adults), and more inclusion of disabled 
people in all parts of society.

As we all know, life, let alone disability or raising children, is not black 
and white but rather filled with multiple shades of grey. I hope Phillips’ 
documentary starts a long overdue and nuanced conversation. Both women and 
disabled people deserve better than simplistic judgments.

 * Comments on this article will be pre-moderated  