
My mum is looking to buy a new laptop after Christmas. Her budget is tight: 
around £200. She uses it for Microsoft Office, browsing the internet (reading 
the Guardian) and watching TV. I suggested a 32GB SSD drive – which would be 
really quick – as she will use USB sticks, SD cards and the cloud for storage. 
I saw one for £160, but if she bought that, she would need to buy an external 
DVD drive for burning music to CD etc. Would it just be easier to stay safe and 
get a standard laptop with a hard drive? Charlie


There are two kinds of laptop at the low end of the PC market. First, there 
are traditional laptops, where the base system has a 15.6in screen, 4GB of 
memory, a 500GB or 1TB hard drive, and (usually) a read/write DVD drive. These 
machines are not very portable and don’t have long battery life, but they do 
the job. Current prices range from around £250 to £500.

The second type is much like a netbook, albeit one that doesn’t meet all the 
netbook’s now-obsolete specifications (such as a 1024 x 600-pixel screen). They 
are designed to be thinner, lighter and cheaper than traditional laptops, and 
they usually have much better battery life. The base system typically has a 
10in or 11.6in screen, 2GB of memory, and 32GB of Flash storage. The 
touch-screen models often double as tablets: their screens are detachable or 
have 360-degree hinges that make them into 2-in-1s. Current prices range from 
about £150 to £300.

The hardware specifications of new-style netbooks are very similar to 
Chromebooks and they sell at much the same prices. Like Chromebooks, they are 
designed for web-based computing, though they can do much more. They can still 
run traditional Windows programs, such as Microsoft Office and Apple iTunes, 
and they can easily use external DVD and Blu-ray drives and other peripherals.

Traditional laptops are usually bought as desktop PC replacements. New-style 
netbooks and Chromebooks are better seen as companion devices that supplement 
either a desktop PC or laptop – though they could be seen as upgrades for 
people who only have smartphones or tablets. New-style netbooks are great for 
casual computing, and for carrying around in handbags, but they compromise on 
screen size, CPU power, and storage.

Beware of 32GB “SSDs”

Contrary to what you think, netbooks do not have SSDs (solid state drives) – 
or at least, not the kind of SSD that can replace a standard hard drive. PC 
manufacturers often describe them, accurately, as eMMC (Embedded Multi Media 
Card) drives. They are more like SD storage cards soldered to the motherboard. 
They are used in smartphones, tablets and low-end laptops because they are very 
small and very cheap, but they don’t perform anything like real SSDs. Indeed, 
while eMMC chips load data faster than traditional hard drives, they won’t 
always write data faster.

Apart from that, I think 32GB Flash memory drives are too small for 
traditional laptop uses. Microsoft has reduced the size of Windows 10, partly 
by compressing the Windows files, but it’s going to get bigger with use. There 
will be numerous upgrades, growing log files, swap files, and large caches of 
temporary internet files. (When I removed Google Chrome, it had about 1.3GB of 
temp files.)

Windows 10 is getting in-place upgrades twice a year – the Creators Update 
<https://blogs.windows.com/business/2016/12/06/windows-10-creators-update-advances-security-best-class-modern-tools/>
 is coming soon – and these are installed as new operating systems. So, you 
need space for the current version of Windows 10, space for the new version, 
and space for a backup copy of the old version, which is preserved so you can 
roll back the upgrade if something goes wrong. August’s Anniversary Update 
needed 10-20GB of free space to install, and it wouldn’t install on my 32GB 
2-in-1. which had 9GB free. I had to plug in an external hard drive.

Looking three years or six upgrades ahead, I can’t see a 32GB drive coping 
without some massive clean-ups. Significant upgrades may have to be downloaded 
separately and installed from a USB thumb drive.

Since eMMC drives can’t be upgraded, I recommend buying PC’s with 64GB instead 
of 32GB.

Stick with tradition

Your mother sounds like a traditional laptop user, and if she wants to install 
Microsoft Office and assemble tracks to burn audio CDs, she’d be better off 
with a traditional laptop. This is a different scenario from someone who wants 
a very light PC to carry around, whose data is online, and who streams 
everything instead of saving and owning it.

Of course, traditional laptops are more expensive than new-style netbooks, but 
if you include the cost of an external DVD, there’s not much in it.

Although no PC manufacturer now makes traditional laptops to sell for £250, 
you can still buy them for less than that. You can get bargains in the sales, 
refurbished laptops (which come with a guarantee), and second hand machines. 
Some companies, including HP, do their own refurbishing and sell Grade A 
laptops that are almost “as new”, except for coming in plain boxes. Some 
companies, such asTier1Online <http://www.tier1online.com/>, sell ex-corporate 
systems that may have been heavily used but can still be good value.

You will have to shop around. Argos often has sale bargains, especially on 
Lenovo equipment. Currys PC World sometimes has special deals.Laptop Outlet 
<http://www.laptopoutlet.co.uk/>, on the Tottenham Court Road in London, has 
deals and refurbished machines. It’s also worth checking online suppliers such 
asLaptops Direct <http://www.laptopsdirect.co.uk/>, eBuyer.com 
<http://www.ebuyer.com/store/Computer/cat/Laptops>, Morgan Computers 
<https://www.morgancomputers.co.uk/c/404/Laptops-Netbooks/> and so on.

Possible laptops

At the moment, mum’s best bet could be the 15.6in Acer Aspire ES 
<http://www.argos.co.uk/product/5996951> with a quad core Intel Pentium N4200 
processor, 4GB of memory, 1TB hard drive and read/write DVD, which Argos is 
selling for £199.99 (was £299.99). The exact model is not specified, and the 
Pentium N4200 runs at 1.1GHz to 2.5GHz, not the 2.6GHz in Argos’s blurb. 
However, it’s a decent processor and makes the machine good value for money.

An alternative is the Lenovo IdeaPad 110 
<http://www.currys.co.uk/gbuk/computing/laptops/laptops/lenovo-ideapad-110-15-6-laptop-black-10146807-pdt.html>
 with the same specification, except for its much slower dual core Intel 
Celeron N3060 processor. PC World is selling this model online for £249.99, or 
for £269.99 in store.

Laptop Outlet has a refurbished 14in HP 14-AM012NA 
<http://www.laptopoutlet.co.uk/hp-14-am012na-14-best-value-laptop-intel-celeron-n3060-4gb-ram-500gb-hdd-dvdr.html>
 with the same slow Celeron N3060 and a 500GB hard drive for £219.99. However, 
refurbished ThinkPads tend to be better value. For example, you could get a 
LenovoThinkPad T420 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Lenovo-Thinkpad-Professional-Certified-Refurbished/dp/B01DZNQUTI/>
 – a business workhorse – with a 2.50GHz Intel Core i5-2520M, 320GB hard drive 
and Windows 10 Pro from Eflex on Amazon.co.uk for £229.99, whichundercuts 
Tier1online 
<http://www.tier1online.com/728-4180a32-b/lenovo-thinkpad-t420-i5-2520m-2-50ghz-grade-b-14-1600-x-900-webcam-wireless>
. It may have a second-generation Core i5 but it’s still faster than a 
seventh-gen Core i3-7100U. (It runs at 35W instead of 15W, but your mother 
won’t care.)

In passing, it’s hard to find real SSDs at this price level, but Laptop Outlet 
is selling new 11.6inLenovo ThinkPad 11e 
<http://www.laptopoutlet.co.uk/lenovo-thinkpad-11e-11-6-mini-laptop-intel-celeron-n2940-4gb-ram-128gb-ssd.html>
 laptops with 128GB SSDs for £249.99. This is a tough, military-spec system 
designed for use in schools, andcurrent models 
<http://shop.lenovo.com/gb/en/laptops/thinkpad/11e-series/11e-3rd-gen-intel/> 
start at £549.99. The LO version has no DVD and is still running Windows 8.1, 
but it might suit someone with a child who needsassistive technologies 
<https://www.microsoft.com/en-gb/accessibility/windows10upgrade>.

Have you got another question for Jack? Email it to Ask.Jack@theguardian.com 
<mailto:Ask.Jack@theguardian.com>
 