
This is the time of year when the UK’s retail giants launch their blockbuster 
television ads and this year has been no exception, with a comedy bouncing dog, 
Mrs Claus and a time-poor dad.

Which retailers are giving money to charities this year?

Retailers are raising funds and awareness for many causes this year. John 
Lewis is supporting theWildlife Trusts <http://www.wildlifetrusts.org/> with an 
uplifting ad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/10/john-lewis-christmas-ad-2016-dog-trampoline>
about a bouncing boxer called Buster. The retailer has opted for light-hearted 
comedy, rather than the more sentimental values of previous campaigns. Last 
year’s heartfelt ad for Age UK told the story of lonely old man living in a 
moon crater. This year, John Lewis is selling a range of cuddly animal toys 
donating 10% of each sale to the Wildlife Trusts.

The ad cost £1m to make in a west London studio and the department store will 
spend a total of £6m on the campaign.

Christmas TV ads - the search for a cracker, the fear of a turkey
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/05/christmas-tv-ads-john-lewis> 
“Coming home” is the theme behind Waitrose’s Christmas advert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/13/waitrose-joins-john-lewis-journey-christmas-tv-ad>
, which follows the migration of a robin. The supermarket chain is selling 
Michael Morpugo’s book about the robin’s journey for £5 and donating 50p from 
each sale to Crisis.

Sainsbury’s is supporting Great Ormond Street with an animation film voiced by 
comedian James Corden.The advert  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/14/sainsburys-joins-christmas-ad-battle-with-james-corden-voiced-animation>
tells the story of Dave who decides to create clone helpers so he can spend 
time with his family this Christmas. The profits from a gingerbread “Dave kit” 
will help fund on-site accommodation at the children’s hospital.

Aldi is raising funds for Barnardo’s with its campaign about Kevin the carrot 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aCZrWFrRgbQ&sns=tw> who desperately tries to 
reach the fireplace and meet Father Christmas. Soft toys of Kevin are being 
sold for £2.99, with 100% of profits going to the children’s charity.

'We had a fox stuck on a trampoline' – wildlife charities react to the John 
Lewis Christmas ad
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/shortcuts/2016/nov/14/wildlife-charities-react-john-lewis-christmas-ad>
And which aren’t?

Marks & Spencer’s Mrs Claus film <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V5QPXhStb5I> 
directed by Oscar-winning Tom Hooper has been described as this year’s best 
Christmas advert, but it is not raising money for a specific charity. The high 
street retailer is instead continuing with its popular Food on the Move 
campaign, with profits going to Shelter.

How much will the charities get?

Retailers and charities tend to be equally tight-lipped about how much 
charities actually get as a result ofChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> TV advertising.

But this isn’t just about money. Age UK reported a huge boost in inquiries 
about volunteering as a result of the 2015John Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/johnlewis> ad, which raised issues of 
loneliness.

How else are charities hoping to raise money during the festive season? 

Special fundraising events include Doctors of the World UK’s annual Santa Run 
<https://www.doctorsoftheworld.org.uk/pages/santa-run-2016> in Victoria Park, 
east London, on 4 December, while Save the Children is encouraging everyone to 
take part inChristmas Jumper Day 
<https://christmasjumperday.org/fundraise/?utm_campaign=cjd2016&utm_medium=ppc&utm_source=cjdschoolsppc2016&gclid=CjwKEAiA3qXBBRD4_b_V7ZLFsX4SJAB0AtEVbcFsPjgNym9MilaGbXYv6mUPaevDfgZp4QmIflPZlhoCiXLw_wcB>
, on 16 December. The NSPCC is hoping to raise more than £150,000 for its 
Childline service at aChristmas carol service 
<https://www.nspcc.org.uk/what-you-can-do/events/merry-little-christmas-carol-service-st-pauls/>
 held in the crypt of St Paul’s on 13 December.

And  <https://www.givingtuesday.org/>on Giving Tuesday 
<http://www.givingtuesday.org.uk/>, on 29 November, organised by the Charities 
Aid Foundation, more than 1,400 UK charities will be involved in a huge 
campaign expected to raise millions of pounds in a short space of time. Last 
year, the day brought in more than £6,000 a minute for UK charities.



Talk to us on Twitter via @ <https://twitter.com/gdnvoluntary>Gdnvoluntary  
<https://twitter.com/gdnvoluntary>and join our community 
<https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/> for your free Guardian 
Voluntary Sector monthly newsletter, with analysis and opinion sent direct to 
you on the first Thursday of the month.
 