
The world seems to be spinning out of control into realms of fantasy, if not 
downright insanity. Fanciful notions and striking imagery overrule all else. 
Forget the boring but serious everyday business of fact-based government. When
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has a good 
chance of becoming US president andBoris Johnson is foreign secretary, 
globe-trotting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/shortcuts/2016/sep/28/when-boris-met-the-man-he-called-a-wankerer-from-ankara->
 in our name, then maybe all bets on rationality are off.

Within its first week back, on 11 October, parliament will be debating Brexit: 
no, not the plodding details of what the hell to do next, but whether Brexit 
meansit’s time to bring back the royal yacht Britannia 
<http://www.parliament.uk/mps-lords-and-offices/offices/commons/speakers-office/wadjourns1/>
. Requiring a crew of 240, the 1952 floating palace has a state drawing room 
and state dining room for entertaining dignitaries around the world; it is a 
place, theQueen once said, where “I can truly relax” 
<http://www.royalyachtbritannia.co.uk/plan-your-visit/royal-yacht-blog/blog/2016/may/join-our-party!-celebrate-the-queen%E2%80%99s-official-90th-birthday-aboard-britannia/>
.

Why do we need it? The Conservative MP Jake Berry, a close Boris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> ally, says it would be a floating 
embassy to help the UK strike new post-Brexit trade deals around the world. 
Liam Fox would sail in her too, as he calls on foreign potentates: only last 
week he was on bended knee to Gulf dictators seeking the new trade bonanza he 
promises.

How much more fitting for him, and indeed for Boris, to woo such people with a 
visual reminder that Britannia rules the waves. British magnificence is what we 
do best. Berrytells the Sun: 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/1791862/tories-want-royal-yacht-britannia-to-rule-the-waves-again-and-drum-up-post-brexit-trade-as-a-floating-embassy/>
 “It could bring in billions of pounds worth of trade deals for post-Brexit 
Britain.”

In this miasma, gestures and dreams can ignore the terrible prospect of years 
of brain-crunching negotiations on every detailed aspect of trade and 
regulation for every product and service, which might take not two but 10 years 
of soul-destroying and pointless agony, distracting from all the country’s 
other pressing problems. And a good result of all this would be merely to end 
up no worse off.

The usually diplomatic Institute for Government has just delivered a 
devastating warning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/29/brexit-negotiations-could-cost-tens-of-millions-of-pounds-says-report>
 on how unprepared and chaotic the government’s approach has been so far, 
condemning the bizarre division of Brexit between three new departments(led, 
though the report doesn’t say so, by three erratic, vain men). This means 
hiring 500 more civil servants – and they need to be big-brained – costing some 
£65m.

Already Theresa May has had to slap the three down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/27/brexit-weekly-briefing-theresa-may-3-three-brexiteers-0>
 for grandstanding turf wars, declaring for a hard Brexit before she has said 
anything at all about her approach. We have no idea what she intends – because, 
says the report: “There is a gaping void in the government negotiating 
strategy.”

Meanwhile the rest of the world looks on at our pantomime politics with 
bemused perplexity, irritation or mockery. Best was theutter incredulity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/28/brexit-negotiator-hits-out-at-uk-ministers-mixed-messages>
 of the European parliament’s chief Brexit negotiator, Guy Verhofstadt, at the 
sheer nerve of Boris Johnson promising Turkey to be its strongest advocate for 
joining the EU.

“So Boris Johnson wants to help Turkey join the EU – after he just campaigned 
for the UK to leave the EU on the basis that Turkey would be joining the EU in 
the near future,” hewrote on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/GuyVerhofstadt/posts/10155001346840016>. Just 
remember all those warnings of Turks poised at our borders.

Next Verhofstadt rightly walloped our defence secretary, Michael Fallon, for 
vowing to stop the EU setting up its own army. “The UK defence minister says 
the UK government will block EU efforts to enhance its security capabilities, 
even though the UK is leaving the EU – yet they say they want an enhanced 
security relationship with the EU after Brexit.”

And then he went for the international trade secretary, Liam Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liamfox>, who he said had “indicated the 
UK will leave the EU’s customs union because he thinks other markets are more 
important – while his prime minister tells us the EU27 ‘will sign’ an ambitious 
trade deal with the UK”. Politics, he said, “never fails to surprise me”.

Indeed, it astounds many of us in Britain too. Slap-downs abound from EU 
leaders at the sheer unreality of British ministers’ fantasies about the deal 
they pretend they can get.

The royal yacht will almost certainly stay in its dock in Leith, where 
tourists flock to this relic of the dying days of empire. In dry dock too is 
any coherent plan, any shred of an idea of what Brexit means, as all the old 
leave campaigners and their press clamour for a quick “hard” exit, calling 
anything less a betrayal of the voters.

Meanwhile the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders said yesterday that 
with 80% of cars from many UK plants selling to the EU, an industry supporting 
300,000 jobs would be “jeopardised if we are not in the single market”.

But oh, let’s debate the royal yacht instead – much easier and more fun. We 
are no longer a country to be taken seriously.

Brexit weekly briefing: Theresa May 3, Three Brexiteers 0
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/27/brexit-weekly-briefing-theresa-may-3-three-brexiteers-0> 