
The US election might not end tomorrow. Anyone who lived through the 
photo-finish of 2000, when it took until mid-December for a winner to be 
declared – and only then by a ruling of the supreme court – will know that a 
presidential contest does not always produce a president, at least not right 
away. But one thing will certainly be over – and that is the dizzying, 
sometimes nauseating, 18-month-long saga that has been the 2016 campaign.

It is standard to describe a US presidential contest as bitter and divisive. 
In 2012,the Guardian’s front-page story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/nov/07/obama-four-more-years-america-verdict>
 branded the battle of Barack Obama v Mitt Romney “one of the most closely 
fought and polarised in recent history”. Looking back, that race looks like a 
veritable philosophy seminar, exemplary in its civility and decorum, compared 
with this one.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwho-is-to-blame-us-election-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d4bcafa5312fcf1df4ed1f3e475e2411abc5490%2F0_257_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Who%20is%20to%20blame%20for%20this%20awful%20US%20election%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwho-is-to-blame-us-election-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Who%20is%20to%20blame%20for%20this%20awful%20US%20election%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwho-is-to-blame-us-election-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d4bcafa5312fcf1df4ed1f3e475e2411abc5490%2F0_257_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 America’s search for Obama’s successor has been a horror show of lies, 
bullying and the bigotry. Photograph: Robyn Beck/AFP/Getty Images 
In a crowded field, the 2016 campaign stands out as unusually awful. Yes, it 
has been riveting, whether followed from a distance or covered up close. Those 
who sayit has unfolded like a Netflix drama in real time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/01/us-election-netflix-drama-binge-watching-clinton-trump-battle>
 are not exaggerating. Except no drama would have dared offer this cast of 
characters – a real-estate tycoon with a crush on a Russian dictator, an 
ex-congressman investigated for sexting an underage girl, a former Miss 
Universe humiliated as “Miss Piggy” – or the last-minute reversals of fortune. 
Campaign 2016 has made House of Cards look tame.

But that cannot conceal the truth: the US’s search for Obama’s successor has 
been a horror show, revealing – and dredging up – a stew of racism, misogyny 
and casual violence bubbling below the surface of American life. Eight in 10 US 
voters say the campaign has left them feeling disgusted, according toa CBS/New 
York Times poll last week 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/04/us/politics/hillary-clinton-donald-trump-poll.html>
. Not dissatisfied.Disgusted. The platonic ideal of an election is a sober 
discussion of the questions that will confront the US over the next decade. The 
reality has been a marathon of insult, threat and lies.

If elected, Donald Trump poses the greatest threat to all our futures | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/07/if-elected-donald-trump-poses-the-greatest-threat-to-all-our-futures>
The blame for this belongs to one man. Donald Trump has fought a presidential 
campaign like no other. He has mocked opponents for their looks, belittled 
women, disparaged war heroes, damned ethnic and other minorities in crude, 
bigoted language, jeered at disabled people, beaten his chest with bellicose 
promises of state-sponsored violence that would trample on the US constitution 
and trigger a third world war, and told dozens and dozens of lies every day. 
While his opponent has offereddetailed and substantive policy prescriptions 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/article/2016/jul/22/hillary-clintons-top-10-campaign-promises/>
, those have barely got a mention: Trump’s knack for hogging media attention, 
usually by saying or tweeting something jaw-droppingly outrageous, has left no 
room. In the four-and-a-half hours of formal presidential debates between Trump 
and Hillary Clinton, climate change was discussed for not one minute.

But Trump does not bear the blame alone. Also shamed by the 2016 campaign are 
those institutions and individuals who failed to stand up to him. Some 
understood the danger he represented, seeing in him a would-be dictator – “I 
alone can fix this!” – whose contempt for basic democratic norms, from the 
importance of a free press to the need to respect the outcome of a democratic 
election, suggested a lurch towards fascism. That small handful will be 
remembered with admiration. But, whatever the outcome today, historians of the 
American republic will judge harshly those who did not stop Trump when they 
could. It will damn those who indulged, pampered and enabled him to reach this 
moment: where polls still show him with a path, albeit narrow, to the White 
House.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwho-is-to-blame-us-election-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33d2b1067022f23ef7329880d8efacb4e8ace0bd%2F0_116_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Who%20is%20to%20blame%20for%20this%20awful%20US%20election%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwho-is-to-blame-us-election-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Who%20is%20to%20blame%20for%20this%20awful%20US%20election%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwho-is-to-blame-us-election-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33d2b1067022f23ef7329880d8efacb4e8ace0bd%2F0_116_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Jeb Bush was among the Republican rivals who had no idea how to deal with 
Trump. Photograph: Spencer Platt/Getty Images 
First in this roll-call of shame is the Republican party. Among those hanging 
their heads should be the 16 rival candidates who allowed themselves to be 
steamrollered by a reality TV host and serially bankrupted businessman. Jeb 
Bush, Marco Rubio, Ted Cruz and the others had no idea how to deal with Trump. 
They collectively made a strategic error by failing to realise their primary 
task was to take him out. Instead, they fought each other, each hoping to 
emerge as the sole, anti-Trump candidate around whomRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> would unite. That proved a 
delusion.

As Trump’s poll lead increased in late 2015 and early 2016, his rivals grew 
ever more frightened of taking a shot at him, anxious that they might alienate 
his supporters or, worse, that he might train his fire back on them. So while, 
say,Chris Christie mocked Rubio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/07/republican-debate-new-hampshire-marco-rubio-chris-christie-donald-trump-ted-cruz>
 on a TV debate stage in New Hampshire in February, Trump could literally step 
back and watch – only to emerge as the winner in that state’s Republican 
primary a few days later.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwho-is-to-blame-us-election-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F503ac8289b40c1720d6f08ed534c54be7015fb1f%2F0_0_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Who%20is%20to%20blame%20for%20this%20awful%20US%20election%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwho-is-to-blame-us-election-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Who%20is%20to%20blame%20for%20this%20awful%20US%20election%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwho-is-to-blame-us-election-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F503ac8289b40c1720d6f08ed534c54be7015fb1f%2F0_0_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
 Trump rival and New Jersey governor Chris Christie. Photograph: Mel Evans/AP 
Perhaps the Republicans cannot be blamed for the weakness of the field that 
fought Trump for their party’s nomination. Perhaps no traditional politician – 
no senator or governor – could take on Trump when the Republican grassroots, so 
furious at the political establishment, were hungering for an outsider. 
(Although, of course, this anti-establishment fervour, this loathing of all 
things Washington, was itself stoked for years by Republicans and their allies 
on Fox News and in the rest of the conservative political-media-entertainment 
complex. In losing their party to Trump, the Republicans were burned by a fire 
they themselves had started.)

But what shames them is their conduct afterwards. Even as Trump made clear 
what kind of man he is – calling Mexicans “rapists”, suggesting 
African-Americans are too lazy to work, that Jews see everything through the 
lens of money, calling women “dogs” and “pigs”, threatening violence against 
protesters, endorsing torture and the murder of the families of suspected 
terrorists, calling for a foreign power (Russia) to hack into emails belonging 
to his political rival, arguing that women who have abortions should “face some 
sort of punishment”, and being exposed as a proud perpetrator of sexual 
assault, a man whose approach to women is to “grab them by the pussy” – even 
after all this and so much more, most senior Republicans of note stood by him.

To be sure, they condemned him occasionally, when the extremity of their 
standard bearer’s behaviour left them no alternative. Paul Ryan, who serves as 
speaker of the House of Representatives, rightly called it the “textbook 
definition of a racist comment” when Trump said thatJudge Gonzalo Curiel could 
not be impartial in handling the lawsuit against the so-called Trump University 
because Curiel was “Mexican” 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/donald-trump-keeps-up-attacks-on-judge-gonzalo-curiel-1464911442>
. In fact, the judge was a US citizen, born in Indiana. Ryan cold-shouldered 
Trump again, after the release of the Access Hollywood tape in which Trump 
boasted of his attacks on women. But he never repudiated him fully. Ryan never 
said Trump was unfit to be president of the United States and that he would not 
vote for him.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwho-is-to-blame-us-election-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8b741b95a2e2ea85645fcecf4f26e2bde5368c4%2F0_40_3354_2012%2F3354.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Who%20is%20to%20blame%20for%20this%20awful%20US%20election%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwho-is-to-blame-us-election-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Who%20is%20to%20blame%20for%20this%20awful%20US%20election%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwho-is-to-blame-us-election-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8b741b95a2e2ea85645fcecf4f26e2bde5368c4%2F0_40_3354_2012%2F3354.jpg>
 Senator John McCain initially endorsed Trump. Photograph: J. Scott 
Applewhite/AP 
The same was nearly true of Senator John McCain, tortured for five and a half 
years in a Hanoi cell and yet derided as “not a hero” by Trump (who said he 
preferred those who were not captured). McCain swallowed that, along with 
Trump’s promise to ban Muslims and to deport 11 million undocumented migrants – 
only withdrawing his endorsement last month, after the notorious tape.

Until then, McCain, like most of his fellow Republicans, clung to the fiction 
that Trump would transform himself into a new creature: sober, presidential 
and, above all, capable of being tamed by the Republican establishment – even 
though there was not a shred of evidence, bar a very occasional willingness on 
the candidate’s part to read prepared lines from a teleprompter, to support 
that fantasy.

That puts them on a moral plane only slightly above that occupied by Trump’s 
trio of enablers: Rudy Giuliani, Chris Christie and Newt Gingrich. Those three 
horsemen of the Republican apocalypse conspired in the lie that a snake-oil 
salesman was fit to be president – and destroyed what remained of their 
reputations in the process. AsHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> pointed out, Giuliani 
used to prosecute tax-dodgers. In this campaign, he praised Trump’s failure to 
pay income tax for at least two decades as evidence of his “genius”.

And that is to omit the fourth horseman: Mike Pence, the defender of family 
values who has served as the running mate of a thrice-married, serially 
adulterous, self-confessed grabber of women. When the 2005 “grab them” tape 
emerged, Pence went into seclusion. Some thought he might emerge to announce he 
was quitting the Republican ticket. He did no such thing. Instead, he examined 
his conscience, found it pristine and continued to act as a character witness 
to a man who cheats his taxes, cheats on his wives and lies every time he opens 
his mouth.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwho-is-to-blame-us-election-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F267f3ccf1675ff3f460b49a0bf5a6be3ca6fe08d%2F161_222_2827_1696%2F2827.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Who%20is%20to%20blame%20for%20this%20awful%20US%20election%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwho-is-to-blame-us-election-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Who%20is%20to%20blame%20for%20this%20awful%20US%20election%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwho-is-to-blame-us-election-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F267f3ccf1675ff3f460b49a0bf5a6be3ca6fe08d%2F161_222_2827_1696%2F2827.jpg>
 Donald Trump and Mike Pence campaign together In Wisconsin. Photograph: Chip 
Somodevilla/Getty Images 
It’s easy to attack the spineless “leaders” of the Republican party. Easy but 
incomplete. It’s a rule of political combat that no one ever, ever, attacks the 
voters – a rule Clinton unwisely brokewhen she deployed an odd metaphor to 
describe half of Trump’s supporters as a “basket of deplorables” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/10/hillary-clinton-trump-supporters--bigoted-deplorables>
. But that rule only applies to candidates for office. Any truthful assessment 
of a campaign has at least to include those doing the voting.

Some blame surely attaches to the Americans who let Trump keep up the bullying 
and the bigotry and voted for him anyway. There is no escaping the fact that 
north of 40% of the US electorate have been prepared to vote for Trump despite 
everything that he has said and done.One poll found 22% of Trump’s own 
supporters believed he would start a nuclear war 
<http://thehill.com/blogs/ballot-box/presidential-races/297383-poll-nearly-half-of-voters-think-trump-will-detonate-a>
. They thought that, but were prepared to vote for him anyway. None of them 
will be able to say: “We didn’t know.”

Notable among that group are Christian evangelical voters, people who used to 
say that character mattered, that the personal conduct of a candidate was 
crucial. Five years ago, only 30% of white evangelicals believed that a person 
guilty of “immoral” personal behaviour could behave ethically in a public role.
Now that figure stands at 72% 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/acts-of-faith/wp/2016/10/19/the-trump-effect-evangelicals-have-become-much-more-accepting-of-politicians-immoral-acts/>
, a remarkably rapid shift. It means people of supposedly deep moral 
convictions have been prepared to junk those beliefs just to accommodate Trump.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwho-is-to-blame-us-election-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc0c77118a9277337457f38e7d1d3f5c725f4a5e%2F660_167_2853_1711%2F2853.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Who%20is%20to%20blame%20for%20this%20awful%20US%20election%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwho-is-to-blame-us-election-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Who%20is%20to%20blame%20for%20this%20awful%20US%20election%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwho-is-to-blame-us-election-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc0c77118a9277337457f38e7d1d3f5c725f4a5e%2F660_167_2853_1711%2F2853.jpg>
 The Christian vote: a Republican presidential rally in Mobile Alabama. 
Photograph: Julie Dermansky/Corbis via Getty Images 
Still, they will have had their reasons – including, for many millions, an 
all-consuming loathing of Hillary Clinton, a hatred so deep it blocks out, or 
at least outweighs, Trump’s copious flaws. Analysts have not been sure how to 
explain the other motives. Some have been compassionate and highlighted the 
role of economic disadvantage among Trump supporters, those left behind by 
globalisation. Others have suggested that Trumpism is a howl of often racist, 
misogynistic rage from angry white men, furious that their once-privileged 
place in American life has been supplanted. The latter camp has taken to 
sharing pictures or reports of overt racism and sexism by Trump supporterswith 
the sarcastic caption: “economic anxiety” 
<https://twitter.com/soledadobrien/status/795426520768581637>.

This debate has been thoroughly aired in parts of the American press, but, 
overall, the media – and especially TV – shares some responsibility for the 
dire state of the 2016 campaign. It’s true that the most respectable newspapers 
and reporters kept tabs on Trump’s prodigious lying:one correspondent tweeted 
out a daily tally <https://www.thestar.com/news/donald-trump-quickfacts.html>, 
often stretching into the dozens. Others maintained diligent fact-checking 
services.

But the big picture was indulgence on an epic scale. For months, Trump had 
unique and unprecedented access to the airwaves of cable TV. Rather than wait 
to be booked for a set-piece interview, he would simply call up Fox or MSNBC 
and put himself on the air. He knew he was ratings gold; he knew the networks 
would not be able to say no. He had a similarly instinctive, reptilian 
understanding of the media’s addiction to outrage: his nocturnal tweeting habit 
spread offence and insult far and wide – but it ensured he remained at the 
centre of public attention for over a year. According to the media analyst Jack 
Shafer,the only subject ever to have enjoyed a comparable full-spectrum 
dominance is 9/11 
<http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2016/11/2016-election-trump-media-takeover-coverage-214419>
.

Yet that quantitative imbalance was not the only distortion. The media clung 
to its notion that balance required equivalence, so that if Trump wallowed in 
dishonesty, requiring constant fact-checking, then Clinton had to be treated as 
equally dishonest. Witnessthe morning TV anchor Matt Lauer 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/08/us/politics/matt-lauer-forum.html>, widely 
pilloried for a programme in which he let Trump say anything, much of it false, 
but played inquisitor-general with Clinton, especially over her emails. (Still, 
the enduring face of media indulgence of Trump will be that of late-night TV 
host Jimmy Fallon,playfully ruffling the hair of the real estate magnate 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u0BYqzdiuJc> – treating him as just another 
lovable rogue.)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Du0BYqzdiuJc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Du0BYqzdiuJc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Du0BYqzdiuJc&media=>
 The moment when TV host Jimmy Fallon ruffled Trump’s hair epitomised the 
media’s indulgence of him. 
Nowhere was this mindset more misleading than in the never-ending discussion 
of those emails, especially in the campaign’s final stretch. Which brings us to 
the role of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and, in particular, its 
director, James Comey. His decision to announce 10 days before election day 
that he was, in effect, reopening the FBI probe into the email affair handed 
the last week of the campaign to Trump. It put Clinton on the defensive, halted 
her momentum and stopped the bleeding in Team Trump. Many analysts believe 
that, by bringing Republican voters back home to the party, it will also 
prevent Democrats retaking the senate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwho-is-to-blame-us-election-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12dbba3a5078cefb023727a4cd39b752c034d8bf%2F0_134_2716_1630%2F2716.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Who%20is%20to%20blame%20for%20this%20awful%20US%20election%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwho-is-to-blame-us-election-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Who%20is%20to%20blame%20for%20this%20awful%20US%20election%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwho-is-to-blame-us-election-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12dbba3a5078cefb023727a4cd39b752c034d8bf%2F0_134_2716_1630%2F2716.jpg>
 FBI director James Comey takes his place in the hall of shame. Photograph: 
Carolyn Kaster/AP 
And all that on what turned out to be an entirely false premise. On Sunday, 
Comey had to admit that the cache of supposedly new emails was, in fact, 
nothing of the sort and that there were no grounds to alter his July view that 
Clinton should face no further action. But by then the damage had been done. 
Whether through partisan bias or sheer incompetence, we do not yet fully know.

So Comey takes his place in the hall of shame of the 2016 campaign, shuffling 
into the group photo alongside Julian Assange, who might as well have handed 
over his WikiLeaks operation to the Trump campaign. Assange kept up a drip feed 
of leaked emails from the Clinton team, many of them embarrassing, none 
devastating – while conspicuously leaking nothing that might damage the 
Republican nominee. WikiLeaks never produced Trump’s tax returns or the 
outtakes from The Apprentice said to contain yet more evidence that Trump is a 
bigot and sexual predator. It targeted Clinton alone.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwho-is-to-blame-us-election-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd668e00f2cd58fa4157f72fc95e9f72e2c88b3d3%2F0_148_2896_1737%2F2896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Who%20is%20to%20blame%20for%20this%20awful%20US%20election%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwho-is-to-blame-us-election-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Who%20is%20to%20blame%20for%20this%20awful%20US%20election%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwho-is-to-blame-us-election-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd668e00f2cd58fa4157f72fc95e9f72e2c88b3d3%2F0_148_2896_1737%2F2896.jpg>
 Julian Assange’s WikiLeaks operation kept up a drip feed of leaked emails from 
the Clinton team, while leaking nothing that might damage Trump. Photograph: 
Ken McKay/ITV/Rex/Shutterstock 
And there should be room in that photo for Vladimir Putin, whose intelligence 
agencies are near-universally believed to be behind the wholesale hacking of 
the Democratic party, and whose goal appears to have been either the 
installation of Trump or, failing that, the sowing of confusion and chaos in 
the US electoral system. (Some believe Putin is saving his greatest attack till 
last, fearing he will hack the electronic voting system used in several key US 
states, thereby casting doubt on the validity of the result.)

The New York Times deserves great praise for keeping the spotlight on Trump by 
exposing his non-payment of tax

And who would stand on the other side? Who should win a medal for their 
service in this bloody campaign? Michelle Obama will be remembered for giving 
two of the best speeches of recent times,one at the Democratic convention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/26/michelle-obama-convention-speech-female-president>
, the otherlambasting Trump for his misogyny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/14/michelle-obama-speech-donald-trump-women>
. The old media behemoths of the New York Times and Washington Post deserve 
great praise for keeping the spotlight on Trump, the former by exposing his 
non-payment of tax, the latter for the work ofDavid Fahrenthold 
<https://twitter.com/Fahrenthold>, who got the scoop on the “grab them” tape 
and who kept digging at Trump’s exaggerated claims of charitable giving. The 
comedians of Saturday Night Live deserve a mention, too, especially for Alec 
Baldwin’s performance, which captured the bullying, meandering emptiness of 
Trump. Daily Show alumni John Oliver and Samantha Bee also did their bit and 
did it well.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwho-is-to-blame-us-election-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37fa77ca75389c6c733439b13fdbf6c14b83fd22%2F64_0_723_434%2F723.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Who%20is%20to%20blame%20for%20this%20awful%20US%20election%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwho-is-to-blame-us-election-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Who%20is%20to%20blame%20for%20this%20awful%20US%20election%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwho-is-to-blame-us-election-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37fa77ca75389c6c733439b13fdbf6c14b83fd22%2F64_0_723_434%2F723.png>
 The Daily Show’s Samantha Bee. Photograph: YouTube 
Those who can hold their heads highest, however, are the conservatives who put 
country before party. The Bush family could have gone further – by, say, 
officially backing Clinton – but their refusal to endorse Trump does something 
to redeem the clan’s reputation. Newspapers such asthe Arizona Republic 
<http://www.azcentral.com/story/opinion/editorial/2016/09/27/hillary-clinton-endorsement/91198668/>
 or theDallas Morning News 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/09/dallas-morning-news-endorses-clinton-for-president-227815>
 broke with their pasts, and their readers, to endorse a Democrat rather than 
back someone they saw as unfit. The backlash was severe:staff at the Arizona 
paper received death threats 
<http://www.politico.com/blogs/on-media/2016/09/arizona-republic-receives-death-threats-for-clinton-endorsement-228889>
. Individuals including senators Jeff Flake and Ben Sasse and former Bush 
speechwriter David Frum made a similar choice.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fmichelle-obama-full-speech-trump-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Full%20speech%3A%20Michelle%20Obama's%20powerful%20rebuke%20against%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fmichelle-obama-full-speech-trump-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Full%20speech%3A%20Michelle%20Obama%27s%20powerful%20rebuke%20against%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fmichelle-obama-full-speech-trump-video&media=>
 Michelle Obama’s powerful rebuke against Trump and his treatment of women. 
They all understood what their fellow Republicans did not. That Trump was not 
just this year’s party standard-bearer, to be shown due loyalty. That he was, 
instead, a menace to the republic, someone ready to violate the norms that 
underpin democracy – and that nearly half the country was ready to vote for 
him. This campaign is almost over. But the dangers it has revealed will not 
disappear.
 