
I have seen the future of housing for working-class Londoners, and it is 
frightening. It is a land of flats so broken that the children who live in them 
are hospitalised. Where families have to live among condemned electrics and 
mouse infestations. Where nails poke up from carpets, tearing the skin off 
babies’ feet, while parents are driven mad trying to get an apparently 
indifferent landlord to fix things.

Rob the poor and give to the rich – housing policy for 2016 | Aditya 
Chakrabortty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/05/rob-poor-give-rich-housing-policy-2016>
All this is happening not in the 1960s but right now. Those rundown properties 
aren’t owned by some slumlord, but a Labour council 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/23/real-politics-empty-london-housing-estate>
.

Go see the future for yourself, at Custom House 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Custom_House,_London> – that stretch of the East 
End where the beards and the bankers give way to massive conference centres and 
dead industrial estates. For more than a decade residents here have been living 
under the shadow of the wrecking ball – a multibillion-pound“regeneration” 
scheme 
<https://www.newham.gov.uk/Pages/ServiceChild/Regenerating-Canning-Town-and-Custom-House.aspx#CanningTownandCustomHouseregenerationmasterplan>
 announced in the booming noughties but still to begin in earnest. While 
waiting for the developers and coffee shops to move in, Newham council sublet 
more than 300 of its properties in this small patch of the capital to a big 
private landlord called Tando. And that’s where the problems begin.

I recently spent an afternoon walking around Custom House, and everyone to 
whom I mentioned the nameTando <http://www.tandoproperty.com/> told me horror 
stories. On their request, I shan’t give full details, but all were youngish 
women with children, shifted off Newham council’s waiting list into a Tando 
home. They were told that the flats were newly done up – yet when the mothers 
moved in, what they say they found was broken toilets and dodgy plumbing, and 
homes too draughty to bring up young children in.

Lavinia relates how her flat had a gas leak that forced her to stay with her 
mum. Shaheda says she found a flooding toilet and sharp nails poking up through 
the carpets that would puncture her toddlers’ feet. Their complaints would 
apparently go unanswered, sometimes for days, and then when repair men came, 
their work would amount to cheap bodge jobs. Temi kept complaining about a leak 
coming into the downstairs toilet: each time a workman came, he would only 
patch things up, never fix the problem. The leak spread, as did the mould. She 
recalls how, one day, while her boy was in the toilet, the ceiling came 
crashing down.

Rent rises: we can no longer afford our 'affordable' housing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/aug/04/rent-rises-weeks-notice-no-longer-afford-affordable-housing-lq>
Imagine you are one of those mothers, promised a new home that turns out to be 
a pit of dangers. You phone the repairs service only to get an engaged tone or 
to be shouted at (something that the women kept mentioning). Meanwhile, you and 
your young children have to endure things that no family living in one of the 
richest cities on the planet should have to suffer.

From day one, Shaheda’s windows let in so much wind that the entire family 
would have to swaddle themselves in coats and jumpers – and even then “it would 
feel like winter inside”. Just before her youngest was born, she says she 
pleaded with Tando not to put the newborn through this. Her baby kept catching 
colds, had difficulty breathing, would fall asleep but wouldn’t wake up. The 
boy was kept in hospital and put on steroids and a nebuliser. The lasting 
trauma of this and other episodes in the flat, she believes, has been to make 
her son withdrawn, scared to be without his mum and dad.

Even as she recalled the details, tears came to Shaheda’s eyes.At the time, 
the 30-year-old came “close to a breakdown”, crying constantly and unable to 
sleep. One thought tortured her: “Because of these poxy windows, my son’s 
suffering so badly. I can’t get help from anyone. I can’t do anything.”

Forget Downing Street speeches on social mobility 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/statement-from-the-new-prime-minister-theresa-may>
: if we want our children to be and do the best they can, we must give them 
decent and safe homes. But what these women were describing was squalor – of a 
kind that Henry Mayhew and the other Victorians would have recognised. That 
squalor made a mockery of their attempts to get on and bring up their families. 
While graduate Lavinia shared her dreams of becoming a social worker, raising 
the kids well, perhaps one day buying a house, I looked around at the baby 
photos and the signs reading “Eat Your Greens” and “Family: Where Life Begins 
and Love Never Ends”. What chance did she give to achieving those sensible, 
modest goals? “Not likely.” She, her family, and all their talent and promise 
are being squandered.

For real politics, don’t look to parliament but to an empty London housing 
estate | Aditya Chakrabortty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/23/real-politics-empty-london-housing-estate>
Who pays for this dilapidation? Us, the taxpayers. Although the flats are 
public property, Tando sets the rent. It is of course much higher than council 
charges – and it is largely met through our housing benefit bill. Even while 
paying far more for much less, Lavinia and her neighbours have none of the 
security of tenure routine for Newham tenants. Lavinia started on a year-long 
tenancy, but it now rolls over from week to week.

Insecurity at the bottom, booming business at the top – coupled with 
convenient denials where it matters. Newham council told me that it “closely 
monitors the service provided by Tando”, and that officers “meet regularly with 
the directors” of the company. Yet despite the stories above and many others 
like them, Newham has not only renewed its contract with Tando for another few 
years but handed it another 210 units to manage. Tando director Harry Antoniou 
told me that the vast majority of tenants are very satisfied with their 
accommodation. He did admit to issues with a small group of tenants but claimed 
they were “historic”.

But if that’s the case, it’s probably because the tenants have, together with 
community activists’ groupPeach <http://peache16.wix.com/peach#!our-story/c10m2>
, spent months protesting their conditions. Last month they finally met 
Antoniou. Since then Tando repair men have begun putting things right. In 
21st-century London, it apparently takes a mass rebellion to get a functioning 
sink.

Those who deny the housing crisis can no longer conceal their idiocy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/aug/05/those-who-deny-the-housing-crisis-can-no-longer-conceal-their-idiocy-resolution-foundation>
Meanwhile, Tando’s parent company Omega is expanding into the rest of the 
country, and is nowBirmingham city council’s “social lettings agency” 
<http://www.londonstockexchange.com/exchange/news/market-news/market-news-detail/MER/12116565.html>
 – shifting residents there off the waiting list into private rental 
accommodation. And Omega was bought in 2014 by Mears – a company that 
specialises in outsourced social housing and care for the elderly – for around 
£40m.

Remember that this is happening in a London borough whose mayor, Robin Wales, 
allegedly told a young woman a couple of years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/23/why-occupying-boarded-up-east-london-council-house-social-housing>
 that “if you can’t afford to live in Newham, you can’t afford to live in 
Newham”. Remember that the supposedly socially aware Theresa May was part of a 
government that brought in theHousing Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/05/rob-poor-give-rich-housing-policy-2016>
, which will finallykill off council housing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/04/end-of-council-housing-bill-secure-tenancies-pay-to-stay>
 in inner London. Remember that the austerity programme Britain is still 
enduring is seeing a mass privatisation of remaining state assets – including 
public land. Then go to Custom House, because what you’re seeing there isn’t a 
one-off scandal: it’s the future.
 