
I can no longer avoid the issue of gender diversity among children – much as I 
have tried to. Not only have some of my friends been affected by the issue, but 
also books, distributed in some schools, such asCan I Tell You About Gender 
Diversity? 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/can-i-tell-you-about-gender-diversity.html> 
by CJ Atkinson, are becoming increasingly visible – andcontroversial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/02/book-explaining-gender-diversity-to-primary-school-children-sparks-furore>
.

One reads about this regularly enough in the Guardian, but it is still quite a 
muddle. So this column is my attempt to understand – and explain – gender 
diversity. It will almost certainly be wrong and I look forward to the comment 
thread that will explain to me in what precise fashion I have been a 
transphobic halfwit.

It starts off simple enough. Sex and gender are separate. Sex is biological – 
the possession of certain sexual organs. Gender is assigned, ie it is a set of 
behaviours traditionally associated with a certain sex. Someone who used to be 
called a tomboy might have a female sex, but might identify with more typically 
male behaviours, and feel themselves to be more masculine than feminine. Such a 
person would nowadays be known as a trans boy (there are also of course trans 
girls, not to mention“non-binary transgender” such as Jack Monroe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/24/jack-monroe-i-want-to-be-treated-as-a-person-not-a-woman-or-a-man-interview-transgender-identity>
).

Gender – according to the theory – is assigned by society, which insists, at a 
mass level, on certain kinds of gender behaviour and taste: pink dolls for 
girls and blue trucks for boys. But this assignation is not final, and an 
individual can reject this if they grow up feeling a different gender identity. 
This sense of being trapped in the wrong kind of body is known asgender 
dysphoria 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Gender-dysphoria/Pages/Introduction.aspx>.

So, unlike sex, which is a biological fact (although there are some people 
with ambiguous genitalia), gender identity is assigned (by society) and felt by 
an individual. Therefore, gender identity can be cultural and biological, 
either imposed by society or conjured by some kind of innate – and conflicting 
– tendency within the individual brain.

I do not doubt that such feelings are real and powerful. They can reach such 
an intensity that someone may opt to change their biological sex so that it 
fits better with their gender self-identification. This is transitioning. In 
this case, after bodily alteration, they will become transsexual or transgender.

What are we to make of all this confusion? How would I feel if one of my 
daughters turned out to feel she were a male, and wanted surgery to reassign 
her identity?

I would, admittedly, be worried that this might cause her physical and mental 
distress. Being so different in a world that makes a number of assumptions 
about gender identity would be just another problem to solve. (Of course, many 
of those problems might mainly arise from the unfair stigma put on to those 
with gender dysphoria.)

All the same, I am perfectly happy, in the liberal tradition, that people 
should have any gender identity they want, or any sex that they want – though 
the question of which toilets they use, or who should pay for gender 
reassignment, and at what age they should be able to make a such a decision 
remains a conundrum which as yet I have formed no opinion on.

It is clear that from the hysterical reaction to Can I Tell You About Gender 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gender> Diversity? by elements of the 
rightwing press, that transphobia is a real enough phenomena. So to be clear I 
am not in favour of simply tolerating it – the idea of gender fluidity should 
be thoroughly welcomed, for all its complications, as an extension of the range 
of human possibility.

If any or all of my daughters wants to be a boy, it’s fine with me. So long as 
they let me borrow their clothes. And don’t try to explain it to me that often, 
or in too much detail.

@timlottwriter <https://twitter.com/timlottwriter>
 