
It was sometime in August 2014 when I got my first taste of Reddit. It was one 
of those hot, slow Fridays when the torrent of emails slows to a trickle and 
the office is populated by empty chairs. I can’t now remember how I found 
myself onReddit <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/reddit>, but what 
started as an idle hour quickly became a full-blown addiction.


This was at the height of the Ebola epidemic and apocalyptic media reporting 
was turning a humanitarian crisis in West Africa into an existential threat for 
the Joneses. As I was working with the thenhonorary general secretary of the 
Society for Applied Microbiology 
<http://sec.kingston.ac.uk/about-SEC/people/academic/view_profile.php?id=70>, 
an expert on infectious diseases and antibiotic resistance, I pitched to him 
the idea of doing an online Q&A (more specifically, an AMA) on Reddit.

And the rest, as they say, is r/history 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/science/comments/2iumkg/science_ama_series_im_mark_fielder_professor_of/>
.

Wait… what’s Reddit?

For the uninitiated, Reddit is a social content aggregation website and the 
self-styled “front page of the internet”. In many ways, it lives up to its 
billing, creating a live, evolving snapshot of the most popular online content 
from across the web. Reddit has over 234 million members and gets over 8 
billion page views per month. Eight. Billion. Its members (known as redditors) 
represent almost every nation on earth.

Reddit’s mission <https://about.reddit.com/> is “to help people discover 
places where they can be their true selves, and empower our community to 
flourish”. It’s a complex place where your faith in humanity can be restored, 
destroyed and rebuilt again in the space of minutes.

You can witness a thousand small acts of kindness between complete strangers, 
self-righteous moralising, cruelty, silliness and any casual “ism” you wish to 
mention. But despite the endless puns and self-indulgences, it is generally an 
earnest, generous place where people genuinely want to help each other.

Eight smart ways to use social media in universities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jan/20/eight-smart-ways-to-use-social-media-in-universities>
A galaxy of online communities

Reddit is made up of nearly 900,000 communities (subreddits) organised around 
almost any topic you could imagine… and some you wouldn’t want to. Anyone can 
set up a new community, start sharing content and interact with other 
subscribers.

These communities post and discuss content from around the internet, including 
university news 
<http://www.ox.ac.uk/news/2016-08-30-amputees-brains-remember-missing-hands-even-years-later>
,academic comment pieces 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/science/comments/4vy603/78_of_the_children_in_a_study_who_had_adhd_as_a/>
, and evenacademic papers 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/philosophy/comments/4zttth/this_article_argues_that_pseudodionysius_the/>
, connecting relatively niche content with an enthusiastic audience. Many also 
hostopen Q&As with researchers 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/philosophy/comments/50c7yp/i_am_caspar_hare_professor_of_philosophy_at_mit/>
 on specific aspects of their work.

If you’re searching for a niche, active online community look no further. Some 
of the more idiosyncratic includer/MonksLookingAtBeer 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/monkslookingatbeer/> and r/CatsStandingUp 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/CatsStandingUp/>, while many directly relate to 
academic disciplines, liker/history <https://www.reddit.com/r/history/>, 
r/philosophy <https://www.reddit.com/r/philosophy/>, r/politics 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/politics/>, r/economics 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/Economics/>. 

Because science

Reddit is obsessed with all things science and technology. Elon Musk 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elon_Musk> is their god. 

Its most popular dedicated science community (r/science 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/science/>) has over 12 million members – and strict 
contributor rules to maintain a serious tone. All posts must include references 
and links to trusted sources and academic publications. It dubs itselfThe New 
Reddit Journal of Science.

The combined membership of the top three science subreddits weighs in at over 
20 million. Throw intech 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/technology/comments/50ehas/an_independent_scientist_has_confirmed_that_the/>
,gaming <https://www.reddit.com/r/gaming>, futurology 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/Futurology/comments/508u87/a_universal_basic_income_wont_stop_people_from/>
,space 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/space/comments/50bfsa/good_morning_from_the_international_space_station/>
 andengineering <https://www.reddit.com/r/engineering> and you have over 50 
million Stem-loving redditors.

Ask Me Anything

Ask Me Anything (AMA) sessions give celebrities and experts the opportunity to 
engage redditors in an informal, time-limited, question-and-answer session. 
Reddit has hosted everyone fromBarack Obama 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/z1c9z/i_am_barack_obama_president_of_the_united_states/>
 toBill Gates 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/49jkhn/im_bill_gates_cochair_of_the_bill_melinda_gates/>
,a vacuum cleaner repair man 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/1pe2bd/iama_vacuum_repair_technician_and_i_cant_believe/>
 andSteven Hawking 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/science/comments/3nyn5i/science_ama_series_stephen_hawking_ama_answers/>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhigher-education-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fwhy-scientists-should-learn-to-love-reddit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe02c1d06d9febd72d336b40ebb4f2f2892ca42b3%2F0_334_4938_2963%2F4938.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20scientists%20should%20learn%20to%20love%20Reddit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhigher-education-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fwhy-scientists-should-learn-to-love-reddit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20scientists%20should%20learn%20to%20love%20Reddit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhigher-education-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fwhy-scientists-should-learn-to-love-reddit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe02c1d06d9febd72d336b40ebb4f2f2892ca42b3%2F0_334_4938_2963%2F4938.jpg>
 What’s in here? Photograph: Alamy 
While Obama’s AMA ended up being a bit bland, the experiences and knowledge 
shared by the vacuum repair man made it one of the most popular and memorable 
AMAs ever hosted.

Q: What is the weirdest thing you have ever found inside of someone’s vacuum?

A: Mostly, bullets. I mean, WTF people?? I’ve also found: snake eggs, gecko 
eggs, a desiccated toad, and four mouse pinkies, also desiccated.

Each day, the moderators at Reddit’s science subreddit provide the chance to 
interact with academics from the sciences and social sciences. These closely 
monitored, good-natured Q&As draw in redditors from a wide range of backgrounds 
and can generate many thousands of questions and comments.

They are free and easy to organise. Not only that, but they generate comments 
and statistics that act as a permanent record of the interactions. Not bad for 
a few hours and zero pounds invested.

At a time when the value of “experts” is being openly questioned, and 
researchers are under increasing pressure to engage with the public and 
demonstrate “impact” on the wider world, AMAs provide an opportunity for a 
genuine dialogue with a huge public audience.

I love it when you call me Big Data 

The most recent AMA I organised 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/science/comments/4x7o9u/science_ama_series_hi_reddit_im_dr_ashok_jansari/>
 included a link to anonline test <http://psy770.gold.ac.uk/umft/show_page.php> 
designed to identify so called “super-recognisers”, people at the very top of 
the facial recognition spectrum.

Within 24 hours of posting, over 16,000 people had taken the test, 
significantly more than over the entire span of the study. This data has the 
potential to radically alter our understanding of this area and will directly 
lead to academic publications.

How to increase your impact with academic social media
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/feb/24/how-to-become-an-academic-social-media-star>
The genius of the crowd

Reddit is both testament to and stark warning of the dangers of crowd 
sourcing. Infamous for its potentially deadly contribution to theBoston 
Marathon bomber manhunt 
<http://nation.time.com/2013/04/23/inside-reddits-hunt-for-the-boston-bombers/>
, its members also intervene tocatch vandals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/21/graffiti-artist-casey-nocket-reddit-investigation>
,provide sports equipment 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/pics/comments/4nvwn0/they_bought_the_kid_a_speed_sled_he_can_get_rid/>
 to the disadvantaged andsend pizza to kids with cancer 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/UpliftingNews/comments/24cw8v/last_year_reddit_threw_this_little_girl_a_pizza/>
.

Fundamentally, it’s this positive (if at times misguided) collective will that 
makes Reddit such a powerful platform for a range of potential academic 
engagements with the public.

There’s gold in them thar hills…

There have been recent examples of innovative, non-academic projects on Reddit 
that could open a door for researchers in the arts and humanities.

On April Fool’s day 2015, a Reddit administrator started an online social 
experiment calledThe Button 
<https://redditblog.com/2015/06/08/the-button-has-ended/>. It featured an 
online button and a 60 second countdown that reset each time the button was 
pressed. When the countdown reached zero the experiment ended – but it didn’t 
for over two months.

Each participant was assigned a colour depending on when they pressed the 
button, which quickly led to the creation of factions with rich (and often 
amusing) micro-cultures, rules and behaviours.

Reddit has also become a popular destination for innovative, interactive 
fiction. Aside from its hugely popular horror fiction community (r/NoSleep 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/>), the so-called Interface Series 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/9M9H9E9/> has generated national news coverage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/05/9mother9horse9eyes9-the-mysterious-tale-terrifying-reddit>
 for its innovative approach to storytelling.

But watch out for dragons

Fundamentally, Reddit embodies many of our hopes and fears about the internet. 
While vast, it crystallises the unnavigable cosmos of information (and 
misinformation) that is the web into self-organising and moderating special 
interest communities.

It reflects much of the good and bad of the wider web and its huge potential 
for academic engagement should be embraced, but with caution: there’s the 
vanilla version of Reddit represented by the “front page” – cute animals, funny 
gifs, people sharing advice, movie trailers and the latest scientific 
discoveries. But there is also a darker side frequented by communities we 
cannot name.

Reddit, like much of the internet, is a huge public space that we experience 
in a very private way. It’s a reflection of the best and worst of humanity, and 
it creates ways of behaving and interacting too. Reddit is not neutral, and 
needs to be approached with the same care and respect you would extend to any 
group or community you want to work with IRL (in real life).

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 