
Jorge Cruz has just finished his overnight shift stacking shelves at Whole 
Foods in Los Altos, California, and is waiting at the bus stop outside. Like 
much of Silicon Valley, there’s a regular flow ofTesla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/tesla>, BMW, Nissan and Google electric 
cars that cruise past from their nearby headquarters, and Cruz rather likes 
them.


“I really wouldn’t mind having an electric car,” he says, though his first 
choice is probably a Honda or an Acura. Regardless, for now, he rides the bus. 
“I need to save up for a car,” he explains.

As Cruz waits, a newly purchased Tesla zips by, advertising “ZERO EMISSIONS” 
on its license plate.

Electric cars set to pass 2m landmark globally by end of 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/13/electric-car-sales-set-to-pass-2m-landmark-globally-by-end-of-2016>
Electric cars have never been closer to the mainstream, the market pushed 
ahead by California subsidies for electric car buyers, and a wide array of new 
models from established car firms such as Toyota and Chevy. Tesla’s focus on 
luxury, high-performance vehicles has also broadened their appeal; electric 
cars are no longer purely an environmental statement, but a tech status symbol 
too.

Yet the “zero emissions” claim grates on some experts, who have continued to 
argue over whether electric cars are really more environmentally friendly than 
gas guzzlers, once the manufacturing process for the vehicles and their 
batteries are taken into account.

Electric cars rely on regular charging from the local electricity network. The 
power plants providing that energy aren’t emission-free; even in California,60% 
of electricity 
<http://www.energy.ca.gov/almanac/electricity_data/electric_generation_capacity.htmlhttp:/www.energy.ca.gov/almanac/electricity_data/electric_generation_capacity.html>
 came from burning fossil fuels in 2015, while solar and wind together made up 
less than 14%.

“I couldn’t bear to hear them say the words ‘zero emissions vehicle’ one more 
time,” says Joshua Graff Zivin, who advised one of California’s three main 
utilities, San Diego Gas & Electric, on electric cars. Graff Zivin is a 
professor of economics and public policy at the University of California, San 
Diego.

“How you incentivize them to charge could really matter,” Zivin says about 
electric vehicle owners. “Utilities haven’t thought through it.”

One third of US power is generated by coal

More than 1.2m electric vehicles were sold in 2015, the intergovernmental group
International Energy Agency 
<http://gas2.org/2016/06/07/new-iea-report-says-1-26-million-electric-cars-sold-2015/>
 estimates, while campaign group Transport & Environment expects2m electric 
vehicles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/13/electric-car-sales-set-to-pass-2m-landmark-globally-by-end-of-2016>
 to be on the road by the end of 2016. The world’sbiggest markets for electric 
cars 
<https://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/Global_EV_Outlook_2016.pdf>
 are the United States and China, though electric vehicles have a larger market 
share in some European countries such as the Netherlands and Norway.

California’s electric vehicles can plug into a greener grid than most regions 
of the world – especially China, where coal generated 72% of all power in 2014 
according to the International Energy Agency (IEA). The US gets about a third 
of its electricity from coal-fired power, IEA says, and more than 40% of total 
electricity worldwide comes from burning coal.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Felectric-car-emissions-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a9d7ab7bc95fc94b995aa53cfaac89bc0bf6a00%2F0_71_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20electric%20cars%20are%20only%20as%20clean%20as%20their%20power%20supply&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Felectric-car-emissions-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20electric%20cars%20are%20only%20as%20clean%20as%20their%20power%20supply&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Felectric-car-emissions-climate-change%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a9d7ab7bc95fc94b995aa53cfaac89bc0bf6a00%2F0_71_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Tesla’s focus on luxury, high-performance vehicles has broadened their appeal. 
Photograph: Justin Sullivan/Getty Images 
In the US, the Union of Concerned Scientists – which works to raise awareness 
of climate change – believes that despite a fossil-fuel-dependent grid, 
electric cars are, on balance, better for the environment.

“There are no areas of the country where electric vehicles have higher global 
warming emissions than the average new gasoline vehicle,” the campaign group 
claims in its paper,State of Charge 
<http://www.ucsusa.org/clean-vehicles/electric-vehicles/emissions-and-charging-costs-electric-cars>
, which calculates the emissions equivalent of an electric vehicle using the 
makeup of the local energy supply.Using UCS’s formula 
<http://www.ucsusa.org/clean-vehicles/electric-vehicles/ev-emissions-tool>, a 
Tesla Model X charging in the Los Altos Whole Foods garage achieves a fuel 
efficiency equivalent to 81 miles per gallon – far higher than a gas-powered 
car.

Yet not all scientists agree with that approach. “All of the action is in the 
hourly,” says Graff Zivin. It’s not only the region that an electric vehicle 
plugs into that matters. The hour of the day is equally critical. “The cheapest 
power is not the greenest power.”

In California, the cheapest power is produced at night, mostly from natural 
gas, hydroelectric dams and nuclear. Night is when many people will charge 
their electric cars. However, the greenest power gets generated during the day, 
when solar power can feed the grid; solar doesn’t work in the dark, windmills 
stop spinning if there’s no wind and, in today’s grid, there is almost no 
capacity to store solar and wind-generated electricity to use later. Grid 
storage is slowly expanding, but most electricity has to be used as it is 
produced.

The trolling of Elon Musk: how US conservatives are attacking green tech
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/04/elon-musk-trolling-us-conservatives-green-tech>
Units of electricity also can’t be tagged according to where and how they were 
generated, so nobody can verify whether the electricity they use is from a 
sustainable source – unless they plug directly into their own solar panel or 
windmill.

Electric car use improves air quality in cities

Graff Zivin, along with economics researchers Matthew Kotchen and Erin Mansur, 
waded into this contentious territoryin a 2014 paper 
<http://www.dartmouth.edu/~mansur/papers/GraffZivin_Kotchen_Mansur_MargEmit.pdf>
. Zivin concluded that a plug-in electric vehicle, such as the Nissan Leaf, 
always produces less carbon dioxide emissions than a hybrid electric- and 
gas-powered car – but only in selected regions that rely on less coal, like the 
western United States and Texas. Charging from the coal-dependent grid in the 
upper midwest of the US at night could generate more emissions than an average 
gasoline car. And, in some US regions, plugging in at different times of day 
could even double an electric car’s emissions impact.

Charging an electric car for 100 miles of travel could use about 30kwh – 
roughly the same amount of energy an average US home uses in just over a day.

“Since we wrote this paper we have seen more and more coal going out [of 
use],” Zivin says. Natural gas-fired power plants emit less greenhouse gas per 
unit of energy produced than coal-fired power stations. As more coal plants are 
mothballed – partly in response to cheaper natural gas prices – so the 
electricity powering electric cars emits less carbon dioxide. “But the counter 
to that is that because of [Barack] Obama’s Cafe standards, we now have much 
cleaner gasoline cars.”

Nobody knows what President-elect Donald Trump will do with Cafe, the 
Corporate Average Fuel Economy standards, which regulate fuel economy and 
emissions on new US vehicles. Yet whatever happens in the US probably won’t 
hold back the adoption of electric vehicles worldwide, because apart from 
limiting carbon dioxide emissions, electric cars can also improve the local air 
quality in cities by moving emissions from cars to power plants.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Felectric-car-emissions-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe620dae831f9d7ddd36a388a1f310430120c6737%2F0_331_2544_1525%2F2544.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20electric%20cars%20are%20only%20as%20clean%20as%20their%20power%20supply&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Felectric-car-emissions-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20electric%20cars%20are%20only%20as%20clean%20as%20their%20power%20supply&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Felectric-car-emissions-climate-change%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe620dae831f9d7ddd36a388a1f310430120c6737%2F0_331_2544_1525%2F2544.jpg>
 Apart from limiting carbon dioxide emissions, electric cars can also improve 
the local air quality in cities by moving emissions from cars to power plants. 
Photograph: Imaginechina/Rex/Shutterstock 
“Even conservative people in Los Angeles are interested in air quality,” says 
Thomas Turrentine, director of the Plug-in Hybrid & Electric Vehicle Research 
Center at the University of California, Davis. He has surveyed electric vehicle 
owners worldwide about why they like their electric cars. “Climate change was 
not on the top of the list.”

While carbon dioxide is a greenhouse gas, it isn’t toxic to human health and 
does not contribute to smoggy skies. However, gasoline and diesel cars also 
emit nitrogen and sulfur compounds that contribute to acid rain and form tiny 
airborne particles that spoil air quality and contribute to strokes, heart 
disease, lung cancer and respiratory diseases, including asthma. Air pollution 
is one of the world’s most urgent environmental hazards, causingmore than 3m 
premature deaths annually 
<http://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/blog/2016/05/un-health-agency-warns-of-rise-in-urban-air-pollution-with-poorest-cities-most-at-risk/>
, according to the World Health Organization. The Chinese government has 
repeatedly announced its commitment to develop electric vehicles, partly 
because of air pollution concerns.

Governments are incentivizing adoption

Spurred by Volkswagen’s 2015 emissions scandal, in which the company falsified 
its diesel emissions levels during testing, Germany passed a resolution in 
October banning combustion engine cars by 2030. It’s a largely symbolic 
regulation, designed to spur action in the European Union, but the Netherlands 
and Norway are also discussing bans, and 20% of new car sales in Norway are 
already electric.

For some people, though, giving up gasoline will be hard. “If the whole world 
started going to electric vehicles, and the demand for gasoline substantially 
dropped, the price of oil would plummet,” says Severin Borenstein, professor of 
business administration and public policy at theHaas School of Business 
<http://haas.berkeley.edu/> at the University of California, Berkeley 
<http://www.berkeley.edu/>. If oil demand drops by 10%-20%, Borenstein says, 
the price would “almost certainly collapse” to $20 per barrel or lower, or $1 
per gallon gasoline before taxes. “That would make it much less economic to use 
electric vehicles – that would be where we really run into the real question: 
are we willing to stick to this?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Felectric-car-emissions-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9acebbb9714eaab8f64a3967dfcc7bf1eb0ab439%2F35_21_3965_2379%2F3965.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20electric%20cars%20are%20only%20as%20clean%20as%20their%20power%20supply&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Felectric-car-emissions-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20electric%20cars%20are%20only%20as%20clean%20as%20their%20power%20supply&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Felectric-car-emissions-climate-change%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9acebbb9714eaab8f64a3967dfcc7bf1eb0ab439%2F35_21_3965_2379%2F3965.jpg>
 Air pollution is one of the world’s most urgent environmental hazards, causing 
more than 3m premature deaths annually. Photograph: Ben Smith for the Guardian 
Another challenge is the material used in electric cars’ lithium batteries. 
“The positive side is they’re not particularly toxic,” Turrentine explains, 
unlike lead or nickel-based batteries, but they can still be difficult to 
recycle. Batteries can also use rare elements such ascobalt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/19/children-as-young-as-seven-mining-cobalt-for-use-in-smartphones-says-amnesty>
, the mining of which has raised some serious environmental and ethical issues 
in countries such as the Democratic Republic of Congo. Battery technology may 
become less dependent on such elements, Turrentine believes, though it is still 
some way off.

But in California, the government is pushing ahead with the electric vehicle 
revolution. Consumers have been offered generous clean air incentives of up to
$2,500 per vehicle <https://driveclean.ca.gov/pev/Costs/Vehicles.php>, and the 
US government also offers a $7,500 tax credit on electric cars.

While Silicon Valley’s technology companies are pioneering electric cars as 
part of their self-driving car vision, the California Energy Commission has 
handed out $150m in grants for building out electric charging infrastructure, 
and another $10m grant went to Tesla for its development of the Model X.

Back at Whole Foods – where an $88,000 Tesla is charging up – even the 
charging stations were paid for with public money. When Cruz hears that, he’s a 
little less enthusiastic about the electric car future.

“If I would have known that, it’s like, well, what do I get?” he says. “I’d 
rather use the money for those who commute from here to there on the bus.”

 * This article was amended on 9 December 2016 to clarify that there is almost 
no capacity to store solar and wind-generated electricity to use later.  