
I’d better come clean right away: I am a Frozen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/frozen> fan. And not because I have small 
children whose obsession forced me to choose between insanity and just getting 
the hell on board. In fact, it was me who spent the months after the film’s 
release recommending it to everyone’s kids (you’re welcome, friends).

I hasten to add that I’m not crazy. I haven’t made a YouTube cover of Let it Go
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=moSFlvxnbgk>; I don’t have a white-blonde wig.
I just think it’s brilliant 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/frozen-at-christmas>. So while part of me 
wants to answer with the words of the woman whoallegedly divorced her husband 
for Frozen ambivalence 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/06/05/frozen-divorce-_n_5453809.html> – “If 
you can’t understand what makes this movie great, there’s something wrong with 
you as a human being!” – I do understand people’s bafflement. Because, even to 
a fan, the film’s cultural domination defies belief.

I tried to hate Frozen and the parents who love it. But I can't deny its power 
| Martin Pengelly
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/13/frozen-movie-parents-love>
Since its release in December 2013, Frozen has become the biggest animated 
film of all time,grossing over $1.2bn globally 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-27585310>. It won two Oscars 
(best original song andbest animated feature film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/03/frozen-wins-best-animated-film-oscar>
), aGolden Globe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/12/golden-globes-2014-full-list-of-winners>
 and a Bafta, and is currently the UK’sbestselling DVD of the decade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/04/ice-lolly-frozen-set-to-become-highest-selling-dvd-of-decade>
. Its multi-platinum soundtrack beat Beyoncé’s surprise fifth album to thetop 
of the Billboard charts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/13/frozen-mania-elsa-anna-olaf-disney-emo-princess-let-it-go>
, and theofficial singalong YouTube video of Oscar-winning Let it Go 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L0MK7qz13bU> has had more than 940m views. The 
film’s merchandise consistently tops “hottest toys” lists,a Broadway show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/27/michael-grandage-to-direct-frozen-on-broadway>
 is in the works, and whenFrozen 2 was announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/13/frozen-2-announcement-makes-little-elsas-and-disney-shares-jump-for-joy>
 last March, Disney’s stocks jumped $4.28 in a day.

So what is all the fuss about? Well first there’s the writing, which has been 
roundly praised for its nuanced characterisation, multi-generational comedy, 
delicately shifting tone and perfect plot arc. As one unfeasibly perceptive 
six-year-old told me: “It’s got that same story that’s in every film: you get 
to know the characters, then the story starts, then there’s a problem, then it 
gets sorted out and there’s a happy ending.” The classic hero’s journey, 
comfortingly familiar even before we understand what it is. But this one comes 
with twists on the usual Disney template, and it is these twists that form the 
basis of the world’s obsession.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTbQm5doF_Uc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTbQm5doF_Uc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTbQm5doF_Uc&media=>
Official trailer for Frozen <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TbQm5doF_Uc> 
Frozen <https://www.theguardian.com/film/frozen> has not one, but two Disney 
princesses, and neither of them fits the typical mould; the customary 
love-at-first-sight royal engagement is ridiculed; the handsome prince is a bad 
egg; and the finale ditches romance for sisterly devotion. Rescues are at the 
hands of the spunky, younger princess Anna – something her sidekick Kristoff 
accepts without a single grumble or mansplain. There’s even a same-sex couple 
with a gaggle of giggling children.

Such progressive elements not only sparked hefty debate and hearty praise from 
critics, academics, parents, and equal rights campaigners – helping to fan the 
flames of the film’s populist blaze and rack up the box office sales (after 
all, it’s not kids but approving adults who buy the tickets) – they also 
delighted children.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-why-frozen-film-so-popular%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5b4cd2aaa03926938484c64de6883664dea9892%2F236_255_1953_3034%2F1953.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20is%20Frozen%20so%20popular%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Lucinda%20Everett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-why-frozen-film-so-popular%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20is%20Frozen%20so%20popular%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Lucinda%20Everett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-why-frozen-film-so-popular%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5b4cd2aaa03926938484c64de6883664dea9892%2F236_255_1953_3034%2F1953.jpg>
 ‘Perhaps that’s the film’s real power; the fact that we just can’t stop 
talking about it.‘ Photograph: Allstar/Disney/Sportsphoto Ltd 
My six-year-old correspondent listed many reasons she and her friends love 
Frozen, and most of them tallied with those of the adults. The fact that “girls 
can be heroes, too. Not just boys”; that “you can choose whether you trust 
someone and it’s OK if you don’t” (the Prince Hans lesson); that it’s “OK to be 
yourself” and that “if you do something by accident, like get angry, that’s OK, 
because you probably didn’t mean to”. The last two are the Elsa lessons and, if 
there was one character who could be credited with sole responsibility for 
Frozen’s success, it’s her.

The complex, damaged older sister with icy powers that her abusive parents 
forced her to conceal, was originally the villain of the piece – blue of skin 
and spiky of hair. But when married songwriting duo Robert Lopez and Kristen 
Anderson-Lopez composed Let it Go as an empowering ode to self-acceptance, the 
film was rewritten and Elsa-mania was born. Voiced byIdina Menzel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/idina-menzel>, she’s undoubtedly the darling 
of the film’s younger viewers; the combination of her powers and how she reacts 
to them enchants the target audience. But her anthem – which Anderson-Lopez 
says should encourage people to “screw fear and shame, be yourself, be 
powerful” – became a touchstone for a huge cross-section of adults, too. People 
feeling ostracised by society; cancer survivors; divorcees – messages of thanks 
flooded into the film’s creators.

And the Let it Go tributes began. Thousands of them, posted on YouTube by 
adults and children alike, winning millions of views. These were quickly 
followed by lip synchs and spoofs of the rest of the soundtrack. Which brings 
us to another force behind Frozen’s, ahem, snowballing popularity: social media.

What Frozen needs is a lesbian Elsa | Chitra Ramaswamy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/04/frozen-elsa-first-lesbian-disney-princess-lgbt>
This was the first big Disney musical animation to hit screens when its fans 
were old enough to take to YouTube, Twitter et al and share their fandom. Soon, 
elaborate fan art took over Tumblr and hundreds of hashtags sprang up –
#thecoldneverbotheredmeanyway 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/thecoldneverbotheredmeanyway?lang=en> for the 
self-empowerment contingent and, more recently,#GiveElsaaGirlfriend 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/GiveElsaaGirlfriend>, for those keen to see 
Disney’s first lesbian character 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/04/frozen-elsa-first-lesbian-disney-princess-lgbt>
 in the sequel. And the fan debates aren’t slowing down; last year, Frozen was 
the most discussed film on Facebook. Two years after its release.

Perhaps that’s the film’s real power; the fact that we just can’t stop talking 
about it. You’re still Googling, I’m still extolling its virtues, academics are 
still dissecting its meanings and messages. Last May, the University of East 
Anglia hostedSymfrozium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/jun/08/frozen-symfrozium-film-academic-conference>
, the world’s first academic conference devoted to the film. There were 
presentations on Frozen’s fairytale roots, its reworking of the superhero 
genre, and its presentation of gender roles. And while some of the theories 
were less than favourable – one speech explored links between the film and 
pro-anorexia websites – most were full of praise for its trailblazing liberal 
outlook.

If you ask me, it’s that liberal outlook that’s keeping Frozen at the top of 
the DVD charts and the front of people’s minds. Because it gives us hope – and 
boy do we need that this year. If a cultural influencer as crucial as Disney is 
writing female heroes, promoting self-acceptance and tolerance, and positively 
representing same-sex parenting, then maybe, just maybe, the next generation 
will continue its good work in their own lives. Why is Frozen so popular? 
Because it represents the future that so many of us want.
 