
When out jogging, leering and lewd comments from men you’ve never met, as they 
whizz by in their cars, is exactly the kind of “encouragement” that women 
dread. Yet, despite the fairly obvious fact that none of us appreciates 
harassment at the best of times, let alone when we’re gasping up a steep 
incline or making our way around a deserted park, it is at precisely these 
moments that many women find themselves the target of of it.

One such experience was shared with Everyday Sexism 
<http://www.everydaysexism.com/> on Twitter this week, echoing thousands of 
similar stories from others, angry and frustrated at the impact that harassment 
has on their efforts to exercise out of doors.
Nicola Gee (@Nicolagee91) 
I'm sharing this because no-one should be subjected to this when doing 
something they love.#EverydaySexism 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/EverydaySexism?src=hash> #running 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/running?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/Vo3Q35thHr 
<http://t.co/Vo3Q35thHr>
 <https://twitter.com/Nicolagee91/status/632983543854067712> August 16, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/Nicolagee91/status/632983543854067712> 
It’s worth pointing out: she faces comments on every single run, escalating 
into someone physically blocking her way, and then verbally abusing her when 
she asked to be left alone. For those who haven’t experienced sexual harassment 
this might sound shocking, but to many women it is simply the price they pay 
for simply choosing to jog, cycle, or exercise outside. Plenty of women have 
posted on Everyday Sexism with similar experiences:

As I was running to my local swimming pool, a car slowed down beside me and a 
guy shouted ‘whore’ at me.”

Was outside trying to enjoy a run, and in the hour I spent in public, got 
honked and/or shouted at no less than three times.”

I do exercise classes outside in a public park. Teenagers on bicycles yelling 
obscenities. Middle aged men leering openly as I stretch. Men old enough to be 
my father saying things that make it clear that I’m obviously only there for 
them to look at.”

Cycling up Stamford hill last Friday, a man grins at me saying ‘lucky saddle’. 
I’m 41, and heard exactly the same phrase when I was cycling to school at 16.”

I’m tired of being kind to creepy men in order to stay safe | Daisy Buchanan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/20/sexual-harassment-women-curfew>
From comments about weight loss and women’s figures, to sexually explicit 
invitations and aggressive verbal abuse, women find themselves facing a 
veritable gauntlet of unwanted attention. And the problem doesn’t stop there; 
in many instances it escalates further:

Just had my crotch grabbed at by man on bike whilst I was jogging in north 
London.”

I was cycling alone on a secluded road near my house a few years ago, I was 
about 14. A car drove up beside me, at speed and less than a foot away and a 
man reached out and grabbed my bum, nearly pushing me off the bike.”

I was out running by a canal recently. I ran past a man walking in the other 
direction who used the narrow path to his advantage and managed to grab a feel 
of my bum as I ran past.”

The problem is so bad that many women describe the coping mechanisms they 
adopt, from avoiding certain routes, to playing loud music through headphones 
to avoid hearing harassment. Many even said they had given up on exercise 
altogether in order to avoid it.

I live in north London. I used to run on a regular basis but no longer enjoy 
going because of the number of comments I receive.”

I want to take up jogging but without a buddy too intimidated due to previous 
experience of heckling.”

Just had to cut my run short & go home as felt very unsafe due to men driving 
past and slowing down, beeping and shouting obscenities at me out the window. I 
was out for five minutes. How is this fair?”

According to Sport England, 2 million more men than women play regular sport 
<http://www.sportengland.org/our-work/national-work/this-girl-can/>. Meanwhile 
only31% of 14-year-old girls do regular exercise, compared to 50% of boys the 
same age. 
<https://www.womeninsport.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/Changing-the-Game-for-Girls-Policy-Report.pdf>

The good news is that a number of women have described positive experiences 
after choosing to report incidents. One runner, whose bottom was grabbed as she 
ran along the canal, wrote:

A few days later I called the police as I couldn’t get it out of my head that 
he had been there to prey on women, using the narrow path to his advantage. I 
thought the police would laugh at me for reporting something so minor, but they 
took it very seriously. They were even a bit cross I hadn’t called it in at the 
time. They came and took a full statement and will now have more officers out 
on the canal path to watch out for the joggers.”

Another said: 

While out running on a reasonably busy street in broad daylight, I was stopped 
and asked for directions … I obliged and as I showed him on the map on my phone 
he looked down my top, made a sleazy remark then grabbed my breast … I calmly 
took his registration and went straight to the police. I was surprised by how 
seriously they took it. They thanked me for coming in! They agreed with me: 
this guy was out of order and his behaviour was not OK! He’s been charged.”

However, not everybody feels able to report incidents to the police, and it 
would be helpful to see more bystanders stepping in to challenge harassment, as 
they are often in a stronger position to do so than the victim. It is 
ludicrous, in 2015, that women are made to feel scared, hounded and unsafe 
exercising in public spaces. And for anyone who thinks that harassing a jogger 
is a great romantic approach, this runner has the perfect response:
Eliza (@deepoceandive) 
Big thanks to the guy who decided to follow, imitate & mock me whilst I was 
running :):) I now want to have your babies!!!#everydaysexism 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/everydaysexism?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/deepoceandive/status/619831965177540608> July 11, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/deepoceandive/status/619831965177540608>  