
Of all the things we vegans avoid, honey categorically invites the most eye 
rolls. For some reason people can wrap their heads around the “no meat, no 
dairy and no egg” thing, but when it comes to this divisive little sweetener 
the mind apparently boggles.

But let’s look at the definition of veganism, which put simply is “a person 
who doesn’t eat or use animal products”. That includes everything that we put 
both into our bodies and on them – even the surprisingly delicious secretions 
of a stripy insect. While it may seem unnecessarily dogmatic to eschew 
something so seemingly innocent, there are a few uncomfortable truths about 
honey.

Bees added to US endangered species list for the first time
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/01/bees-added-to-us-endangered-species-list-for-the-first-time>
Honey, as we all know, is a wondrous natural substance that not only tastes 
fantastic but has a multitude of health benefits too. It has been used as a 
medicine for millennia. What’s the problem then? Well let’s look at the very 
first thing I learned about honey harvesting. Commercial extraction means that 
the honey the bees have worked so damned hard to produce for their winter food 
store from the nectar they collect from flowering trees and plants is being 
replaced witha sugar water solution 
<http://beethechangeproject.org/useful-resources/>. This is a well-known (and 
somewhat controversial) large-scale beekeeping practice that could be avoided 
if enough honey were left for the bees to consume over the winter period. But 
the beekeepers needs to make a profit, right?

Because sugar water is devoid of any crucial protective properties, it’s 
trickery on an insect level. Without the essential antibiotic/antioxidant 
shield the honey provides the honey bee is ultimatelyleft more susceptible to 
disease 
<http://www.naturalnews.com/028055_honeybees_colony_collapse_disorder.html> – 
something that might account for some of our current“bee decline” crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/01/bees-added-to-us-endangered-species-list-for-the-first-time>
 and what scientists are referring to as “colony collapse disorder 
<http://www.ethicalconsumer.org/ethicalreports/honey/beewelfareandhoney.aspx>”. 
That, coupled with exposure to pesticides means they (and ultimately we), are 
on a hiding to nothing. It’s a scary prospect to envisagea world without bees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2008/may/31/animalwelfare.environment> 
and buying honey (or beeswax, propolis and royal jelly for that matter) sadly 
isn’t going to save us.

But we need the honey bees to pollinate our crops, don’t we? Well, yes and no. 
Honey bees can and do pollinate our crops but they are not necessarily the best 
for the job. Wild bees are also effective pollinators, but don’t produce honey 
we can harvest so it’s not worth our time and energy investing in them for 
honey. On the surface, it appears that honey is merely a by-product of the 
pollination process, and yet once you dig a little deeper you soon realise that 
the coveted golden nectar (and the retrieval thereof) is a major concern for 
commercial beekeepers, along with the lucrative contracts they get from farmers 
to pollinate their crops.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fwhy-dont-vegans-eat-honey-google-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9cf2852159324531cf03758997b5d7a46d6def7c%2F0_0_3413_5120%2F3413.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20don%E2%80%99t%20vegans%20eat%20honey%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Aine%20Carlin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fwhy-dont-vegans-eat-honey-google-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20don%E2%80%99t%20vegans%20eat%20honey%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Aine%20Carlin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fwhy-dont-vegans-eat-honey-google-questions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9cf2852159324531cf03758997b5d7a46d6def7c%2F0_0_3413_5120%2F3413.jpg>
 ‘ I can wholly understand why some self-proclaimed vegans have no issue in 
purchasing local, raw honey.’ Jars of English blossom honey and lavender honey 
for sale in Burford in the Cotswolds. Photograph: Tim Graham/Getty Images 
No bees get harmed in the process of honey production though, right? Not 
exactly. Industrial bee farming has been known to “cull” hives after harvesting 
because it’s cheaper than feeding the bees throughout the winter. Those farmers 
who do choose to keep the hives in operation feed the bees that insipid sugar 
water, which in turn weakens their immune systems and leaves them vulnerable to 
infection. In the wild, of course, these bees would be using the honey they 
diligently harvested to keep themselves going throughout the winter months, 
arming themselves with all the nourishment they need to see them through. 
Another tactic implemented by large-scale beekeepers is to clip the wings of 
the queen bee to prevent swarming, thus ensuring there is no decline in honey 
production. For the same reason the queen is sometimes killed and replaced with 
a younger model. Comforting to know we humans don’t apply ageism just to our 
own species, eh?

But what about locally produced honey from small-scale beekeepers? Urban 
beekeeping is a hugely popular pastime at present and with it come many welcome 
positives. I tend to think of it as a bit of a grey area – and my approach to 
veganism fully acknowledges the reality of these “grey areas” in our complex, 
modern society. Even within this growing movement there are several varieties 
of small-scale beekeeping, a few of which include “balanced beekeeping” (taking 
the honey only when it’s in abundance), “natural beekeeping” (little or no 
interference with the hive) and “conservation beekeeping” (no honey is taken, 
the bees are left to their own devices), all of which can help restore the 
relationship we currently have with the honey bee to a more natural balance.

While I personally don’t consume honey and haven’t done for many years, I can 
wholly understand why some self-proclaimed vegans have no issue in purchasing 
local, raw honey. Of course, this is a hugely contentious issue that evokes 
strong emotions but for me this is about making a personal, informed decision 
not driven simply by the definition of a word.

Are you a significantly lesser vegan if you consume a small amount of honey 
given to you by a “balanced beekeeper 
<http://www.naturalbeekeepingtrust.org/bee-centred-vs-conventional>”? I don’t 
yet have the answer to that. But if you’d rather not risk your hard-won vegan 
credentials, thankfully there is an array of plant-based sweeteners (maple 
syrup, date syrup and coconut nectar to name but a few) that will keep you 
satiated and the honey bee safe. And, more importantly, don’t forget you can 
keep Britain buzzing by planting abee-friendly garden 
<https://bumblebeeconservation.org/get-involved/gardening-for-bees> yourself to 
help encourage all bees to thrive. To use a very un-vegan phrase: there’s more 
than one way to skin a cat – or in this case, more than one way to save the 
bees.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fwhy-dont-vegans-eat-honey-google-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85a2e055b35965f473b894395a1097f207288c8f%2F0_315_3052_1832%2F3052.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20don%E2%80%99t%20vegans%20eat%20honey%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Aine%20Carlin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fwhy-dont-vegans-eat-honey-google-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20don%E2%80%99t%20vegans%20eat%20honey%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Aine%20Carlin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fwhy-dont-vegans-eat-honey-google-questions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85a2e055b35965f473b894395a1097f207288c8f%2F0_315_3052_1832%2F3052.jpg>
 A buff-tailed bumble bee on an azalea flower. Photograph: Amelia 
Collins/Friends of the Ea/PA  