
Spoiler alert: don’t read on if you haven’t watched The Lying Detective, which 
aired on 8 January.

Until the epilogue, Sunday’s episode of Sherlock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/09/sherlock-recap-series-four-episode-two-the-lying-detective-toby-jones>
 contained only a scattering of twists. We discovered that Sherlock Holmes had 
only become strung out on heroin to cheer up John Watson a bit, and that he 
only did that because Watson’s James Bond wife told him to from beyond the 
grave, and that the capture and arrest of Toby Jones’ worst serial killer in 
history was just a handy byproduct of that. So far so normal.

Sherlock recap: series four, episode two – The Lying Detective
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/09/sherlock-recap-series-four-episode-two-the-lying-detective-toby-jones>
But then, after the jaunty “everything’s fixed and we’re all pals again” theme 
struck up, things went a bit haywire. We discovered that:

• Watson’s therapist wasn’t really a therapist.


• She was simply posing as a therapist after killing the real therapist and 
hiding her body in a cupboard.

• She was actually the woman who flirted with Watson on a bus in the previous 
episode, in disguise.

• Her real identity is Euros Holmes, Sherlock’s secret sister.

• Euros also spent a night talking to Sherlock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/sherlock>, disguised as Toby Jones’ 
sister, and he didn’t twig.

• Which basically means that the easiest way to fool the most intelligent man 
in the world is to wear glasses and do a rubbish northern accent.

• Oh, and also Euros Holmes shot Watson in the face for no real reason and now 
he’s probably dead.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fsherlock-gutless-why-im-disappointed-in-the-big-twist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1418385993f01708e08f573b93a00fc9d570e5e9%2F0_454_2856_3639%2F2856.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20I'm%20so%20disappointed%20by%20gutless%20Sherlock's%20big%20twist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fsherlock-gutless-why-im-disappointed-in-the-big-twist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20I%27m%20so%20disappointed%20by%20gutless%20Sherlock%27s%20big%20twist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fsherlock-gutless-why-im-disappointed-in-the-big-twist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1418385993f01708e08f573b93a00fc9d570e5e9%2F0_454_2856_3639%2F2856.jpg>
 Please have the guts to see this through, Sherlock… Photograph: BBC/Hartswood 
Films/Robert Viglasky 
All this was squeezed into the last two and a half minutes of what had 
predominantly been a heavy-handed parable about Jimmy Savile until that point. 
This machine gun rattle of twist after twist after twist was discombobulating 
to say the least. Was it effective? That’s harder to say.

Traditionally, a satisfying plot twist needs to contain three things: a 
cliffhanger ending, plenty of foreshadowing and courage in its convictions.

The perfect example of all three elements in action – and to my mind the 
greatest twist in TV history – is the finale of Lost’s third season. By that 
point we’d all become used to Lost’s reliance on flashbacks to flesh out its 
characters, so it was no surprise to see Jack bearded and depressed and 
addicted to pills. But then, in the dying breaths of the episode, he yelled “We 
have to go back”, signalling that we’d all been tricked. This wasn’t a 
flashback at all. It was a flashforward, hiding in plain sight. All along, we’d 
been watching what happened after Jack left the island. Not only did the 
episode end on that beat, giving viewers a moment to regather the fragments of 
their blown minds, but the twist went on to provide the pivot point for the 
entire series. It was endlessly gratifying.

But if you remove any of these elements, you run the risk of turning your 
twist into a gimmick. When series regular Lisa Faulkner had her head deep-fried 
in the second episode of Spooks, it came completely without warning. As a 
result, the moment felt less like a true narrative device and more a cynical 
moment of get-a-load-of-this swagger. And when Dallas brought Bobby Ewing back 
to life, consigning his death – and the entire series that surrounded it – to a 
dream his wife had, it felt like a cowardly climb-down.

Speaking of cowardly climb-downs, here’s why I’m less than impressed with 
Sherlock’s big twist. Was it foreshadowed? Yes. The series had been filled with 
sly references to other siblings and “east winds” – Euros is the name of the 
Greek god of the east wind – since 2014. Was it a cliffhanger ending? No 
disputes there. But will Sherlock have enough courage in its convictions to see 
this through?

Probably not, because Sherlock never has courage in its convictions. In The 
Reichenbach Fall, Sherlock made the incredibly brave move of killing both 
Holmes and Moriarty, only to have them both come back – in various forms, with 
various non-committal explanations – in subsequent episodes. In fact, this sort 
of thing has become one of Sherlock’s signature pieces; the grand, 
definite-seeming pronouncement, followed by a disappointing explanation that 
resets the story in order to protect the show’s longevity.

If Sherlock really does have the guts to see this through – if Watson is dead 
and stays dead forever – then I’ll take this back and give Sherlock the 
standing ovation it deserves. But if it doesn’t, and the writers talk 
themselves out of the ending like they’ve done so often in the past, then we’re 
just going to feel cheated. And that will be a twist too far.
 