
Unless you are one of those out-of-touch liberals who Still Don’t Get It about 
the US election result, you will concur that the best analysis of where we go 
from here has come from entertainment’s Gwyneth Paltrow. “People are clearly 
tired of the status quo,”she explained 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/gwyneth-paltrow-donald-trump-president-win-exciting-quote-comments-a7431846.html>
 a couple of weeks ago. “It’s sort of like someone threw it all in the air and 
we’re going to see how it all lands. It’s very important for me, personally, 
now more than ever, to create a community and to remember the humanity of 
everybody and to create love and understanding.”

That is excellent positive thinking – particularly when you remember that the 
community Gwyneth is talking about isGoop <http://goop.com/>, her self-curated 
lifestyle website that doubles as arolling satire on late capitalism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz+film/gwynethpaltrow>. 
Consequently, there will be some who find madam’s optimism for the role of Goop 
in Donald Trump’s America slightly counterintuitive. After all, if anything at 
all symbolised the insanity of unchecked elitism, then Goop was surely it, with 
its fringe health theories, ultraprime product ranges, and the all-pervasive 
sense that eating a processed foodstuff was not just a moral failing, but could 
literally send you into anaphylactic shock.

Yet it seems Gwyneth doesn’t see things that way. In fact, she regards the 
presidential election result as a fantastic opportunity. “It’s such an exciting 
time to be an American because we are at this amazing inflection point and 
everything is kind of up in the air,” she has declared. Furthermore, she 
believes it is “such an amazing time for entrepreneurship”. (A view that is 
certainly shared by Ivanka Trump, who press released the $10,800 bangle she wore
when she and her father appeared on 60 Minutes 
<http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/opinion/commentary/ct-ivanka-trump-bracelet-business-20161116-story.html>
 shortly after his election.)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fdonald-trump-plane-air-force-one-comparison-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20Force%20One%20v%20Air%20Force%20One%3A%20how%20do%20they%20compare%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fdonald-trump-plane-air-force-one-comparison-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20Force%20One%20v%20Air%20Force%20One%3A%20how%20do%20they%20compare%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fdonald-trump-plane-air-force-one-comparison-video&media=>
Trump Force One v Air Force One: how do they compare? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/dec/08/donald-trump-plane-air-force-one-comparison-video>
As for Gwyneth’s evolving business plan, I really picture her reading four or 
five articles on the left-behind in the immediate aftermath of Trump’s win, and 
– in very short order – managing to work herself into the declared state of 
entrepreneurial excitement, thinking: “How hard can it be? I’ll bet I can reach 
out to those people with the offer ofa vagina steam 
<http://goop.com/city-guide/infrared-saunas-detox-spas-and-the-best-spots-for-colonics/tikkun-spa/>
 or a$46,000 Hermès mahjong set 
<http://goop.com/the-ridiculous-but-awesome-gift-guide/>, to say nothing of a 
‘long read’ on the business of consciously uncoupling or creating herbal 
alternatives to canine antidepressants.”

That said, the result does appear to have happened a bit close to deadline for 
Goop’s legendary annual Christmas gift guide to adapt entirely. But last year 
does seem to have been the high-water mark of batshit commerce, with its offer 
of$956 loo paper, and so much else besides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2016/aug/12/gwyneth-paltrow-starts-a-new-spin-class-with-a-2500-washer-and-dryer>
. Were Gwyneth to have continued in this vein, this year’s guide would have 
consisted of products such as single-use zeppelins or a black-diamond-studded 
bumper sticker reading DON’T BLAME ME – I VOTED HILLARY.

Instead, she appears to have adapted to changing times 
<http://goop.com/ridiculous-but-awesome/>, without sacrificing Goop’s crucial 
ingredient of WTF-ery. For instance, one could argue that, in her own way, 
Gwyneth is now making direct overtures to the survivalist elements of Trump’s 
base. Yes, having long run a website which appears to deliberately goad the 
apocalypse, Gwyneth has begun to vertically integrate into selling you the 
tools to cope with the fallout of that event, even though all you’ll really 
need is a selection of assault rifles, militia leadership qualities and an 
ability to pretend that murder can be justified on an increasingly regular 
basis. Unfortunately, Gwyneth hasn’t got any of those in stock. But what shehas 
got this year is a $399dual jet pack <http://jetpackbag.com/shop/dual-pack>, 
which apparently contains everything two people will need to survive for 72 
hours (six blow-dries not included).

Still, it’s fair to say that the guide doesn’t appear to have done a full 180 
towards the rust belt, given the section pushing “fabulous jewellery guaranteed 
to make her smile”. I should coco, at£437,400 for one pair of earrings 
<https://www.modaoperandi.com/arunashi-gg16/infinity>.

Other highlights? A coffee-table book explaining where to get pizza anywhere 
in the world – a notoriously hard-to-accomplish task. Don’t take a trip without 
it. Another personal favourite is the$8,300 yurt 
<https://www.ecprovisionco.com/products/groovyyurts-super-ger-20-yurt>, which 
has been “adapted to North American conditions”. Because, let’s face it: the 
Gobi desert has its challenges, but it’s nothing on a California backyard.

If that doesn’t tick off one hard-to-buy-for relative, how about the $199 
pelvic floor exerciser 
<http://shop.goop.com/collections/elvie/products/pelvic-floor-exercise-tracker?variant=19672241734>
? “Ultimately,” explains Gwyneth, “it’s the gift of a better orgasm.” Tell that 
imperiously to your mum when she’s unwrapped it and is pretending it’sso much 
better than the sheepskin wellington boot insoles she asked for.

All in all, though, my favourite section is entitled “Gifts for the 
Philanthropist” <http://goop.com/ridiculous-but-awesome/>. This runs to a mere 
two suggestions: “send someone to college” and “fund an entire study”. It feels 
well-pitched. Among a certain stripe of grand people, there’s a real 
one-downmanship to Christmas giving. You know the sort of thing: “We have a £10 
limit”/“We only do presents for the children.” Well done them. But this year 
I’m planning to win this game hands-down, by going around saying: “We only fund 
research grants.”
 