
It’s Monday morning and the start of a year 7 English class at Highbury Grove 
school, a large comprehensive in north London. The students have been played 
the soundtrack to a film and hands are creeping up as they are questioned about 
the role background music plays in setting the mood.

Answers are tentative, but as the pace picks up, their vocabulary strengthens 
with discussion of “foreshadowing” and “transition” and “perspective”. 
Encouraged by their young hipsterish teacher, Lewis Green, who tells them that 
“just because I challenge you it doesn’t mean you’re wrong, it just means I 
want you to explain more”, their answers become longer and more eloquent. By 
the end of the class, well over half the pupils have their hands up, bursting 
to speak.

An ordinary, lively English lesson? Not quite. Hardly a word has been put to 
paper. The emphasis of this lesson, in a school in which 70% of students are in 
receipt of pupil premium, is on speaking skills. The approach is based on the 
work of consultant Martin Robinson, author of twobooks 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/trivium-21c.html> that attempt to bring 
classical principles to modern comprehensive education, surprise hits in recent 
years.

GCSE English to drop speaking and listening components
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/aug/29/gcse-english-speaking-listening-drop>
Robinson, who advises Highbury Grove, says: “It is important that young people 
develop educated opinions, that is, opinions that emerge after exploring and 
weighing up different sides of an argument.” Robinson believes an educated 
18-year-old “should be able to respond to gentle interrogation and not worry 
when they get to the point of not knowing, relish it even because they can 
explore and find out more”.

This week sees the launch of a campaign, the Oracy Network 
<http://www.esu.org/stories/events/2016/the-oracy-network-launch>, to raise the 
profile of public speaking in the national curriculum, backed by the English 
Speaking Union (ESU) and involving, among others,Peter Hyman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/10/headteacher-blair-peter-hyman-school>
, founder of School 21 in east London and anenthusiast for the cause 
<http://www.voice21.org/>. Too many schools still don’t seem to know about the 
benefits of encouraging pupils to be confident speakers, or haven’t integrated 
oracy into other parts of the curriculum. Anew study 
<https://www.lkmco.org/oracy-state-speaking-schools/> published today by LKMCO 
<https://www.lkmco.org> thinktank, reports that provision is patchy. “Few 
schools evaluate the quality of pupils’ verbal contributions in lessons, or 
communicate with parents about the quality of these contributions.”

The report says 57% of teachers say they have not received training in oracy 
in the past three years, and 53% would not know where to look for more 
information if they needed it.

For Duncan Partridge, of the ESU, the government’s much-criticised 2013 
decision to remove speaking and listening assessments from GCSE English grades 
has proved both “a threat and an opportunity”. “It’s a threat because schools 
in the current climate don’t tend to concentrate on what isn’t being assessed. 
But it’s an opportunity because students taking GCSE English will still get a 
separate speaking and listening certificate, which gives schools a chance to 
develop their oracy work.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fwhy-dont-schools-focus-on-public-speaking-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6786b2d912bd4714b5f23267c2c227e47fc716f9%2F0_157_4855_2914%2F4855.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20don%E2%80%99t%20more%20schools%20focus%20on%20public%20speaking%3F%20Discuss&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fwhy-dont-schools-focus-on-public-speaking-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20don%E2%80%99t%20more%20schools%20focus%20on%20public%20speaking%3F%20Discuss&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fwhy-dont-schools-focus-on-public-speaking-campaign%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6786b2d912bd4714b5f23267c2c227e47fc716f9%2F0_157_4855_2914%2F4855.jpg>
 A year 7 English lesson at Highbury Grove school mainly involved discussion. 
Photograph: Sarah Lee for the Guardian 
Nick Gibb may quibble – the schools minister was reported to have described 
attempts to develop classroom speaking as “encouraging idle chatter [pdf] 
<http://www.robinalexander.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2012/11/Alexander-Neither-national-nor-a-curriculum-Forum.pdf>
” – but evidence of the link between oracy and higher attainment is firmly 
established.Neil Mercer <https://www.educ.cam.ac.uk/people/staff/mercer/>, of 
Cambridge University, who has researched the subject, says: “Children who were 
taught the art of reasoned discussion significantly improved their scores in 
maths and science. They also increased their scores on Raven’s progressive 
matrices test, a standardised psychology test of non‑verbal reasoning.”

According to a paper by the influential Education Endowment Foundation 
<https://educationendowmentfoundation.org.uk/resources/teaching-learning-toolkit/oral-language-interventions/>
, pupils who participate in spoken language interventions make approximately 
five months’ additional progress over a year, and such interventions are listed 
among thetop 10  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2012/feb/02/children-learning-sutton-trust-feedback>
most effective methods of improving teaching.

But what of that daunting distance between research and practice? How do you 
persuade sassy adolescents wedded to their smartphones to become persuasive 
public speakers?

Why debating still matters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/06/why-debating-still-matters> 
Tom Sherrington, headteacher of Highbury Grove, and the school’s director of 
oracy, Andrew Fitch, approach this with gusto. Commonsense rules for speaking 
are pinned up around the school, urging pupils to mind their slang and reject 
double negatives. A soapbox project runs through years 7 to 9 for which every 
student has to deliver a three-part persuasive speech to an audience that 
includes parents. “Of last year’s year 8, 192 out of 198 did their public piece 
and there were some fantastic contributions,” says Sherrington. Sixth formers 
must give an oral presentation as part of their extended project qualification.

Students reluctant to give a formal talk are encouraged to build up their 
arguments through one-to-one discussion “doing it again and again until it’s 
better”, says Fitch, who is also co-coach toEngland’s winning World Schools 
Debating team, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/06/why-debating-still-matters> 
sponsored by the ESU.

But it’s not only students who need encouragement says Sherrington: “Teachers 
often think, they don’t have time. There’s so much content to get through. We 
tell them it’s not an add-on, it’s part of the pedagogy.”

Fitch adds: “There’s a lot of learning where students don’t actually have to 
verbalise concepts but it’s useful.” He describes teaching An Inspector Calls, 
when a student couldn’t say the word “vigorously”. “He knew the word perfectly 
well, he just couldn’t get it off the page.” Fitch made him repeat it until he 
could.

Sherrington has a similar story about a year 7 maths class where pupils were 
finding it hard to say “denominator”. “They were using substitute, vague terms 
like the ‘numbers at the bottom’.” He adds: “Every year group has its 
particular challenges. With some older pupils, it’s not the speaking out that’s 
the problem. They can be confident, cocky and loud, feel obliged to act up a 
bit. So I say to them: ‘Your challenge, guys, is actually to play it straight.’”

At Highbury Grove the experiment is in its early stages. But watching that 
year 7 group, hands stretched high by the end of the lesson, it’s also not 
difficult to believe, as Fitch says, that “students adapt quickly if they know 
speaking is something expected of them right from the start.”
 