
The BBC’s recent hit drama The Night Manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-night-manager>, a thriller about 
a spy who infiltrates an arms dealer’s network, is the sort of show that’s 
sometimes described as “aspirational” – not because most people aspire to hang 
out with the kind of foreign despots liable to gas their own people, but 
because it’s the sort of world that features private jets and five-star hotels 
and characters called things like “Dickie Onslow Roper” and “Lord Langbourne” 
and the kind of long-necked women who drape themselves languidly over business 
tycoons’ arms.

It is, to use another piece of shorthand, posh; a world of money and privilege 
– and apart from two overworked civil servants trying to bring them to heel 
from a dingy London office, one of whom is Olivia Colman, the BBC’s resident 
everywoman – almost the entire cast comes from what used to be called the 
“officer class”. So it’s not exactly a surprise when, just after the final 
episode is broadcast, theGuardian runs a story about where the three male leads 
went to school 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/shortcuts/2016/mar/28/dragon-school-tom-hiddleston-tom-hollander-hugh-laurie-night-manager>
. Because for the past 18 months or so, the papers have been full of stories 
about how increasingly rarefied acting is becoming. How difficult it is for 
anyone from any normal background to break into it. How some of the great 
actors of the past 30 years simply wouldn’t make it today.

The story is not that the three stars – Hugh Laurie, Tom Hiddleston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tom-hiddleston> and Tom Hollander – are all 
privately educated. That would surprise no one. The story is that they all went 
to the same private school: the Dragon School, a small prep school in Oxford 
with fees of up to £28,000 a year that also educated Emma Watson, Jack 
Davenport and Jack Whitehall, among others. From there, Laurie and Hiddleston 
both went on to Eton, the launchpad for what are some of the hottest actors of 
the moment, alma mater to Eddie Redmayne, Damien Lewis and Dominic West.

Our national psychodramas are being acted out by graduates of our most 
expensive public schools

What unites Laurie, Hiddleston and Hollander most, of course, is talent. They 
all give standout, highly praised performances. And, arguably, it’s anecdotal 
evidence of nothing very much; commenting on it reveals nothing more than a 
certain leftwing chippiness on the part of the commentator.

Certainly, the issues at stake have little to do with Laurie, Hiddleston or 
Hollander. It’s far bigger than any of them. But it’s also not posh-bashing for 
the sake of posh-bashing. There’s nowevidence of an inequality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/feb/27/class-ceiling-working-class-actors-study>
 that runs like a seam through the entire profession and which goes far beyond 
the anecdotal. This year, academics from the London School of Economics and 
Goldsmiths College, in a peer-reviewed study, found that only 27% of actors 
come from a working-class background and that the profession is “heavily skewed 
towards the privileged 
<http://www.lse.ac.uk/newsAndMedia/news/archives/2016/02/LSE-research-finds-acting-has-become-a-largely-middle-class-profession.aspx>
”. In February this year, the Sutton Trust, a thinktank dedicated to social 
mobility,included acting for the first time in its survey of leading professions
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/feb/27/class-ceiling-working-class-actors-study>
, and found, among other things, that 67% of British Oscar winners and 42% of 
Bafta winners went to a private school.

Countless stars have spoken out about it, including Julie Walters, who’s said 
that “people like me wouldn’t get the chance today 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jan/24/julie-walters-people-like-me-wouldnt-get-a-chance-today>
” and Judi Dench, who gets letters “countless times a week asking for help to 
get through drama school”. And, in this light,The Night Manager starts to seem 
more like a parable. Because it depicts a world that is run by and for a rich, 
privileged elite. And it turns out, that’s true not just within the dramatic 
confines of the story, but outside it too. That there’s a tiny, well-born 
cohort who seem to be getting all the plum roles.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fworking-class-actors-disappearing-britain-class-privilege-access-posh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68d277cc996cee89c2c08ba7bb7210230a349698%2F0_151_4168_2501%2F4168.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20working-class%20actors%20are%20a%20disappearing%20breed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fworking-class-actors-disappearing-britain-class-privilege-access-posh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20working-class%20actors%20are%20a%20disappearing%20breed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fworking-class-actors-disappearing-britain-class-privilege-access-posh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68d277cc996cee89c2c08ba7bb7210230a349698%2F0_151_4168_2501%2F4168.jpg>
 The Night Manager’s male stars, Tom Hiddleston (left) and Hugh Laurie, went to 
the same prep school and then on to Eton. Photograph: Jamie McCarthy/Getty 
Images for AMC 
The bigger question is whether it matters. Acting is structurally unfair 
anyway, especially for women – so much is based on looks, on having the kind of 
languid limbs that can be draped over a business tycoon’s arms. Does it really 
matter if this tiny elite is dominated by Etonians? Or by the 7% who are 
privately educated rather than the 93% who aren’t? There are so many 
inequalities in Britain today that in some ways this feels like the least of 
them.

But it’s part of a much bigger picture. Because what has happened in acting 
and therefore what we see on our screens is intimately connected to what is 
happening in Britain. Acting, culture, identity, representation and politics 
are all inextricably entwined. The actors on our screens, the dramas that are 
commissioned, the way we view ourselves, the politicians we vote for, our 
ability to empathise with people from other parts of our culture, are all of a 
piece. Can it really be just a coincidence that the upper echelons of acting 
and government are dominated by Old Etonians?

The Liverpool-based screenwriter Frank Cottrell Boyce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/frankcottrellboyce>, who wrote the story 
for the opening ceremony of the London Olympic Games, tells me that he believes 
actors are like everyone else, just more visible. “The shortage of 
working-class actors is simply a mirror of what’s going on everywhere: a 
shortage of working-class academics, engineers and politicians. I’m much more 
concerned about the broader picture because it’s a beacon, an indicator, of a 
much deeper problem.”

Actors are simply the most visible, he says. “It’s an issue simply because 
we’ve noticed it but it’s going on everywhere, in every profession. It’s about 
access to education and being able to take a risk. That’s the nursery of 
innovation not just in the arts but in science, in business. What’s happening 
to the dramatic arts, should be a warning to people that this is happening 
everywhere. Actors are simply the end of the process. University or college or 
art school used to be where you’d go to meet your contemporaries and start 
something off. But they’ve been completely monetised. Universities are 
transaction service providers, students are service users, it’s not a creative 
space or an intellectual space any more, it’s a service where you get a piece 
of paper in exchange for your student loan. And it’s completely changed the 
nature of it.”

Because now it’s about money. And there’s simply not enough of it go around. 
Every week, he says, he is inundated with letters. “‘Can you give me £500?’ I 
get them week in, week out, and everybody else does too.”

Acting has changed because Britain has changed. And money, and its Great 
British handmaidens – inequality, privilege, class – is at the heart of it.Nina 
Gold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/24/game-of-thrones-star-wars-casting-nina-gold>
, one of the most influential casting directors in Britain, goes to the 
showcases that the drama schools hold every year for the graduating class and 
has seen the shift at first hand.

She says: “There’s definitely a big homogenous load of middle-class actors all 
quite similar to each other. It’s not just class-wise, there just seem to be 
fewer characters, people who don’t conform to the ideal look, people who are 
overweight, or funny-looking. I really miss that.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fworking-class-actors-disappearing-britain-class-privilege-access-posh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd3c81210d07c3d27ba6ea5b020687119545ee4a%2F520_9_1509_1885%2F1509.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20working-class%20actors%20are%20a%20disappearing%20breed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fworking-class-actors-disappearing-britain-class-privilege-access-posh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20working-class%20actors%20are%20a%20disappearing%20breed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fworking-class-actors-disappearing-britain-class-privilege-access-posh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd3c81210d07c3d27ba6ea5b020687119545ee4a%2F520_9_1509_1885%2F1509.jpg>
 Julie Walters in the film adaptation of Educating Rita. The actor says that 
“people like me wouldn’t get the chance today”. Photograph: Rex 
“It’s not like the 1980s when all the exciting, big names were people like 
Gary Oldman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/gary-oldman>, Tim Roth, Pete 
Postlethwaite. When you think of all the fabulous actors of the moment, you 
think of Eddie Redmayne, Tom Hiddleston, Dominic West, Benedict Cumberbatch. 
There’s Michael Fassbender. But he’s Irish and German so goes right by the 
whole class distinction.”

There are brilliant and successful working-class actors out there – Gold cast 
Peckham-bornJohn Boyega  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/13/star-wars-force-awakens-john-boyega-stormtrooper-observer-profile>
inStar Wars: The Force Awakens and she found him (initially for the film Attack 
the Block) by “looking really hard” outside the usual drama schools – but the 
change has been dramatic. “What I want to get across is that I really, really 
want there to be more working-class actors and it needs to happen. Because it’s 
got nothing to do with talent, ability or intelligence. It’s to do with money. 
And it’s a reflection of how society is working. It’s very much a mirror of the 
way it is in real life.”

It’s always been tough, of course. Getting in to drama school is tough. And 
making it once you’ve got out is tougher still. “Even in the best-case 
scenario, you’re getting rejected left, right and centre,” says Nina Gold. 
“Even if you’re successful. And then if you do become really famous, that’s a 
whole hell of its own. My son wants to do drama A-level and I find myself 
thinking, please, God, let him never, ever want to become an actor.”

And even someone as successful and patently talented as Maxine Peake  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/21/stuart-maconie-working-class-heroes-poverty-porn-bbc-radio-4-review>
tells me how she was turned down by Manchester Metropolitan University’s 
theatre school three times and Guildhall School of Music and Drama three times 
before finally being accepted by Rada.

“Then, at the final workshop, they said to me, how are you going to pay for it 
if you do get in? And I said, ‘I can’t. There’s no way. I’m from a 
single-parent family, My mum works part-time. We’re skint.’”

Rada helped her get a scholarship and she went straight from there to the late 
Victoria Wood’sDinner Ladies and the rest is history. As a rags-to-riches, 
Cinders-you-shall-go-to-the-ball fairytale, it’s a great story. And it does 
still – on rare occasions – happen.

In Rada’s elegant 1931 building in Bloomsbury, central London, I meet Yasmin 
Taheri, 22. She’s from Mirfield near Huddersfield, and like Peake, she grew up 
in a one-parent family. She tells me how she applied to dozens of drama schools 
and how she supported herself to pay for it. The process costs hundreds, if not 
thousands of pounds. It’s anywhere between £50 and £80 to audition for each 
round at each drama school, not to mention the travel. “I worked in McDonald’s 
and as a care assistant, as a medical secretary, as a receptionist, in an 
Italian restaurant, as a Spanish au pair…”

And Taheri didn’t apply once or twice, she carried on for five years, and 
then, eventually, miraculously, got in. What was that like, I ask her. “Oh my 
God!” she says and even today looks like she still can’t quite believe it. And 
Rada has helped her, as it did Maxine Peake, find a scholarship which now 
covers her maintenance.

The fairytales do still happen. It’s in Rada’s DNA. Royalties from Pygmalion, 
George Bernard Shaw’s play about a flower girl who learns to act like a duchess 
(which later became the musicalMy Fair Lady), helped pay for the founding of 
the school. But, it’s getting rarer and rarer. In just a few years the whole 
landscape has changed. It used to be hard for everyone. Whereas now, it’s still 
hard for everyone but it’s a whole lot harder, quantifiably harder, if you 
happen to come from anything other than money and privilege.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fworking-class-actors-disappearing-britain-class-privilege-access-posh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd4005769d021d6051922fb612dec323ae665596%2F0_98_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20working-class%20actors%20are%20a%20disappearing%20breed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fworking-class-actors-disappearing-britain-class-privilege-access-posh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20working-class%20actors%20are%20a%20disappearing%20breed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fworking-class-actors-disappearing-britain-class-privilege-access-posh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd4005769d021d6051922fb612dec323ae665596%2F0_98_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 John Boyega with his Bafta Rising Star award for Star Wars: The Force Awakens. 
Photograph: Richard Kendal/Barcroft Media 
Because for every Taheri, there are hundreds, maybe thousands more Tom 
Stockses. I meet 23-year-old Stocks in Canary Wharf in a break from his job in 
a call centre. It’s known informally as “the actors’ call centre” and “is three 
floors of out-of-work actors who just come and go all the time”. Stocks has 
written the kind of letters that Judi Dench and Frank Cottrell Boyce have 
received, as well as emailing hundreds of agents. Do you ever hear back? 
“Never.” And he’s applied to all the drama schools “and I paid the ridiculous 
audition fees for all of them”.

And then he won a place at the well respected East 15 Acting School in 
Loughton, Essex. It was an amazing piece of good fortune. And yet – it wasn’t 
quite amazing enough. “I was quite naive, thinking OK, it’s 12 grand but I can 
borrow that from the government,” he says. And you can’t? “No. The only way you 
can fund it is with a career-development loan which isn’t like a student loan. 
You have to pay back £200 a month for the next five years come what may.”

It’s possible to get student loans to study drama, if the course is affiliated 
to Ucas, and if it’s your first degree. But Stocks, like many actors before 
him, had already been to university – a performing arts course at the 
University of South Wales in Newport, where he did three jobs to pay his 
maintenance.

At East 15, he would get a showcase, a crucial first step if you want to make 
it as an actor. It’s just that he can’t figure out how to pay for it. He grew 
up in Bolton and his father is a chef, his mother a school dinner lady. “I 
decided to defer for a year and get a job and try and save the money. But I 
didn’t have nearly enough so I thought, I’m going to go all in and just borrow 
it. But then my dad sat me down and said, you’ve already got all your student 
loans from university and £200 a month is such a big commitment and there’s no 
loopholes. And in the end, I just couldn’t do it.”

He deferred for another year and “then it came to Christmas and it came to a 
point where I was chasing a dream. I was just never going to get the finances. 
My parents couldn’t pay for it. And I was so deluded to think I could get this 
money on my own. A bunch of actors writing to private sponsors. It was never 
going to happen.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fworking-class-actors-disappearing-britain-class-privilege-access-posh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87fd1e3e5efd23836635ea910786640081b67600%2F1988_55_3016_3770%2F3016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20working-class%20actors%20are%20a%20disappearing%20breed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fworking-class-actors-disappearing-britain-class-privilege-access-posh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20working-class%20actors%20are%20a%20disappearing%20breed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fworking-class-actors-disappearing-britain-class-privilege-access-posh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87fd1e3e5efd23836635ea910786640081b67600%2F1988_55_3016_3770%2F3016.jpg>
 Line of Duty actor Daniel Mays has criticised ‘the Downton effect’ on British 
television. Photograph: Richard Saker for the Observer 
He shrugs. There was nothing to be done. So, he’s moved to London and is 
attending open auditions and has launched something calledActor Awareness 
<http://www.actorawareness.co.uk/>, a campaign for greater diversity and 
representation in the industry. He’s had messages of support from the cast of
This Is England and John Challis (Boycie from Only Fools and Horses), and an 
“anonymous” £1,000 donation that arrived just hours after he told Sir Ian 
McKellen about it. He’s impressively upbeat and dynamic and determined to get 
on and do something. “People thought I was just whining initially but I’ve 
really put my money where my mouth is.” But later I ask Nina Gold what her 
advice would be to someone from a working-class background, and I can’t help 
thinking of Stocks. “If you can somehow find a way to get to drama school, go,” 
she says. “It’s not the only way but you learn a lot, you get to act a lot, all 
day, every day, and you get seen by the industry.” It’s just a brutal fact of 
life that Stocks can’t afford it. And his place will go to someone else who can.

If good drama reflects us back at ourselves, what does it mean that the 
version of ourselves that we see on screen is so often male and Etonian? That 
we’re living in a Britain where our national psychodramas are being acted out 
by graduates of our most expensive public schools?

Daniel Mays, giving an interview to the Radio Times to publicise his leading 
role inLine of Duty recently, spoke about how British TV is “awash with the 
Downton effect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/15/tv-working-class-writers-downton-abbey-daniel-mays>
”. Period dramas “have a place”, he said, “but there are a lot of public-school 
actors and writers about at the moment”. The great, starring roles of recent 
times, the ones that go to Cumberbatch and Hiddleston and Lewis and Redmayne, 
the roles that have propelled them into the big time, are not great 
working-class heroes.

They’re not the kind of roles that Daniel Mays – currently on stage as Aston 
in Harold Pinter’sThe Caretaker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/10/the-caretaker-old-vic-observer-review>
 – gets. Nina Gold mentions him when I ask her about the standout stars she’d 
seen at drama schools. “You really thought, my God, he’s brilliant.”

But then, class, she says, is one of the hardest things to cast against type. 
“LikeEddie Redmayne <https://www.theguardian.com/film/eddie-redmayne>, who is 
genuinely, totally brilliant, we even cast him to play a woman. Why would you 
cast him to play a working-class character? What’s the advantage? Though from 
his point of view, it’s probably fun to do.”

And what, you can’t help wondering, is our obsession with period drama all 
about?Downton, suggests Josie Long, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/josie-long> comedian and co-founder of the 
charityArts Emergency, <http://www.arts-emergency.org/> “speaks to that certain 
weird thing that is going on in the UK. Something very repressive that is 
reflected in our art.”

It’s what happens, she thinks, “when you don’t have different voices coming 
through”. And “posh fetishisation… posh as aspiration” becomes a defining 
feature of our culture.

Posh is at the very heart of mainstream viewing, a cornerstone of all TV 
schedules and a guaranteed seller abroad.The Night Manager is currently being 
broadcast in America on the cable channel AMC, which contributed a large part 
of its £18m budget. It’s a vision of Britain that sells.

It’s about young people from working-class backgrounds not being able to get 
on the first rung
David Morrissey 
And at the other end of the social scale is… well, what? In his 2011 book, 
Chavs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jun/08/chavs-demonization-owen-jones-review>
, the journalist and activist Owen Jones argued that the artistic 
representation of the working classes has all but disappeared from our screens. 
And in its place is an underclass to be feared and despised. There’s been no 
modern austerity equivalent of the great, epoch-defining Alan Bleasdale drama,
Boys from the Blackstuff, a series that seemed to signal the high-water mark of 
Thatcherism. If you were alive in the 80s, you followed Yosser Hughes’s tragic 
efforts to find work and hang on to his family. It elicited huge public 
sympathy for him, and crucially, others like him. What’s the defining programme 
on poverty during George Osborne’s reign as chancellor?Benefits Street.

Five years ago, when I wrote about Jones’s book, I rang Phil Redmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/13/phil-redmond-british-tv-elite-failing-to-tell-working-class-stories>
, the creator ofBrookside and Grange Hill to ask him what he thought, and when 
I ring him again, he says it’s the same, only worse, and launches into a vivid 
monologue about how the TV industry works. “You might have somebody saying, 
well the prime minister has all these plans to regenerate sink estates, why 
don’t we do a drama about a sink estate? And they’ll say, good idea! Who would 
make that? It reminds me of a very good idea somebody had about garden cities 
in the 1930s, between the wars, with these great historical social forces at 
work. Fascinating stuff. What’s Dominic doing at the moment?”

David Morrissey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/sep/16/david-morrissey-working-class-actors-priced-out>
, another actor who has spoken out on the subject, points out that “for every
Downton, there’s a Happy Valley”. Almost everyone I talk to mentions Happy 
Valley <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/happy-valley>, the brilliant 
Sally Wainwright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/07/sally-wainwright-writer-happy-valley-second-series>
 BBC drama set in the Calder valley, as the counter-example toDownton and The 
Night Manager, but it’s perhaps pretty damning that portraying ordinary working 
people with warmth and humanity is, in 2016, seen as a revolutionary artistic 
act.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fworking-class-actors-disappearing-britain-class-privilege-access-posh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11cd05a31c1963f4bac7d73ec0e162db49ae7223%2F85_89_4030_2418%2F4030.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20working-class%20actors%20are%20a%20disappearing%20breed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fworking-class-actors-disappearing-britain-class-privilege-access-posh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20working-class%20actors%20are%20a%20disappearing%20breed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fworking-class-actors-disappearing-britain-class-privilege-access-posh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11cd05a31c1963f4bac7d73ec0e162db49ae7223%2F85_89_4030_2418%2F4030.jpg>
 Sarah Lancashire in Sally Wainwright’s police drama Happy Valley, set in west 
Yorkshire. Photograph: Ben Blackall/BBC 
For Morrissey, though, it’s not about the kinds of drama being made, it’s 
simply about access. “It’s about young people from working-class backgrounds 
not being able to get on the first rung. Not being able to take a risk. The 
creativity that comes from suburban bedrooms. That world has gone and that has 
enormous consequences for our nation. If you look at how important the creative 
industries are to Britain, how much things like the Beatles and Harry Potter 
have formed our national identity, it’s like we’re going around tarmac-ing over 
the oil wells.”

And it’s not just acting, he says. “Young people are being asked to work for 
very little money and so it’s becoming a de facto middle-class profession. 
We’re not looking after them in our industry and I’d say that’s true of your 
profession too.”

It’s a good point. But it’s striking in journalism how this affects content – 
local London stories being treated as topics of national interest, Port Talbot 
being viewed as somewhere just outside Mars, an awful lot of quinoa – so it 
seems improbable that it doesn’t in TV and film too. Or as Edward Kemp, the 
artistic director of Rada, who describes himself as having “the classic British 
director training of an English degree from Oxford University”, says: “I think 
the fact that our gatekeepers, of whom I’m one, all look rather like me and 
have my background, must have an impact. I can’t see how it can’t.”

We’re talking in his office, in Rada’s elegant Bloomsbury building with its 
photos of eminent alumni in the lobby, dozens of them, the great and the good, 
the stars of British stage and screen for more than a century. In the 50s, he 
tells me, a man called John Fernald took over as principal. He had served with 
men from all backgrounds during the war and encouraged students to celebrate 
their roots and keep their accents. “Sheila Hancock is very sharp on this 
because she caught the end of the previous era and speaks RP whereas her 
husband, John Thaw, was part of this new generation that came through. It meant 
that when there were writers and directors ready to make movies in which Albert 
Finney and Tom Courtenay and all those people starred, there was a generation 
of actors who were able to make that happen.”

It’s all connected. In the 60s, the first working-class actors with 
working-class voices were part of a wider phenomenon, the great explosion of 
social mobility and cultural blossoming that expanded our ideas about what is 
and isn’t a fit subject for art. David Morrissey tells me he was inspired to 
become an actor after seeing the film,Kes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/sep/11/kes-ken-loach-review>, the first 
time he’d seen his life reflected on screen. I feel a bit the same way about 
Phil Redmond’sGrange Hill. I just hadn’t realised at the time that it was the 
kind of gritty social realism that would subsequently vanish.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fworking-class-actors-disappearing-britain-class-privilege-access-posh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bc67dd7033e449f5899d1506a6df1a2720c4427%2F0_530_4690_2814%2F4690.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20working-class%20actors%20are%20a%20disappearing%20breed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fworking-class-actors-disappearing-britain-class-privilege-access-posh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20working-class%20actors%20are%20a%20disappearing%20breed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fworking-class-actors-disappearing-britain-class-privilege-access-posh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bc67dd7033e449f5899d1506a6df1a2720c4427%2F0_530_4690_2814%2F4690.jpg>
 David Bradley in Ken Loach’s film Kes, the movie that inspired David 
Morrrissey to act. Photograph: Rex 
But what now? Now that this whole process is in reverse? Already, the 
dramatist Jimmy McGovern has said how hard it is to even find working-class 
actors to play his roles. Is it the start of a great cultural contraction? Are 
our ideas about what is dramatically interesting diminishing? Will we reach the 
stage that Julie Walters fears, where it’ll be “middle-class people playing 
working-class people, like it used to be”.

Rada, in fairness, is doing its best to keep the traditions of the 60s alive, 
but it’s getting harder and harder. “We get defensive about diversity because 
actually 40% of our students come from family backgrounds with an income of 
less than £25,000 and 60% of our students are getting some kind of bursary from 
us,” says Kemp. Rada is lucky because its alumni are often rich and many of 
them want to give back and it’s able to help a significant number of its 
students. “But the real challenge for the actor starting out is how do you 
survive afterwards,” says Kemp. The rep [repertory theatre] system which 
provided full-time employment for actors has all but disappeared. “And how do 
you sustain a career with an expectation that you’ll live within reach of 
London because that’s where the industry is largely based? At that point the 
bank of mum and dad is incredibly useful.”

Kemp’s conclusion, like Frank Cottrell Boyce’s and Nina Gold’s, is that it 
isn’t about acting. It’s about money. It’s about what we’ve done to our 
education system. “I would love it to be the world that Julie Walters came 
from, where it was free, but I would love that for everything in higher 
education,” he says. “It’s not just drama schools. It’s an issue about how we 
pay for higher education.”

The third and final part of the puzzle is schools. Last year, Jessica Hynes 
won a Bafta for her role inW1A and used the occasion to make an impassioned 
speech about how children from low-income families were being driven out of the 
arts. She’s spent the last year visiting schools, talking to headteachers and 
learning about what is happening to drama. “The worst thing is the academy 
system,” she says, “which has monetised all subjects and schools simply don’t 
receive any money from arts subjects, so they’ve become incredibly difficult to 
justify.”

John Baugh, the head of the Dragon School, also points to the stresses and 
strains that state schools operate under. “There’s an obsession withSats  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/29/more-than-30000-people-sign-petition-to-boycott-year-2-sats>
which seem to be the only measure of whether a school is deemed to be 
successful or not.”

But drama, says Hynes, “is not prancing around or finding the next Orlando 
Bloom. It’s about how you build confidence, how you connect with other people. 
It’s about coming into a class where you feel different. Where you feel able to 
express yourself in another way. And it affects all other subjects. There’s so 
much focus on Stem [science, technology, engineering and maths] subjects, but 
don’t you think engineers need confidence and presentation and teamwork skills?

“Wait a moment, I’m going to tell you what Eton says on this…” She stomps off 
to retrieve a piece of paper. “This is from the Eton website,” she says. “This 
is what they say about drama. ‘The aim is to provide the boys with a safe and 
stimulating environment in which to develop skills not easily learned in the 
schoolroom: physical and vocal self-confidence; the social disciplines of group 
work; imaginative spontaneity and the disciplines required to channel it; an 
extended emotional range; the power of their own creativity and a respect for 
that of others.’

“Don’t all children deserve that? Not just Etonians?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fworking-class-actors-disappearing-britain-class-privilege-access-posh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01e4f06680616ed5e249121c2807fc52e5764f94%2F198_370_3933_2360%2F3933.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20working-class%20actors%20are%20a%20disappearing%20breed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fworking-class-actors-disappearing-britain-class-privilege-access-posh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20working-class%20actors%20are%20a%20disappearing%20breed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fworking-class-actors-disappearing-britain-class-privilege-access-posh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01e4f06680616ed5e249121c2807fc52e5764f94%2F198_370_3933_2360%2F3933.jpg>
 Jessica Hynes used her awards success in W1A to speak out about inequality of 
opportunity in the arts. Photograph: Jack Barnes/BBC 
In her Bafta speech, Hynes, who grew up in a single-parent family in Brighton, 
urged people to supportArts Emergency 
<http://www.arts-emergency.org/alumni/josie-long/>, founded by the comedian 
Josie Long and her friend Neil Griffith, which campaigns to create 
opportunities for young people from low income backgrounds. “And it crashed 
their website. I’m very proud of that. They got 20,000 hits.”

Arts Emergency pairs up mentors and mentees – young people trying to find a 
crack into the sort of professions that rely heavily on contacts and networks 
and a certain savvy knowhow. Julie Hesmondhalgh, the Accrington-born actor, who 
played transgender Hayley Cropper inCoronation Street and was recently in Happy 
Valley, is one of the latest mentors to volunteer. She tells me about a young 
woman from Burnley called Lisa-Marie Ashworth whom she’s been trying to help 
for the past year or so and whose life has been genuinely turned around by 
drama. “I were quite disruptive at school,” Ashworth tells me, though this 
sounds like something of an understatement. She was repeatedly excluded, and 
was on track to leave school with no qualifications whatsoever.

“She’s this classic girl. Stunningly beautiful. Proper working-class. And 
absolutely primed to become a statistic,” says Julie Hesmondhaulgh. “Nobody 
could contain her. And then on a whim she auditioned for the school play and 
just blew them away. It was like Miles Davies picking up a trumpet.”

When I talk to Ashworth, she’s still on tenterhooks waiting to hear if she’s 
got a place at drama school next year. “She’s not someone who wants to be rich 
and famous,” says Hesmondhalgh. “She’s hungry for theatre. And she really 
turned it around. She went back to school, retook her GCSEs. It would just be 
amazing if she could break out of the life that’s been mapped out for her.”

A couple of weeks later, Ashworth emails me the good news: she might just do 
that; she’s been offered a place at East 15.

Later, I look up Eton’s website and marvel at its facilities: not one but two 
professionally staffed theatres including “a flying system, orchestra pit and 
revolving stage”. (Frank Cottrell Boyce says: “They’ve got a classical stage 
and a TV studio. Honestly, you could train a monkey. It would be a disgrace to 
leave there and not be a brilliant actor.”)

But the skills required to become an Oscar-winner will also help you become 
prime minister, or mayor of London, or chief executive of a leading company. Or 
win a lead role inThe Night Manager.

Olivia Colman gets her man in the end. Because the TV version of The Night 
Manageris a morality tale that sees the billionaires brought to book. Colman 
brings Dickie Roper to heel and the monied elite who think they can get away 
with it, don’t. But life is not like that. Just ask Tom Stocks. You probably 
won’t see him interviewed in theRadio Times any time soon, but ring up customer 
service at Virgin Wines and you might get him on the end of the line. His 
latest campaign is to get drama schools to abolish their audition fees.

“It just annoys me. You’re up against it already. Surely everyone deserves a 
level start? You can’t win a race if you’re already 100 metres behind.”

Britain has changed so quickly, the gains of 40 years of social progress 
undone in half a generation, that most of us are still struggling to compute 
it, but the evidence is right there in front of us, on our cinema and 
television screens. It’s not posh-bashing to say this is a problem. Laurence 
Fox, the son of James Fox, suggested the likes of Julie Walters banging on 
about it should “shut up”. But maybe we should be taking more notice not less.

To contribute to Arts Emergency or join its Alternative Old Boy’s Network 
click here <http://www.arts-emergency.org/>

For more information on Actor Awareness click here 
<http://www.actorawareness.co.uk/>

• This article was amended on 12 May 2016. An earlier version referred to Nina 
Gold as one of the most influential casting agents, rather than a casting 
director.

 