
Halfway through a video of a speech <https://twitter.com/DaveGoulson> by the 
biologist Professor Dave Goulson there is an abrupt loss of sound. Goulson, who 
has devoted his working life to highlighting the catastrophic decline of bees, 
is giving a talk to hundreds gathered at theNational Honey Show 
<http://www.honeyshow.co.uk/> in 2015. Strangely, his words are silenced for 20 
seconds of the video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hTnEW-wEf5M> uploaded by 
the show to YouTube, precisely when he discusses the impact on bees of the most 
widely used insecticides in the world – neonicotinoids.

Leading insecticide cuts bee sperm by almost 40%, study shows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/27/leading-insecticide-cuts-bee-sperm-by-almost-40-per-cent-study-shows>
Goulson called it “sinister” last week when made aware of the silence, but now 
concludes it was probably an innocent error. Bob Maurer, chairman of the show, 
told me the event has never received any sponsorship from the big chemical 
companies that manufacture neonicotinoids. He believes an accidental “technical 
hitch” by the video producer was responsible.

Concern over this coincidence can be dismissed as a conspiracy theory, but 
what cannot be dismissed is thesolid scientific evidence 
<http://splash.sussex.ac.uk/blog/for/dg229> that Goulson is helping to produce, 
showing how neonicotinoids harm bees and other insects.

Scientists this year calculated that these insecticides caused a 10% reduction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/16/high-pesticide-levels-on-oilseed-crops-harm-wild-bees-scientists-prove>
 in the distribution of bee species that forage on oilseed rape. Another study 
found neonicotinoidscut live sperm in male honeybees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/27/leading-insecticide-cuts-bee-sperm-by-almost-40-per-cent-study-shows>
 by almost 40%. Two studies show a strongcorrelation between neonicotinoids and 
declining butterfly 
<https://www.researchgate.net/publication/306271332_Increasing_neonicotinoid_use_and_the_declining_butterfly_fauna_of_lowland_California>
 populations, while another showed the insecticide accumulating to dangerous 
levels in nearby wildflowers.

The European Union placed a moratorium on three types of neonicotinoids on 
flowering crops such as oilseed rape three years ago but these insecticides 
have not disappeared.

I’ve just about learned how to pronounce neonicotinoids, but what I didn’t 
realise until Goulson told me is that the insecticide’s use in British farming 
continues to rise. It is deployed on non-flowering crops such as wheat. We use 
them in horticulture and daub them on our pets:flea powders for cats and dogs  
<https://www.advocate-spot-on.com/en/for-cats/faqs/>contain imidacloprid, a 
neonicotinoid. Goulson says the “plausible deniability” he encounters from 
neonicotinoid makers is “rather similar to what the tobacco industry did for 50 
years claiming that smoking didn’t cause any harm”.

Next year an expert review will decide whether to tighten or slacken the EU’s 
moratorium. Eighteen conservation organisations arecalling for a better ban 
<https://www.britishbeecoalition.org/news/2016/12/1/open-letter-18-conservation-organisations-mark-pesticides-anniversary>
. I’ll be listening to Dave Goulson.

A hatching of hope
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fbanned-pesticide-kills-bees-neonicotinoid-insecticide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd0f28e63602494c5d1784efd2877238804fea34%2F0_99_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20is%20a%20banned%20pesticide%20that%20harms%20bees%20actually%20being%20used%20more%3F%20%7C%20Patrick%20Barkham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fbanned-pesticide-kills-bees-neonicotinoid-insecticide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20is%20a%20banned%20pesticide%20that%20harms%20bees%20actually%20being%20used%20more%3F%20%7C%20Patrick%20Barkham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fbanned-pesticide-kills-bees-neonicotinoid-insecticide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd0f28e63602494c5d1784efd2877238804fea34%2F0_99_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 A 24-hour-old bearded vulture. Photograph: Fabian Bimmer/AP 


I was momentarily stumped when recently asked to write about 2016’s good 
animal news. In our tyrannical position as the world’s dominant animal, we are 
destroying our planet and its life forms.

Look around a little and there are, of course, myriad small good deeds and 
changes for the better. In the past week alone, Athens, Madrid, Mexico City and 
Paris have pledged togo diesel-free 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/02/four-of-worlds-biggest-cities-to-ban-diesel-cars-from-their-centres>
 by 2025;Tesco and Sainsbury’s agreed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/30/tesco-and-sainsburys-ban-plastic-cotton-buds-to-cut-waste>
 to ban plastic-stemmedcotton buds <http://www.switchthestick.org/> to reduce 
British beach rubbish; and we learned that after failing for four years, the
only pair of bearded vultures in Andorra 
<http://raptorpolitics.org.uk/2016/12/01/after-failing-in-the-last-4-years-the-only-bearded-vulture-pair-in-andorra-successfully-fledged-a-chick-this-year-see-the-incredible-images/#more-21636>
 successfully fledged a chick. Here’s to the hatching of more eggs of hope, as 
my hero Alan Partridge might quip.

Wish and chips
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fbanned-pesticide-kills-bees-neonicotinoid-insecticide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4935c6a0254a9d95debbaa103cf353c474606e03%2F7_0_4495_2697%2F4495.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20is%20a%20banned%20pesticide%20that%20harms%20bees%20actually%20being%20used%20more%3F%20%7C%20Patrick%20Barkham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fbanned-pesticide-kills-bees-neonicotinoid-insecticide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20is%20a%20banned%20pesticide%20that%20harms%20bees%20actually%20being%20used%20more%3F%20%7C%20Patrick%20Barkham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fbanned-pesticide-kills-bees-neonicotinoid-insecticide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4935c6a0254a9d95debbaa103cf353c474606e03%2F7_0_4495_2697%2F4495.jpg>
 A river Otter beaver on chip-making duty. Photograph: Nick Upton/NPL/REX 
Shutterstock 
Beavers returning to the river Otter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/14/beavers-new-weapon-britains-fight-against-flooding>
 is another nugget of good news, and why shouldn’t Devon Wildlife Trust cash 
in? I’ve donated £75 for achip of Devon beaver-chewed wood 
<http://supportdevonsbeavers.org/delivery-details-beaver-chip/>. Just don’t 
order it as a Christmas present: it could take five months to arrive “due to 
the finite and irregular supply”.

Devon’s chief beaver-chip finder must be cursing the bright spark from 
marketing who dreamed this up. Or maybe they are just enjoying their stroll 
alongside the river Otter.
 