
When, just a few weeks before the 2015 general election, the Conservative 
party announced that it would be introducing30 hours of so-called free 
childcare for working parents in England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/apr/14/david-cameron-promises-to-double-free-childcare-and-revive-right-to-buy>
 – promptly overshadowing Labour’s own25-hour pledge 
<http://press.labour.org.uk/post/62043577088/labour-to-pledge-working-parents-25-hours-of-free>
 – parents rejoiced.

Childcare costs outstrip mortgage payments, report reveals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/mar/04/childcare-costs-outstrip-mortgage>
In a country where parents can spend more on childcare than they do on their 
mortgages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/mar/04/childcare-costs-outstrip-mortgage>
, this offer was seen as a lifeline for many families. Unfortunately, the 
closer we get to the September 2017 rollout of the extended offer, the clearer 
it becomes that this policy has been rushed through, is ill thought out, and 
crucially, is massively underfunded.

Earlier this month the government published a disappointing response to the 
long-awaited consultation on early-years funding 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/early-years-funding-changes-to-funding-for-3-and-4-year-olds>
. Despite repeated warnings from the early-years sector that the 30-hour offer 
is not being properly financed, the Department for Education confirmed that it 
is ploughing ahead with its “ambitious” plans.

What makes this so frustrating is that the problem of early-years underfunding 
is not new. For years the amount that the government pays providers (nurseries, 
schools, pre-schools and childminders) to deliver early-years places hasn’t 
come close to covering the actual cost, meaning that providers lose money on 
every “free” hour they provide.

As it stands, all three- and four-year-olds, and the most disadvantaged 40% of 
two-year-olds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/14/nursery-places-deprived-children-political>
, in England can receive 15 hours of government-funded early education and 
childcare a week, butindependent research commissioned by the Pre-school 
Learning Alliance <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-30010984> (PLA) in 2014 found 
that for every five children currently accessing funded places as part of the 
15-hour offer, government funding only covers four.

'High social cost' adults can be identified from as young as three, says study
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/dec/12/high-social-cost-adults-can-be-identified-from-as-young-as-three-says-study>
So you can imagine our frustration when, instead of addressing this problem, 
the government – in a fit of pre-election pledge-making – decided to exacerbate 
it. A2015 government review 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/review-of-childcare-costs> of the 
cost of delivering childcare places prompted a small increase in average 
funding rates, but nowhere near enough to plug the funding shortfall. In fact, 
in its consultation response the government confirmed that 20% of local areas 
will actually see their early-years funding decrease when the new funding rates 
come into effect in April 2017.

Worse still, the government has confirmed that these new funding rates – rates 
that so many have warned are insufficient –will be fixed until 2020 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/publications/written-questions-answers-statements/written-question/Lords/2016-11-02/HL2941>
, even as national minimum and living wages, mortgages, rents, utilities and 
other business costs inevitably rise. Last week the government admitted that it 
hasno plans to formally review the costs of delivering childcare and 
early-years education 
<https://hansard.parliament.uk/Lords/2016-12-05/debates/5D5FEC02-E1F3-46BD-8411-B62CC928B64E/ChildcareEarlyYearsFunding#contribution-8CB2067C-BA31-44F6-9FCC-380BE971DF33>
.

In what world is this an acceptable approach to policymaking, especially for 
the delivery of a flagship manifesto pledge? The government cannot shut its 
eyes and hope this problem goes away. Without sufficient funding, we’re likely 
to see more and more early-years providers restricting the number of funded 
places they offer, if not opting out of the scheme completely in order to stay 
in business: and, consequently, more and more parents struggling to find a 
“free” place for their child.

Sure Start closures almost doubled last year, figures show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/08/sure-start-closures-almost-doubled-last-year-figures-show>
The simple fact is that the 30-hour offer can only work if government funding 
actually covers the costs of delivering early-years places, something that the 
PLA’sFair Future Funding campaign 
<https://www.pre-school.org.uk/fairfuturefunding> is calling on the government 
to ensure. This is not about asking for endless investment. It’s about the 
government committing itself to properly funding a pledge that it chose to make.

And it’s not about taxpayers paying for other people’s children to be looked 
after. It’s about investing in quality early education, just as we do for 
state-funded primary and secondary education.

Either the government can afford to fund this policy properly or it can’t – 
and if it can’t, it needs to come clean and admit that the childcare it is 
offering parents isn’t free after all, but merely subsidised.

This is a government that has talked a lot about life chances 
<https://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/education-committee/news-parliament-2015/foundation-years-and-uk-governments-life-chances-strategy-launch-15-16-/>
, about closing the gap and ensuring that all children get the best start in 
life. And yet, somehow we are in a situation where its childcare policy is 
falling apart at the seams,children’s centre closures are on the rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/08/sure-start-closures-almost-doubled-last-year-figures-show?CMP=share_btn_fb>
, and no one seems to be willing to admit there’s a problem.

If the government is truly committed to supporting children and families, its 
actions need to start matching its rhetoric.
 