
As the European parliament hosts another Eritrean politician 
<https://brianhayesdublin.wordpress.com/2016/11/27/hayes-to-host-eu-conference-on-the-the-future-of-eritrea/>
 in the hope of reducing the number of refugees fleeing the small African 
state, the fact that the regime has been found guilty of “crimes against 
humanity”by the UN 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/08/un-commission-eritrea-international-criminal-court-hague>
 has once again been overlooked.

The event, organised by Irish MEP Brian Hayes and attended by Eritrea’s 
minister of information, Yemane Gebremeskel, is the latest example of the EU’s 
attempts to tackle the refugee crisis byreaching out to repressive regimes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/06/eu-sudan-eritrea-migration>.

Since the small Red Sea nation gained independence from Ethiopia in 1993, 
Europe has made repeated attempts to build a relationship with the government, 
but to no avail. Which leaves open the question: what crime mustEritrea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eritrea> commit to be condemned by the 
international community?


In 2001 when the president, Isaias Afwerki, cracked down on all political 
opposition andjailed more than 10 independent journalists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/19/eritrea-forgotten-journalists-jailed-pen-international-press-freedom>
, the Italian ambassador to Eritrea presented a letter of protest to the 
authorities. He was promptly expelled and other European ambassadors were 
withdrawn. The EU presidency said relations between the EU and Eritrea had been 
“seriously undermined”.


At first Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> demanded that 
Eritrea improve its human rights record before normal relations could be 
resumed. But President Afwerki did nothing of the sort, assuming that he could 
outlast the EU’s anger. He was right: it was the Europeans who buckled. 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Feu-leaders-want-new-beginning-eritrea-wont-bear-fruit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94b9e8ba52e70bfe3f94eeaad62df676a88d57da%2F771_110_1870_2338%2F1870.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20do%20EU%20leaders%20still%20think%20they%20can%20engage%20with%20Eritrea's%20regime%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Feu-leaders-want-new-beginning-eritrea-wont-bear-fruit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20do%20EU%20leaders%20still%20think%20they%20can%20engage%20with%20Eritrea%27s%20regime%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Feu-leaders-want-new-beginning-eritrea-wont-bear-fruit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94b9e8ba52e70bfe3f94eeaad62df676a88d57da%2F771_110_1870_2338%2F1870.jpg>
 President Isaias Afwerki. Photograph: Mohamed Nureldin Abdallah/Reuters 
As time passed the EU reassessed its relations with Asmara. Although there had 
been no sign of movement on human rights it was decided to try to have a “new 
beginning” with Eritrea.


In May 2007 the president was invited to visit Brussels and was warmly 
welcomed by the then EU development commissioner, Louis Michel.


By August 2009 Michel was sufficiently encouraged that progress could be made 
that he visited Asmara, after receiving assurances from an Eritrean diplomat 
thatDawit Isaak, a Swedish-Eritrean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/dec/08/press-freedom-body-highlights-plight-of-eritreas-jailed-journalists>
 journalist imprisoned in 2001, would be released into his care. Having booked 
a ticket for Isaak to return with him to Europe, Michel flew to Asmara.


But once he arrived it became apparent that the president had no intention of 
allowing the journalist to go free. Michel was not even permitted to visit the 
prisoner and returned home humiliated.


Despite these setbacks, the EU remained wedded to attempting to improve its 
relationship with Eritrea.

In 2009, European and American diplomats discussed whether to strengthen 
military sanctions against the country. A US diplomatic cable, released via
WikiLeaks <https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks>, revealed that EU 
representatives called for engagement with Eritrea rather than isolation.

The Italians described Eritrea as governed by a “brutal dictator” and noted 
that it had “not gotten results from its efforts at engagement”, while at the 
same time cautioning against “creating another Afghanistan” by imposing 
sanctions. The French said that while engagement was “useless”, they would 
continue on this track as there was no other option.

The then US deputy assistant secretary for African affairs, Karl Wycoff, 
pointed out that EU policy was contradictory. Wycoff described what he called 
“the inconsistency between the private acknowledgment that Asmara was not only 
playing a spoiler role” by supporting Islamist groups in Somalia, which 
contained “violent, anti-west elements”, and the continued provision of aid 
programmes to Eritrea. He also noted that strong actions, including sanctions, 
were needed to have a chance of changing Afwerki’s behaviour.

Ignoring these concerns, the EU pressed ahead with its strategy of engagement. 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Feu-leaders-want-new-beginning-eritrea-wont-bear-fruit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b4825ed3ad21dd37f1a8c3809d900e136a34f70%2F153_0_3533_2119%2F3533.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20do%20EU%20leaders%20still%20think%20they%20can%20engage%20with%20Eritrea's%20regime%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Feu-leaders-want-new-beginning-eritrea-wont-bear-fruit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20do%20EU%20leaders%20still%20think%20they%20can%20engage%20with%20Eritrea%27s%20regime%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Feu-leaders-want-new-beginning-eritrea-wont-bear-fruit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b4825ed3ad21dd37f1a8c3809d900e136a34f70%2F153_0_3533_2119%2F3533.jpg>
 Migrants, most from Eritrea, jump into the water during a rescue operation off 
Libya in August. Photograph: Emilio Morenatti/AP 
Years on, human rights violations and indefinite conscription continue to 
drive 4,000-5,000 Eritreans beyond its borders every month. Many arrive on 
European shores: in 2015 a total of 38,791 crossed the Mediterranean,according 
to the European border agency Frontex 
<http://frontex.europa.eu/assets/Publications/Risk_Analysis/Annula_Risk_Analysis_2016.pdf>
, arriving mostly in Italy.


The refugee question has become so toxic that a number of European states have 
been attempting again to establish a “new engagement” with Asmara. In 2014 the 
Danish government sent officials to the country. Their report, published by the 
Danish Immigration Service, concluded that “the human rights situation in 
Eritrea may not be as bad as rumoured”.

The report was not well received. It was alleged to be inaccurate and 
misquoted its key academic source. Prof Gaim Kibreab, whose work featured 
heavily, said he felt betrayed by the way in which it was used. “I was shocked 
and very surprised …They have completely ignored facts and just hand-plucked 
certain information,” he said.


Britain refusing asylum to Eritreans on back of discredited report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/10/britain-refusing-asylum-eritreans-discredited-report>
Despite these allegations, the report was picked up by a number of European 
nations, including the UK. Britain sent its own officials to Asmara who 
returned with similar conclusions.


In March 2015 the UK’s position dramatically changed after the Home Office 
published updated country guidance suggesting a marked improvement in Eritrea’s 
human rights. The acceptance rate for Eritrean refugees plummeted from 84% in 
2014 to 44% in 2015. However, the courtsreportedly overturned 92% 
<http://www.politics.co.uk/comment-analysis/2016/04/11/deported-to-persecution-the-home-office-s-eritrean-programme>
 of the cases they heard.

The EU is now attempting to deal with Eritrea as part of a wider African 
initiative to end refugee flows. In 2015 EU leaders met their African 
counterparts in Malta. The action plan they adopted detailed how Europe would 
co-operate with African nations to fight “irregular migration, migrant 
smuggling and trafficking in human beings”.


This was reinforced last year by the announcement of a possible €200m aid deal 
 for Eritrea <https://www.ft.com/content/4bdf3a4a-5d2f-11e5-a28b-50226830d644>. 
A consensus had developed in European foreign ministries that the country was 
about to abandon one of the main driver of refugees: indefinite conscription. 
It was an illusion that would soon be shattered.


In February Reuters published a report 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/us-eritrea-politics-insight-idUKKCN0VY0M5> 
quoting unnamed EU diplomats who accused Eritrea of “back-tracking on privately 
made commitments by some officials last year to fix national service at 18 
months”. Afwerki had done what he has done so often in the past: allowed his 
officials to give assurances to gain international leverage, only to pull the 
rug from under them at the last moment.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Feu-leaders-want-new-beginning-eritrea-wont-bear-fruit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff11604219d1f6d9db273479573691c53af5a4395%2F19_0_3462_2077%2F3462.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20do%20EU%20leaders%20still%20think%20they%20can%20engage%20with%20Eritrea's%20regime%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Feu-leaders-want-new-beginning-eritrea-wont-bear-fruit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20do%20EU%20leaders%20still%20think%20they%20can%20engage%20with%20Eritrea%27s%20regime%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Feu-leaders-want-new-beginning-eritrea-wont-bear-fruit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff11604219d1f6d9db273479573691c53af5a4395%2F19_0_3462_2077%2F3462.jpg>
 Eritrea’s capital, Asmara. Photograph: Thomas Mukoya/Reuters 
In May, Der Spiegel reported that Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> was leading the way in reducing 
refugee flows from Eritrea. The magazine said that the European commission had 
warned that “under no circumstances” should the public learn what was being 
discussed.


Under the heading “risks and assumptions”, an assessment drawn up by EU 
officials listed “provision of equipment and trainings [sic] to sensitive 
national authorities (such as security services or border management) diverted 
for repressive aims; criticism by NGOs and civil society for engaging with 
repressive governments on migration (particularly in Eritrea and Sudan)”.

It is apparent that European officials – pressed by politicians to reduce 
migration – have learned little from their failures. Although they have 
acknowledged that attempts to engage with the Eritrean regime are ineffective, 
they see no alternative but to deal with the regime.

This is an edited extract from Martin Plaut’s new book, Understanding Eritrea: 
Inside Africa’s Most Repressive State, published by Hurst Publishers
 