
The National Audit Office (NAO), fulfilling its invaluable role as the voters’ 
official fact checker,reports today 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/30/no-evidence-welfare-sanctions-work-says-national-audit-office>
 that – surprise – government policy isonce again evidence-lite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/may/31/ministers-misuse-statistics-resign>
. This time the policy in question isbenefits sanctions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/mar/24/benefit-sanctions-trivial-breaches-and-administrative-errors>
, which has caused so much misery in the past five years. No one, it turns out, 
actually measures whether the government gets value for money from sanctioning 
benefit claimants if, for example, they miss an interview at the jobcentre, nor 
even whether sanctions actually do what they are supposed to do and improve 
attendance rates at jobcentres.

No evidence welfare sanctions work, says National Audit Office
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/30/no-evidence-welfare-sanctions-work-says-national-audit-office>
Although there are “studies”, the report suggests no one monitors who gets 
sanctioned where; no one has apparently tried to explain why sanction rates 
vary so much from year to year or from place to place. Yet in 2013, the number 
of sanctions imposed on benefits claimantsexceeded the number of fines 
<https://www.crimeandjustice.org.uk/resources/benefit-sanctions-britains-secret-penal-system>
 imposed by magistrates’ and sheriffs’ courts – more than 1.1m benefits 
sanctions against about 840,000 court fines. The sanctions system is, in 
effect, operating as a parallel punishment system, judged in secret by 
officials. It’s not that there is no appeal – there is, and they are often 
successful, but they take time and in the interim the person who has been 
sanctioned may literally end up going hungry.

The Trussell Trust, one of the main providers of food banks, has long 
suspected an association between demand for food parcels and sanctions – which 
can cost an adult over 25 as much as £300 a month, and last for up to three 
years – and in October an Oxford University studyestablished a clear correlation
 
<https://www.trusselltrust.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2016/10/University-of-Oxford-foodbanks-sanctions.pdf>
. In the first stage of a 16-month review, examining 259 local authorities and 
food bank use between 2012 and 2015, the researchers found that as the stricter 
sanctions regime came in three years ago, so food bank use peaked.

Back to the NAO report 
<https://www.nao.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/Benefit-sanctions.pdf>. Its 
figures show that last year, the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) spent 
anything up to £85m administering sanctions (70,000 sanctions were appealed 
against last year) and providing hardship payments for people who had been 
sanctioned. The savings, in payments not made, were something about £130m. In 
other words, for savings in the region of £50m, 400,000 people were sanctioned 
(and twice that number experienced the nightmare of referral for a sanction 
decision), about 10% of whom will have had to rely on a food bank.

Benefits sanctions: a policy based on zeal, not evidence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/30/benefits-sanctions-a-policy-based-on-zeal-not-evidence>
The sanctions policy is not supposed to be about saving money but, in the 
language of the DWP, about changing behaviours. The whole policy relies on the 
assumption that there is a significant number of claimants who won’t work 
without a big stick behind them. Yet international studies suggest that 
although people who have been sanctioned appear to find jobs more often than 
those who are not, these jobs are low paid and often short term. When this 
employment ends, people fall off the work-radar altogether.

It would be wrong to suggest the DWP has not tried to answer some of the 
criticisms of its sanctions policy, but as the NAO points out, changes such as 
giving more autonomy to individuals at jobcentres to tailor conditions that 
might incur sanctions also leads to inconsistency. A claimant might be 
sanctioned in one area and not in another. There is inconsistency between the 
approach of work providers too. That might be a lesser disadvantage than a 
rigid and inflexible approach, but unless someone’s watching to see how it 
works, who is to know?

It is not only individual claimants who suffer from what can be a harsh and 
arbitrary system. As politicians compete to sound tough, they have successfully 
undermined the whole idea of social welfare. The latest British Social 
Attitudes survey confirmedthe long-term decline in support for welfare spending 
<http://www.bsa.natcen.ac.uk/latest-report/british-social-attitudes-32/welfare.aspx>
 which has fallen from 67% in the last year of Margaret Thatcher’s government 
to 27% in the last year of the Labour government; and although it’s recovered a 
little, not even a majority of Labour voters says they would back higher 
spending.

Are you Daniel Blake? Here’s a guide to using our nightmarish benefits system 
| Matthew Ahluwalia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/18/daniel-blake-guide-benefits-system-welfare-claimants>
Theresa May rightly recognises the anger that corporate greed provokes. She 
appreciates, she says, the struggle of thejust about managing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/02/theresa-may-brexit-conservatives-economy>
. But it is those families who have to rely for a month or two or a year or two 
on the state to get by who have really borne the brunt of austerity.

And at the core of the earthquake in traditional political alignments lies the 
catastrophic loss of national empathy. It played its part in Brexit. Rebuilding 
it will take more than yesterday’s feeble proposals to cap executive pay. How 
about making policy less on rhetoric and more on evidence, and starting to 
restore the case for a welfare state that makes national wellbeing the 
responsibility of us all?
 