
Brian Krebs is one of the unsung heroes of tech journalism 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brian_Krebs>. He’s a former reporter for the 
Washington Postwho decided to focus on cybercrime after his home network was 
hijacked by Chinese hackers in 2001. Since then, he has become one of the 
world’s foremost investigators of online crime. In the process, he has become 
an expert on the activities of the cybercrime groups that operate in eastern 
Europe and which have stolen millions of dollars from small- to medium-size 
businesses through online banking fraud. His reporting has identified the 
crooks behind specific scams and even led to the arrest of some of them.

Krebs runs a blog – Krebs on Security <http://krebsonsecurity.com/> – which is 
a must-read for anyone interested in these matters. Sometimes, one fears for 
his safety, because he must have accumulated so many enemies in the dark 
underbelly of the net. And last Tuesday one of them struck back.

The attack began at 8pm US eastern time, when his site was suddenly hit by a 
distributed denial of service 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Denial-of-service_attack>(DDoS) attack. This is 
a digital assault in which a computer server is swamped by trivial requests 
that make it impossible to serve legitimate ones. The attack is called a 
distributed one because the noxious pings come not from one location, but from 
computers located all over the world that have earlier been hacked and 
organised into a “botnet”, which can then direct thousands or millions of 
requests at a targeted server in order to bring it down. Think of it as a 
gigantic swarm of electronic hornets overwhelming a wildebeest.

DDoS attacks are a routine weapon in the cybercriminal’s armoury. They are 
regularly used, for example, to blackmail companies, which then pay a ransom to 
have the hornets called off. They’re a useful tool because it’s very difficult 
to pinpoint the individuals or groups that have assembled a particular botnet 
army. And in the past Krebs has had to deal with DDoS attacks that were 
probably launched by people who were not amused by the accuracy of his 
investigative reporting.

Last Tuesday’s attack was different, however – in two respects. The first was 
its sheer scale. It got so bad that evenAkamai 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Akamai_Technologies>, the huge content delivery 
network that handles 15-30% of all web traffic, had to tell Krebs that it 
couldn’t continue to carry his blog because the attack was beginning to affect 
all its other customers. So he asked them to redirect all traffic heading for 
krebsonsecurity.com to the internet’s equivalent of a black hole. This meant 
that his site effectively disappeared from the web: a courageous and 
independent voice had been silenced.

GCHQ’s plan for a Great British Firewall creates a dangerous norm | Heather 
Brooke
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/15/gchq-great-british-firewall-creates-dangerous-norm-government-controls-information>
The attack that did this damage was distinctive in another – more disturbing – 
respect. Up to now, most botnets have been assembled by constantly roaming the 
internet probing for PCs that are unprotected. When a vulnerable machine is 
discovered, it is infected with malware that lies there undetected, awaiting 
the command to start pinging the site that has been chosen for an attack. For 
the more sophisticated cybercriminal, though, this way of doing things is 
beginning to look obsolete. The PC market has peaked, so zombie machines will 
become rarer and existing PCs tend to be better managed and protected from 
intrusion than they used to be. We are getting to the point, in other words, 
where PC-based botnets aresooo yesterday.

So where is the smart online criminal going to go next? Obligingly, the tech 
industry has provided him with the capability to assemble even bigger botnets 
with much less effort. The new magic ingredient is the internet of things – 
small, networked devices that are wide open to penetration. The significance of 
the attack on Krebs is that it looks as though many of the attacks on him came 
from large numbers of enslaved devices – routers, cameras, networked TVs and 
the like. “Someone has a botnet with capabilities we haven’t seen before,” says
Martin McKeay 
<https://krebsonsecurity.com/2016/09/krebsonsecurity-hit-with-record-ddos/>, 
Akamai’s senior security expert. The DDoS arms race has just moved up a gear.

Meanwhile, Krebs is back online, courtesy of Project Shield 
<https://jigsaw.google.com/projects/#project-shield>, a free facility run by 
Google to help protect journalists from online censorship. Which is great, but 
also sobering, because it shows that the only organisations that have the 
resources to resist the kinds of DDoS attacks that silenced Krebs are the 
industrial leviathans that now dominate the internet. Come back, Thomas Hobbes, 
all is forgiven.
 