
For people of a certain age, there’s nothing like an old Ladybird book to take 
you back in time. Whether it’s King Alfred in battle, Peter and Jane grooming 
Pat the dog, or a bunch of shiny happy children at a birthday party, for many 
of us, there’s a Ladybird picture to stir up our childhood selves, along with a 
swell of nostalgia for that sure, safe world of endless summer.

The Ladybird logo was registered in 1915 and the centenary is to be marked 
this summer by an exhibition of original Ladybird illustrations at theHouse of 
Illustration <http://www.houseofillustration.org.uk/> in King’s Cross, central 
London. Lawrence Zeegen, professor of illustration at University of the Arts 
London, has been instrumental in pulling it together, having first produced the 
centenary bookLadybird by Design 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/ladybird-by-design.html>.

“When you view the artwork in the flesh, the quality of craftsmanship is 
amazing,” says Zeegen. “You can look at a Ladybird image, come back the next 
day, and the next, and still see something new – it’s the level of detail, the 
perfectly captured moment. The iconic Ladybird world we remember probably 
stretched from the 50s through to the 70s. By the 80s, when Britain was 
changing and Ladybird wasn’t changing at the same pace, there was a feeling 
that those books were naive and a bit naff. Now, we can re-evaluate. Ladybirds 
were the first children’s books designed entirely with the child in mind.”

The Ladybird format never changed – 56 pocket-sized pages, text on the left 
(with age-appropriate language, font and spacing) and, crucially, a full-page 
colour illustration on the right, always carefully designed to hold the gaze of 
a child.

“Until then, children’s books typically had a colour illustration on the cover 
and the odd black and white drawing inside,” says Zeegen. “It was partly 
production costs, but also that no one had stopped to think about what children 
wanted. Ladybird was the first to see through a child’s eyes.”

The key person here was Douglas Keen, who joined the company in 1936 as a 
salesman before leaving to serve in the second world war. At this point, 
Ladybird was a sideline produced by a Loughborough publishing company, Wills & 
Hepworth, better known for its glossy motoring brochures. Paper shortages and 
government rationing of all literature except children’s books led them to 
create the Ladybird imprint: pocket-sized books (usually about fluffy woodland 
creatures) made from one sheet of paper folded in a particular way.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fwhy-we-love-the-ladybird-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F30%2F1435679370073%2Ffed16b29-a519-46e7-aeb1-96fec9cbd0a7-711x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20we%20love%20the%20Ladybird%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fwhy-we-love-the-ladybird-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20we%20love%20the%20Ladybird%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fwhy-we-love-the-ladybird-books%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F30%2F1435679370073%2Ffed16b29-a519-46e7-aeb1-96fec9cbd0a7-711x1020.jpeg>
 Douglas Keen transformed Ladybird – by his retirement in 1973 the imprint was 
selling 20m books a year. Photograph: © Douglas Keen family archive 
Keen was a socialist from a modest, single-parent background. Committed to the 
education of all children, when he rejoined the firm after the war, he set 
about transforming Ladybird. He investigated themes of astonishing breadth and 
depth, finding writers and educationists, and commissioning artists. He became 
company director in 1957 and by his retirement in 1973, Ladybird sales averaged 
20m a year.

Keen’s wife and mother-in-law were trained artists. Perhaps this, together 
with his early experience in advertising and sales, made him acutely aware of 
the power of pictures. “This was the golden era for illustration,” says Zeegen. 
“The cost of reproducing photography meant that most magazines, catalogues and 
ad campaigns were illustrated.”

The best artists were extremely technically accomplished, able to create 
pictures that, for children especially, seemed utterly true. Despite the 
enormous number of series – from Historical to How it Works and Hobbies and 
Interests to Prayers and Hymns – Ladybird’s distinctive look was created by a 
relatively small number of artists. Keen used only the best, providing some 20 
or 25 artists with hundreds of commissions and years of work. If an artist was 
given a book to illustrate – that’s 24 pictures – he was usually given the 
whole series and maybe more after that. “The key Ladybird artists were British 
men who had lived through the war and were in middle age,” says Zeegen. “They 
included war artists, portrait artists, comic illustrators. The country had 
been bombed to smithereens but there was optimism, a positivity about Britain’s 
future which shows in the images.”

As Keen worked from home, many artists would arrive for meetings, stay for 
lunch and become close family friends. Keen’s two daughters, Caroline and 
Jenny, were sometimes used as models. Jenny’s wedding featured in In a Hotel 
from the People at Work series. Caroline is the girl stripping batteries in 
Junior Science and also kneeling by her bed in The Lord’s Prayer.

“The consistency running through the images is partly because my father was 
the only one making the main conceptual and creative decisions,” says Jenny.

“He didn’t consider highly stylised, vague, imaginative or fanciful 
illustration appropriate, even for fiction like the fairytale series, 
Well-Loved Tales.”

The best Ladybird illustrations ever!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2015/mar/10/the-best-ladybird-illustrations-ever-sophy-henn>
According to Caroline, her father’s skill was choosing the right artist for 
the job. John Kenney, who illustrated many historical titles such as King 
Alfred the Great, had served in the war and recorded the D-Day landings with 
drawings on the spot, images that clearly informed his Ladybird work. Charles 
Tunnicliffe, the renowned artist who specialised in birds and natural history 
(and had been made famous by his wood engravings for Tarka the Otter), 
illustrated Ladybird’s The Farm, and Nature series What to Look For.

“The People At Work series was illustrated by John Berry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jan/22/john-berry-obituary>, the 
portrait artist who later painted Princess Diana,” says Caroline. “I don’t 
think children’s literature had given credit to ordinary working people before 
– a postman, a miner, a builder. John Berry’s perfect realism and focus brought 
those people to life.”

Martin Aitchison, now 95, illustrated more than 100 Ladybirds between 1963 and 
1987, including the Key Word series – the Peter and Jane books, which he 
largely shared with artist Harry Wingfield.

“After 10 years illustrating the Luck of the Legion strip for Eagle comic, the 
Eagle went bust so I was suddenly out of work,” Aitchison recalls. “My father 
met Douglas Keen at art classes in Stratford where they both lived and he 
mentioned me to Douglas.”

Some say Ladybird created a utopian, squeaky clean world where the sky was 
always blue, but Aitchison says: “I just illustrated the script, set in 
everyday life around me – north London suburbia in my case. “If the sky was 
always blue, it was probably because we waited for a fine day to take reference 
photos. After years of illustrating the French Foreign Legion going into 
battle, drawing children eating ice-cream took a little getting used to!”

• Ladybird by Design is at the House of Illustration, King’s Cross, London 
from 10 July to 17 September,houseofillustration.org.uk 
<http://www.houseofillustration.org.uk/>

The boy in The Party: ‘That was was my sixth birthday party in 1959’

The Party, published in 1960, was part of the Learning to Read series. Harry 
Wingfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/mar/23/guardianobituaries.booksobituaries>
, the illustrator, used his nephew Andy Dickens as the model. Now a musician, 
Dickens lives near Winchester.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fwhy-we-love-the-ladybird-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F30%2F1435683665439%2Ffdf99327-a388-4a9b-ac50-96527d7d8bdb-1335x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20we%20love%20the%20Ladybird%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fwhy-we-love-the-ladybird-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20we%20love%20the%20Ladybird%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fwhy-we-love-the-ladybird-books%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F30%2F1435683665439%2Ffdf99327-a388-4a9b-ac50-96527d7d8bdb-1335x2040.jpeg>
 The Party, published in 1960 by Ladybird. 
“That was my sixth birthday party – March 1959. Those pictures weren’t staged. 
I know the names of every one of those children. Harry came along beforehand 
and took photos and sketched as it happened. To be honest, I was unaware of his 
presence. As far as I know, there wasn’t a single child there who knew they 
were in that book. Harry did make some changes – he made it look as if I was 
going to the party when actually it took place in our home in Solihull. I also 
don’t recognise the girl who’s my sister – I used to tell my real sister she 
must have been too ugly to be included!

Harry was my uncle, married to Ethel, my dad’s sister. He had a pronounced 
stammer but spoke with his eyes, his smile and his pictures. His work showed 
how he saw the world, the detail and intensity with which he saw it. I can’t 
tell you how faithful they are – the candlewick cover on my parent’s bed, the 
pictures on the wall, the bookcase my dad built. I was horrified by the picture 
of me getting dressed in my room – I certainly didn’t want to take my trousers 
off – but the realism is incredible. That clock and the aluminium torch were 
very much part of my childhood.

I was also the boy in the Junior Science books. Harry would come round and set 
up experiments. It was fun, I enjoyed them. I didn’t meet the girl model until 
recently – Douglas Keen’s daughter – as Harry did them separately. I had the 
books on my bookshelf but didn’t spend much time thinking about it. There was 
no “wow factor”. The adults around at that time – some had been fighter pilots, 
some had commandeered U-boats. There was a general acceptance that people did 
what they did and we were equally respectful of the milkman.

Did we really dress like that? Yes! I had that red tie until recently and the 
little camel coat haunted me for years. Even then, I had a suspicion it wasn’t 
cool. We were a very valued generation. My father was very working class – he 
left school at 14 – but there was a great optimism for us, because of 
education, because of the possibilities. Birthday parties really were simple, 
happy occasions. In Harry’s obituaries, it was said that he created a fantasy 
world. No he didn’t. That was my world – and a very, very real childhood.”

House of Illustration is holding a private view of Ladybird by Design on 
Tuesday 14 July, exclusively for Guardian Members. Book your tickets at
membership.theguardian.com 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/guardian-local-ladybird-by-design-private-view-and-curator-talk-17368824622>

• This article was amended on 4 July 2015 to correct spelling errors in the 
names of Lawrence Zeegen and John Kenney. It was further amended on 6 July 2015 
to correct the attribution of quotes from Douglas Keen’s daughters.
 