
Wave after wave of elephant slaughter, driven first by European and US ivory 
collectors and more recently by demand in Asia, has brought the African 
elephant to its knees. Acatastrophic decline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/31/poaching-drives-huge-30-decline-in-africas-savannah-elephants>
 in the past decade is primarily due to poaching to feed a continuing passion 
for ivory.

The poachers are mainly Africans, but their clients are often criminal gangs 
based in Asia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/12/large-ivory-seizures-in-singapore-make-it-a-smuggling-hub-of-primary-concern>
 who smuggle the tusks on planes and ships to countries where demand for ivory 
continues to grow. The largest of these is China.

《卫报》为何要用中文报道大象的生存危机？
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/09/why-the-guardian-is-publishing-its-elephant-reporting-in-chinese-language>
Over the coming year, the Guardian will be reporting at length 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/12/why-the-guardian-is-spending-a-year-reporting-on-the-plight-of-the-worlds-elephant-population>
 on efforts to arrest the decline of this unique and sensitive animal. In 
recognition of the fact that the elephant will not be saved without the support 
of Chinese consumers and the Chinese authorities, we have teamed up with
chinadialogue <https://www.chinadialogue.net/> to bring this year of in-depth 
reporting, expert opinion and features to consumers and readers in China.

With its 10-year record of sharing environmental concerns with Chinese 
readers, chinadialogue recognises that we have reached a critical moment in the 
story of the elephant, one that will determine its fate for ever. We hope that 
readers inChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> and around the world 
will share our concern and understand that we must act before it is too late.

Our partnership begins with an explanation of the major conservation issues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/08/why-the-guardian-is-publishing-its-elephant-reporting-in-chinese>
 for not only African elephants, but their Asian cousins. This will be followed 
in the coming days with the translation of amoving feature from Kenya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/01/frontline-bloody-battle-save-africa-elephants>
, one of the major battlegrounds for the survival of the elephant. John 
Scanlon, secretary-general of the UN Convention on International Trade in 
Endangered Species, will also givean overview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/30/7-billion-people-how-protect-wildlife-endangered-species>
 of two global meetings this month that could have a major impact on the future 
of the elephant.

事实上，大象已经濒临灭绝
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/09/elephants-on-the-path-to-extinction-the-facts-chinese-language>
Ivory consumers are a minority in China 
<http://news.nationalgeographic.com/2015/08/150812-elephant-ivory-demand-wildlife-trafficking-china-world/>
 and around the world, and awareness and concern over the problem of poachingis 
growing 
<http://wildaid.org/sites/default/files/resources/Print_Ivory%20Report_Final_v3.pdf>
. The government has committed to ending all ivory trading bothoutside 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/26/china-and-us-agree-on-ivory-ban-in-bid-to-end-illegal-trade-globally>
 andinside 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/may/29/china-agrees-to-phase-out-its-ivory-industry-to-combat-elephant-poaching>
 its borders. Together the Guardian and chinadialogue hope that respectful 
dialogue will alert Chinese and English readers alike to the wonder and 
fragility of the elephants.

Isabel Hilton is the CEO of chinadialogue. Karl Mathiesen is commissioning 
editor for theGuardian’s elephant conservation project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/series/elephant-conservation>.
 