
Businesses are buying more wind and solar electricity than ever before to help 
lower their carbon footprint in offices, stores and factories. But the two 
sources of renewable energy are far from getting equal love from corporate 
America.

Wind energy has long been the favorite. Businesses, not counting power 
companies, signed 2,000 megawatts of it in 2015 
<http://www.awea.org/MediaCenter/pressrelease.aspx?ItemNumber=8711>, a jump 
from 100 megawatts in 2009, according to the American Wind Energy Association. 
Wind energy is enabling Google, the largest corporate buyer of renewable 
electricity in the world, to hit the100% renewable energy goal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/dec/06/google-renewable-energy-target-solar-wind-power>
, which it expects to achieve next year. The company has inked 2,548 megawatts 
of wind contracts and 141 megawatts of solar from projects around the world.

A good job if you can get it: America's solar workforce is heating up
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jul/02/america-solar-power-workforce-growing-market-solarcity-suniva>
Interest in solar energy is growing, but at a slower rate. Solar contracts 
shot up to 1,070 megawatts in 2015 from 339 megawatts in 2010, said the Solar
Energy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> Industries Association.

Wind energy has historically been much cheaper than solar, making it a more 
attractive option, especially when energy can be a major expense for a company. 
As more businesses come under pressure from their customers, investors or 
government regulators to cut their greenhouse gas emissions and help rein in 
global warming, they will be looking for low-carbon energy that can compete 
with the price of coal and natural gas.

Wind and solar are not the only sources of electricity with lower carbon 
footprints than coal and natural gas. Hydropower and nuclear are too, and, 
unlike solar and wind, are able to produce electricity any time. But hydropower 
plants require access to ample sources of surface water. A nuclear power plant 
can take longer to secure permits and cost more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/sep/12/carbon-free-plants-nuclear-energy-future-power-state-sources>
than building other types of power plants.

“Corporate participation (in buying solar and wind) is still relatively new,” 
said Brian Janous, director of energy strategy at Microsoft, which recently 
announced thebiggest wind energy contract 
<https://news.microsoft.com/2016/11/14/microsoft-announces-largest-wind-energy-purchase-to-date>
, at 178 megawatts, in its renewable energy portfolio. “It’s only within the 
last few years that we’ve seen an uptick, and we’ve yet to fully address the 
challenges in expanding this market.”
Top 10 American corporate wind energy buyers 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/12/hydropower-plants/> 
A head start

America pioneered 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wind_power_in_the_United_States> early research 
and development of commercial turbines, installing the world’s first wind farm 
in 1980 and leading the amount of installations, in megawatts, until the late 
1990s, when Germany and eventually China began to catch up and then slowly push 
ahead. Solar hasn’t experienced the same long term and consistent investments 
and construction, which help to lower cost.

Wind power costs cratered 66%  
<http://www.aweablog.org/the-truth-about-wind-power/>in the last six years, 
said the American Wind Energy Association. The lowest price for a wind contract 
is around $0.02 per kilowatt-hour while it’s $0.03 for solar, said Ryan Wiser, 
a renewable energy market researcher at the Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory, part of the US Department of Energy. That minor difference in price 
can add up to a hefty bill for heavy users of electricity, such as data centers 
that require an around-the-clock electricity supply.

More than half of the 4,000 megawatts of new wind energy contracts last year, 
and 3,440 megawatts this year, were signed by companies across industries from 
tech to grocery chains, according to the wind trade association and the Rocky 
Mountain Institute.Utilities <https://www.theguardian.com/business/utilities> 
bought the rest.

Amazon, for example, has invested more in wind and solar in the past two 
years. It’s paying for power from a 150-megawatt wind farm in Indiana and 
waiting for a 208-megawatt wind project in North Carolina to come online soon. 
It’s also signed agreements for several hundred megawatts of new wind energy 
that are scheduled to start delivery in 2017.

Amazon, Microsoft, Google, Dow Chemical and 3M are buying five times more wind 
than solar 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-11-17/clean-power-is-too-hot-for-even-trump-to-cool>
, said Bloomberg New Energy Finance.

Why solar is playing catch-up

Solar has become an increasingly attractive option following a massive 
construction of factories to build solar panels, mostly notably in China. 
Prices for solar contracts have dived 63% over the last five years, said the 
solar trade association.
Cumulative corporate wind energy buyers from America 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/12/clean-energy-buyers/> 
In the 2016 ranking of top corporate solar energy buyers 
<http://www.seia.org/campaign/solar-means-business-2016>, Target gets the top 
spot with 147.5 megawatts of installed capacity, according to the solar trade 
association. The retailer is followed by industrial real estate developer 
Prologis (107.8 megawatts), Apple (93.9 megawatts), Costco (50.7 megawatts) and 
Kohl’s (50.2 megawatts).

Businesses looking to sign renewable energy contracts or even develop their 
own solar or wind projects often find themselves on a steep learning curve 
about borrowing money, structuring contracts and understanding the complex 
rules that govern the electric industry. Getting rid of these road blocks will 
encourage more companies to lower their use of fossil fuel energy, business 
leaders said.

For a company that operates in many states or even countries, figuring out a 
way to standardize renewable energy contracts helps it to save money and time, 
Janous said.

“How do we make deals more attainable for not just Microsoft but smaller 
companies? There has to be some simplification,” he added.

In cities where the local power companies don’t offer much, if any, wind or 
solar energy for sale, businesses could install their own solar panels or wind 
turbines on their properties. The cost of this do-it-yourself model has 
historically been higher than paying for electricity supplied by the local 
utilities, noted Herve Touati, managing director of Rocky Mountain Institute’s 
Business Renewable Center. But that cost is coming down and, in some cases, 
lower than the electricity from the grid.

Here comes the sun: US solar power market hits all-time high
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jun/28/solar-power-energy-us-utilities-environment-climate-change>
“It’s cheaper for Microsoft to use onsite generation than ask utilities to 
double their existing grids,” Touati said.

Companies with renewable energy contracts or a stake in a solar or wind farm 
typically don’t use that low-carbon electricity directly – electricity from 
power plants of all types usually enters the transmission lines and gets mixed 
up. As a result, businesses would count the amount of solar or wind they pay 
for against their overall electricity use to calculate their carbon footprint 
reduction.

Despite uncertainties about the impact of a Trump administration on renewable 
energy –the president-elect has criticized regulations that pressure businesses 
to address climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/12/donald-trump-climate-change-energy-environment>
 – businesses and market analysts said the prices for renewable energy have 
fallen steep enough to make them a more feasible option.

“Certainly, there are many policy questions yet to be answered, but I don’t 
see the US election having a significant impact on our commitments,” Janous 
said.

 * The article was amended on 27 December 2016. The charts on wind energy 
contracts signed by top corporate buyers showed data in gigawatts when they 
should be in megawatts.  