
When you’re staring at a tricky corner of a grid, wondering which toxic 
mushroom has a name which anagrams to “iron cups”, you might wonder about the 
point of crosswords.

Happily, a “Baltimore prepper examiner”, one Daniel Vale, has compiled a handy 
manual titledCrossword Puzzles Provide Stealth Training For Prepper Family 
Members 
<http://www.examiner.com/article/crossword-puzzles-provide-stealth-training-for-prepper-family-members>
 (“prepper” being an alternative name for survivalist).

Yes, if you and your family are not ignoring the impending societal cataclysm, 
crosswords are a crucial component of your survival preparation. For a start, 
insists Vale:

An adequate vocabulary helps to effectively maintain critical oral and written 
communications with other family members during emergencies.

What preppers and survivalists tell us about America's apocalyptic readiness
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/10/preppers-survivalists-survivalcon-expo-nuclear-bomb-republicans-mormons>
The last thing you want to growl at your son as he returns to the cave is: 
“No, no, no: I asked you tovaccinate Grandpa and eviscerate the hare. Now we 
have no Varivax, but on the bright side I suppose we’ll have a thicker stew.”


Crosswords also, we learn, instil invaluable persistence. Vale notes that when 
solvers leave a puzzle for a while, they find that when they return, their 
unconscious has solved the clues:


What seems like an overwhelming challenge at first, eventually becomes more 
and more doable.

In just the same way, you will find yourself wondering exactly how many 
sharpened sticks 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1477501/pdf/annsurg00444-0042.pdf> 
are enough for the mantrap you’ve dug to protect the pair of trousers stuffed 
with stones and charcoal which you’re hoping will part-purify the scant 
post-apocalyptic water supply.


The answer, of course, is: there are never enough sharpened sticks. So, once 
your wrist is numbed, remember the lesson you’ve learned from crosswords, take 
a short break, then get right back to your whittling.


Meet the preppers: inside the UK's only one-stop apocalypse shop
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/30/inside-the-uks-only-one-stop-apocalypse-shop>
And of course, you absolutely should not stop solving once society has 
crumpled. Crosswords need no batteries and can be enjoyed in the flickering 
light of a distant arson fire. As Vale observes:

A crossword puzzle book will take up very little space in a bug-out bag.

That puzzle book is not just a form of training: it may provide a welcome and 
entertaining distraction. Rather than finishing the day by listening to 
snatches of short-wave radio accounts of poets being hanged in football stadia, 
you can choose to re-solve one of those puzzles you’ve stashed and hope that 
some of your dreams are of innocent wordplay rather than of the appalling hum 
of the mob.

At the risk of resembling advertorial, then, remember to supplement your 
blood-clotting powder, duct tape and catapult with the very best of the 
Guardian’s setters. You can buya collection of 1,200 Quicks at a discount 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/363542/s/guardian-quick-crosswords-books-1-8/>
 – or perhaps that’s better expressed: can you afford not to?

 