
It is not just Google that gets asked why hedgehogs have declined 
<https://www.google.co.uk/webhp?sourceid=chrome-instant&ion=1&espv=2&ie=UTF-8#q=why%20have%20hedgehogs%20declined>
. In fact, over the past 10 years I have increasingly been quizzed on “where 
have all the hedgehogs gone” by the audiences of my lectures around the country.

Initially I wondered whether this was more an indication of the age of the 
crowd. Many were Women’s Institute groups and often the youngsters were in 
their 60s. Perhaps this was a nostalgic thing – harking back to a time when 
food tasted nicer, teenagers were politer, and there were more hedgehogs.

Hedgehogs continue to disappear from British gardens, wildlife survey shows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/14/hedgehogs-continue-to-disappear-from-british-gardens-wildlife-survey-shows>
But their anecdotes were spot on. As the survey work of thousands of citizen 
scientists was pulled together for the 2011state of Britain’s hedgehogs report 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwjTot-oi4zPAhVBKcAKHacQAkEQFggeMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.britishhedgehogs.org.uk%2Fleaflets%2Fsobh.pdf&usg=AFQjCNGgZPSQ3oXyc8Pmj3MPr2ijvo5iTQ&sig2=haNw97u5tj00AbA0qQwJSQ>
, published by the partnership of theBritish Hedgehog Preservation Society 
(BHPS) <http://www.britishhedgehogs.org.uk/> and the People’s Trust for 
Endangered Species (PTES) <https://ptes.org/>, the truth took shape.

Back then they were able to say that, conservatively, there had been a 25% 
decline in the previous 10 years. In the most recent update, in 2015, themore 
robust figures 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwjTot-oi4zPAhVBKcAKHacQAkEQFggkMAE&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.britishhedgehogs.org.uk%2Fpdf%2FSoBH_2015.pdf&usg=AFQjCNE22o-E_ewKvCXZ0CLWp7rAI3uldg&sig2=ZizK6JQFCGS0Dy8vDApmJA>
 reveal that there has been a decline in urban hedgehogs of about a third since 
the turn of the century and by up to three-quarters in the countryside.

These are dramatic and worrying figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/jan/29/hedgehog-population-dramatic-decline>
. They do not, as some have suggested, mean we are going to see the extinction 
of the hedgehog in thenext 10 years 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/tv/tv-news/hedgehogs-could-wiped-out-just-5720570>. 
But they do mean we are going to continue seeing fewer of these wonderfully 
charismatic animals unless we start to act.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fwhy-have-hedgehogs-declined-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9375135926e36b091c9bca481ce55c9d1eea96c2%2F0_72_2046_1228%2F2046.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20have%20hedgehogs%20declined%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Hugh%20Warwick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fwhy-have-hedgehogs-declined-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20have%20hedgehogs%20declined%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Hugh%20Warwick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fwhy-have-hedgehogs-declined-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9375135926e36b091c9bca481ce55c9d1eea96c2%2F0_72_2046_1228%2F2046.jpg>
 ‘Hedgehogs have a much-mocked relationship with cars and roads.’ Photograph: 
Kirsty Wigglesworth/PA Photos 
Before we can act we need to know why the decline is happening. This has been 
at the heart of the research work commissioned and funded by the PTES and BHPS.

For urban hedgehogs the problems are fairly obvious, but exacerbated by the 
recently discovered need for them to have a much larger home range that 
expected. A viable population of hedgehogs requires, in the best possible 
habitat (imagine a large park with plenty of interconnected gardens surrounding 
it) at least 90 hectares of unfragmented habitat.

Hedgehogs are disappearing fast – gardeners to the rescue | Patrick Barkham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/may/22/hegehogs-disappearing-fast-need-champions>
This gets to the heart of the hedgehogs’ problem. Their habitat is fragmented 
into pieces that are too small to sustain a population. So hedgehogs will still 
be present, but numbers may be dwindling even as we enjoy their company on a 
balmy evening.

To deal with this Hedgehog Street <http://www.hedgehogstreet.org> was 
launched. Theplan is simple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/may/22/hegehogs-disappearing-fast-need-champions>
: people love having wildlife in their gardens and thrill at the birds, bees, 
bats and butterflies that make use of the ecologically sensitive planting – but 
they forget that not all wildlife has wings. So, we make a hole in the fence 
(talk to your neighbour first of course) and get them to do the same and on to 
the next – spreading hedgehog love along the street.

The success has been a delight, 40,000 households are now signed up. And there 
are bigger projects using the same idea – in Oxford, Stockport, Chester, 
Solihull and Ipswich. People are reaching out beyond just their streets and 
into the wider community.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fwhy-have-hedgehogs-declined-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff07dc7482a89a051f8cd477e4e89d22a6cdedb0d%2F0_279_4496_2698%2F4496.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20have%20hedgehogs%20declined%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Hugh%20Warwick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fwhy-have-hedgehogs-declined-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20have%20hedgehogs%20declined%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Hugh%20Warwick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fwhy-have-hedgehogs-declined-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff07dc7482a89a051f8cd477e4e89d22a6cdedb0d%2F0_279_4496_2698%2F4496.jpg>
 ‘Hedgehogs give us all a chance to getting really close, nose-to-nose, with a 
wild animal.’ Photograph: Richard Bowler/Rex Shutterstock 
Fences are not the only obstacles, of course. Hedgehogs have a much-mocked 
relationship with cars and roads – and it is likely that at least 100,000 are 
killed each year (probably more than 10% of the population). Keeping hedgehogs 
off roads is never going to be easy, better that motorists drive at night with 
a little more care for wildlife.

Our rural hedgehogs have been suffering an even more dramatic population 
decline and here the reasons become a little contentious. There is no escaping 
the fact that where there are more badgers there are fewer hedgehogs. But asI 
have argued before 
<http://www.countryfile.com/blog/hedgehog-decline-are-badgers-blame>, to blame 
badgers for this state of affairs is ecologically illiterate.

Hedgehogs: Sow, Grow, Repeat Autumn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/audio/2015/nov/07/hedgehogs-sow-grow-repeat-gardening-podcast>
Badgers and hedgehogs have coexisted in this country since at least the 
retreat of the last ice sheet some 10,000 years ago. They are species that 
compete for the same food – macroinvertebrates such as worms. What has changed 
in recent years is industrial agriculture and its massive impact on the amount 
of this food in the soil, affecting both hedgehogs and badgers alike. Badgers 
have the advantage in that they can predate hedgehogs. They also create a 
climate of fear, in effect fragmenting the landscape for the hedgehogs as 
effectively as a busy road.

What can we do for rural hedgehogs? Ensure that there is sufficient food and 
shelter for them. They are not called hedgehogs on a whim, they really do hog 
the hedges, and these need to be hedges with enough density to allow them to 
shelter away from badgers. Food will return to the field margins if farmers can 
be encouraged to not strip-mine the life out of the land.

Hedgehog numbers throughout Britain have declined because of us; because of 
the way we use and abuse the land. Yet hedgehogs are an important species to us 
– we regularly vote it asour favourite animal 
<http://www.discoverwildlife.com/british-wildlife/britains-national-species-revealed>
. But I believe their importance runs deeper.

Hedgehogs give us all a chance to getting really close, nose-to-nose, with a 
wild animal. They have no flight or fight response; they roll into a ball when 
bothered. So you can wait, quietly, for them to relax. As they do, you get to 
see their bright beady eyes and just possibly you might open your heart to them 
a little more. Which is good for all wildlife. Hedgehogs are like a gateway 
drug for falling in love with the natural world.
 