
Julian Assange’s internet was cut off by Ecuador, WikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks> has said, deflecting blame from 
the US and British governments, which have sparred with Assange for releasing 
sensitive material.

Ecuador <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ecuador> has reiterated its 
determination to protect Assange despite the internet link of the WikiLeaks 
founder being “intentionally severed”, as WikiLeaks said.

An early morning tweet on Monday accused a “state party” of being responsible 
for shutting down internet access to Assange, who has been living inside the 
Ecuadorian embassy in London for over four years.

The tweet said the group had “activated the appropriate contingency plans”.

WikiLeaks did not immediately release more information about the incident, and 
the tweet attracted a storm of comments and speculation on social media from 
across the world.

These ranged from concerns for the Australian’s health to support for any move 
to stop the activities of the group.

From liberal beacon to a prop for Trump: what has happened to WikiLeaks?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/14/wiileaks-from-liberal-beacon-to-a-prop-for-trump-what-has-happened>
Many felt it was no coincidence that the internet was cut just after WikiLeaks 
had released another batch of emails 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/16/wikileaks-hillary-clinton-wall-street-goldman-sachs-speeches>
 from the campaign manager of the US presidential candidate Hillary Clinton.

The anti-secrecy organisation released three transcripts on Saturday of 
Clinton’s paid Goldman Sachs speeches, which her campaign team had long refused 
to release.

The transcripts show how she bantered with the investment bank’s executives, 
which is likely to fuel fears among liberalDemocrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> that she is too cosy with Wall 
Street.

The Clinton camp has neither confirmed nor denied the leaked emails are 
authentic. There have been no indications they are fake.


It has now been confirmed that neither Clinton’s team nor any political party 
was responsible for Assange losing his internet access.

Assange is wanted for questioning in Sweden over a sex allegation, which he 
denies, but he believes that if he leaves the embassy he will be extradited to 
the US for questioning over the activities of WikiLeaks.

It is not yet known what Ecuador’s motivation was for cutting his Wi-Fi.

A source in the Ecuadorian government told the Press Association: “We don’t 
respond to speculation circulating on Twitter. Ecuador will continue to protect
Julian Assange <https://www.theguardian.com/media/julian-assange> and uphold 
the political asylum granted to him in 2012.”





 