
Hillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> avoided 
direct criticism of Wall Street as she examined the causes and responses to the 
2008 financial crisis during a series of paid speeches to Goldman Sachs, 
according to transcripts released by WikiLeaks.

Clinton senses big victory after Trump's week of self-inflicted defeat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/15/hillary-clinton-donald-trump-presidential-election>
Three transcripts, released Saturday as part of the hack of her campaign 
chairman’s emails, did not contain any damning revelations showing she was 
unduly influenced by contributions from the banking industry,as her Republican 
opponent Donald Trump has said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/10/debate-donald-trump-threatens-to-jail-hillary-clinton>
. Still, her soft-handed approach in the speeches may remind liberals of fears, 
raised by her former Democratic rival Bernie Sanders, that the party’s nominee 
is too close to Wall Street to be an effective check on its excesses if elected.

In October 2013, the transcripts show, Clinton told bankers she had “great 
relations” and worked closely with Wall Street as New York’s senator, and said 
“the jury is still out” on whether the Dodd-Frank financial reforms, enacted 
after the crisis, were appropriate. She said more openness from the start could 
have prevented the uproar on Wall Street over those reforms.

“What happened, how did it happen, how do we prevent it from happening? You 
guys help us figure it out, and let’s make sure that we do it right this time,” 
she told the bankers, according to the transcripts.

Working to relate her speech to her audience, Clinton likened her experience 
as secretary of state to finance, saying: “It’s like anybody’s balance sheet,” 
with both opportunities and potential liabilities. In one exchange, a 
conference participant from Texas told Clinton that she had “the honor to raise 
money for you” during her 2008 presidential campaign.

Clinton responded: “You are the smartest people.” 

In the hard-fought Democratic primary, Sanders repeatedly called on Clinton to 
release the transcripts of her speeches to Wall Street, some of which earned 
her hundreds of thousands of dollars. In an ironic twist, the transcriptsended 
up becoming public 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/wikileaks-hillary-clinton-paid-wall-street-speeches>
 because her campaign aides had distributed them among themselves in an effort 
to prepare for any attacks she might face. Those internal campaign emails were 
then leaked in the hack of campaign chairman John Podesta’s emails.

Clinton’s campaign neither confirmed nor denied that the speech transcripts 
and leaked Podesta emails were authentic. Clinton’s teamhas accused Russia’s 
government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/11/clinton-campaign-wikileaks-hack-russia-donald-trump>
 of hacking Podesta’s emails, and the Obama administration has formally blamed 
Moscow for a series of breaches affecting US political groups.

“There is no getting around it: Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> is cheering on a Russian 
attempt to influence our election through a crime reminiscent of Watergate, but 
on a more massive scale,” said a Clinton spokesman, Glen Caplin.

The transcripts, all from 2013, include speeches and question-and-answer 
sessions with Clinton at a Builders and Innovators Summit, an Alternative 
Investment Management Summit and a gathering of CEOs, all hosted byGoldman Sachs
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/goldmansachs>.

In another speech, Clinton said that after 2010 leak of US diplomatic cables, 
she had to go on an “apology tour” while serving as Barack Obama’s secretary of 
state.

In those cables, US officials and diplomats characterized some foreign leaders 
as “vain, egotistical, power hungry, corrupt. And we knew they were. This was 
not fiction.”

“I had grown men cry,” Clinton recalled. “I mean, literally. ‘I am a friend of 
America, and you say these things about me?’”

Clinton said she apologized to world leaders by saying ambassadors “get 
carried away – they want to all be literary people”.

Lloyd Blankfein, CEO of Goldman Sachs, then told Clinton that she had put on 
“an Italian accent”.

“Have a sense of humor,” Clinton replied.

“And so you said, Silvio,” Blankfein answered, alluding to the then Italian 
prime minister, Silvio Berlusconi.

She praised other leaders, including Chinese president Xi Jinping, who had 
assumed power in the fall of 2012. Clinton described Xi as “a more 
sophisticated, more effective public leader” than his predecessor, Hu Jintao, 
and said that he could “work a room”.

“You can have him make small talk with you, which he has done with me,” she 
said.

Clinton also told bankers that she would have liked to see the US intervene in 
Syria “as covertly as is possible” – and complained about reports to the press.

“We used to be much better at this than we are now,” she said. “Now, you know, 
everybody can’t help themselves. They have to go out and tell their friendly 
reporters and somebody else: look what we’re doing and I want credit for it.”
 