
Wildlife <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/wildlife> is abundant around 
the site of the Chernobyl nuclear plant, despite the presence of radiation 
released by the world’s most catastrophic nuclear explosion nearly three 
decades ago, researchers have found.

The number of elk, deer and wild boar within the Belarusian half of the 
Chernobyl exclusion zone today are around the same as those in four nearby 
uncontaminated nature reserves.

Wolves, which are commonly hunted in the region because of their impact on 
livestock, were seven times as abundant with the zone, according toa study 
published on Monday <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2015.08.017>. 

The findings run counter to previous hypothesises that chronic long-term 
exposure to radiation would hit animal populations.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fwildlife-thriving-around-chernobyl-nuclear-plant-despite-radiation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e30fb2ef91e3cae7cce392c6789cf4b17919aa6%2F0_0_10551_7346%2F10551.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wildlife%20thriving%20around%20Chernobyl%20nuclear%20plant%20despite%20radiation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fwildlife-thriving-around-chernobyl-nuclear-plant-despite-radiation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wildlife%20thriving%20around%20Chernobyl%20nuclear%20plant%20despite%20radiation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fwildlife-thriving-around-chernobyl-nuclear-plant-despite-radiation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e30fb2ef91e3cae7cce392c6789cf4b17919aa6%2F0_0_10551_7346%2F10551.jpg>
 Wolves are seven times as abundant with the exclusion zone as other nearby 
uncontaminated reserves, the study found. Photograph: Valeriy Yurko/University 
of Portsmouth 
“What we do, our everyday habitation of an area – agriculture, forestry – 
they’ve damaged wildlife more than the world’s worst nuclear accident,” said 
Prof Jim Smith, professor of environmental science, University of Portsmouth, 
and one of the paper’s authors.

“It doesn’t say that nuclear accidents aren’t bad, of course they are. But it 
illustrates that the things we do everyday, the human population pressure, 
damages the environment. It’s kind of obvious but it’s an amazing illustration 
of it.”


The explosion of reactor four on 26 April 1986 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/24/chernobyl-arch-faces-265m-funding-gap-ahead-of-disasters-29th-anniversary>
 killed dozens of plant staff and rescue workers, and led to high radiation 
doses in the first weeks and months that had significant effects on animal 
health and reproduction around Chernobyl.

But after analysing previously unpublished animal track records and aerial 
surveys from Belarusian authorities and scientists, the authors of the study, 
which waspublished in the journal Current Biology 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2015.08.017>, found no long-term impact to 
population numbers from the radiation released by the accident.

“Chernobyl caused a lot of human damage. The social and economical problems 
were huge. If you set that aside – if you can set that aside – it’s hard to 
argue that it’s really damaged the ecosystem as a whole,” said Smith.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fwildlife-thriving-around-chernobyl-nuclear-plant-despite-radiation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd50d6f8c71a0b810a15d8b6d5ac3bdb279492920%2F0_0_1653_949%2F1653.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wildlife%20thriving%20around%20Chernobyl%20nuclear%20plant%20despite%20radiation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fwildlife-thriving-around-chernobyl-nuclear-plant-despite-radiation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wildlife%20thriving%20around%20Chernobyl%20nuclear%20plant%20despite%20radiation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fwildlife-thriving-around-chernobyl-nuclear-plant-despite-radiation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd50d6f8c71a0b810a15d8b6d5ac3bdb279492920%2F0_0_1653_949%2F1653.jpg>
 Wild boar in a former village in the exclusion zone. Photograph: Valeriy 
Yurko/University of Portsmouth 
The number of animals was probably lower before the nuclear accident than now, 
because the area was relatively developed, with industry, agriculture and 
hunting. While it was possible that radiation still had some negative effects 
on animals it was not enough to affect their populations, Smith said.

But Anders Pape Møller of the University of Paris-Sud questioned why the data 
had gone unpublished for decades and argued the rebound in populations was 
simply a sign of wildlife doing better acrossEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. 

Chernobyl animal numbers 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/10/chernobyl_animals/giv-31114VL7ijMFNUeld/>
“Big mammals have been increasing for the last decades in most of Europe. So 
Chernobyl is no different. The interesting question is whether the increase in 
Chernobyl is larger than say in Germany, France or Scandinavia,” he told the 
Guardian.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fwildlife-thriving-around-chernobyl-nuclear-plant-despite-radiation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8424edf3ca5e7d307c1310c265f6c40d78c8fb2f%2F0_0_1575_1181%2F1575.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wildlife%20thriving%20around%20Chernobyl%20nuclear%20plant%20despite%20radiation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fwildlife-thriving-around-chernobyl-nuclear-plant-despite-radiation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wildlife%20thriving%20around%20Chernobyl%20nuclear%20plant%20despite%20radiation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fwildlife-thriving-around-chernobyl-nuclear-plant-despite-radiation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8424edf3ca5e7d307c1310c265f6c40d78c8fb2f%2F0_0_1575_1181%2F1575.jpg>
 Baby spotted eagle in Chernobyl exclusion zone. Photograph: Valeriy 
Yurko/University of Portsmouth 
Møller, who has researched the region since 1991 and published papers on the 
negative impact of radiation oninsects 
<http://rsbl.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/5/3/356.short> and birds 
<http://rsbl.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/3/5/483.short> at Chernobyl, 
said there was no reason to expect differences between different types of 
animals.



The researchers analysed a 2,165 sq km (836 sq miles) area of the exclusion 
zone inBelarus <https://www.theguardian.com/world/belarus>, known as Polesie 
State Radioecological Reserve (PSRER), looking at data since 1986 on the 
abundance of elk, roe deer, red deer and wild boar. Species that have been 
sighted or reintroduced to the area since the accident but were not found there 
previously, such as European bison and lynx, were not included.
 