
Wildlife traffickers from a small, sleepy village in Vietnam are using Facebook
 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> to offload large amounts of 
illegal ivory, rhino horn and tiger parts, an investigation has revealed.


The results of an 18-month sting by the Wildlife Justice Commission 
<http://www.wildlifejustice.org/> (WJC) – shared with the Guardian – will be 
presented at a public hearing on 14 and 15 November at the Peace Palace in the 
Hague. They will show how social media sites such as Facebook are allowing 
traders greater access to customers.

“It’s wildlife trafficking on an industrial scale,” said Olivia Swaak-Goldman, 
the executive director of the WJC.

Undercover investigators visited the Vietnamese village of Nhi Khe, known as a 
wildlife trafficking hub, five times in the past year and scoured Facebook and 
WeChat, which is popular in China. In all, they tallied illegal wildlife 
products worth $53.1m (£42.8m) stemming from just 51 traders in the village for 
sale in person and online.

Nhi Khe traders are primarily using Facebook to sell processed ivory products. 
But even whole ivory tusks and tiger bone paste have been sold on the platform.

“Social media provides a shopfront to the world,” Swaak-Goldman said.

Items are being sold in closed or secret groups through auctions, which means 
new buyers or sellers have to be approved before being allowed into the group. 
Once in, traders will use instant messaging to keep in touch with buyers.

Such Facebook groups are also allowing traders to meet a wide array of 
potential new buyers. Payment is usually done via WeChat Wallet.

WJC investigators have found that Facebook is primarily used by traders to 
sell wares locally or across other parts of south-east Asia. In contrast, 
traders use WeChat to sell unprocessed products in bulk to Chinese traders. 
Since Vietnamese traders aren’t able to write in Chinese, they tend to offer 
products on WeChat via voice message.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fwildlife-smugglers-using-facebook-sell-ivory-rhino-horn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcda313e247ce8e2bc0ded0dc744bfb5cdbf5d8a6%2F0_0_1644_986%2F1644.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wildlife%20smugglers%20using%20Facebook%20to%20sell%20ivory%20and%20rhino%20horn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fwildlife-smugglers-using-facebook-sell-ivory-rhino-horn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wildlife%20smugglers%20using%20Facebook%20to%20sell%20ivory%20and%20rhino%20horn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fwildlife-smugglers-using-facebook-sell-ivory-rhino-horn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcda313e247ce8e2bc0ded0dc744bfb5cdbf5d8a6%2F0_0_1644_986%2F1644.jpg>
 A beaded elephant bone and ivory bracelet, advertised for sale on Facebook and 
identified by the WJC. Photograph: Wildlife Justice Commission 
This appears to be a widening pattern for wildlife traffickers in the region. 
In March, Traffic, another anti-wildlife trade organisation, announced that 
Facebook had become a popular tool for selling both animals parts and live 
animals withwildlife traffickers in Malaysia 
<https://news.mongabay.com/2016/03/facebook-emerging-as-a-thriving-wildlife-trade-marketplace/>
. These traders also use auctions in closed and secret groups to keep their 
illegal activities out of the public eye.

The WJC approached Facebook about the issue and a spokesperson from the social 
media group told it: “Facebook does not allow the sale and trade of endangered 
animals and we will not hesitate to remove any content that violates our 
community standards when it is reported to us.”

The social media giant’s community standards 
<https://www.facebook.com/communitystandards> “prohibit the use of Facebook to 
facilitate or organise criminal behaviour that causes physical harm to … 
animals”.

Swaak-Goldman said Facebook needs to go further, including shutting down 
traderss accounts and cooperating with law enforcement.

Facebook has the capacity to delete posts of entire accounts, but the group 
said how it reacts depends on the severity of the breach in community 
standards. As to working with law enforcement, Facebook said it would not 
comment on specific legal cases.
 Buyers make bids for the bracelet below the post. Prices offered for this 
piece are little more than US$20 because only one of the beads is ivory. 
Photograph: Wildlife Justice Commission 
Sales are also continuing in person in Nhi Khe, which is home to just a few 
thousand people. Historically, Nhi Khe was a village of wood carvers, but in 
recent decades its economy has shifted towards this more lucrative trade, 
dealing in everything from dead baby tigers in a jar to sawed-off rhino feet, 
as documented in photos and videos taken by WJC investigators. The village is 
perfectly situated for the illicit trade, being 20km south of Hanoi and not far 
from the Chinese border.

Throughout the investigation, the WJC tallied products representing up to 907 
dead elephants and 225 dead tigers. Experts believe most of the tigers were 
born in tiger farms, because if they were coming strictly from wild tigers, it 
would represent nearly 6% of the world’s population.

But even more surprising was the amount of rhino material passing through Nhi 
Khe. Investigators detailed rhino parts from 579 individual rhinos, nearly half 
of the total amount of rhinos killed in South Africa last year.

And these numbers don’t take into account products not directly seen by 
investigators either via social media or in person.

“Can you imagine what the real number is?” said Swaak-Goldman. “This is the 
tip of the iceberg.”

The WJC also noted products in Nhi Khe that were from bears, pangolins, 
hawksbill sea turtles and helmeted hornbills.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fwildlife-smugglers-using-facebook-sell-ivory-rhino-horn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b436d6fe1abc00195a5c7325892830cc019c4de%2F0_0_1080_1920%2F1080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wildlife%20smugglers%20using%20Facebook%20to%20sell%20ivory%20and%20rhino%20horn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fwildlife-smugglers-using-facebook-sell-ivory-rhino-horn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wildlife%20smugglers%20using%20Facebook%20to%20sell%20ivory%20and%20rhino%20horn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fwildlife-smugglers-using-facebook-sell-ivory-rhino-horn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b436d6fe1abc00195a5c7325892830cc019c4de%2F0_0_1080_1920%2F1080.jpg>
 The WJC said its investigators found more than one instance of raw elephant 
tusks being advertised for sale on Facebook. Photograph: Wildlife Justice 
Commission 
Last month, WWF and the Zoological Society of London released an update of the 
Living Planet Report <http://www.livingplanetindex.org/home/index> that found 
the world is suffering acatastrophic loss in global wildlife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/27/world-on-track-to-lose-two-thirds-of-wild-animals-by-2020-major-report-warns>
. According to the report, wildlife populations fell by 58% from 1970-2012 and 
we are on track to lose two-thirds of wildlife populations by 2020.

The global wildlife trade is playing a leading role in what could become the 
world’ssixth mass extinction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/radical-conservation/2015/oct/20/the-four-horsemen-of-the-sixth-mass-extinction>
 event. The illicit trade is estimated to be worth around $23bn (£18.5bn), 
making it the fourth largest illegal trade after drugs, arms and human 
trafficking (and that’s not including illegal fisheries, worth between $10bn 
and $23.5bn annually).

Over the past year, Nhi Khe traders have stopped showing their products in 
windowed store fronts, but the trade remains brazenly open, even more so than 
online.

“On the front [of the shops], it advertises in Mandarin ‘rhino horn’, ‘tiger’, 
‘ivory’. It’s like buying a Big Mac,” Swaak-Goldman said.

Ivory is in high demand worldwide for carvings and decorations, while rhino 
horn is believed, against all evidence, to be a curative in eastern Asian 
medicine. But Swaak-Goldman said tiger parts have largely become a status 
symbol for men. They are a part of the “Vietnamese gangster” look, she said, 
adding that wearing the body parts of a dead tiger is “a fashion statement with 
its claws and its slight hoodlumism”.

Such beliefs are killing off the world’s megafauna. Tigers are listed on the 
IUCN red list of endangered species. Several tiger subspecies are already 
extinct and all those remaining in south-east Asia (Sumatran, Malayan and the 
Indochinese) are on the verge of extinction. Meanwhile, Africa has lost 110,000 
elephants from 2007-15 due to an epidemic of poaching, potentially putting
forest elephants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/radical-conservation/2015/jul/23/forest-elephants-evidence-science-species-ivory-crisis>
 – which have been harder hit than savannah elephants – at risk of annihilation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fwildlife-smugglers-using-facebook-sell-ivory-rhino-horn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F362f47ecd21ec15fd49e529c221c476055c0d8e1%2F0_0_960_960%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wildlife%20smugglers%20using%20Facebook%20to%20sell%20ivory%20and%20rhino%20horn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fwildlife-smugglers-using-facebook-sell-ivory-rhino-horn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wildlife%20smugglers%20using%20Facebook%20to%20sell%20ivory%20and%20rhino%20horn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fwildlife-smugglers-using-facebook-sell-ivory-rhino-horn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F362f47ecd21ec15fd49e529c221c476055c0d8e1%2F0_0_960_960%2F960.jpg>
 A trader in Vietnam shows off his tiger claw necklace, gun and other spoils of 
the trade. Photograph: Wildlife Justice Commission 
While the WJC is working with Facebook to combat the trade online, its biggest 
target is the Vietnamese government. The WJC began communicating with the 
government as soon as it launched the investigation in July 2015. Since then, 
it has handed over thousands of pages of evidence prepared by qualified law 
enforcement professionals to five government agencies.

“Unfortunately, we have not received an adequate response or seen indication 
of serious law enforcement activity. We have continued to offer our support and 
co-operation to dismantle this network,” Swaak-Goldman said. “Given this lack 
of action [by the government], we have no choice but to present this 
investigation at a public hearing.”

Experts have long viewed Vietnam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vietnam> 
as a hub for the global wildlife trade, especially in rhino horn. Today, three 
of the world’s five rhino species are listed as critically endangered by the 
IUCN red list, while the world is losing more than 1,000 white rhinos a year to 
poachers. Poaching has also taken a human toll: both wildlife rangers and 
poachers are sometimes killed in gunfights.

The WJC believes simply shutting down the trade in Nhi Khe alone could have a 
“significant impact” on global rhino poaching, given the staggering amount of 
product moving through the village.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fwildlife-smugglers-using-facebook-sell-ivory-rhino-horn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78303663c38f7747b7e9942602777fc1eb821a06%2F40_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wildlife%20smugglers%20using%20Facebook%20to%20sell%20ivory%20and%20rhino%20horn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fwildlife-smugglers-using-facebook-sell-ivory-rhino-horn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wildlife%20smugglers%20using%20Facebook%20to%20sell%20ivory%20and%20rhino%20horn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fwildlife-smugglers-using-facebook-sell-ivory-rhino-horn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78303663c38f7747b7e9942602777fc1eb821a06%2F40_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 An awning in Nhi Khe advertising ivory, agarwood and rosewood. Photograph: 
Wildlife Justice Commission 
If caught and convicted, illegal traders in wildlife products in Vietnam face 
up to three years in jail. But the sentence could jump to seven years if the 
trade is deemed organised, which the WJC asserts is the case in Nhi Khe. Still, 
this is lower than other crimes in Vietnam. For example, possessing heroin in 
the country can lead to a life sentence or the death penalty.

But Vietnam has shown some signs of creating a new strategy on wildlife 
trafficking. In September, Prime Minister Nguyen Xuan Phuc issued a directive 
urging local and regional officials to step up the fight against wildlife 
trafficking. The country has also announced a partnership with the US to combat 
the global trade. Vietnam is hosting amajor international conference on 
<http://iwthanoi.vn/> the global wildlife trade 17-18 November, with Prince 
William expected to attend.

Although only a year old, the WJC has already had success combating the 
illegal wildlife trade: an investigation resulted in the arrest of 16 wildlife 
traders in Malaysia in September.

The WJC hopes the public hearing on Monday will push Vietnam to “take real 
action” against the traders of Nhi Khe, Swaak-Goldman said. The public hearing 
at the Hague can be viewed live on Monday and Tuesday on the WJC’swebsite 
<http://www.wildlifejustice.org/>. 
 