
Jonathan Freedland <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jonathanfreedland>: 
the remain majority in the Commons makes it possible

Surely those who should be cheering today’s high court judgment the loudest 
are the people who have been the most passionate defenders of parliamentary 
sovereignty. So rejoice, Daniel Hannan: the judges have heeded your earnest 
plea to make parliament supreme. Put out the bunting, Michael Gove: your 
insistence that Westminster be the ultimate arbiter of our national affairs has 
been given the judicial seal of approval. Let all those who spent the spring 
trumpeting the glory of England, hailing it as the mother of parliaments, now 
celebrate their victory.

Except, of course, they won’t. Those who campaigned for leave in the name of 
wresting power from Brussels to Westminster went strangely quiet when it came 
to the question decided by the court today: who has the power to trigger 
article 50? Suddenly they found that parliament was not quite so sacred or 
central – that some things were best left to ministers to decide. Well, the 
judges have called out that hypocrisy. They have decided that the Brexiteers 
should have to comply with their own logic – and bow to parliament.

Does that mean, as Nigel Farage has said he fears, that a “betrayal” 
<https://twitter.com/Nigel_Farage/status/794123280613576705> is imminent – that 
parliament might opt for a “half Brexit”, as the former Ukip leader put it, or 
even that it might halt Brexit altogether? You can see why that’s a 
possibility: the remain camp still has a majority in the Commons, when you add 
up not just Labour, the SNP and the Liberal Democrats but also the estimated185 
Tory MPs 
<http://www.conservativehome.com/parliament/2016/06/europe-how-conservative-mps-break-down-1-over-half-those-backing-remain-are-on-the-payroll.html>
 who wanted to stay in the EU. If they all united and voted as they did on 23 
June, they could block Brexit tomorrow.

They won’t do that. Too many would regard it as a constitutional offence to go 
against the public’s verdict delivered in the referendum. Others have a more 
practical fear of contradicting the wishes of their own local electorate, 
anxious they would pay the price with their own seats.

Who are the judges who ruled that MPs should vote on Brexit?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/-three-judges-mps-vote-brexit-article-50-high-court>
But that fear will only fully kick in if Theresa May presents them with a 
straight, up-or-down choice: a one-line motion to trigger article 50 or not. If 
the choice is any less stark than that, if May proposes detailed legislation – 
then that would give anti-Brexit MPs plenty of wriggle room. They could say 
that while the public voted to leave, they did not vote for thiskind of leave. 
That would give the remain majority in parliament the chance to slow things 
down and demand a much softer Brexit.

Two other factors could prove decisive. The coherence of Labour in parliament 
now matters. If the party can get its act together and unite around, say, the 
demand that Britain remains a member of the single market then it will have 
real muscle. The early signs were not encouraging: recall that the first public 
figure to demand the immediate triggering of article 50 was Jeremy Corbyn, 
hours after the vote. But Keir Starmer and others have set a good lead: Labour 
needs to press the case against hard Brexit strongly and coherently.

The other thing to remember is that parliament is not just the Commons. The 
Lords will have a say too. Unelected peers thwarting the will of the people may 
look like a democratic outrage. But Gove, Hannan and the rest can hardly 
complain. The Lords are an ancient part of our parliament. And parliament – as 
they never stopped reminding us – is sovereign.




Dreda Say Mitchell <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/dreda-say-mitchell>: 
If MPs attempt to overturn Brexit, public trust will fall even further

For those of us who voted leave in order to ensure that it’s our MPs who make 
political decisions in this country, this morning’s ruling in the high court is 
a nice irony. I personally don’t have a problem with anyone using any 
democratic or legal means to achieve any political end they want. And there’s 
no doubt that MPs have the right to cancel Brexit if they choose to do so.

But I would advise them to use their power respectfully and wisely. The 
reputation of the political classes in this country is already very low, and 
any attempt to overturn the referendum result is likely to send it down even 
further with baleful consequences.

Whether it’ll make any difference in the long run is a moot point. There are 
powerful vested interests in the UK already at work to get the ballot 
overturned or render it meaningless. There are equally powerful interests in 
the EU itself who are willing to help them out. Personally, I wouldn’t bet 
against them succeeding. As the French, Dutch, Irish and Greeks have 
discovered, referendums in the EU are flexible friends. But that will leave a 
pertinent question – do votes actually count for anything in Europe these days, 
or are they merely glorified opinion polls?

Tim Farron <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/tim-farron>: the public must 
get a say on the final Brexit deal

Given the Conservative party’s long-standing commitment to the principles of 
parliamentary representative democracy, it is disappointing that today’s 
decision had to be made in the court. Ironically, a failure to consult elected 
representatives of the public on the terms of the negotiation package would 
undermine the very principles that David Davis, Boris Johnson and Liam Fox have 
championed. Hopefully, this will provide some much-needed clarity on what has 
been a completely chaotic showing from the government so far.

It will be vital that parliament now works productively together to get the 
best possible negotiating deal to take to Europe. Given the strict two-year 
timetable of exiting the EU once article 50 is triggered, it is critical that 
the government now lays out its negotiations to parliament, before such a vote 
is held. So far, May’s team have been all over the place when it comes to 
prioritising what is best for Britain, and it’s time they pull their socks up 
and start taking this seriously.

Ultimately, the British people voted for a departure but not for a 
destination, which is why what really matters is allowing them to vote again on 
the final deal, giving them the chance to say no to an irresponsible hard 
Brexit that risks our economy and our jobs.

Schona Jolly <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/schonajolly>: The 
government’s appeal is unlikely to succeed
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fwill-article-50-ruling-stop-brexit-high-court-parliament%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ee3e2419e7c657a03a5cc47d5b0b563dff525c5%2F0_0_4534_2721%2F4534.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20the%20article%2050%20ruling%20stop%20Brexit%3F%20%7C%20The%20panel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fwill-article-50-ruling-stop-brexit-high-court-parliament%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20the%20article%2050%20ruling%20stop%20Brexit%3F%20%7C%20The%20panel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fwill-article-50-ruling-stop-brexit-high-court-parliament%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ee3e2419e7c657a03a5cc47d5b0b563dff525c5%2F0_0_4534_2721%2F4534.jpg>
 Prime minister Theresa May. Photograph: WPA Pool/Getty Images 
The government has announced that it will appeal against a judgment by a UK 
court that restores sovereignty to the UK parliament to legislate for the UK’s 
legal landscape. Even for the sake of appearances, that just looks bad. The 
Vote Leave camp campaigned for sovereignty to be restored to the UK parliament. 
It is symptomatic of their many inconsistencies that they now argue that this 
crucial decision ought not to be taken by parliament.

Brexit has caused havoc already. Now parliament must save us | Polly Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/03/brexit-parliament-article-50-mps>
During three days of legal argument, the writing was on the wall for the 
government when it was forced to make the significant concession that article 
50 is both unconditional and irrevocable. That might be true politically, but 
it is at least open to challenge legally. The irony of the government’s appeal 
is that it now opens up the Pandora’s box of whether the article 50 question on 
irreversibility can be answered only by the European court of justice. If so, 
what sort of delay will that entail?

In my view, the government has poor prospects of succeeding in the supreme 
court. The high court’s key reasoning is that the government “cannot without 
the intervention of parliament confer rights on individuals or deprive 
individuals of rights”. There is no answer to this. The removal of the ability 
to seek authoritative rulings of the European court, for example, is but one 
material change in our law, and it may have a profound impact on fundamental 
and social rights. So, too, other major rights merely “glossed over” by the 
government’s arguments. I don’t see a comeback to the various fatal gaps in the 
government’s reasoning, which the court found to be flawed.

The most fundamental rule of UK constitutional law is that parliament is 
sovereign, and that legislation enacted by both Houses of Parliament is 
supreme. If “Brexit means Brexit”, the court has confirmed that only parliament 
can trigger it. Both Houses of Parliament now need to stand up for the national 
interest and demand accountability from the executive, and for their 
constituents. The courts have done their bit for the rule of law. Parliament, 
on behalf of all of us, now needs to do the same.

David Lammy <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/davidlammy>: This is what 
taking back control really means

Today’s ruling is a huge victory for our parliamentary democracy. This is what 
real sovereignty looks like, and this is what taking back control really means.

This decision is about parliamentary sovereignty and our constitution. It is 
not about leave or remain – it is actually about whether we have a sovereign 
parliament in this country, and as such the decision is the right one.

We got a Bill of Rights in 1689 which gave parliament powers and took power 
away from the executive and the monarch. Those who wanted to leave the EU 
campaigned on the basis of parliamentary sovereignty, so it would have been 
completely inconceivable for the executive to overreach its prerogative powers 
and trigger article 50 without any form of parliamentary scrutiny or approval.

Parliament specifically legislated to hold an advisory, non-binding 
referendum, so it is now important that the government puts its plans before 
parliament so that MPs can scrutinise these plans before the decision on 
triggering article 50 and beginning the Brexit process.

Anand Menon <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/anand-menon>: This ruling 
won’t halt Brexit, but further legitimise it

Keep calm, everyone. Today’s high court ruling does not mean parliament will 
prevent Brexit. They won’t and, what is more, they shouldn’t. Why won’t they? 
Well, first, because they may not get a chance to. The judgment is not the end 
of the story, there is an appeal to come. But let’s assume the supreme court 
upholds the verdict. Parliament then would have a right to vote on the 
triggering of article 50. Will they use this opportunity to block the process? 
Almost certainly not.

Of the 650 MPs, 479 are reckoned to have backed remain (including over half of 
Conservative MPs). So there was, prior to the referendum, a parliamentary 
majority in favour of remaining. But things have changed since 23 June. For one 
thing, elected representatives were shown to be out of touch with their voters:
421 of 574 English and Welsh parliamentary constituencies voted to leave 
<https://medium.com/@chrishanretty/the-eu-referendum-how-did-westminster-constituencies-vote-283c85cd20e1#.z5evg0r1p>
. Polling suggests, moreover, that significantly more than 50% of 2015 
Conservative voters and more than 30% of Labour voters backed leave. Voting 
against a referendum result generated by many of their own voters is not 
something many MPs would willingly countenance doing.

High court Brexit ruling: what does it all mean?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/high-court-brexit-ruling-what-does-it-all-mean>
The most parliament seems likely to do is to impose procedural conditions on 
the prime minister. These may include the need to report back regularly on the 
negotiations – providing the kind of running commentary she has resisted to 
date. Yet even then, it is hard to see how MPs can materially affect the final 
outcome.Article 50 <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/article-50> lays down 
a two-year deadline. Once a deal is struck, they will face a choice between 
whatever Theresa May has achieved and no deal at all. There will be no scope to 
modulate what is on the table.

And this is as it should be. It’s not as if politics was held in high regard 
before the referendum. I shudder to think what would happen if, following a 
unique democratic moment that mobilised the population in a way even elections 
fail to, a parliament that had approved the legislation providing for the vote 
decided to overturn it because it had come up with the “wrong” answer.

And so to the final irony. The chances are this ruling will not halt Brexit, 
but further legitimise it. A judgment hailed by remainers will, ultimately, 
serve merely to place a parliamentary stamp of approval on an outcome they 
oppose.
 