
Marvellous! She’s just marvellous,” says Mrs Home Counties, an energetic woman 
in her mid-60s. “Just the medicine!” Medicine? “She means tonic,Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> is just the tonic we need!” 
says her husband, Mr Home Counties, neither wanting their name in the Guardian.

Brexit: Theresa May prioritises immigration curbs over single market
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/02/brexit-theresa-may-prioritises-immigration-curbs-over-free-movement>
This is the tribe overwhelmingly responsible for the referendum result, not 
mainly Labour voters, not the young, but these older folk of the shires. In 
their migrant-fearing yet migrant-free Tory strongholds, this is what they 
yearned for. But their vision isn’tLiam Fox’s globalised unfettered free trade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/30/globalisation-poverty-corruption-free-trade-liam-fox>
: theirs is the drawbridge little England (and Wales) he calls protectionist. 
“We can go back to making things for ourselves, train up our own people,” hopes 
Mrs H. They clap every reminder that they are on the stairway to Brexit heaven.

May and her party had better relish every moment. Today Brexit can mean 
whatever anyone wants it to, and the EU will knuckle under because we are Great 
Britain and they need us more than we need them. But this time next year the 
government will be knee-deep and sinking fast in the quicksands of real 
negotiations, forced to confront what their party has brought upon us. The 
French and Germans will have had their elections, the far right biting at their 
heels: being beastly to the British will become an electoral necessity for many 
EU politicians. The head of Jaguar Rover says thatalready consumers on the 
continent are boycotting British cars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/30/european-customers-boycotting-british-cars-eu-brexit-vote-jaguar-land-rover>
: we are not popular and risk becoming detested.

Those who made a political career out of insulting fellow Europeans are 
conducting the negotiations, drawn from that once-eccentric clique of 
Euro-lunatics John Major called “the bastards”. How did the likes ofBill Cash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/oct/25/bill-cash-herald-of-apocalypse>
,John Redwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/14/british-austerity-brexit-budget-nhs-disability-benefits-property>
 andJacob Rees-Mogg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/dec/02/owen-jones-jacob-rees-mogg-no-easy-answers-syria>
 inveigle a moderate and sensible country into voting for this colossal 
self-harm? The Sun headlines May’sgreat repeal bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/02/theresa-may-great-repeal-bill-eu-british-law>
 the “March to Freedom” as Iain Duncan Smith calls for a harder, faster break: 
he says if the EU refuses a “take-it-or-leave it deal”, just walk out. Ken 
Clarke rightly warns these “headbangers 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/1444593.stm>” will never be satisfied: 
no deal will ever be enough.

Turning hard Brexit, the prime minister may be more of a realist than her 
party, refusing to pose as a cake-and-eat-it pretender. That’s the brutal logic 
as she rejects free movement and European court of justice jurisdiction. 
Creating the role of international trade secretary was a hard-Brexit act: Fox 
would have no job if we stayed in the customs union and the single market, 
which bars countries from independent trade deals.

Those who made a political career out of insulting fellow Europeans are 
conducting the negotiations

May insists there will be “no running commentary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/sep/07/theresa-may-not-provide-running-commentary-on-brexit-negotiations-video>
”, but oh yes there will.Diplomacy by Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/02/may-on-collision-course-with-backbenchers-seeking-soft-brexit>
 has already begun, with Donald Tusk’s “EU27 will engage to safeguard its 
interests”. The prime minister of Malta tweets, “The 4 freedoms cannot be 
decoupled” (goods, services, capital and people). TheItalian prime minister  
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-37502578>warns out loud that it will be 
“impossible” to allow the UK to end up better off outside the EU.

The cards are all in the EU’s hands once article 50 is triggered, with only 
two years to settle not just exit, but an interim trade deal, pending a 
tortuous deal with 53 countries the EU already trades with. Every government 
and a majority of MEPs has to agree – those MEPs who have endured Nigel 
Farage’s outrageous insults all these years.

What sweeteners might we offer? Some suggest Spain eyes a deal on Gibraltar. 
Others wonder if eastern Europeans will want copious visas – but if so, what 
has all this been for?

As speech after speech salutes “taking back control” as “a fully independent 
sovereign country”, only old sober-sides Philip Hammond throws cold water. 
There is a price to pay, he warns. He didn’t disagree withInstitute for Fiscal 
Studies estimates that Brexit will cost the UK 4% in growth in coming years 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-37023488>.

He will press for the softest Brexit, to remain “the best of neighbours … the 
closest of trade associates”. Here’s his killer alert: “People did not vote to 
become poorer or less secure.” Will voters reconsider their priorities once 
they see the price to be paid for limiting immigration? The question for 
history is whether in the dread process ahead, yet another Tory prime minister 
will end up bulldozed by her Europhobes.

What a miserable distraction this is from the myriad problems stacked on 
No 10’s doorstep. Deficit reduction is still the chancellor’s prime purpose: 
admitting there will be no surplus in 2020 was no more than stating the 
blindingly obvious, as Osborne missed every target himself. Waiting for an 
answer is the ballooning health and social care crisis.Abolishing torturing 
work tests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/01/dwp-scraps-retesting-for-chronically-ill-sickness-benefits-claimants>
 for the severely disabled tells us little about compassionate Conservatism when
£13bn of benefit cuts 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/benefit-cuts-will-leave-mothers-13bn-worse-off-over-course-of-current-parliament-a6914571.html>
 are still set to hit “just about managing” families. Enormous tax cuts for the 
rich are due in capital gains, inheritance and corporation tax while half these 
families’ incomes is falling, says the Resolution Foundation.

Will May’s government stop bribing the old and depriving the young? She 
promises a government “small, strong and strategic” and size matters: Osborne 
wanted a very small state,under 35% of GDP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/dec/03/autumn-statement-2014-george-osborne-spending-cuts>
, 10% below any equivalent countries. No answers yet.

In tomorrow’s speech, submarine May needs to surface and show if there is any 
substance to her “centre ground” pitch. Her “country that works for everyone” 
mantra is repeated by every speaker, ear-achingly, brain-deadeningly mindless. 
It’s time to tell us what will work and for whom – or will everything be swept 
aside by the destructive pointlessness of Brexit?
 