
New federal rules 
<http://www.fda.gov/AnimalVeterinary/NewsEvents/CVMUpdates/ucm535154.htm> went 
into effect last week that ban the use of antibiotics to help livestock gain 
weight, a practice that leads to antibiotic-resistant bacteria that pose health 
threats to humans. Meat producers will also need a veterinary prescription to 
use these drugs for other purposes such as treating or preventing disease.

The new rules by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) represent a broad 
attempt to limit antibiotic use in farm animals, not just banning a class of 
antibiotic for a type of livestock. Historically, antibiotics are given 
regularly to chicken, cattle, pigs and other animals not only to treat diseases 
but also to prevent them and to make the animals grow faster and bigger. But 
most of the antibiotics given to them are also used to treat humans and 
referred to as“medically important” 
<https://www.nrdc.org/experts/david-wallinga-md/livestock-antibiotics-surging>.

We're eating more antibiotic-free chicken. But what about beef?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/oct/04/meat-antibiotics-mcdonalds-chick-fil-a>
The widespread use of antibiotics 
<https://resistancemap.cddep.org/AnimalUse.php> in both animals and humans has 
contributed to the rise of so-calledsuperbugs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/20/un-declaration-antibiotic-drug-resistance>
, bacteria that have grown resistant to antibiotics. Drug-resistant infections 
currently kill an estimated 700,000 people worldwide each year, a number that 
could increase to 10 million by 2050 if the drug resistance trend continues, 
according to a report <https://amr-review.org/> commissioned by the UK 
government. In the US, at least 2 million people get sick from drug-resistant 
bacteria each year, and roughly 23,000 die annually, said theCenters for 
Disease Control and Prevention <https://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/> (CDC).


Critics contend the FDA’s new rules are weak. The Natural Resources Defense 
Council, for example, says the rules would still let farmers useantibiotics for 
disease prevention 
<https://www.nrdc.org/experts/avinash-kar/fda-regs-livestock-antibiotic-abuse-put-lipstick-pig>
, an allowance that continues to sanction the prolonged use of the drugs.


Below are some charts that show why the widespread use of antibiotics 
threatens public health.

More meat in the future
 Illustration: USDA 
Americans’ meat diet has changed. In the past decade, we’ve eaten less beef 
and pork, but more chicken. But the government isprojecting an increase 
<https://www.ers.usda.gov/amber-waves/2016/september/us-beef-and-pork-consumption-projected-to-rebound/>
 for all three types of meat as their prices fall, a result of a growing demand 
for them domestically and overseas and falling cost to feed the animals. Beef 
consumption is forecast to grow 11.7% and pork 10.3% from 2016 to 2025.

The term “broilers” in the chart refers to young chickens (as opposed to, say, 
hens raised primarily for eggs), which make up the bulk of chickens eaten.


Tracing antibiotic-resistant bacteria
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Ffda-antibiotic-use-in-livestock%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74dd09a92accb09789b37a527c81680a4076bb3e%2F0_0_950_1229%2F950.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20new%20FDA%20rules%20curb%20the%20rise%20of%20antibiotic-resistant%20superbugs%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Ffda-antibiotic-use-in-livestock%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20new%20FDA%20rules%20curb%20the%20rise%20of%20antibiotic-resistant%20superbugs%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Ffda-antibiotic-use-in-livestock%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74dd09a92accb09789b37a527c81680a4076bb3e%2F0_0_950_1229%2F950.jpg>
 Illustration: CDC 
When bacteria that dwell in farm animals develop resistance to drugs, they are 
more likely to reach humans. Some of the paths for the bugs take to get to 
their human hosts include handling and eating raw or undercooked and 
contaminated meat, drinking or swimming in water contaminated with animal feces 
and taking care of animals.


The sales boost
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Ffda-antibiotic-use-in-livestock%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fafcfa509f6db567a84320010d10b756d3e03b4a3%2F0_0_1015_799%2F1015.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20new%20FDA%20rules%20curb%20the%20rise%20of%20antibiotic-resistant%20superbugs%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Ffda-antibiotic-use-in-livestock%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20new%20FDA%20rules%20curb%20the%20rise%20of%20antibiotic-resistant%20superbugs%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Ffda-antibiotic-use-in-livestock%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fafcfa509f6db567a84320010d10b756d3e03b4a3%2F0_0_1015_799%2F1015.jpg>
 Illustration: Ucilia Wang/The Guardian 
For more than a decade, the meat industry has faced mounting pressure from 
consumers and health groups to phase out the routine use of antibiotics in 
raising animals. The industry had to stop using certain antibiotics because the 
practice contributed to drug-resistant bacteria and caused a rise in food-born 
illnesses. Yet sales of medically important antibiotics to raise livestock, 
such as penicillins, tetracyclines and macrolides, have grown 26% from 2009 to 
2015, according to the FDA.

As much as 70% of antibiotics 
<https://www.nrdc.org/experts/avinash-kar/antibiotic-use-livestock-going> 
developed to treat humans are sold for use in feed and water for farm animals.

Detoxing Chicken
 Illustration: USDA 
Americans are eating more chicken than before, partly because it’s cheaper 
than beef or pork, 
<https://www.ers.usda.gov/amber-waves/2016/september/us-beef-and-pork-consumption-projected-to-rebound/>
as well as the belief that white meat is healthier than red meat. Chicken 
farmers have been ahead of other meat producers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/oct/04/meat-antibiotics-mcdonalds-chick-fil-a>
 in reducing the use of antibiotics.

The FDA also has banned the use of certain antibiotics – sarafloxacin and 
enrofloxacin – in chicken because their use led to a type of drug-resistant 
bacteria called Campylobacter, which shows upin food poisoning 
<https://www.cdc.gov/foodsafety/diseases/campylobacter/> cases in humans and 
causes diarrhea, stomach pain and fever. The bacteria developed resistance to 
ciprofloxacin, which belongs to the same class of antibiotics as the banned 
versions for chicken. Bacterial resistance to ciprofloxacin has persisted, 
however, mainly because many people contract the infection while traveling 
overseas, said the CDC.

How fast food chains respond
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Ffda-antibiotic-use-in-livestock%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65fee89fd35e0cf57a7a2221f6f1ae3969575fc4%2F0_0_5000_2613%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20new%20FDA%20rules%20curb%20the%20rise%20of%20antibiotic-resistant%20superbugs%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Ffda-antibiotic-use-in-livestock%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20new%20FDA%20rules%20curb%20the%20rise%20of%20antibiotic-resistant%20superbugs%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Ffda-antibiotic-use-in-livestock%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65fee89fd35e0cf57a7a2221f6f1ae3969575fc4%2F0_0_5000_2613%2F5000.jpg>
 Illustration: Natural Resources Defense Council 
In response to the changing FDA rules and pressure from consumer advocates, 
fast foodrestaurants such as McDonald’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/mar/05/in-n-out-antibiotic-free-meat-pledge-fda>
, Subway andChick-fil-A in recent years have pledged 
<https://thechickenwire.chick-fil-a.com/News/Chick-fil-A-to-Serve-Antibiotic-Free-Chicken>
 to use meat raised with minimal or no antibiotics. Several consumer groups, 
including Center for Food Safety and Consumer Union, issued areport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/sep/20/burger-king-kfc-mcdonalds-antibiotic-free-meat>
 in September that graded big chain restaurants on their antibiotics policies. 
The scorecard, shown above, gave a failing grade to well-known brands such as 
KFC and Dunkin’ Donuts.


Consumer food and safety groups sent a petition earlier this month to 16 fast 
food restaurants, including KFC, Burger King and Jack in the Box, demanding 
that they stop using these drugs in their meat products.
 