
Jonathan Freedland <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jonathanfreedland>: 
She brazenly sought to colonise territory that once belonged to Labour

Theresa May delivered a speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/05/mays-conservative-party-conference-speech-key-points-analysed>
 that could have been co-written by Ed Miliband and the editor of the Daily 
Mail. It was a fusion of two usually opposed political outlooks into a single 
message – one that aimed to command, and hold, the centre ground for the 
Conservative party. To that end, it brazenly sought to colonise territory that 
used to belong to Labour - thereby shoving that party to the very margins.

Start with the more obvious treats served up for the Mail. None was bigger, of 
course, than the promise toexit the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>, with no ifs or buts on 
ending both free movement and jurisdiction by the European court of justice. 
But May also deferred to several cultural touchstones cherished by the Mail: 
the promise to open the first newgrammar schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/13/grammar-schools-gamble-young-peoples-futures-social-mobility-london>
 for 50 years; an attack on “leftwing human rights lawyers”, castigated for 
harassing British soldiers; condemnation of those metropolitan types who feel 
more affinity for “the international elite” than for the people who live down 
their street.

We are witnessing nothing less than a Tory reformation | Rafael Behr
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/05/birmingham-witnessing-tory-reformation-conservative-conference-brexit>
Much more interesting, though, were the long passages that could have come out 
of the mouth of the last Labour leader. May offered a vision that was a radical 
break from Thatcherism. She said: “There is more to life than individualism and 
self-interest,” as if rebuking the notorious claim that“there is no such thing 
as society” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/apr/08/margaret-thatcher-quotes>. 
While Thatcher’s ally Ronald Reagan always insisted that government was the 
problem, May said it could be “part of the solution”.

She made the case for an active state, intervening where the market had 
failed. She praised Clement Attlee, the NHS and the BBC. She made a moral 
argument for rich people to pay their taxes. She called the housing market 
“dysfunctional”, and promised that the government would start building houses. 
While she was at it, she denounced modern slavery,stop-and-search 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/feb/11/uk-police-forces-still-abusing-stop-and-search-powers>
 and institutional racism.

The political pitch was clear: to promise onetime Labour voters that they 
could have everything they used to value in Labour, without backing what had 
become – in a neat reverse of her past verdict on her own political tribe -“the 
nasty party” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2002/oct/08/uk.conservatives2002>. For it 
was, she said, the Tories who were now the party of the workers, the NHS and of 
public servants.

It was bold, even shameless. Thanks to Brexit, it may also prove hollow – 
since exiting the EU will threaten many of the things about Britain she boasted 
of. (How long will Britain boast three of the world’s 10 best universities when 
foreign students are discouraged from coming here?) But it was an effective 
speech designed to command the territory that matters most - and where power 
resides.

Polly Toynbee <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/pollytoynbee>: The Tories 
are brilliant at cognitive dissonance

While Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> commands 
the political universe, the new centre ground is wherever she says it is. But 
any political topographer will note how far the victorious rightwing Brexiteers 
have shunted the centre of gravity rightwards. They are the masters, with their 
tanks on the lawn, for now.

But you wouldn’t know that from the stirring sermon delivered by the vicar’s 
daughter, a homily on morality, social justice and fairness that could have 
come from Labour (bar the anti-immigration riffs). What party doesn’t pitch for 
“everyone”, “one nation”, “the many not the few”?

But by her tough choices we shall know her. In her land-grab for Labour 
voters, how can she really “seize the day” for workers, public servants andthe 
NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/jul/15/what-lies-in-store-jeremy-hunt-nhs-theresa-may-government>
? Ignoring the current crisis, let’s hope she knows that her boast on generous 
NHS funding was near as dammit a lie. Public servants? A million have been 
sacked, and the rest suffer the harshest pay downgrade ever.

Yes, this powerful speech will be remembered and May will be reminded of these 
words every step of the way. Will she halt the disastrous £13bn benefit cuts 
still to come, especially to tax credits of her “just-about-managing” families, 
whose incomes will fall sharply? Will she stop the great giveaways to the 
“privileged few’, in inheritance tax, capital gains tax and corporation tax 
bonanzas? Not a word was said on whether the burden of deficit reduction will 
shift from “ordinary working-class people” on to the “privileged few”.

If her actions were to match her words, then she would indeed command the 
entire political landscape and the heavens beyond. But Tories are brilliant at 
cognitive dissonance. How often their faithful listen to pulpit proclamations – 
“blessed are the poor for they shall inherit the earth” – without for a moment 
considering what that requires of them. It takes strenuous suspension of 
disbelief to imagine Tories will no longer be Tories.

Anne McElvoy <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/anne-mcelvoy>: May 
understands the limits of the free-market worldview

A change is gonna come. Did Sam Cooke ever imagine himself as the refrain of a 
speech by a freshly minted Conservative leader in 2016? Possibly not.

Theresa May was heralding an entirely different Britain from one hidebound by 
unfairness, dogged by the vested interests of the wealthy or imbued with 
quietly pernicious racism.

The “nasty party” tag was neatly turned on “divisive” Corbynite Labour – an 
easy applause-inviter for the conference. But May is a veteran of the Tory 
circuit who knows how to soften up an audience before surprising them. The next 
minute, they were tilted headlong into an Old Labour speech, complete with 
workers’ rights and protection for those at the sharper end of capitalism’s 
elbows, and greedy Philip Green sliced and diced.

Will Theresa May be the next Tory leader to be bulldozed by the Europhobes? | 
Polly Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/04/theresa-may-tory-conservative-party-brexit-eu-negotiations>
Here were the themes and the anxieties of the broader left – and some of its 
favourite target villains in sight. “If you’re a tax dodger, we’re coming after 
you,” intoned a gimlet-eyed May, as if she might personally send out the state 
troopers.

Mayism is a curious hybrid – in part a stolid reflection of core Tory 
instincts and desires: Brexit but without the pain; grammar schools, but 
fudging the messiness of selection at 11. But she is also someone who 
understands the limits of the free-market worldview, and how unsettling many 
voters find it.

The speech contained clear signs that May has been harbouring resentments for 
years of being trapped in the outer-inner core of David Cameron’s cabinet. “A 
country that works for everyone” eclipsed, “We’re all in this together” and the 
Blairite reprise of, “The many, not the few”.

The desire to deliver more, practically and financially, for blue-collar 
Britain is keenly felt. But choosing which parts of the change she is serious 
enough to turn into hard policy will be the May dilemma, when the applause 
fades.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Ftheresa-may-speech-tory-conference-panel-verdict%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d5be9e8585bc87b94f8059260b608f058fafca6%2F0_85_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20Theresa%20May%E2%80%99s%20speech%20appeal%20beyond%20Tory%20conference%3F%20Our%20panel%E2%80%99s%20verdict%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Freedland%2C%20Polly%20Toynbee%2C%20Anne%20McElvoy%2C%20Joseph%20Harker%2C%20Giles%20Fraser&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Ftheresa-may-speech-tory-conference-panel-verdict%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20Theresa%20May%E2%80%99s%20speech%20appeal%20beyond%20Tory%20conference%3F%20Our%20panel%E2%80%99s%20verdict%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Freedland%2C%20Polly%20Toynbee%2C%20Anne%20McElvoy%2C%20Joseph%20Harker%2C%20Giles%20Fraser&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Ftheresa-may-speech-tory-conference-panel-verdict%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d5be9e8585bc87b94f8059260b608f058fafca6%2F0_85_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 ‘There was even a thinly veiled attack on Phillip Green. Well done. None of 
this could have come from Dave.’ Photograph: Matt Cardy/Getty Images 
Giles Fraser <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/gilesfraser>: Genuine 
Conservatives are so much better for the poor than slick liberals such as 
Cameron

If you played a drinking game during Theresa May’s speech, who would have 
guessed that it would have been the phrases“working people” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/05/theresa-may-conference-interventionist-government-for-workers>
 and “working class” that would have got you drunk the fastest? All things are 
relative. And I know she is hard to warm to – too angular, too awkward in 
emoting – but genuine Conservatives such as May are so much better for the poor 
than slick liberals such asDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron>.

Cameron believed, first and foremost, in business. His was the hedge fund 
premiership, the friend of global capitalism. He was our CEO, not our PM. And 
make no mistake: that’s the reason – the only reason – he wanted to stay in the 
EU. He knew it was the capitalist’s friend.

The Tories are using the army to take a shot at human rights | Conor Gearty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/04/tories-army-human-rights-theresa-may-repeal-act-millitary>
With Theresa May we have a prime minister back. Yes, there was a lot of 
rhetoric and not much policy. But the rhetoric was pro-government, centre-left, 
red Tory. For the vicar’s daughter, the community comes first: we need our 
politics to be “more than individualism and self interest”. And there was a 
thinly veiled attack onPhillip Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green>. Well done. None of this 
could have come from Dave.

And clever old Jeremy Corbyn. By taking Labour to the left he has dragged the 
Conservatives <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> into that 
vacated space, shifting the whole of our politics leftwards. But the problem is 
that in this post-Brexit world, left/right doesn’t apply so much. The battle 
lines are now between a deracinated free-market individualism and a social 
communitarianism that believes in mutual responsibility. So two cheers for 
Theresa May.

Joseph Harker <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/josephharker>: Calling 
Labour the ‘nasty party’ ignores decades of history

This was the easiest leader’s conference speech Theresa May will ever have to 
make. Britain changed on 23 June, revealing a host of issues that had been 
festering, unacknowledged, for decades: of huge swaths of the country that had 
missed out on economic success; of communities impacted by rapid change; of 
simmering hatred towards an out-of-touch elite.

May can claim to be the fresh new face who can change all this. Meanwhile her 
party faithful are revelling in the afterglow of Brexit and the thought of 
“taking back control”. And the official opposition is reeling after a ferocious 
and divisive summer-long leadership challenge. So, right now, May can say what 
she likes and people will lap it all up – including many traditional Labour 
lines.

That’s why the prime minister can say she believes 100% in the free market, 
yet that the Conservatives are “the party of the workers, the party of public 
servants, the party of the NHS”. She can run through a list of racial 
injustices and say, “I want this Conservative government to fight every single 
one of them.”

Why May can rebrand herself as passionately pro-Brexit – “our laws will be 
made not in Brussels but Westminster” – even though she was notionally on the 
remain side. Why she can attack the “privileged few”, and promise the tax 
dodgers and those who help them, “We’re coming after you”. Because, right now, 
people will give her the benefit of the doubt.

But if May really believed this, why is she in the Tory party? A party that 
has imposed austerity on society’s most vulnerable. It’s a good soundbite to 
claim that Labour is now “the nasty party” but it ignores years, indeed 
decades, of history.
 