
Americans love to eat. Each person devours, on average, 1,996 lbs 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/thesalt/2011/12/31/144478009/the-average-american-ate-literally-a-ton-this-year>
 – or nearly a ton – of food per year. The enormous effort to satisfy that big 
appetite creates significant environmental impacts, fromfertilizers leaching  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2014/aug/21/geological-survey-salinity-pure-water-shortage-chemical-runoff-agribusiness-watershed>
into our water supplies andoverfishing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/may/02/overfishing-42bn-tuna-industry-risk-collapse>
 tomassive die-offs of bees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/dec/11/bees-decline-pollinator-agriculture-honeybee>
 from pesticides and habitat loss.

Our eating habits come with tremendous social costs, too. More than 70% of the 
adults <https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/obesity-overweight.htm> in the US and 
abouta third of children  
<https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hestat/obesity_child_13_14/obesity_child_13_14.htm>
are overweight. The medical cost of treating people who are grossly overweight, 
or obese,reached $147bn within the past decade 
<https://www.cdc.gov/obesity/adult/causes.html>. 

Increasingly, businesses from farms to retailers are under pressure to reduce 
the environmental and social impact of growing produce and processed food. Here 
are five challenges we face in 2017 and beyond.

How to persuade farmers 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fchallenges-sustainable-food-2017-organic-farming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9bedb402c9b2638c149077cbced48b09be8d645f%2F0_1180_4437_2663%2F4437.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%202017%20be%20the%20year%20we%20get%20serious%20about%20sustainable%20food%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fchallenges-sustainable-food-2017-organic-farming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%202017%20be%20the%20year%20we%20get%20serious%20about%20sustainable%20food%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fchallenges-sustainable-food-2017-organic-farming%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9bedb402c9b2638c149077cbced48b09be8d645f%2F0_1180_4437_2663%2F4437.jpg>
 In a time of increasing population growth, climate change and environmental 
degradation, organic farming could hold the answer. Photograph: Mint Images - 
Bill Miles/Getty Images/Mint Images RF 
Making a strong business case to farmers that changing their farming 
practices, such as moving away from conventional fertilizers and pesticides, is 
hard. That switch can be costly and time consuming, and cause them totussle 
with government regulators 
<https://ensia.com/features/sustainable-farm-crop-insurance/> or customers. And 
there are no guarantees that their investments will pay off.

The struggle to convince more farmers to switch to organic farming is a prime 
example. Market research shows that consumers want to buy more yogurt, cereal 
and other food made with organic ingredients, a market that reached an estimated
$13.4bn in the US last year 
<http://www.euromonitor.com/organic-packaged-food-in-the-us/report> from 
$12.8bn in 2014. But only about 1% of cropland nationwide has received the 
organic designation because farmers aren’t convinced that the three years 
required to show the results of changing their use of pesticides and other 
practices is worth the financial investment.

“Your farm is your financial life, and when you decide you’re going to change 
the way you’re doing your business, you’re kind of putting it at risk,” Chris 
Garibaldi, a cherry farmer in California, said in a story aboutinitiatives by 
General Mills and Kashi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jul/19/organic-food-certification-struggling-farmers>
 to encourage farmers to go organic. “The grocery stores don’t give a crap 
whether you’re in the transition to being organic. All they care about is are 
you certified or not.”

Organic farming also typically produces 10% to 20% less yields than 
conventional methods, making it seem an unattractive option. John Reganold, a 
soil science professor at the Washington State University, argues thatfarmers 
will make more money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/aug/14/organic-farming-agriculture-world-hunger>
even with smaller crops because their organic produce can command higher 
prices. He also points to several environmental and social benefits, from 
preserving the rich soil quality to keeping farm laborers healthy.

Reganold believes organic farming should play an important role in feeding the 
world’s population that is expected to reach 10 billion by 2050: “In a time of 
increasing population growth, climate change and environmental degradation, we 
need agricultural systems that come with a more balanced portfolio of 
sustainability benefits.”

The trouble with antibiotics
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fchallenges-sustainable-food-2017-organic-farming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0a36940e236d916e7c2aeb075c0702a238ab5c5%2F0_0_5283_3523%2F5283.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%202017%20be%20the%20year%20we%20get%20serious%20about%20sustainable%20food%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fchallenges-sustainable-food-2017-organic-farming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%202017%20be%20the%20year%20we%20get%20serious%20about%20sustainable%20food%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fchallenges-sustainable-food-2017-organic-farming%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0a36940e236d916e7c2aeb075c0702a238ab5c5%2F0_0_5283_3523%2F5283.jpg>
 The In-N-Out Burger has responded to consumer pressure and announced it will 
move away from using beef raised with antibiotics designed for human use. 
Photograph: Jonny Weeks for the Guardian 
Taking a dose of antibiotics and finding out that it has no power to make you 
feel better is scary. That scare has become abig public health issue 
<https://www.cdc.gov/narms/faq.html> with the rise of antibiotic-resistant 
bacteria,or superbugs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/dec/28/will-2017-be-the-year-we-take-drug-resistant-superbugs-seriously>
. That has shined a spotlight on the use of antibiotics in raising chickens, 
cattle and other livestock because antibiotics are often used toprevent 
illnesses rather than treat them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/dec/28/will-2017-be-the-year-we-take-drug-resistant-superbugs-seriously>
, and the drugs are also given to animals to make them grow faster.

The widespread use of these antibiotics over the years has prompted the 
federal government to try tolimit the use of antibiotics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/dec/11/fda-crackdown-antibiotics-animals-meat>
 that are developed to treat humans. That has pressured meat producers and 
restaurants to sell meat raised with minimal or no antibiotics, including 
McDonald’s, In-n-Out and Chick-fil-A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/mar/05/in-n-out-antibiotic-free-meat-pledge-fda>
. And, afterreceiving an “F” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/sep/20/burger-king-kfc-mcdonalds-antibiotic-free-meat>
 by the Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) last September for the 
company’s lack of commitment on antibiotics,Burger King announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/29/burger-king-to-cut-use-of-antibiotics-in-its-chicken-as-part-of-superbug-fight>
 last week that it will start using chickens raised with a minimal use of 
antibiotics designed for humans.

So far, this movement to cut antibiotics use is taking root mostly on chicken 
farms, as Sasha Stashwick and Lena Brook from NRDC point out in thisopinion 
piece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/oct/04/meat-antibiotics-mcdonalds-chick-fil-a>
. But beef, pork and turkey producers will need to get their act together and 
follow suit.

Illegal bounty from the sea
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fchallenges-sustainable-food-2017-organic-farming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50e4f0c696f9e0c2f1edfaa0ea2a2140566501cb%2F0_0_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%202017%20be%20the%20year%20we%20get%20serious%20about%20sustainable%20food%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fchallenges-sustainable-food-2017-organic-farming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%202017%20be%20the%20year%20we%20get%20serious%20about%20sustainable%20food%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fchallenges-sustainable-food-2017-organic-farming%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50e4f0c696f9e0c2f1edfaa0ea2a2140566501cb%2F0_0_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
 The central and western Pacific is a rich fishing ground, providing an 
estimated 60% of the world’s tuna catch for a $7bn annual global market. 
Photograph: Jonne Roriz 
Americans love seafood, consuming nearly 5bn lbs 
<http://www.ift.org/food-technology/daily-news/2016/november/28/americans-seafood-consumption-grows.aspx>
 of it in 2015 and importingas much as 90% 
<https://www.fishwatch.gov/sustainable-seafood/the-global-picture> of the 
edible sea creatures they buy. Shrimp, canned tuna and salmon are thetop choices
 
<http://www.worldatlas.com/articles/most-popular-seafood-products-in-the-united-states.html>
. While this can create great economic opportunities, it also leads to poaching,
slavery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jul/18/slavery-in-the-seafood-supply-chain-what-can-we-do-about-it-event>
and other problems.

The good news is consumers are demanding more sustainably caught and produced 
seafood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/may/11/seafood-industry-sustainable-fishing-salmon-overfishing>
 than ever before, prompting big retailers such as Walmart, McDonald’s and 
Whole Foods to sell fish that’s been sustainably caught. These changes in 
preference have forced fishing fleets and seafood wholesalers to change how 
they catch fish, reduce bycatch and treat laborers fairly.

In the tuna-rich waters off Palau, for example, the Nature Conservancy has 
dispatched 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/gallery/2016/may/01/sustainable-fishing-photography-marine-wildlife-ocean-conservation-palau>
 scientists to show fishermen thebenefit of using fishing hooks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/may/01/palau-sustainable-fishing-protect-endangered-marine-life>
 that can reduce catching unwanted or protected species. Palau, Soloman Islands 
and Asian countries also plan to experiment withusing artificial intelligence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/20/artificial-intelligence-illegal-fishing-tuna-sharks>
 to identify illegal catch.

Coming up with alternatives to conventional fish food is another major 
industry wide effort to preserve a healthy fish population. Fish farming is a 
major source of seafood – the World Bank predicts that nearly two-thirds of the 
fish consumed by 2030 will be raised rather than wild caught. Fish farms 
usually use feed made with wild-caught fish. They will also see more options 
for feed that’s madewith insects 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/aug/06/eating-insects-food-grubbly-farms-sustainable-seafood-startups>
 like black soldier flies.

Fake meat diet
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fchallenges-sustainable-food-2017-organic-farming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa69632bbe8c8eb8e2dcb9ab2f2c387431e2b42c%2F0_68_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%202017%20be%20the%20year%20we%20get%20serious%20about%20sustainable%20food%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fchallenges-sustainable-food-2017-organic-farming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%202017%20be%20the%20year%20we%20get%20serious%20about%20sustainable%20food%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fchallenges-sustainable-food-2017-organic-farming%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa69632bbe8c8eb8e2dcb9ab2f2c387431e2b42c%2F0_68_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Impossible Foods’ plant-based mixture of potato and wheat, coconut fat, 
Japanese yam, vegetable broth, xanthan gum, sugars and amino acids is a dead 
ringer for the real thing. Photograph: Beck Diefenbach/Reuters 
It’s no secret that producing meat leaves a high carbon footprint 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/21/eat-less-meat-vegetarianism-dangerous-global-warming>
. While eating less meat is an obvious approach to minimize that impact, asking 
Americans to, say, give up burgers and chicken nuggets might be as difficult as 
getting President-elect Donald Trump to announce that climate change is real.

The challenge of feeding the omnivores among us has prompted entrepreneurs 
who, armed with hundreds of millions of dollars in venture capital, have 
created meat alternatives using plant-based building blocks or cultured animal 
cells and tissues.

One of those startups, Impossible Foods, debuted its burger in restaurants in 
New York and California this year. The fanfare attracted not only meat lovers 
but also vegetarians such as Mary Catherine O’Connor, who has not eaten meat in 
30 years. In heressay about trying the Impossible Burger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/oct/23/vegetarian-impossible-foods-meatless-environment>
, she talked about her mixed emotion at taking her first bite: “As I took my 
second and third bites, I started to wonder if eating this Impossible Burger 
would flip some long repressed caveman switch in my brain, making me crave meat 
again.”

As she pointed out, to make a real dent in cutting our greenhouse gas 
emissions, we will need McDonald’s to give the meatless burger a shot.
 