
Always quick to get to the point, social media came up with an instant 
distillation of the global response to the improbable, unsettling election of 
Donald Trump as president of the United States:#RIPAmerica 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/RIPAmerica?src=hash>.

Donald Trump to meet Barack Obama at the White House – live updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/nov/10/donald-trump-barack-obama-white-house-us-election-live-updates>
That hashtag declared that we had witnessed something more than a simple 
change of government. (Such a slogan would not have circulated had Mitt Romney 
beaten Barack Obama in 2012.) Instead, it implied that Trump had not merely 
taken over the running of the United States for four years, but that his 
presidency represented a much darker threat – that it would, in fact, destroy 
the country.

Of course, Twitter is prone to the hyperbolic and hysterical. But more sober 
commentators were raising a similar prospect, albeit in not quite such stark 
terms. David Remnick, the editor of the New Yorker, spoke for many when hewrote:
 <http://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/an-american-tragedy-donald-trump> 
“The election of Donald Trump to the presidency is nothing less than a tragedy 
for the American republic, a tragedy for the constitution, and a … sickening 
event in the history of the United States and liberal democracy … It is 
impossible to react to this moment with anything less than revulsion and 
profound anxiety.” For the millions who shared that sentiment, dawn on 
Wednesday felt like mourning in America.

What they fear is that Trump will make good on all the promises – and threats 
– he made during these last 18 months. What if he goes ahead and deports 11.3 
million undocumented migrants? What if he really does ban all Muslims entering 
the country? What if he tries to use the powers of the state to go after media 
organisations that have criticised him – making life difficult for the 
businesses that own inquisitive newspapers such as the Washington Post, for 
example – as he has said he will? What if he overturns abortion rights, even 
imposing “some form of punishment” on a woman who terminates a pregnancy, as he 
once suggested? And what if he really does build that wall?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%202016%20US%20election%20night%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%202016%20US%20election%20night%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video&media=>
How the 2016 US election night unfolded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/how-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video>
There are plenty who believe that if Trump went ahead and actually implemented 
his programme, he would create a different country: closed, xenophobic and at 
odds with some of the founding principles – religious equality or freedom of 
speech – that have defined the United States since its founding. The country 
would still exist – but it would no longer be America.

Naturally, there is a ready chorus of self-styled realists and grownups, quick 
to say that such talk is excessive. Those voices offer assorted forms of 
reassurance. First, they make the perennial claim that every successful 
politician – whatever the bluster and rhetoric of the campaign – always 
moderates once in office. This view holds it to be all but a law of nature that 
the radicalism of the candidate is always tempered by the reality of governing. 
Trump may have talked up a storm on his way to the White House, they say, but 
once behind the desk of the Oval Office, pragmatic, practical considerations 
will surely constrain him.

What’s more, runs the argument, there are formal mechanisms in place to do 
just that. The United States, after all, is ruled by a constitution that 
insists on the separation of powers, so that the executive – the president – 
can never go too far, always held in check by both the independent judiciary, 
in the form of the supreme court, and the legislature, Congress. These 
venerated institutions will surely prevent Trump from doing anything too crazy. 
Less august, perhaps, but also to be taken into account is the federal 
bureaucracy: a vast civil service of non-partisan technocrats, who will ensure 
that any Trump proposal is softened and smoothed into shape, sanding off its 
harsher, more wild edges. And there is always the military: they surely won’t 
let Trump get out of hand.

The trouble is, none of those reassurances stacks up. Start with the notion 
that once he has sworn the oath of office, Trump is bound to tone it down, 
dropping his most incendiary plans. The trouble with that idea is that party 
bigwigs were saying the same thing throughout the campaign, earnestly hoping 
that Trump would change once he became the frontrunner, that he would change 
once he won the party nomination, that he would change once he started the 
campaign proper in September. Normal candidates do indeed do that. But with 
Trump, it never happened.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fwill-trump-destroy-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6f0c85cd15bab1acc36999e9d81cc00e047fafc%2F0_438_6575_3945%2F6575.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20Donald%20Trump%20destroy%20America%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fwill-trump-destroy-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20Donald%20Trump%20destroy%20America%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fwill-trump-destroy-america%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6f0c85cd15bab1acc36999e9d81cc00e047fafc%2F0_438_6575_3945%2F6575.jpg>
 Jaden Rams cheers as Donald Trump speaks at a rally in Grand Junction, 
Colorado. Photograph: Damon Winter/New York Times/Redux/Eyevine 
Instead, he kept sounding off, insulting bereaved military parents one minute, 
a former Miss Universe the next. The only time he agreed to take direction was 
in the very final week, when he finally stuck to a message and read scripted 
lines from a teleprompter. But that was just for a few days, when the big shiny 
prize was in sight. It is a slim foundation on which to build the hope that a 
70-year-old man with a proven lack of impulse control – “I just grab them by 
the pussy” – will miraculously transform himself the minute he walks through 
the door of 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue.

But if the restraint won’t come from within, what about from without? Won’t 
there be institutions to hold Trump in check? The trouble is, Republicans did 
not only win the presidency, they also won both houses of Congress. That gives 
Trump enormous power, a strength that has eluded most of his predecessors. 
(George W Bush governed with a Republican Congress for a short spell. Before 
him, the last Republican to enjoy such untrammelled might was Herbert Hoover in 
1928.)

The result is that Trump will face no congressional constraint. They will do 
his bidding. Some have suggested that, while their party affiliation might be 
the same, Trump will nevertheless encounter resistance on Capitol Hill because 
so many congressional Republicans are hostile to him. They cite the House 
speaker, Paul Ryan, who publicly clashed with Trump several times on the 
campaign – once accusing him of making a “textbook example of a racist comment” 
– and who endorsed Trump only through gritted teeth.

Brexit and Trump mark a whitelash. Politicians must not pander to it | Polly 
Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/10/brexit-trump-whitelash-politicians-must-not-pander>
But Ryan will not dare oppose Trump now. Trump is the one with the national 
mandate, the winner of a much larger electoral college victory than anyone ever 
thought possible. Trump won states that had eluded the Republicans for decades: 
he even took Pennsylvania, which had been in Democratic hands since 1988. That 
gives him huge clout inside the Republican party. He succeeded in doing what 
they had long failed to do, expanding the map and winning over white 
working-class voters who had previously spurned them.

And so Republicans in Congress will be the junior partners in this new 
relationship, forced to bow to the man whose electoral appeal is so much 
stronger than theirs. He won’t be their creature; they will be his. If 
representatives were to dare to step out of line, Trump will ask them who the 
voters in their districts – who will almost certainly have voted for him – 
would back. The answer will always be him.

That pressure won’t be applied only to Republicans. Witness this exchange 
between Newt Gingrich, rumoured to be a possible secretary of state in a Trump 
administration,and journalist Evan Osnos 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/09/26/president-trumps-first-term>. 
Osnos had asked about the proposed border wall with Mexico, wondering if a 
Trump administration would really be able to get Congress to pay for it (given 
that no one believes Mexico ever would, despite Trump’s hot air, pay for it 
itself). Gingrich replied that he would use the pressure of re-election to 
bring doubters around. “Remember how many Democrats are up for election in the 
Senate in 2018,” Gingrich said, adding that the answer was 25. “Do you really 
want to go home as the guy who stopped the fence? Then, by all means, but we’ll 
build it in ’19.”

So if Congress promises to be supine, what of the supreme court, surely the 
ultimate restraint? That body has a vacancy, ready to be filled by the next 
president. Trump can nominate a pliant judge and the Senate will be unlikely to 
resist. That would instantly give Trump a 5-4 conservative majority on the 
highest court. And with several other supreme court justices in their late 70s 
or 80s, other vacancies could appear soon, too. Trump will have the chance to 
reshape the court in his image. (He can do the same for the lower courts, too, 
rapidly filling up the federal bench with Trump-friendly lawyers.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fwill-trump-destroy-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b795eeaf858080d47006bff9f43d7ffd9c92698%2F0_231_3900_2340%2F3900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20Donald%20Trump%20destroy%20America%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fwill-trump-destroy-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20Donald%20Trump%20destroy%20America%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fwill-trump-destroy-america%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b795eeaf858080d47006bff9f43d7ffd9c92698%2F0_231_3900_2340%2F3900.jpg>
 A man holds up an image of Barack Obama with the word ‘tyrant’ above itduring 
a Trump rally in Colorado Springs. Photograph: Damon Winter/New York 
Times/Redux/Eyevine 
And remember, once on the court, a judge can stay for life. So Trump’s impact 
will be felt for a generation. He could have the numbers to overturn Roe v 
Wade, the ruling that gives women abortion rights; to further entrench 
so-called gun rights, reducing what few restrictions currently exist (he has 
proposed that schoolteachers be armed); or even to reinterpret the first 
amendment to allow for his proposed tightening of the libel laws: Trump wants 
the right to pursue journalists who have criticised him, so that “we can sue 
them and win lots of money”.

As for the federal bureaucracy, the US system is not like the one in Britain. 
A new president does not have to confine himself to appointing a handful of 
special advisers, fitting them into an existing, politically neutral machine. 
He makes a staggering 4,000 appointments, staffing the entire top layer of 
government – all owing their jobs and total loyalty to him. So, no, there will 
be no civil service to stopDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. They will be Trump’s 
servants. (It’s said that the military will behave in the same way: they will 
not want to be seen resisting democratically elected, civilian power.)

In other words, Trump will have enormous power from inauguration day on 20 
January 2017. He can build his border wall if he wants to – and, so memorable 
was the promise, the political penalty for not doing so will be enormous. But 
he can do much, much more besides.

On day one, he can – at the stroke of a pen – undo much of the Obama legacy. 
Trump has had a team of aides draw up what they call the First Day Project, a 
series of executive orders signed by Obama that Trump could overturn with his 
signature before he has got his feet under the desk. Among the measures they 
have targeted for repeal are: the Paris agreement on climate change, the Syrian 
refugee programme and the rules demanding checks on the background of someone 
seeking to buy a gun. By the end of that first day, America would already be a 
changed country.

Once work starts on the border wall, Trump’s most vociferous supporters will 
demand action on the president-elect’s other signature proposal: the 
deportation of those migrants. With Republican control of the House and Senate, 
he will have no excuses for inaction or delay. On this, too, there has been 
some advance work. One thinktank envisages a force of 90,000 “apprehension 
personnel”, equipped to make raids on farms, restaurants and building sites, 
rooting out illegal immigrants. As Osnos reported: “Thousands of chartered 
buses (54 seats on average) and planes (which can accommodate 135) would carry 
deportees to the border or to their home countries.” Others have talked of 
putting these unwanted people on trains and expelling them – a method that 
evokes the darkest chapter in European history.

In the meantime, Trump could work on his ban on Muslims entering the US. The 
constitution might strike that down as discrimination on grounds of religion, 
but it would not be too hard to refashion it. Indeed, Trump has spoken of 
banning arrivals from countries associated with “Islamic terrorism”, which may 
be an effective workaround. And all the while, Trump would be shredding the 
legacy of America’s first black president, abolishing Obamacare which gave 
millions health insurance.

But there is another promise Trump will want to implement. It came during the 
TV debates when Trump pledged that, if he won, he would put Hillary Clinton in 
jail over her use of a private email server as secretary of state. He can’t do 
that directly, but he could steer his Justice Department to pursue her, perhaps 
via a special prosecutor. Who would stop him doing that? His base will demand 
nothing less: their cries of “Lock her up!” are still ringing. (The only thing 
that might stay his hand is if he calculates that the threat of prosecution 
provides useful leverage, a sword to hang over the heads of the Clintons, to 
ensure they keep quiet and out of his way.)

So this is the country that Trump – unshackled and unbound – can forge, 
starting three months from now. Oblivious to the environment, hostile to 
migrants, snarling towards Muslims and seeking to roll back rights that took 
decades to secure. It would be a country that saw the constitution not as its 
greatest gift, but as an obstacle to overcome. It would see diversity not as a 
strength, but as a fact to be tolerated, at best. And anyone objecting to any 
of this would find the big institutions, all three branches of government, 
arrayed against them. RIP America? It certainly might feel that way.

For what we saw in the astonishingly ugly campaign fought by Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/07/who-is-to-blame-us-election-trump>
 would be only an inkling of what is to follow. Or, as one senior Democrat put 
it to me: “The horror show has not even started. This is just the overture.”
 