
Antimicrobial resistance, the emergence of superbugs resistant to the 
antibiotics that modern medicine depends on, is not a future threat looming on 
the horizon but a problem that isalready here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/18/last-line-antibiotics-european-centre-for-disease-prevention->
 and likely to have a big impact on business – especially in sectors such as 
food and pharmaceuticals.


The World Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Organisation 
estimates there are already 700,000 deaths globally due to antibiotic resistant 
infections each year, and if the problem is not addressed, this could rise to 
10 million deaths per year by 2050.

According to one study, 70% of bacteria around the world have already 
developed resistance to antibiotics,including colistin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/27/us-reports-first-case-of-bacteria-resistant-to-antibiotic-of-last-resort>
 – often described as medicine’s antibiotic of last resort.


The growth of factory farming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/mar/03/factory-farming-divestment-explain>
 has correlated closely with the development of antimicrobial-resistant 
bacteria. Two-thirds of antibiotic consumptionin the EU 
<http://www.efsa.europa.eu/en/efsajournal/pub/4006> and 70% of usage in the US 
<http://www.fda.gov/downloads/ForIndustry/UserFees/AnimalDrugUserFeeActADUFA/UCM440584.pdf>
 occurs in the animal farming industry.

Most often, antibiotics are not used to treat illnesses. Instead, they are 
preventative, as animals require regular (often daily) doses of drugs to remain 
healthy in their overcrowded facilities. This overuse may kill some bacteria 
and temporarily keep livestocks healthier, but it allows antibiotic-resistant 
bacteria to strengthen and increase in number, diluting the effects of 
antibiotics on human illnesses.


'I don't see a problem': Tyson Foods CEO on factory farming and antibiotic 
resistance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/apr/05/tyson-foods-factory-farming-antibiotic-resistance-donnie-smith>
Governments have started to take action to curtail these practices and stem 
the rise of superbugs, which will affect all companies in the food value chain. 
For example, we are already seeing stricter agricultural regulation of the use 
of antibiotics in both the US and EU.

Denmark has introduced bans on certain drugs, and California passed a bill in 
2015 to sharply limit antibiotic use in factory farms. The EU’s introduction of 
legislation banning products in which growth-promoting antibiotics are used, 
led to a ban of some US beef imports that has cost the US industry many 
millions every year.


Antibiotic-free food

Additionally, consumer preferences are trending towards antibiotic-free meat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/jun/18/is-it-time-for-antibiotic-free-label-on-our-food>
 and some companies are responding. Antibiotic-free chicken sales rose by 34% 
in the US in 2013, and a further 25% in 2014, constituting 11% of overall 
chicken sales in the US.

In the UK, sales of organic products surged by 6% overall in 2016, as 
consumers increasingly seek out antibiotic free products with a credible, 
audited supply chain. Should companies fail to adapt to evolving consumer 
preferences, they risk falling behind their peers in the market.


Some may look to the pharmaceutical sector for solutions, but despite the 
growing rate of drug-resistant bacteria, the number of new antibiotics approved 
each year by the USFood <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/food> and Drug 
Administration has fallen dramatically in the last decade.

As antibiotics tend to be short-term prescriptions, the time and resources 
spent developing them produce low returns. Lack of innovation has exposed the 
pharma sector to reputational and financial risk for failing to act as 
resistance grows.


This year, Boston Common Asset Management joined a coalition of investors 
<http://www.fairr.org/news-item/1-trillion-investor-coalition-demands-corporate-action-on-systemic-overuse-of-antibiotics-press-release/>
 worth $1tn asking ten of the world’s largest food companies, including Yum! 
Brands and Domino’s, to end the routine use of antibiotics in their global meat 
and poultry supply chains.

Is it time for an antibiotic-free label on our food?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/jun/18/is-it-time-for-antibiotic-free-label-on-our-food>
We have seen some positive results. For example, The Restaurant Group 
(including brands such as Frankie & Benny’s and Garfunkel’s) has committed to 
phase out the routine, preventative use of antibiotics in its supply chain. 
Perdue, one of the largest poultry manufacturers in the US, announced it had 
ended routine use of all antibiotics in its entire operation. Similarly, 
McDonald’s promised this summer to stop serving poultry treated with 
antibiotics in its US restaurants.

Slow progress

Although companies are taking first steps, the pace of change is far too slow. 
The vast majority of corporate policies on antibiotic use are either piecemeal 
or unambitious in their scope.

While McDonald’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/04/mcdonalds-chicken-food-safety-experts>
 has made commitments on poultry in the US, the multinational food giant also 
sells beef, pork and dairy products in over 100 countries. For any commitment 
to be meaningful, it should encompass the company’s full global operations.

The ideal business response necessary to curb antibiotic resistance is 
two-pronged. All major food producers and retailers should commit to phasing 
out the routine use of antibiotics in their entire supply chains.

Simultaneously, the pharmaceutical industry should help mitigate the crisis by 
spending more resources on developing new strains of antibiotics as old ones 
become ineffective.

At the 2016 World Economic Forum in Davos, 80 companies committed 
<https://amr-review.org/industry-declaration> to reinvigorate the scientific 
research and development needed to create a new antibiotics pipeline. The new 
year is the time to honour these commitments.

Sign up to be a Guardian Sustainable Business 
<https://register.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/> member and get more 
stories like this direct to your inbox every week. You can alsof 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>ollow us on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>.
 