
From its vibrant cities and dazzling beaches to its spectacular wildlife and 
vast savannas, South Africa is a country with enduring appeal, making it ideal 
for an unforgettable escape.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-south-africa%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fwin-a-seven-night-holiday-for-two-to-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36be6e1034f295354d69a194e42c237edeadc915%2F0_0_1780_527%2F1780.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Win%20a%20seven-night%20holiday%20for%20two%20to%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-south-africa%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fwin-a-seven-night-holiday-for-two-to-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Win%20a%20seven-night%20holiday%20for%20two%20to%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-south-africa%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fwin-a-seven-night-holiday-for-two-to-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36be6e1034f295354d69a194e42c237edeadc915%2F0_0_1780_527%2F1780.png>
Thanks to South African Tourism and British Airways 
<http://www.britishairways.com/en-gb/destinations/africa/south-africa?refevent=ptr_gua_saf>
, you could win a seven-night holiday for two people to South Africa. The prize 
includes return flights with British Airways to Cape Town from London Gatwick 
or London Heathrow and accommodation for seven nights at the four-starPresident 
Hotel 
<http://www.britishairways.com/travel/fx/public/en_gb?eId=111083&productCode=ZA-CPT-4348111&productType=Hotel&saleOption=PAKFH&refevent=ptr_gua_pres>
 in Cape Town.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-south-africa%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fwin-a-seven-night-holiday-for-two-to-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53661663b8853ff82d6f8193776d17eb7c6c67b4%2F0_0_800_351%2F800.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Win%20a%20seven-night%20holiday%20for%20two%20to%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-south-africa%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fwin-a-seven-night-holiday-for-two-to-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Win%20a%20seven-night%20holiday%20for%20two%20to%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-south-africa%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fwin-a-seven-night-holiday-for-two-to-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53661663b8853ff82d6f8193776d17eb7c6c67b4%2F0_0_800_351%2F800.png>
For your chance to win this incredible holiday, simply enter your details 
below.


Terms and conditions

 * The South Africa Tourism prize draw (the “Prize Draw”) is open to residents 
of the UK aged 18 and over. The winner of the holiday prize draw must be able 
to travel between 15 April and 30 September 2017.

 * The Prize Draw is not open to employees or agencies of Guardian News & 
Media Limited (“GNM” or the “Promoter”), their group companies or family 
members, freelance contributors to GNM, or anyone else connected to the Prize 
Draw. 
 * Entrants into the Prize Draw shall be deemed to have accepted these Terms 
and Conditions. 
 * To enter the Prize Draw you must fill in the form with your details. No 
purchase is necessary. If you have any questions about how to enter or 
otherwise in connection with the Prize Draw, please email us at
competitions.glabs@guardian.com <mailto:competitions.glabs@guardian.com> with 
“South Africa Tourism competition” in the subject line. 
 * Only one entry per person. Entries on behalf of another person will not be 
accepted and joint submissions are not allowed. You are responsible for the 
cost (if any) of sending your Prize Draw entry to us. The winner shall be the 
owner of the email address from which the selected winning entry is sent. 
 * GNM accepts no responsibility for entries that are lost, delayed, 
misdirected or incomplete or cannot be delivered or entered for any technical 
or other reason. Proof of delivery of the entry is not proof of receipt by GNM. 
 * The Prize Draw closes at 23:59 on 31 January 2017. Entries received outside 
this time period will not be considered. 
 * The winner will receive a trip for two (2) to Cape Town, South Africa. The 
prize includes roundtrip economy airline tickets with British Airways for two 
adults from London Gatwick or London Heathrow airport to Cape Town airport, 
pending availability at the time of booking. The prize also includes seven 
nights’ accommodation for two adults on a B&B basis at the four-star President 
Hotel in Cape Town. Travel period for this holiday is: 15 April to 30 September 
2017, with no block out dates. There are no other activities, transfers or 
meals associated with this prize. The winner (and guest) is responsible for 
costs regarding transfers to and from the airport, any insurance needed and 
spending money and any other personal expenses. The winner is solely 
responsible for all applicable state and local taxes and/or any other 
fees/costs associated with the prize or receipt of the prize. Times and dates 
are subject to availability. Citizens from some countries need a visa in order 
to travel to South Africa. The winner is responsible for organising any 
required visa and covering any costs involved. All travel arrangements are 
subject to availability, blackout dates & other restrictions. The prize is 
valid until 30 September 2017 and is subject to availability, but must be 
booked by 31 March 2017. Winner and guest must travel on the same itinerary 
throughout. Rebooking and changes are not permitted. Tickets are non-refundable 
and non-transferable. The Promoter is not responsible for cancellation, delays 
or changes or any other part of the prize or for the inability of the 
prizewinner to take up any part of the prize due to problems with travel or any 
other factor outside Promoter’s control. GNM accepts no responsibility for any 
costs associated with the prize that are not expressly included in the prize. 
 * GNM accepts no responsibility for any costs associated with the prize that 
are not expressly included in the prize. 
 * The winners will be selected by way of a random draw from all entries 
received in accordance with these Terms and Conditions. The draw will take 
place on or after 2 January 2017. 
 * The winners will be notified by email on or after 3 February 2017 and given 
details of how to claim their prize. If a winner does not respond to GNM within 
14 days of being notified of their win, the winner’s prize will be forfeited 
and GNM shall be entitled to select another winner in accordance with the 
process described above (and that winner will have to respond to notification 
of their win within 14 days or else they will also forfeit their prize). If a 
winner rejects their prize or the entry is invalid or in breach of these terms, 
the winner’s prize will be forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to select 
another winner. 
 * The name and county of the winner can be obtained after 3 March 2017 by 
sending a stamped addressed envelope to the following address: Guardian Labs, 
Guardian News & Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. 
 * The prizes are non-exchangeable, non-transferable and not redeemable for 
cash or any other prize. 
 * GNM reserves the right to substitute the prize with an alternative prize of 
similar value in the event that the original prize offered is not available. 
 * The winners may be required to take part in promotional activity related to 
the Prize Draw and the winners shall participate in such activity on the 
Promoter’s reasonable request. The winners consent to the use by the Promoter 
and its related companies, both before and after the closing date of the Prize 
Draw for an unlimited time, of the winner’s voice, image, photograph and name 
for publicity purposes (in any medium, including still photographs and films, 
and on the internet, including any websites hosted by the Promoter and its 
related companies) and in advertising, marketing or promotional material 
without additional compensation or prior notice and, in entering the Prize 
Draw, all entrants consent to the same. 
 * The Promoter shall use and take care of any personal information you supply 
to it as described in its privacy policy, a copy of which can be seen at
https://www.theguardian.com/help/privacy-policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/privacy-policy>, and in accordance with data 
protection legislation. By entering the Prize Draw, you agree to the 
collection, retention, usage and distribution of your personal information in 
order to process and contact you about your Prize Draw entry, and for the 
purposes outlined in paragraph 12 above. 
 * GNM accepts no responsibility for any damage, loss, liabilities, injury or 
disappointment incurred or suffered by you as a result of entering the Prize 
Draw or accepting the prize. GNM further disclaims liability for any injury or 
damage to your or any other person’s computer relating to or resulting from 
participation in or downloading any materials in connection with the Prize 
Draw. Nothing in these Terms and Conditions shall exclude the liability of GNM 
under law for fraud or fraudulent misrepresentation, or for death or personal 
injury resulting from its negligence. 
 * GNM reserves the right at any time and from time to time to modify or 
discontinue, temporarily or permanently, this Prize Draw with or without prior 
notice due to reasons outside its reasonable control (including, without 
limitation, in the case of anticipated, suspected or actual fraud). The 
decision of GNM in all matters relating to the Prize Draw is final and no 
correspondence will be entered into. 
 * GNM shall not be liable for any failure to comply with its obligations 
relating to this Prize Draw where the failure is caused by something outside 
its reasonable control. Such circumstances shall include, but not be limited 
to, weather conditions, fire, flood, hurricane, strike, industrial dispute, 
war, hostilities, political unrest, riots, civil commotion, inevitable 
accidents, supervening legislation or any other circumstances amounting to 
force majeure. 
 * The Prize Draw and these Terms and Conditions will be governed by English 
law and entrants to the Prize Draw submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of the 
English courts. 
 * Promoter: Guardian News & Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London, 
N1 9GU. 
This competition was amended on 21 December 2016, to correct the competition 
end date.
 