
Does a good man make a good president – and a bad man a bad one? Barack 
Obama’s leaving speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2017/jan/11/barack-obamas-farewell-speech-in-full-annotated>
 in Chicago on Tuesday night was as uplifting as hisarrival speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/21/barack-obama-2013-inaugural-address>
 in November 2008. It exuded optimism, moderation and generosity. He was 
neither triumphalist nor sectarian. Ever adept at masking cliche with rhetoric, 
he turned “Yes we can” to “Yes we did 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/11/barack-obama-final-speech-as-president-video-highlights>
”.

The years of calm are over. In Donald Trump we’ll have a child at the White 
House | Dave Eggers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/02/donald-trump-white-house-obama-scandal>
There were tears in many eyes that November night, including mine. I recall an 
American friend’s reaction: “I am so tired of America being hated,” she said. 
“I long to be admired. Now perhaps I will.” It is hardly partisan to suggest 
that few tears were shed on the election ofDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, except of dismay.

Yesterday’s bizarre press conference by the president-elect, his tweets and 
cavalier dismissal of various sexual allegations against him are more 
suggestive of a banana republic than a democratic inauguration. That America has
exchanged a saint for a sinner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/02/donald-trump-white-house-obama-scandal>
 is hardly controversial, even among many Trump supporters. But American 
presidents are not chosen to be saints. They may stand as momentary icons of 
nationhood, but first and foremost they are chief executives.

Obama listed his achievements on Tuesday night, and they were not 
inconsiderable. In 2009 he pulled the American economy back from the brink of 
recession with perhaps an emphatic modern-dayKeynesianism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2013/may/15/us-budget-deficit-austerity-stimulus>
. Hesaved the auto industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/sep/04/rising-us-auto-sales-obama>, 
prevented a bank collapse and put his country on the road back towardsfull 
employment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/06/us-wage-growth-trump-labour-market-barack-obama-job-creation>
. He introduced a health plan that may be flawed, but should be too entrenched
for its enemies to destroy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/31/obamacare-barack-obama-democrats-republicans-trump>
. Abroad, he pulled off deals with Iran and Cuba, and tried to bring an end to 
the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq.

Obama was a good man. The president’s regime was scandal-free, his family 
admirable, his colleagues able. He brought dignity, noble intent and a clear 
intelligence to the job. He knew that American democracy was a fragile flower, 
and what most threatened it: the fragmentation ofidentity politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/white-voters-victory-donald-trump-exit-polls>
. His most specific warning in Tuesday’s speech was against “the rise of naked 
partisanship and economic and regional stratification … a retreat into bubbles, 
of people who look like us and share the same political outlook”.

He never wanted to be seen as a black president. In his 2008 speech he did not 
once mention race. His remarkableautobiography 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/nov/06/president-obama-story-kenya-to-white-house-part-one>
 was the memoir not of a salvationist minority leader but of ayouth from a 
white family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/nov/04/barack-obama-grandmother-madelyn-dunham>
 searching for the roots of his blackness. The passion of the welcome for his 
presidency was due in large part to the symbolism of a barrier being breached.

What Obama understood was that he had become the president of a nation in need 
of healing, and that he faced a world still looking to America as an exemplar 
of a decent society. Of all recent presidents, Obama seemed the most committed 
to bringing people together – to globalisation in the best sense of the word.

Yet the central task for Obama after that November evening in 2008 was to 
convert the glory of his election into political capital. In this he failed. He 
did not clean the Augean stables of Washington, and suffered dearly for it. An 
assertive and partisan Congress was able to shackle him. It prevented him from 
establishing an electoral base sufficient to hold off a Republican resurgence, 
and thus protect his own legacy.

Under Obama there was no easing of racial tension, desperate as he was to 
achieve it. There was no gun control – and little evidence ofpolice control 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/31/the-counted-police-killings-2015-young-black-men>
. Guantánamo was not closed. America did not withdraw its lumbering military 
presence from places where it had no right or cause to be. It still has troops 
in Afghanistan and Iraq. Obama could not prevent the crazy Anglo-French 
intervention in Libya, of which heclearly disapproved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/12/barack-obama-says-libya-was-worst-mistake-of-his-presidency>
. Nor did he do anything but prolong the horror of Syria’s civil war, by 
backing the losing side.

In thrall to military advisers and lobbyists, Obama scattered his drones and 
special forces throughout the Muslim world, as counter-productive to peace as 
they ever were. He failed to discipline Israel or define a new relationship 
with Russia. Washington showed no understanding that terrorism was not the same 
as an attack on the security of a state.

The president and his Democrats thus left it open to Trump, of all people, to 
attack Wall Street and Washington’s beltway bubble. They left it to Trump to 
appear on the side of the small guy. They left it to him to champion 
non-intervention abroad and reassess the purposes of Nato in Europe. They left 
it to him to call for rapprochement, however sinister, with Russia.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fignore-prohecies-trump-obama-much-in-common-america-ability-to-stay-same%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3347128072035ff39c61e5858b08c3e148346659%2F0_86_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=With%20Barack%20Obama%E2%80%99s%20exit%20the%20US%20is%20losing%20a%20saint.%20But%20a%20sinner%20may%20make%20a%20better%20president%20%7C%20Simon%20Jenkins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fignore-prohecies-trump-obama-much-in-common-america-ability-to-stay-same%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=With%20Barack%20Obama%E2%80%99s%20exit%20the%20US%20is%20losing%20a%20saint.%20But%20a%20sinner%20may%20make%20a%20better%20president%20%7C%20Simon%20Jenkins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fignore-prohecies-trump-obama-much-in-common-america-ability-to-stay-same%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3347128072035ff39c61e5858b08c3e148346659%2F0_86_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
 ‘Watching the documentary Inside Obama’s White House, we sensed the 
president’s honed intelligence turning toughness to indecision’ Photograph: 
Pete Souza/BBC/The White House 
Of course Obama claimed to seek many of these things on coming to office, but 
he did not carry them through. There were moments in Norma Percy’s gripping 
2016 documentary,Inside Obama’s White House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/15/inside-obamas-white-house-barack-bbc-kim-kardashian-the-trouble-with-access-all-areas-tv>
, when we sensed his honed intelligence turning toughness to indecision.

Trump may not do what he claims to want to do – sane or insane. But if a good 
man fails to do what he promises, is it inevitable that a bad man will do 
worse? I think I prefer intelligent indecision to impetuosity. But as yet, who 
knows? A Trump presidency remains a wholly unknown quantity, not least, 
probably, to himself.

Eight years ago the whole world cried out for Obama. He was portrayed, 
unhelpfully, as an American messiah. No one cries “Messiah” of Trump, except on 
the wilder shores of political love. On Obama’s coming to power, the cliche was 
that “America will never be the same again”. For better or worse, it is much 
the same. But the same apocalyptic prophecies are being made of Trump.

Since they were not true of Obama, there is no reason to think they will be 
true of Trump. His enemies seem as likely to be within his own party as among 
his political opponents. When anything can happen, the only divide is between 
nature’s optimists and pessimists.

The mistake is clearly to exaggerate the significance of any president and of 
his room for manoeuvre. It was Obama’s undoing that the American constitution 
has a facility for throwing up barriers against the exercise of any sort of 
power.

Perhaps America’s friends should take comfort not from its capacity to change, 
but from its capacity to stay the same. That capacity has seldom seemed more 
needed than today.

• This article was amended on 17 January 2017 to correct the year of the 
documentary Inside Obama’s White House.
 