
It is fascinating to note that in just a few days Britain has become a country 
where so many people are now ready to speak positively and passionately about 
EU membership. With Brexit-hovering seen as a near-death experience for an 
entire country, people are scrambling to express their emotions about wanting 
to stay in.

I can only think of one other country where there was a (relatively 
comparable) public groundswell of sudden pro-EU sentiment: that’sUkraine, in 
December 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/01/ukraine-largest-street-protests-orange-revolution>
, when a generation understood it was being deprived of a future it thought was 
all but guaranteed, and then made its frustration very clear.

Ukrainians flocked on to the main square of their capital after learning they 
were about to be denied plans for an association agreement with the EU. That 
was the start of theMaidan movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/15/maidan-anti-maidan-ukraine-situation-nuance>
. Now in Britain social media is awash with calls to reject the breakup of 
links between the UK and the EU.

Tens of thousands signed up to join Tuesday’s event at Trafalgar Square 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/jun/28/thousands-of-pro-eu-demonstrators-protest-at-trafalgar-square-video>
, and more rallies are being announced. On Facebook, organisers said: 
“Regardless of the referendum result, we stand alongside the people of Europe 
to show we are inclusive, open and patient – we stay with Europe!”

This could be an ephemeral and geographically limited reaction. London voted 
massively for remain. One glimpse at the electoral map shows how the city 
resembles a large bubble detached from the rest of a mainly pro-Brexit England. 
Still, the passions that have been aroused are striking.Young people throughout 
Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/young-remain-voters-came-out-in-force-but-were-outgunned>
 favoured remain by a huge majority of 75%. They now feel something has been 
stolen from them. Shock and disappointment can be powerful motives for wanting 
to take things into your own hands.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fthousands-of-pro-eu-demonstrators-protest-at-trafalgar-square-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thousands%20of%20pro-EU%20demonstrators%20protest%20at%20Trafalgar%20Square%20and%20Westminster%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fthousands-of-pro-eu-demonstrators-protest-at-trafalgar-square-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thousands%20of%20pro-EU%20demonstrators%20protest%20at%20Trafalgar%20Square%20and%20Westminster%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fthousands-of-pro-eu-demonstrators-protest-at-trafalgar-square-video&media=>
Thousands of pro-EU demonstrators protest at Trafalgar Square – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/jun/28/thousands-of-pro-eu-demonstrators-protest-at-trafalgar-square-video>
It is far-fetched to think this will develop into anything resembling Maidan. 
The contrast withUkraine <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine> in 2013 
hardly needs to be described. Britain is not an autocratic state with a 
president who single-handedly decided to abandon links with the EU because he 
was put under pressure by a large neighbouring power. Britain has held a free, 
democratic referendum whose result cannot be swept aside and whose consequences 
everyone will have to live with.

Yet some kind of awakening seems to be under way. It is happening too late, 
after the referendum battle has been lost, and in the midst of violent, 
immediate aftershocks (financial, political and even xenophobic), which no 
doubt add to the disarray. But it is also a reaction that may, over time, turn 
the tide of one people’s attitude towards the EU as a project.

A decades-old British cold and distant approach to the European project has 
given way to outbreaks of panic in the face of what is about to be sacrificed, 
and a frantic desire to hold on to it. Perhaps it’s only when you are about to 
lose something that you start to cherish it; perhaps it’s only when you find 
yourself confronted with unprecedented disruptions that you start to yearn for 
life to go on the way you believed it would.

Whatever lies ahead, Britain's young people will one day work towards 
correcting the failures of their elders

Whatever the scale of the anti-leave protests that seem to be developing, at 
least online, they represent a turning point. This British moment of shock and 
awe sets the scene for a new outlook onEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. That pulling out of the EU is 
harmful to Britain’s national interests and especially those of its younger 
generation is a truth that has started to seep in, if ever it was doubted.

No satisfaction should be drawn from this, especially not from EU leaders as 
they gather in Brussels. Shows of schadenfreude or attempts to add pain to 
Britain’s self-inflicted humiliation would be the worst possible mistake – if 
ever Europe’s pieces can be picked up from here.

But if there is one bright side to an otherwise very dismal situation: it is 
that a sense of pro-European purpose and energy may now be appearing in a 
country where the EU had only ever been described in prosaic, if not hostile, 
terms. Britain is now discovering what it really meant to be part of a 
collective European endeavour.

Whatever lies ahead, its young people won’t forget this moment, and they will 
one day work towards correcting the failures of their elders. “Brexit not in my 
name” is trending on Twitter.

A new popular mood may be born, one in which the EU becomes a cause for 
engagement, for values and solidarity – not a scapegoat or a caricatured 
technocratic entity. If something good can be drawn from this referendum 
wreckage, it may be the beginning of a permanent, positive culture about Europe 
in Britain. That’s something that has never existed before. If only it had 
happened earlier.
 