
European capitals have been busy sending discreet emissaries to New York to 
sound out Donald Trump’s intentions. Angela Merkel, who on 9 November delivered 
ablunt warning to the US president-elect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/world-leaders-react-to-donald-trumps-us-election-victory>
, sent her close adviser ChristophHeusgen to meet General Michael Flynn 
<http://www.570news.com/2016/12/17/report-merkels-top-adviser-to-meet-michael-flynn-next-week/>
, the new national security adviser, in late December. François Hollande, who 
commented during Trump’s campaign that it made himwant to “throw up” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/03/francois-hollande-says-donald-trump-makes-you-want-to-retch>
, sent his diplomatic adviser,Jacques Audibert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/18/national-security-council-exodus-foreign-policy-michael-flynn>
. Now Theresa May has announced thatshe will travel to Washington to meet Trump 
directly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/05/theresa-mays-aides-visit-donald-trump-team-before-leaders-meeting>
 in the spring. But European leaders are still at a loss as to what to expect 
from the man – hardly surprising when major foreign policy pronouncements are 
made via Twitter. “We’re in another world” one German official recently told 
me, after pointing to how closely Merkel had worked with Obama on Ukraine and 
other issues.

Theresa May to visit Donald Trump in the spring, No 10 confirms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/05/theresa-mays-aides-visit-donald-trump-team-before-leaders-meeting>
Everything that is mind-boggling and distressing about Trump for liberal 
Americans is even more so for democratic Europeans, and that’s because of the 
angst attached to geopolitics. With Trump about to settle in the White House 
and Putin gloating in the Kremlin, two illiberals who like zero-sum games,Europe
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> finds itself dramatically 
caught between a rock and a hard place.

The rock is Trump’s propensity to disparage alliances and show sympathy for 
illiberal European politicians. The hard place is Putin’s expectation that 
more, not fewer, opportunities lie ahead to further his foreign policy goals – 
not least a rewriting of Europe’s architecture, to Russia’s benefit. Noises in 
central Europe that Trump will be keenly interested in the region because his 
wife was born in Slovenia smack of either irony or despair.

For Europe, two dangers arise. The first is that the principles on which the 
transatlantic link was founded in the 1949 North Atlantic Treaty, including the 
pledge to uphold “democracy, individual liberty and the rule of law 
<http://www.nato.int/cps/en/natolive/official_texts_17120.htm>”, might head for 
the dustbin. The second is that Europe may witness a return to spheres of 
influence, something that has historically plagued it, and essentially amounts 
to saying this: might makes right, and the strong do what they can while the 
weak suffer what they must. Not much seems to separate Trump from Putin on that 
account.

If this is the new normal, expect an unseemly European scramble, with 
governments rushing to try to secure their own interests whatever the cost to 
neighbours and the continent’s future. Putin will be waiting with open arms for 
those who, whether out of admiration or fear, might want to compensate American 
strategic withdrawal by seeking lofty arrangements with the great eastern 
neighbour. Peeling Europe away from the US is an objective Putin has long made 
clear. A strong, coordinated Europe is in Putin’s interest only if it is 
ideologically favourable to him – with cultural nativists such as Marine Le Pen,
Geert Wilders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/18/dutch-far-right-leader-geert-wilders-goeson-trial-for-inciting-hatred>
 andViktor Orbán 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/03/migration-crisis-hungary-pm-victor-orban-europe-response-madness>
 calling the shots. If liberal democracy can resist, however, especially in 
France and Germany, then he will continue working to achieve a weak and 
fractured Europe.

Here lies the immediate challenge. Senior figures, including heads of 
intelligence, in Berlin have been publicly sounding the alarm about a Russian 
strategy devised todisrupt forthcoming German elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/german-spy-chief-russian-hackers-could-disrupt-elections-bruno-kahl-cyber-attacks>
 through disinformation and hacking campaigns. Officials in Paris have been 
much less vocal but are similarly anxious. It is significant that Germany’s 
democratic parties have been consulting on how to react in case of a massive 
email hack. The intent seems to be a pledge to refrain from exploiting their 
content in the campaign. But with a US president ready to condemn any criticism 
or exposure of Russia’s cyber activities, do European politicians not risk 
finding themselves out on a limb?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Ftrump-putin-europe-rock-hard-place-exploit-eu-cracks-solidarity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbf95c8608ea3631b2e73024a9d727bd4f3824d0%2F0_10_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=With%20Trump%20and%20Putin%2C%20Europe%20is%20now%20between%20a%C2%A0rock%20and%20a%20hard%20place%20%7C%20Natalie%20Nougayr%C3%A8de&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Ftrump-putin-europe-rock-hard-place-exploit-eu-cracks-solidarity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=With%20Trump%20and%20Putin%2C%20Europe%20is%20now%20between%20a%C2%A0rock%20and%20a%20hard%20place%20%7C%20Natalie%20Nougayr%C3%A8de&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Ftrump-putin-europe-rock-hard-place-exploit-eu-cracks-solidarity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbf95c8608ea3631b2e73024a9d727bd4f3824d0%2F0_10_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 The official signing ceremony in Washington that created the North Atlantic 
Treaty Organisation in April 1949. Photograph: EPA 
It’s not as if Europe has never felt deep unease with a US president. George W 
Bush’s invasion of Iraq left the continent deeply divided. Guantánamo and 
torture inflicted severe damage to America’s image. But Obama’s “reset” was 
hardly convincing either – especially when in 2009 he announced he was
curtailing European missile defence plans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/sep/17/missile-defence-shield-poland-obama>
 on the anniversary of the1939 Soviet invasion of Poland 
<http://www.history.com/this-day-in-history/soviet-union-invades-poland>. More 
importantly, Obama’s momentous failures in Syria have cost Europe dearly, not 
just because of the way the refugee crisis upended European politics, but also 
because the strategic space he handed to Putin arguably empowered the Russian 
leader to turn on Ukraine so aggressively in 2014.

Nor would making “deals” with Putin, as Trump has promised, be in itself a 
crime or a fallacy. After all, Obama made deals withRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> on nuclear issues and on 
Afghanistan. The question that haunts Europe is whether Trump’s definition of a 
deal entails alignment with whatever conditions Putin may set forward. So far 
the mood within major European governments seems to be to try for damage 
limitation.

German spy chief says Russian hackers could disrupt elections
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/german-spy-chief-russian-hackers-could-disrupt-elections-bruno-kahl-cyber-attacks>
In Berlin the hope is that Trump can gradually be convinced to uphold a legacy 
of 70 years of US engagement in Europe. Germany, however much it may be 
embraced as “the last leader of the west”, can hardly go it alone. In Paris, 
anti-terrorism cooperation is likely to be put forward. Britain wants to 
salvage whatever it can from the “special relationship” as it heads for its EU 
exit. Pressure from traditional Republicans in Congress is undoubtedly counted 
on. But European officials are still left despondent. “We’re waiting, let’s 
see” is the general comment.

It’s expected that the first key test will play out in the Donbass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/24/ukraine-conflict-donbass-russia-rebels-foreigners-fighting>
. If Trump backtracks on sanctions against Russia over Ukraine, will the EU be 
able to maintain a common front? German officials privately hint this may 
create a transatlantic rift that they wouldn’t shy away from if Europe’s 
collective interests are deemed at stake. “We may need to go there” says one, 
quickly adding a lot will depend on the French presidential vote.

There are a few bright spots in this otherwise bleak picture. If anything has 
contributed to strengthening European cohesion on Putin, it’s the indignation 
produced byRussia’s mass bombing raids on civilians in Aleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/04/russian-bombs-trigger-mass-aleppo-exodus-syria-conference-told>
. There is also continuing talk of boosting European defence resources.

But no one knows quite what to make of Trump’s maverick style or, for that 
matter, his strategy. There is real bitterness in the air. Obama had 
confidently promised one high-level EU official last year: “Don’t worry, I 
won’t let this guy get near the White House.” Some say the only advantage to 
Trump’s arrival is that Putin has suddenly lost the monopoly on utter 
unpredictability. A short-term consolation perhaps, but not one that does much 
for confidence-building.
 