
If there is an irrepressible human trait it’s the determination, against all 
odds, to reconnect. Though governments seek to atomise and rule, we will keep 
finding ways to come together. Our social brains forbid any other outcome. They 
urge us to reach out, even when the world seems hostile.

This is the conclusion I draw from touring England 
<http://www.ewanmclennan.co.uk/breaking-the-spell-of-loneliness> over the past 
few weeks, talking aboutloneliness and mental health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/nov/29/loneliness-eye-contact-oliver-burkeman>
. Everywhere I have been so far, I’ve come across the same, double-sided story: 
stark failures of government offset in part by the extraordinary force of human 
kindness.

First the bad news: reminders of the shocking state of our mental health 
services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/09/police-forces-mental-health-section-136>
. I met people who had waited a year for treatment, only to be given the wrong 
therapy. I heard how the thresholds for treatment are repeatedly being raised, 
to ration services. I met one practitioner who had been told, as a result of 
the cuts, to recommend computerised cognitive behaviour therapy to her 
patients. In other words, instead of working with a therapist, people mustsit 
at a screen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2005/aug/30/g2.onlinesupplement>, using 
a programme to try to address disorders likely to have been caused or 
exacerbated by social isolation. Why not just write these patients a 
prescription instructing them to bog off and die?At least then they wouldn’t 
have to wait a year to be told to consult their laptops. I heard of children 
profoundly damaged by abuse and neglect being sent to secure accommodation – 
imprisoned in other words – not for their own safety, or other people’s, but 
because there is nowhere else for them to go.

These are not isolated cases. It is a systemic problem. There has been no 
child and adolescent mental health survey 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201415/cmselect/cmhealth/342/34205.htm>
 in this country since 2004 (though one is now planned). Snapshot studies 
suggest something is going badly wrong:figures published last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/23/nhs-figures-show-shocking-rise-self-harm-young-people>
, for example, suggest a near quadrupling in the past 10 years of girls 
admitted to hospital after cutting themselves. But there are no comprehensive 
figures. Imagine the outcry if the government had published no national figures 
on childhood cancer for 12 years, and was unable to tell you whether it was 
rising or falling.

Of children referred for treatment for mental health disorders, 60% do not 
receive it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/04/nhs-child-mental-health-services-anxiety-depression>
. The Guardian recentlypublished a mother’s account of how her child had been 
treated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/03/childrens-mental-health-in-crisis-readers-share-their-stories>
. Despite a severe mental health disorder, it was only after the child 
attempted suicide that she received the care she needed. The treatment 
consisted of sending her to the other end of the country: the only available 
bed was 300 miles from home. You don’t need to be a psychotherapist to imagine 
what that might do to a distressed and vulnerable child. But when the beds 
don’t exist, the health service has no choice. Embarrassed into a semblance of 
action, the coalition governmentpromised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/mar/14/uk-budget-to-include-extra-money-for-mental-health-services-say-lib-dems>
 another £250m a year for children’s mental health. It will scarcely touch the 
sides.

But amid the rubble of a collapsing state, I kept stumbling into something 
wonderful.Performing with the musician Ewan McLennan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/20/ewan-mclennan-and-george-monbiot-breaking-the-spell-of-loneliness-review-fellside>
, using music and the spoken word to explore these subjects, has brought me 
into contact with groups that restore my faith in the human spirit.

In Leeds we ate in a cafe run by the Real Junk Food Project 
<http://therealjunkfoodproject.org/>, whose meals are made from waste or 
donated food. Seeing people of all ages, from all stations of life, who had 
never come together before, yakking away over dinner like old friends, I 
realised that the project is addressing not only the waste of food but also the 
waste of social opportunity. Breaking bread together: this is still the best 
and simplest way of reconnecting.

Neoliberalism is creating loneliness. That’s what’s wrenching society apart | 
George Monbiot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/12/neoliberalism-creating-loneliness-wrenching-society-apart>
In Sheffield I met a man creating safe spaces 
<http://www.rootandbranchderbyshire.org/> for people experiencing manic or 
psychotic episodes: using woods, allotments and – if his project gets planning 
permission – cobb houses like hobbit holes to create a place of comfort for 
those whose minds are reeling. In Durham I saw how people whose poor mental 
health and isolation exclude them from work are beinggently introduced to the 
social skills and creativity <http://www.waddingtoncentre.co.uk/> that might 
allow them to re-engage. In Bristol I met someone fromthe Happy City initiative 
<http://www.happycity.org.uk/>, which is finding ways to measure wellbeing and 
discovering the best means of enhancing it.

Across the country, groups such as the Campaign to End Loneliness 
<http://www.campaigntoendloneliness.org/>, Age UK <http://www.ageuk.org.uk/>, 
Independent Age <https://www.independentage.org/>, Community Network 
<http://communitynetworkprojects.org/>, Young Minds 
<http://www.youngminds.org.uk/>, the Transition Network 
<https://transitionnetwork.org/>, the Network of Wellbeing 
<http://www.networkofwellbeing.org/> and the forthcoming Jo Cox Commisssion on 
Loneliness are trying to provide a coherent response to the troubled times that 
lead to troubled minds. Everywhere I look, I see the kind of enterprise and 
innovation with which business is credited, but which seems to be found most 
often in the voluntary sector.

But what has struck me with greatest force is this. At the end of every gig, 
we ask people in the audience to turn to someone they don’t know and say hello. 
I tell them they needn’t do any more than that, but they can keep talking if 
they wish. On the first night I made the mistake of mentioning the idea before 
we had wrapped up the show. That was all it took – the conversation flared up 
immediately, and it was a long time before I could direct people’s attention 
back to the stage. After every concert the talking has continued long into the 
night, in the venue’s bar or the nearest pub. It’s as if people have simply 
been waiting for permission to speak to the strangers who surround them.

Britain, according to government figures, is the loneliness capital of Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jul/20/loneliness-britains-silent-plague-hurts-young-people-most>
, but even – or perhaps especially – here, the urge to connect is overwhelming. 
This reattachment, I believe, holds the key to both our psychological and 
political transformation. Connected, engaged and happy people do not allow 
themselves to be trampled into the dirt. It is when we are estranged both from 
each other and from our political environment that we are easiest to 
manipulate, asthe rise of demagoguery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/19/welcome-to-the-age-of-trump> 
in Europe and the US seems to attest.

Neither state provision nor community action is a substitute for the other: we 
need both. But the more effective community groups and voluntary initiatives 
become, the harder it is for governments to disregard their duties. By talking 
together, we find our voice.

• You can catch up on our discussion on this article in our Your Opinions 
thread. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/02/your-opinions-brexit-and-expats-mark-carneys-fate-and-our-estranged-society>
 