
When Marmite and PG Tips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/12/tesco-running-low-key-unilever-brands-price-row-supplier-supermarket-falling-pound>
 enter the Brexit wars, reality starts to bite – and sooner than expected. As 
David Davis was on his feet in the Commons on Wednesday,refusing to defend 
staying in the single market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/12/brexit-mps-david-davis-eu-exit-plan>
, thepound plunged again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/11/pound-completes-worst-four-day-performance-since-brexit-vote>
. Anyone changing their money at the airport today will find everything in 
Europecosting them 23% more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/11/winners-losers-sterling-plunge-brexit>
 than it did on 22 June.

Unilever says all its prices must rise by 10% – which is still less than the 
15% fall in the pound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/oct/13/pound-sterling-brexit-price-row-tesco-unilever-live>
, so expect worse to come. TheUnilever spat with Tesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/12/tesco-running-low-key-unilever-brands-price-row-supplier-supermarket-falling-pound>
 over who pays is just a sideshow, as other retailerswarn of steep price rises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/12/british-shoppers-told-to-expect-price-rises-after-steep-fall-in-pound>
, as we import so many essentials. BT’s chairman says imported phones and 
broadband hubsare already up 10% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/12/pound-drops-further-after-davis-hints-uk-could-leave-single-market>
. Each day the Financial Times reports more banks declaring they aremoving 
significant functions abroad 
<https://www.ft.com/content/a3a92744-3a52-11e6-9a05-82a9b15a8ee7>, while car 
manufacturerslook to invest elsewhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/28/uk-car-manufacturing-hits-high-industry-warns-brexit-effect>
 in the EU for their new models. As prices rise, the great majority of the 
population, whose incomes have been stagnant for nearly a decade, will see 
their living standards fall.
Nick Sutton (@suttonnick) 
Thursday's Daily Mail -
Theresa: I'm siding with Britons who voted for Brexit#tomorrowspaperstoday 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/tomorrowspaperstoday?src=hash> #bbcpapers 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/bbcpapers?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/lMSXuAt9yU 
<https://t.co/lMSXuAt9yU>
 <https://twitter.com/suttonnick/status/786316289111363585> October 12, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/suttonnick/status/786316289111363585> 
If this were a sterling crisis knowingly created by some extreme 
anti-business, ideologically-driven Labour government, the attacks on it from 
all sides would almost certainly see it fall. In contrast, theDaily Mail’s 
front page today 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3835341/I-m-siding-Britons-voted-Brexit-says-Theresa-PM-tells-MPs-time-listened-British-people-tensions-rise.html>
 is “Theresa: I’m siding with Britons who voted for Brexit”, as she warns MPs 
to “respect the will of the people and stop trying to halt Brexit”. The Express 
headlines, yet again, “Plot to betray EU exit voters 
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/politics/720575/Theresa-May-Brexit-voters-protest>
”,after yesterday’s 
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/uk/720116/Brexit-Britain-European-Union-Remainers>
, “Forget angry remainers – slash ties with Brussels NOW”.The Sun’s take on the 
price rises 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/1967184/how-unilevers-fatcat-boss-took-home-9-4million-last-year-and-went-on-anti-brexit-marches/>
 is that it’s all the fault of “Brexit bandits”. “Remain-loving Unilever bosses 
threatened before the referendum to hike prices up if a Brexit vote won – in a 
bitter “extortion” tactic that will hit the pockets of hard-working Brits.”

Daily Mail's attack on 'Bremoaners' reflects editor's Brexit fears
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/12/daily-mail-bremoaners-brexit-mps-cbi-bbc-paul-dacre>
As the real-world effect of leaving the EU begins, will there come a tipping 
point when these Brexit-deniers have to confront their reckless 20-year 
campaign to cut us off from our main markets? Probably not. Post-truth 
reporting will keep denying it, or will find other enemies to blame, preferably 
foreign (the Sun points out that Unilever is part Dutch). Meanwhile, Boris 
Johnson, appearing before the foreign affairs select committee, joins the
outright, in-your-face deniers <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-37642902>
: ”Those who prophesied Brexit doom have been proved wrong.” So that’s all 
right then.

Could the time ever come when Rupert Murdoch or the Mail’s Paul Dacre might 
see the country facing such serious disaster that they decide to relent? 
Unlikely, as day after day they pretend that anyone who wants to stay in the 
single market is denying the referendum result. It was their non-stop 
pre-referendum migrant horror headlines that helped bring us to the point where
an Ipsos Mori international poll 
<https://www.ipsos-mori.com/researchpublications/researcharchive/3791/New-global-poll-finds-Britons-most-worried-about-immigration.aspx>
 today shows the British put worry about immigration higher (42%) than any of 
the other 25 countries polled, despite many other countries having far higher 
immigration rates. That’s the formidable challenge faced by “soft” Brexit 
advocates.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fdavid-davis-we-are-putting-together-our-negotiating-brexit-strategy-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Davis%3A%20We%20are%20putting%20together%20our%20negotiating%20Brexit%20strategy%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fdavid-davis-we-are-putting-together-our-negotiating-brexit-strategy-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Davis%3A%20We%20are%20putting%20together%20our%20negotiating%20Brexit%20strategy%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fdavid-davis-we-are-putting-together-our-negotiating-brexit-strategy-video&media=>
David Davis: We are putting together our negotiating Brexit strategy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/oct/12/david-davis-we-are-putting-together-our-negotiating-brexit-strategy-video>
Every speaker in yesterday’s exceptional Commons debate confirmed we are 
leaving the EU. There is no “plot to betray” the referendum result. What was 
revealed was the extremists’ mania for an ever fiercer, harder Brexit: nothing 
will be enough for John Redwood, Bill Cash, Bernard Jenkin or Peter Bone who 
spoke out to back David Davis’s refusal to make the single market a priority. 
Any attempt to salvage favourable trading terms was denounced as 
anti-democratic treachery.

Britain, get real: Brexit means whatever the EU says it means | Joris Luyendijk
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/12/britain-brexit-eu-pound-euro>
This is now the one great issue for the future of the country, overriding 
everything else, jumping party barriers as never before, forging some very 
strange alliances. The Tory “softs” in full throat gave a remarkable display of 
boldness: Dominic Grieve, Anna Soubry, Claire Perry, Chris Philp and, of 
course, Ken Clarke, were heroic in confronting their own front bench. Jeremy 
Corbyn used allsix of his questions at prime minister’s questions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/12/jeremy-corbyn-pushes-theresa-may-over-shambolic-tory-brexit>
 to fire at Theresa May on Brexit, without drifting off-piste. Behind him 
suddenly there was a united Labour party, afterKeir Starmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/video/2016/oct/12/keir-starmer-on-brexit-on-what-terms-should-we-leave-the-eu-video>
’s forensic opening onslaught. Nick Clegg hammered effectively. Nicola Sturgeon 
joins the same united battle to protect tariff-free trading, though her 
bombshell onanother independence referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/13/nicola-sturgeon-challenges-may-with-second-referendum-bill-scottish-independence-snp-conference>
 undermines that unity of purpose. But in all, the common cause against May and 
her Brexiteers looks formidable – and this is just the start.

Today’s court case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/13/government-cannot-trigger-brexit-without-mps-backing-court-told-article-50>
 over parliament’s right to vote before triggering article 50 deserves to be 
won: if the referendum was about returning sovereignty to parliament, how odd 
to hear May and her team refusing it. But does it matter much? The majority in 
parliament is for remain, but what MP would dare vote down the referendum 
result?

Every day that passes shows how disastrous a referendum can be. Bad election 
results can be reclaimed by throwing the bastards out, but a referendum falls 
like a guillotine. Yet its terms were never defined. The public – as expressed 
inadequately in opinion polls – will have to decide how much pain they are 
willing to take in living standards for how much gain in migration control. The 
symbolism of the cost of Marmite may mark the beginning of a shift in people’s 
priorities. Any change in attitudes would strengthen the great new cross-party 
alliance trying to steer us to a soft landing and save us from shipwreck on the 
rocks of the Brexit fanatics.
 