
It’s hardly a revelation that women’s rights over their own bodies are not of 
much concern to Donald Trump. He has over the yearsflip-flopped on abortion 
rights 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/04/03/donald-trumps-ever-shifting-positions-on-abortion/>
, at some stages describing himself as pro-choice. Once he began seeking 
office, in an appeal to certain Republican elements he started making 
increasingly anti-abortion statements. I say statements because his beliefs 
seem to have no core aside from the servicing of his own ego. During the 
campaign he promised to ban abortion: “I am pro-life 
<http://2016.candidate-comparison.org/?compare=Trump&vs=Clinton&on=abortion>”. 
At one point hesuggested women should be punished for having abortions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/30/donald-trump-women-abortions-punishment>
. He said during the third presidential debate that third trimester abortions 
are legal and supported by Hillary Clinton.Neither of these things were true 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2016/live-updates/general-election/real-time-fact-checking-and-analysis-of-the-final-2016-presidential-debate/fact-check-trumps-claim-on-abortions-up-until-the-moment-of-birth/>
.

Donald Trump backs same-sex marriage but not abortion under supreme court 
threat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/trump-supreme-court-abortion-same-sex-marriage>
His anti–abortion stance was part of his electoral strategy. When asked 
whether he would try to overturnRoe v Wade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/roe-v-wade>, the 1973 supreme court 
judgment that made abortion legal in the US, he basically said the way to 
overturn it was to make him president.

And so it begins. One of the first decisions he will make will be appointing a 
supreme court judge to fill the vacancy left followingJustice Scalia’s death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/13/antonin-scalia-dead-us-supreme-court-justice-obituary>
 last year and has signalled his intention to appoint judges who want to 
overturn Roe v Wade. “I’m pro-life. The judges will be pro-life”he told Sixty 
Minutes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/trump-supreme-court-abortion-same-sex-marriage>
. He said the if the decision were overturned, each state would have to decide 
whether to ban abortion or not.

This is one issue where Hilary Clinton was always completely solid: the 
reproductive rights of girls and women. I am well aware that many white women 
voted for Trump, and that many American women are anti–abortion, but the 
rolling back of these rights will hit poorest women the hardest. Many Democrats 
were concerned with not just protecting the right to abortion but extending 
access, and understood that the inequalities between women played out in their 
access to healthcare.

Though we keep being told that part of Trump’s success was somehow the end of 
identity politics, it is quite clear that it is about the reassertion of one 
identity at the cost of all others: that of white men. The bodies of women are 
collateral. The lives of black people are collateral.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fsteve-bannon-trump-misogyny-roe-v-wade-threat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7aab0e4a2f5b286200abaabf75cd6d19ba539dd%2F502_15_2075_1245%2F2075.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=With%20Bannon%2C%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20signed%20up%20the%20meme-makers%20of%20misogyny%20%7C%20Suzanne%20Moore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fsteve-bannon-trump-misogyny-roe-v-wade-threat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=With%20Bannon%2C%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20signed%20up%20the%20meme-makers%20of%20misogyny%20%7C%20Suzanne%20Moore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fsteve-bannon-trump-misogyny-roe-v-wade-threat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7aab0e4a2f5b286200abaabf75cd6d19ba539dd%2F502_15_2075_1245%2F2075.jpg>
 ‘The appointment of Steve Bannon as “chief strategist and senior counselor” 
means that those who have been attacking the progressive narrative from the far 
right are now horrifyingly in positions of power.’ Photograph: Chip 
Somodevilla/Getty 
The appointment of Steve Bannon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/stephen-bannon-reince-priebus-donald-trump-white-house-staff>
 as “chief strategist and senior counselor” means that those who have been 
attacking the progressive narrativefrom the far right 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/who-are-trump-appointees-reince-priebus-and-stephen-bannon>
 are now horrifyingly in positions of power. Those on the left who argued 
during the election that there was not fundamentally much difference between 
Trump and Clinton clearly saw women’s bodily autonomy as some sort of elite 
liberal issue.

The euphemistic talk around unplanned pregnancies hides the fact that it is 
those women at the bottom who suffer most without basic healthcare. The idea 
that reproductive rights are human rights or that human rights even matter is 
anathema to Trump’s entourage.

Donald Trump retracts call for women who have abortions to be 'punished'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/30/donald-trump-women-abortions-punishment>
Do not forget that the website Breitbart News, of which Bannon was executive 
chairman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/20/steve-bannon-profile-breitbart-trump-campaign-manager>
, is open in its contempt for feminism and in its calls for ethnic segregation. 
They were the “meme-makers” both of white supremacy and virulent misogyny. 
Abortion providers are routinely are compared to the murderers of the Holocaust.

The autonomy of women is a threat to these people, which is why once again the 
rights of women to control their own bodies may be decided by men. There are 
many battles to be fought right now, but this one has to be fought over and 
over again.
 