
Outside was panic. Barely a couple of hours after Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> had been declared the next 
president of the United States and even the political columnists, those sleek 
interlocutors of power, were in shock. At theNational Gallery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/national-gallery> in London, however, 
one of the few thinkers to have anticipated Trump’s rise was ready to see some 
paintings. Over from Germany for a few days of lectures,Wolfgang Streeck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/wolfgang-streeck> had an afternoon spare – 
and we both wanted to see theBeyond Caravaggi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/16/beyond-caravaggio-review-national-gallery>
o exhibition.

Nothing in his work prepares you for meeting Streeck (pronounced Stray-k). 
Professionally, he is the political economist barking last orders for our way 
of life, and warning of the “dark ages” ahead. His books bear bluntly 
fin-de-siecle titles: two years ago wasBuying Time 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/buying-time-472181.html>, while the latest is 
calledHow Will Capitalism End 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/how-will-capitalism-end.html>? (spoiler: not 
well). Even his admirers talk of his “despair”, by which they mean sentences 
such as this: “Before capitalism will go to hell, it will for the foreseeable 
future hang in limbo, dead or about to die from an overdose of itself but still 
very much around, as nobody will have the power to move its decaying body out 
of the way.”

What does such gloom look like in the flesh? Small glasses, neat side parting 
and moustache, a backpack, a smart anorak and at least a decade younger than 
his 70 years. Alluding to Trump’s victory, he cheerily declares “What a 
morning!” as if discussing the likelihood of rain, then strolls into the 
gallery.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fwolfgang-streeck-the-german-economist-calling-time-on-capitalism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F793f0590ee8d592c04363c1f2881aa8bd63098bb%2F76_142_877_1097%2F877.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wolfgang%20Streeck%3A%20%E2%80%98Look%20at%20London%20%E2%80%93%20it%E2%80%99s%20a%20second%20Rome.%20This%20is%20what%20an%20empire%20looks%20like%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fwolfgang-streeck-the-german-economist-calling-time-on-capitalism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wolfgang%20Streeck%3A%20%E2%80%98Look%20at%20London%20%E2%80%93%20it%E2%80%99s%20a%20second%20Rome.%20This%20is%20what%20an%20empire%20looks%20like%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fwolfgang-streeck-the-german-economist-calling-time-on-capitalism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F793f0590ee8d592c04363c1f2881aa8bd63098bb%2F76_142_877_1097%2F877.jpg>
 Decadence… Caravaggio’s Boy Bitten by a Lizard. Photograph: The National 
Gallery London 
You don’t merely look at a Caravaggio; you square up to one. The scenes are 
tightly cropped, with characters that jostle and stare at the viewer. Their 
mordancy is a tonic to Streeck, who laughs with delight. He pauses in front of
Boy Bitten by a Lizard 
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/michelangelo-merisi-da-caravaggio-boy-bitten-by-a-lizard>
 and admires how the lizard clings on with its teeth to the boy’s finger. At a 
scene of cardsharps he exclaims, “Feel the decadence! The threat of violence!”

He notes how many paintings date from just before the thirty years’ war: 
“They’re full of the anticipation that the world is about to fall apart.”

Then comes The Taking of Christ 
<http://www.nationalgallery.ie/~/media/Images/Large%20Image/Collections/Highlights/Irish%20Highlights/TakingofChrist.ashx?bc=ffffff&w=649>
, a dark, dense painting that shows Jesus just after his betrayal by Judas. 
Gripped by his treacherous former disciple, Christ looks down, ready to be 
bundled off by the armoured Roman centurions. “Caravaggio is always there just 
before the explosion,” Streeck observes. “This morning might have been a 
Caravaggio moment: just before the election of Trump.”

Like Caravaggio before the explosion, Streeck has been hanging around this 
crash scene for years – long before the plane came hurtling down and the 
centrist politicians and pundits began rushing around.

At a time when macroeconomists have failed and other academics have retreated 
into disciplinary solipsism, Streeck is one of the few (other exceptions 
include Mark Blyth, Colin Crouch and the Centre for Research on Socio-Cultural 
Change) to have risen to the moment. Many of the themes that will define this 
year, this decade, are in his work. The breakup of Europe, the rise of 
plutocrat-populists such as Trump, the failures of Mark Carney and the 
technocratic elite: he has anatomised all of them.

Why should oligarchs be interested in their countries’ democratic stability 
if, apparently, they can be rich without it?

This summer, Britons mutinied against their government, their experts and the 
EU – and consigned themselves to a poorer, angrier future. Such frenzies of 
collective self-harm were explained by Streeck in the 2012 lectures later 
collected inBuying Time:

Professionalised political science tends to underestimate the impact of moral 
outrage. With its penchant for studied indifference … [it] has nothing but 
elitist contempt for what it calls “populism”, sharing this with the power 
elites to which it would like to be close … [But] citizens too can “panic” and 
react “irrationally”, just like financial investors … even though they have no 
banknotes as arguments but only words and (who knows?) paving stones.

Here he is in 2013 <http://www.mpifg.de/pu/mpifg_dp/dp13-7.pdf>, foreshadowing 
the world of LuxLeaks, SwissLeaks and the Panama Papers and their revelations 
of a one-sided class war – by the 1% against the rest of us:

Why should the new oligarchs be interested in their countries’ future 
productive capacities and present democratic stability if, apparently, they can 
be rich without it, processing back and forth the synthetic money produced for 
them at no cost by a central bank for which the sky is the limit, at each stage 
diverting from it hefty fees and unprecedented salaries, bonuses, and profits 
as long as it is forthcoming – and then leave their country to its remaining 
devices and withdraw to some privately owned island?

And in a 2015 essay <http://www.mpifg.de/pu/mpifg_dp/dp15-1.pdf>, he warns 
that resentment against such elites will not be wholesomely Fabian but will 
instead take the form either of “public entertainment” or “some politically 
regressive sort of nationalism”. It will look less like Hillary than Donald:

Politicization is migrating to the right side of the political spectrum where 
anti-establishment parties are getting better and better at organising 
discontented citizens dependent upon public services and insisting on political 
protection from international markets.

In such long, precise, comfortless sentences, Streeck sets out the crises 
facing Britain, the US and the continent. His diagnosis is both political and 
economic, and it makes him what Chris Bickerton, a lecturer in politics at 
Cambridge, thinks might be “the most interesting person around today on the 
subject of the relationship between democracy and capitalism”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fwolfgang-streeck-the-german-economist-calling-time-on-capitalism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44ad1da864c70935210d33620b31c05fbea4daaf%2F0_126_4300_2580%2F4300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wolfgang%20Streeck%3A%20%E2%80%98Look%20at%20London%20%E2%80%93%20it%E2%80%99s%20a%20second%20Rome.%20This%20is%20what%20an%20empire%20looks%20like%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fwolfgang-streeck-the-german-economist-calling-time-on-capitalism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wolfgang%20Streeck%3A%20%E2%80%98Look%20at%20London%20%E2%80%93%20it%E2%80%99s%20a%20second%20Rome.%20This%20is%20what%20an%20empire%20looks%20like%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fwolfgang-streeck-the-german-economist-calling-time-on-capitalism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44ad1da864c70935210d33620b31c05fbea4daaf%2F0_126_4300_2580%2F4300.jpg>
 Lehman Brothers headquarters in New York’s Times Square, 2008. Photograph: 
Mark Lennihan/AP 
Which makes him the most interesting person on the most urgent subject of our 
times. Eight years afterLehman Brothers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lehmanbrothers> keeled over and nearly 
took the entire banking system down with it, capitalism remains broken. British 
workers are suffering their most severe pay squeeze in at least seven decades. 
And even though politicians and the policymakers have pulled on every lever – 
cuts, investment, housing boom, hundreds of billions pumped into the markets – 
still the engine refuses to purr. The failure is international: the Bank of 
International Settlements, the central banks’ central bank, warned a few months 
ago that “the global economy seems unable to return to sustainable and balanced 
growth”.

Not for the first time, the sandwich board-wearers are declaring the end of 
capitalism – but today Streeck believes they are right. In its deepest crises, 
he says, modern capitalism has relied on its enemies to wade in with the 
lifebelt of reform. During the Great Depression of the 30s, it was FDR’s 
Democrats who rolled out the New Deal, whileBritain’s trade unionists allied 
with Keynes 
<http://touchstoneblog.org.uk/2016/11/ernest-bevin-and-three-lessons-for-rethinking-economics/>
.

Compare that with now. Over 40 years, neoliberal capitalism has destroyed its 
opposition. WhenMargaret Thatcher was asked to give her greatest achievement 
<http://conservativehome.blogs.com/centreright/2008/04/making-history.html>, 
she nominated “Tony Blair and New Labour. We forced our opponents to change 
their minds.” The prime minister who declared “There is no alternative”, then 
did her damnedest to extirpate any such alternative. The result? The unions are 
withered, the independent tenants’ associations have disappeared along with the 
stock of council housing, the BBC is forever on the back foot, and local, 
regional and national newspapers are now the regular subjects of obituaries. A 
similar story can be told across the rich world.

Public discontent is fitful and fragmented, ready to fall into Trump’s tiny 
hands. Meanwhile, capitalism – unrestrained and unreformed – will die.

This isn’t the violent overthrow envisaged by Marx and Engels. In The 
Communist Manifesto, they argued that capitalism’s “gravediggers” would be the 
proletariat. Nearly 170 years later, Streeck is predicting that the capitalists 
will be their own gravediggers, through having destroyed the workers and the 
dissidents they needed to maintain the system. What comes next is not some 
better replacement but is more akin to the centuries-long rotting away of the 
Roman empire.

And, yes, his latest book is out just in time for Christmas. Not so long ago, 
such catastrophism would have been the stuff of Speakers’ Corner. Today, it 
goes right to the brokenness of politics.

Streeck is admired by the team around Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> and John McDonnell, and 
was invited to this year’s Labour conference in Liverpool (work commitments 
forced him to decline). One senior adviser described his relevance to British 
politics thus: “He is pretty blunt about how serious the situation is, for 
social democracy and capitalism.”

That we could modify capitalism towards equality and tame the beast – now 
those are utopian ideals

What gives Streeck’s analysis extra force is that he comes from the very 
establishment he now attacks. He has played many key roles: joint head of 
Germany’s top social science institute, an adviser in the late 90s to Gerhard 
Schröder’s government, one of Europe’s most eminent theorists of capitalism. 
While never a Third Way-er, he was friendly with David and Ed Miliband.

“I spent a long time in my life exploring the possibilities for an intelligent 
social democratic solution of the class conflict,” he explains over lunch. “The 
idea that we could modify capitalism towards equality and social justice. That 
we could tame the beast. Now I think those are more or less utopian ideals.”

He is thus a case study in the very thing he writes about: the demoralisation 
of centrist politics – and its radicalisation.

The great disillusionment came upon returning to Germany in 1995, after years 
teaching industrial relations in the US. It was the era of Germany being 
labelled “the sick man of Europe”, when one in five east German workers were 
unemployed. Through the metalworkers’ trade union, Streeck was invited to join 
a committee of trade unions, employers and government. Called the Alliance for 
Jobs (Bündnis für Arbeit), its task was to reform labour laws. Streeck believed 
this was “the last call for trade unions and social democracy”: the final 
chance to get more people into work without stripping workers of their rights.

“We came up with a good model, but everything we proposed was blocked – not 
just by the employers but by the unions, too.”

The Alliance fell apart and within a couple of years, Schröder had brought in 
the Hartz reforms – policies drawn up by a former Volkswagen executive that set 
up a new regime of workfare and benefit sanctions, and kicked the bottom out of 
the labour market.

A member of the Social Democratic Party, Germany’s counterpart to Labour, 
since the age of 16, Streeck finally cancelled his subs a few years ago. Would 
he still place himself as a social democrat? He quotes Keynes: “When the facts 
change, I change my mind.” Inanother interview 
<https://www.jacobinmag.com/2016/02/wolfgang-streeck-europe-eurozone-austerity-neoliberalism-social-democracy/>
 he has described “the most urgent task for the left” as “sobering up”.

The constant sobriety might prove wearing, were it not for his easy 
companionship. Listening back to the recording, the primary sound is Streeck’s 
laughter – that and “Jajaja!”, a Bren gun enthusiasm for any new idea or 
argument.

He also gives good gossip. A “power breakfast” with financial policymakers and 
investment bankers is dismissed as “clueless and so stereoptypical. They 
complained about the stupidity of the masses who didn’t understand the 
expertise that someone like Alan Greenspan was able to bring to central 
banking.” This is the same Greenspan who, as head of the US central bank in the 
bubble years,believed financiers could regulate themselves 
<http://content.time.com/time/specials/packages/article/0,28804,1877351_1877350_1877331,00.html>
.

On this trip he went to a conference on Brexit. “I was shocked by the 
unanimous sense of guilt.” One former British ambassador “began by saying we 
have to apologise to our foreign friends for the vote to leave Europe. I said, 
‘You ought to be happy to have sent a warning to the European Union.’”

He sees the support for Brexit and Trump as stemming from the same source. 
“You have a growing group of all people, who, under the impact of neoliberal 
internationalisation, have become increasingly excluded from the mainstream of 
their society.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fwolfgang-streeck-the-german-economist-calling-time-on-capitalism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F593ea2e22f3d9f87f471de582509e0351aa71fdf%2F716_737_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wolfgang%20Streeck%3A%20%E2%80%98Look%20at%20London%20%E2%80%93%20it%E2%80%99s%20a%20second%20Rome.%20This%20is%20what%20an%20empire%20looks%20like%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fwolfgang-streeck-the-german-economist-calling-time-on-capitalism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wolfgang%20Streeck%3A%20%E2%80%98Look%20at%20London%20%E2%80%93%20it%E2%80%99s%20a%20second%20Rome.%20This%20is%20what%20an%20empire%20looks%20like%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fwolfgang-streeck-the-german-economist-calling-time-on-capitalism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F593ea2e22f3d9f87f471de582509e0351aa71fdf%2F716_737_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Visions of London wealth … Canary wharf financial district. Photograph: DBURKE 
/ Alamy/Alamy 
“You look out here,” He gestures out of the windows of the National Gallery, 
at the domes and columns of Trafalgar Square, “And it’s a second Rome. You walk 
through the streets at night and you say, ‘My God, yes: this is what an empire 
looks like’.” This is the land of what Streeck calls theMarktsvolk – literally, 
the people of the market, the club-class financiers and executives, the 
asset-owning winners of globalisation.

But this space – geographic, economic, political – is off-limits to the 
Staatsvolk: the ones who fly yearly on holiday rather than weekly on business, 
the downsized, the indebted losers of neoliberalism. “These people are being 
driven out of London. In French cities it’s the same thing. This both 
reinforces them as a political power structure, and puts them completely on the 
defensive. But one thing they do know is that conventional politics has totally 
written them off.” Social democrats such as the outgoing Italian prime minister
Matteo Renzi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/matteo-renzi> are guilty, too. 
“They’re on the side of the winners.”

International flows of people, money and goods: Streeck accepts the need for 
all these – “but in some sort of directed, governable way. It has to be, 
otherwise societies dissolve”.

Those views on immigration landed him in another fight this summer, when he 
wrote an essay attacking Angela Merkel for her open-door policy towards 
refugees from Syria and elsewhere.It was a “ploy”, he said, 
<http://speri.dept.shef.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/SPERI-Paper-31-Wolfgang-Streeck-Exploding-Europe.pdf>
 to import tens of thousands of cheap workers and thus allow German employers 
to bring down wages. Colleagues accused him of spinning a“neoliberal conspiracy”
 
<http://www.sueddeutsche.de/kultur/debatte-opportunismus-ohne-obergrenze-1.2939388>
 theory and of giving cover to Germany’s far right. Streeck’s defence is 
simple: “It is impossible to protect wages against an unlimited labour supply. 
Does saying that make me some proto-fascist?”

What gives this back-and-forth a twist is the little-known fact that Streeck 
is himself the child of refugees. Both 25 years old when the second world war 
ended, his parents were among the 12 million displaced people to arrive from 
eastern Europe in West Germany. Streeck was born just outside Münster in a room 
requisitioned by the state from a shoemaker. His parents were poor. “I remember 
they stole vegetables from the fields and coal from passing trains.”

The end of capitalism has begun
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/17/postcapitalism-end-of-capitalism-begun>
His mother was a Sudeten German in Czechoslovakia, who was given 24 hours’ 
notice to leave when the war ended, taking only what she could carry. After 
Streeck left home she began to study the Czech language. “It was a sense of ‘If 
I can’t go back there I at least want to speak the language of those people who 
now live where I used to’.”

Her son went to a grammar school founded by Martin Luther, where he was taught 
Greek and Latin and expected to become a theologian. Instead, he fell in with 
the then-illegal Communist party. Aged 16, he was in charge of organising the 
reading circle – “suppressed literature such as theCommunist Manifesto and Rosa 
Luxemburg” – and held it at the local employers’ association “because no one 
would ever suspect”.

In 1968, he was a student radical at Frankfurt, “but I never had any truck 
with the ‘marijuana left’. I felt closer to the working class than to the 
pot-smoking classes”.

Now he lives with his wife in part of a farmyard of a castle in Brühl, a small 
town just outside Cologne. The retiree is still up by six every morning and at 
his desk for 8.30. “I have learned to write only till 1pm. After that I give 
myself over to academic intrigues.” And to novels: when we meet, he is readingI 
Hate the Internet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/02/i-hate-internet-jarett-kobek-review>
, by Jarett Kobek, a Silicon Valley engineer who claims that the internet has 
“fucked up” his life.

After lunch, we cross the Thames to King’s College where Streeck is to deliver 
a lecture. There is more gossip, this time about Greek politics and the 
hollowing out of the Syriza government. As teenagers, Streeck’s class travelled 
to Greece to look at antiquities. Instead, he began reading local newspapers on 
the king’s attempts to chuck out prime minister Georgios Papandreou. “I wrote a 
report in the school newspaper that was almost entirely concerned with the 
emerging military dictatorship.” Sixty years later, he is working on a book 
about democracy in southern Europe.

The lecture room is packed, students spread across the floor and peering 
around the wall at Streeck, absent-mindedly playing with a paperclip and 
quoting Gramsci: “The old is dying and the new cannot be born. [pause] In this 
interregnum a great variety of morbid symptoms can appear.” In the lecture’s 
interval, a variety of students buy his books and hover about for him to sign 
them. At the end, a student asks: “what should the left do?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fwolfgang-streeck-the-german-economist-calling-time-on-capitalism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba6bdfe7cc11c3982b705f2ab638fbc610de0b21%2F0_189_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wolfgang%20Streeck%3A%20%E2%80%98Look%20at%20London%20%E2%80%93%20it%E2%80%99s%20a%20second%20Rome.%20This%20is%20what%20an%20empire%20looks%20like%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fwolfgang-streeck-the-german-economist-calling-time-on-capitalism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wolfgang%20Streeck%3A%20%E2%80%98Look%20at%20London%20%E2%80%93%20it%E2%80%99s%20a%20second%20Rome.%20This%20is%20what%20an%20empire%20looks%20like%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fwolfgang-streeck-the-german-economist-calling-time-on-capitalism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba6bdfe7cc11c3982b705f2ab638fbc610de0b21%2F0_189_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Occupy protest in Frankfurt, 2011. Photograph: Arne Dedert/EPA 
It is the same question I’d put a few hours earlier. Both times, Streeck warns 
he is about to disappoint us. To me he cites an Occupy protest in Frankfurt. 
Days before that, he says, thousands of police were deployed to Germany’s 
capital of finance. “The authorities were scared shitless. I think more such 
scariness must happen. They must learn that in order to keep people quiet they 
need extraordinary effort.”

No mention of ballot boxes; nor of any need for a bigger vision “because the 
others don’t have a blueprint”.

But, I say, Nigel Farage and the rest are at least pretending to have an 
answer.

“And we should criticise them.” The press always talks of a lack of business 
confidence, he says; now is the time for the voters to demonstrate a lack of 
public confidence.

The analogy doesn’t work and, listening back to the tape, I can hear agitation 
in my voice. A businessperson can go on an investment strike; he or she can 
hoard cash. Even if voters sat out an election, they would still face the 
consequences. Muslim mums would get their headscarves ripped off, a Polish man 
could get stabbed to death for going in the wrong kebab shop.

In a phone call a couple of weeks later, I press Streeck again. “If I look 10 
or 20 years out, I don’t like what I see,” he says. Nor is he alone: he quotes 
a new book by the former head of the Bank of England, Mervyn King, and his 
projection of “great uncertainty” ahead.

But doesn’t he want something better than a new dark ages for his 
grandchildren? “If I am honest, now I am thankful for every passing year that 
is good and peaceful. And I hope for another one. Very short-term, I know, but 
those are my horizons.”

• How Will Capitalism End? Essays on a Failing System by Wolfgang Streeck 
(Verso, £16.99). To order a copy for £13.93, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/how-will-capitalism-end.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min. p&p of £1.99.
 