
A women’s rights group blocked bridges across the UK on Sunday in advance of 
the autumn statement, in protest at cuts to specialist services for black and 
minority ethnic domestic violence survivors.

Around 600 women from anti-domestic violence group Sisters Uncut 
<http://www.sistersuncut.org/>, whose last direct action saw them disrupt the 
red carpet at the premier of the film Suffragette 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/07/feminist-protesters-storm-red-carpet-at-london-premiere-of-suffragette>
, set off flares and blocked traffic on bridges in London, Newcastle, Glasgow 
and Bristol at 1pm.

The group is critical of Theresa May’s pledge of £20m of temporary funding for 
domestic violence services, which activists call a “sticking plaster on a 
haemorrhage”.


Nadine, a Sisters Uncut member who did not give her surname, said: “As 
domestic violence services shrink, Sisters Uncut will continue to grow. We will 
not stand by as black and brown survivors are left stranded in abusive homes 
without the bridges to safety provided by specialist domestic violence 
services, whilst migrant survivors with ‘no recourse to public funds’ find all 
of their bridges blocked by the government’s immigration policies.”

The group argue that the government is failing to secure funding for 
specialist services. “Many of the services lost in austerity were set up and 
run by women of colour for women of colour, because generic services did not 
meet their needs. Those needs remain unmet, and women of colour and migrant 
survivors remain more likely to be trapped in violence, without any support,” 
it said in a statement.

A 2015 report by Imkaan, an organisation dedicated to addressing violence 
against black and minority ethnic (BME) women, revealednine in 10 BME survivors 
preferred to receive support from a specialist BME organisation 
<http://www.endviolenceagainstwomen.org.uk/data/files/resources/74/IMKAAN-STATE-OF-THE-SECTOR-FINAL.pdf>
.

Marcia Smith, a domestic violence survivor from Doncaster who attended the 
Newcastle <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/newcastle> action, said she went to 
the police after abuse but had been told they could not see her bruises because 
of the colour of her skin. “People don’t see black women as victims, and we get 
racism instead of help. With black services, you don’t have racism, you have 
the trust and support you need,” she said.

In 2015, Women’s Aid reported that refuges were being forced to turn away two 
in three survivors 
<https://www.womensaid.org.uk/womens-aid-releases-annual-survey-2015-statistics/>
 who approached them for a range of reasons including a lack of space to an 
inability to meet a survivors’ needs, because of language barriers, or 
disability. Women’s Aid data showed that for BME women, that number rose to 
four in five.
 
<https://www.dropbox.com/s/2h7zknmuh33zno9/Capital%20Losses%20-%20Imkaan%20April%202016.pdf?dl=0>

A spokesman for the Metropolitan police said a protest started at 11.15am at 
Trafalgar Square, before protesters walked towards Waterloo Bridge via the 
Strand. “When they arrived at Waterloo Bridge, the protestors staged a sit-in. 
An appropriate policing plan was in place due to traffic congestion. At 
13.30hrs, the demonstration ended and the protesters left of their own accord,” 
he said. No arrests were made.
 