
For anyone who has suffered with headaches, cramps and other 
menstruation-related symptoms, the Zambian custom of“Mother’s Day” 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-38490513> has a certain obvious appeal. 
Originally observed informally, the entitlement was eventually coded into the 
country’s labour law. All women have a legal right to a day off from work each 
month, to be taken whenAunt Flo is visiting 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aunt_Flo>. Despite the name, the provision 
applies equally to women who don’t have children.

The longer you think about it, though, the clearer it seems that there are 
good reasons to question the wisdom of treating a normal bodily function like 
menstruation as an impairment. Historically, pseudoscientific claims about 
female biology have often been used as an excuse to limit women’s freedom and 
opportunities. Generally speaking, the idea that we’re less competent when 
we’re on our period is one most feminists are keen to discourage. Though about 
10% of women do experience unusually painful periods that interfere with their 
everyday life, most of us have no problem carrying on as normal – perhaps 
popping a couple of paracetamol to deal with any aches and pains.

Gender pay gap down to 5% among UK workers in their 20s, study finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/04/gender-pay-gap-down-to-5-among-uk-workers-in-their-20s-study-finds>
Ideally, employers should allow workers flexibility to work around all kinds 
of chronic pain and disability, though this is easier in some workplaces than 
others. It’s clearly well-intentioned, but creating a specific leave 
entitlement for women seems to create more problems than it solves – 
particularly when the majority don’t really need it. When employment 
legislation treats people differently based on their gender, it creates a 
motive for employers to hire people from the group with fewer legal rights. One 
of the strongest arguments for equalising maternity and paternity leave is that 
it disincentives such discrimination. Taking a day off once a month doesn’t 
necessarily make women less productive over all, but the perception is what 
matters.

Last year, Bristol-based company Coexist provoked a fierce backlash when it 
introduced a similar “period leave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/02/uk-company-introduce-period-policy-female-staff>
” entitlement for its predominately female workforce. Some of the criticism 
came from feminists who were concerned about the implications of assuming 
menstruation hinders women’s ability to work, but the angriest, most vocal 
opponents were men who seemed to sincerely believe that the policy amounted to 
discrimination against their gender. It’s easy to roll your eyes at 
self-professed “men’s rights activists” making absurd claims about misandry and 
“feminism gone too far”, but the idea that gender-specific leave entitlements 
mean women are getting away with slacking is difficult to combat.

The grim irony is, if anyone’s getting special treatment it’s actually men. 
The gender pay gap in Zambia is significant, with women earning an average of
18% less 
<http://reports.weforum.org/global-gender-gap-report-2015/economies/#economy=ZMB>
 for similar work. Even if they’re not able to catch up work missed during 
Mother’s Day at other times, an extra day off each month doesn’t bring them 
much closer to achieving equal pay – for that they’d have to take a days 
holiday every single week.

In the UK the gender pay gap is smaller but still significant. Women in their 
20s earnan average of 5% less than men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/04/gender-pay-gap-down-to-5-among-uk-workers-in-their-20s-study-finds>
 of the same age, so a day off each month would be about right to equal things 
out. The difference gets bigger for older age groups, because women are more 
likely to be primary caregivers and need to put their family ahead of career 
advancement. Sometimes, this fact is used to argue that the gender pay gap 
isn’t really much of a problem – as it’s partly caused by conscious lifestyle 
choices. The assumption is that women are naturally inclined towards 
prioritising parenting over wage increases, and that they’re happy to pick up 
the slack at home and free up male partners to concentrate on paid work.

How did women fare in 2016?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/womens-blog/2016/dec/23/how-did-women-fare-in-2016>
Given the pervasiveness of gender norms it seems strange to just presume this 
is the case. Research has found that even in heterosexual relationships where 
both partners work full-time,women do a disproportionate amount of housework 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/mar/10/housework-gender-equality-women>
. Are we expected to believe that the female gender is also naturally inclined 
towards doing laundry, vacuuming and scrubbing toilets?

Really, any assessment of “fairness” that concentrates exclusively on paid 
work is incredibly limited. Anyone outraged at the thought of women 
occasionally needing time off to deal with painful periods would be better off 
focusing on the extent to which men’s workplace success is often enabled by the 
routine unpaid labour of their female partners.

Only in a world where domestic and caregiving work is routinely devalued – to 
the point it’s assumed to be the natural function of the gender 
disproportionately responsible for performing it – could anyone possibly claim 
that women are getting an easier ride. Instead I suggest at least one monthly 
“pay gap day”. It wouldn’t help solve the problem to claim it, but until these 
assumptions are challenged and the resulting inequalities brought to an end, 
women are nonetheless entitled to it.

• This article was amended on 5 January 2017. An earlier version incorrectly 
said that women in Zambia earn 40% less for similar work; it should have said 
18% less.
 