
Wonga’s losses are expected to almost double after a slump in revenues at the 
payday lender following price caps imposed by the City regulator.

The results, due to be announced on Wednesday, appear to raise questions about 
the success of the company’s attempts to reinvent itself in the tougher 
regulatory environment, as it tries to shrug off past controversies over its 
business practices.

Last year Wonga was ordered to pay more than £2.6m compensation by the 
Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) for“unfair and misleading debt collection 
practices” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/jun/25/wonga-compensation-bill-unfair-misleading-practices>
, after it was found to have sent threatening letters to customers from 
non-existent law firms.

In 2012 the Office of Fair Trading told it to clean up its act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2012/may/22/oft-criticises-wonga-debt-collection>
 after it sent letters to customers accusing them of fraud.

On Tuesday Sky News reported that Wonga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/wonga> would post a pre-tax loss of about 
£70m in 2015, compared with £37m a year earlier. The results will also show a 
sharp decline in Wonga’s revenues from £215m in 2014, the channel said.

The company declined to comment.

The numbers come after a year in which Wonga and other payday lenders have 
been forced to operate under tighter regulations.

Last year interest and fees on all high-cost short-term credit loans were 
capped at a daily rate of 0.8% of the amount borrowed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jan/02/cost-payday-loans-fall-new-price-caps>
. Meanwhile, if borrowers do not repay their loans on time, default charges 
must not exceed £15, while the total cost including fees and interest is capped 
at 100% of the original sum.

According to the FCA, which introduced the rules 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/nov/11/payday-loans-caps-fca>, this 
means no borrower will pay back more than twice the amount they borrowed.

The move followed a string of criticisms levelled at the sector amid 
allegations of unscrupulous practices and customers running up huge debts.

Wonga –which recruited Andy Haste, a former boss of RSA insurance group, to 
clean up its image in 2014 – has said it wants to move its business away from 
the short-term lending that made its name, but also made it the focus of public 
anger.

“Wonga has understandably faced criticism and we know we need to repair our 
reputation and regain our right to be an accepted part of the financial service 
sector,” Haste said when he took on the £500,000-a-year job.

However, the scale of the turnaround facing Haste is illustrated by the latest 
figures, which take Wonga’s losses for the past two financial years to more 
than £100m. In the two years before that, the company made a profit of £39.7m 
in 2013 and £84.5m in 2012.
 