
Woody Harrelson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/woody-harrelson> has 
revealed many of the details of his directorial debut Lost in London, with the 
project promising to be a bizarre mix of autobiography, live theatre and film.

Harrelson announced Lost in London in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/28/woody-harrelson-to-make-directorial-debut-lost-in-london>
, but gave little away other than the title and location. However,in an 
interview with Entertainment Weekly 
<http://www.ew.com/article/2016/12/15/woody-harrelson-lost-in-london-interview>
, Harrelson explained that Lost in London will be screened live in more than 
500 cinemas while it is being shot.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Flink.brightcove.com%2Fservices%2Fplayer%2Fbcpid4773906090001%3Fbckey%3DAQ~~%2CAAAAAA0Xi_s~%2Cr1xMuE8k5Nyz5IyYc0Hzhl5eZ5cEEvlm%26bctid%3D5248239005001&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Flink.brightcove.com%2Fservices%2Fplayer%2Fbcpid4773906090001%3Fbckey%3DAQ~~%2CAAAAAA0Xi_s~%2Cr1xMuE8k5Nyz5IyYc0Hzhl5eZ5cEEvlm%26bctid%3D5248239005001>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Flink.brightcove.com%2Fservices%2Fplayer%2Fbcpid4773906090001%3Fbckey%3DAQ~~%2CAAAAAA0Xi_s~%2Cr1xMuE8k5Nyz5IyYc0Hzhl5eZ5cEEvlm%26bctid%3D5248239005001&media=>
Harrelson has released a teaser trailer 
<http://link.brightcove.com/services/player/bcpid4773906090001?bckey=AQ~~,AAAAAA0Xi_s~,r1xMuE8k5Nyz5IyYc0Hzhl5eZ5cEEvlm&bctid=5248239005001>
 for the project, saying: “No one’s ever shot a movie and live-broadcast it in 
cinemas at the same time. No one’s ever been that stupid, until now.” EW 
reported that the 100-minute shoot will begin at 02:00 on 20 January in London, 
simultaneously screening in the US at 2100 EST and 1800 PST. Harrelson also 
said that, at the suggestion of cinematographer Nigel Willoughby (The Magdalene 
Sisters, Downton Abbey), he decided to shoot the film in a single take, in the 
style ofVictoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/31/victoria-review-one-take-berlin-schipper-heist-thriller>
 andRussian Ark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/arts/fridayreview/story/0,12102,922902,00.html>.

Harrelson describes the content of his film as “a deep, soul-searching comedy” 
about “one of the worst nights of my life”, saying it wasinspired by a 
real-life incident in 2002 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2002/jun/07/news> 
when the actor spent the night in a police cell after apparently damaging the 
inside of a taxi that had picked him up after an evening at the Chinawhite 
nightclub, then in Soho, London. Harrelson was eventually arrested after police 
chased a second cab in which he had fled.

In 2012 Harrelson said that he intended to write a play 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/celebritynews/9061679/Hollywood-actor-Woody-Harrelson-drives-into-trouble.html>
 about the incident, but it would now appear to have metamorphosed into this 
complex film project. He told EW: “I love theatre and I love film and I really 
wanted to figure out a way to merge the two. Then I thought this particular 
story does occur sequentially and cohesively, so I thought I’d like to shoot it 
in real time, like live cinema or whatever you’d call it.”According to Deadline 
<http://deadline.com/2016/12/woody-harrelson-lost-in-london-live-owen-wilson-willie-nelson-live-event-cinema-fathom-events-1201871311/>
, the film will then be prepared for conventional release at a later date.

The trailer indicates that Owen Wilson and musician Willie Nelson will be part 
of the 30-strong cast of the film, which Harrelson says will shoot in 14 
locations. Harrelson also promised that if the project failed he would jump off 
Waterloo bridge in the centre of London. He told EW: “It might be accurate to 
call this insanity.”
 