
I am, of course, pleased that Theresa May recognises that increasing numbers 
of adults and children are suffering from mental health difficulties (May 
pledges to try to reduce stigma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/we-will-reduce-stigma-mental-illness-theresa-may>
, 9 January). The huge emotional burden this puts on families only increases 
the risks. These difficulties have escalated in the six years since massive 
cuts to public services and most preventive mental health services, alongside 
the increased culture of competition that leads to more anxiety and less 
security.

Having been part of primary prevention and secondary child and adolescent 
mental health services in my 30-year career in theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>, it was soul-destroying to see 
services closed and specialist skills built up over decades being lost. It is 
galling to hear the plans presented as if they are new and concerning that one 
of the plans is for teachers to be trained to identify mental health issues and 
provide interventions. Often teachers, also struggling with cuts to services 
and increased pressures, can already recognise mental health issues but lack 
the time and expertise to offer interventions that could make a significant 
difference. Identification alone is not helpful unless combined with resources 
to deal with the issues.

The link between mental health difficulties and environmental stresses is well 
known, and community services can only develop if mental health crises are 
safely managed. Links between mental health services and schools and GP 
practices work well and have been used before, but tend to be cut when there 
are huge pressures on other parts of the system. There is no mention of 
increasing funding to any mental health services or of any evidence-based focus 
to these policies.
Dr Julia Nelki
Retired consultant child and adolescent psychiatrist, Merseyside

• Re the prime minister’s announcement of new measures to end stigma and 
unjust life chances for young people with mental illness, schools and their 
linkage to healthcare and the voluntary and community sector are central to 
“improve mental health”. As the new UK services are set up and evaluated, could 
I beg Guardian readers to share their observations with colleagues in the World 
Health Organisation’s initiativeGlobal Accelerated Action for the Health of 
Adolescents 
<http://www.who.int/maternal_child_adolescent/topics/adolescence/framework-accelerated-action/en/index5.html>
?

A global “sharing society” could strengthen our government’s planned green 
paper on mental health, and help planners in countries with less expertise 
learn from UK successes and failures. I guarantee there will be both failures 
and successes – but it is the responsibility of the whole spectrum of 
stakeholders in mental health to learn from the implementation of policy.
Professor Woody Caan
Editor, Journal of Public Mental Health

• So Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> is going to 
improve mental health care. Let me cite my son’s last two years. He is in the 
highest suicide risk group, single white males between 40 and 45. Recent talk 
about more support for teenagers is a distraction from the fact that adult 
mental health services are in a state of near collapse.

He had a major breakdown two years ago, when single and 42. Since then he has 
been in seven different hospitals. After each discharge, he has relapsed within 
a few weeks. “Care in the community” has been either conspicuously absent or 
totally inadequate. The shortage of beds has meant that on five occasions, he 
was assessed as in need of hospital readmission and, after a long wait in A&E, 
was transported to a new, strange hospital. The lack of continuity of care for 
someone already frightened, confused and distressed is absolutely counter to 
the kind of support necessary.

Providing supported residential accommodation, to ease the transition from 
hospital back into the world, is essential. The lack of available beds is in 
part due to “bed-blocking”, because of a lack of such accommodation. Community 
care teams would be more effective, working together with residential teams in 
supported accommodation, preparing people for rebuilding their lives in the 
community, providing a necessary bridge between hospital and the world.

This, Theresa, is a long-term problem in need of a seriously thought-through 
long-term strategy, and considerable investment.
Name and address supplied

• It is not only acute care that is in difficulties (A&E crisis deepens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/09/labour-party-jeremy-hunt-nhs-waiting-time>
, 10 January). My local NHS mental health trust has had to temporarily merge 
two inpatient wards due to staffing shortages as they cannot recruit enough 
qualified staff. This is not surprising, given the government’s policy of pay 
restraint in the public services by imposing pay rises of no more than 1% in 
recent years, and with no sign of any change, despite the effect they must know 
this has on the ability of the NHS to recruit and retain staff.
Ian Arnott
Peterborough 

• A Christmas card from an NHS forensic psychiatrist schoolfriend a few weeks 
ago said: “Don’t believe claims re money for mental health. We’ve just had 
millions chopped off our budget three weeks ago & meltdown consequently.” I 
expect to read next December that Theresa May gave it all back.
Mark Lewinski
Swaffham Prior, Cambridgeshire

• The prime minister’s pledge to implement new measures to improve mental 
health services for young people couldn’t be more timely, as new figures from 
the Prince’s Trust reveal that one in four young people don’t feel in control 
of their lives.

In response to these findings and the fact that more young people than ever 
before are coming to us experiencing mental health issues, we are addressing an 
urgent need to improve mental health provision by launching our own mental 
health strategy. We welcome the government’s pledge to implement new measures 
to improve mental health services for young people and bring more focus to an 
area where we’ve seen an increasing need for support.

The Prince’s Trust Macquarie Youth Index reveals that young people’s 
confidence and happiness are at their lowest levels since the report was first 
launched in 2009. It paints a deeply concerning picture for a generation of 
young people who feel that their future is slipping away from them.

Many young people feel desperate about their situation; it’s vital that we act 
now if we’re to help them get the right support to create brighter futures for 
themselves.

The most important thing we can do to empower these young people is to 
continue to help them find work, education or training. Now, more than ever 
before, we need to work together to help them build a brighter future and 
regain control of their lives.
Dame Martina Milburn 
Chief executive, The Prince’s Trust

• As part of the work we undertake across the east of England, Ormiston 
Families works with children and young people struggling with mental health 
issues. We see Theresa May’s announcement about a new approach to mental health 
as hugely significant.

It is well documented that the provision of mental health services across the 
UK is inadequate and this lack of care has led to an increase in the number of 
children and young people suffering with mental ill health for prolonged 
periods of time. Through our services in Norfolk and Cambridgeshire we know 
early intervention in young people showing signs of mental health issues is 
critical.

The prime minister talked about focusing “on prevention as well as treatment, 
especially since so many adult mental health problems – which one in four of us 
will suffer from at any one time – begin in childhood”. As a charity working on 
the frontline with children and young people showing signs of mental health 
issues, we are relieved to hear this. Early intervention, and thus prevention, 
is key to reducing the number of people suffering with chronic mental health 
issues.

The numbers in Theresa May’s speech are exactly the type of statistics we are 
working to reduce.

Mental health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/mental-health> is without 
doubt one of the biggest issues facing our society today and it is good to hear 
the prime minister is keen for the government to do more to address the 
problems and “not just in our hospitals but in classrooms and communities”.
Mark Heasman
Chief executive, Ormiston Families

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 