
Carbon emissions stopped growing in 2015 for the first time in 10 years as the 
world turned its back on coal and embraced energy efficiency and renewable 
power with increased vigour,according to a new set of statistics 
<http://www.bp.com/en/global/corporate/energy-economics/statistical-review-of-world-energy.html>
.


China led the way in driving down emissions but the latest figures from oil 
company BP come with a warning that the progress may not last.

With the exception of a drop in global emissions around the time of the 2009 
financial crisis, which heavily depressed overall business activity, the BP 
figure of 0.1% growth in CO2 is the lowest for 25 years.

Wind power <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/windpower> capacity grew 
by 17.4% and solar by 32.6% last year with China overtaking Germany and the US 
as the largest generator of solar. America’s overall renewable energy capacity 
increased by 19.7%, Germany’s by 10.9% and Britain’s by only 4.8%.

“There are good reasons for thinking that some of this (CO2) slowdown reflects 
structural forces (pushing for low carbon power) that are likely to persist and 
grow in importance,” said Spencer Dale, BP’s chief economist.

“But some probably reflects cyclical factors, particularly the contraction of 
China’s most energy-intensive sectors, which are unlikely to keep being 
repeated and may well unwind in future years,” he added.

Global emissions nearly stall after a decade of rapid growth, report shows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/25/global-emissions-nearly-stall-after-a-decade-of-growth-report-shows>
The pledges and determination shown by world governments at the Paris climate 
change talks in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/12/paris-climate-deal-200-nations-sign-finish-fossil-fuel-era>
 meant there would likely be “further policies aimed at shifting the fuel-mix 
towards cleaner, lower-carbon fuels, with renewable energy, along with natural 
gas, the main beneficiary,” said Dale.

He defended his own company’s business model of concentrating investment 
largely on oil and gas, saying BP was gradually moving from oil to favouring 
gas, which results in lower emissions, as a “bridge” fuel to a low carbon 
economy. He also said BP had invested in Brazilian biofuels and US wind power.

But asked at a briefing to unveil the BP annual statistical review of world 
energy whether his employer should do more, he said: “We need governments to 
lead on this... and set a meaningful carbon price.”

The International Energy Agency reported flat CO2 emissions in 2014 and 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/16/surge-in-renewable-energy-stalls-world-greenhouse-gas-emissions>
 but BP said it did not take into account numbers that became available later 
on with regard to Chinese carbon output related to higher grade coal it had 
been burning.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fworld-carbon-emissions-stopped-growing-in-2015-says-bp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda4853d12cf9ccb57a875619d6c3406990077201%2F0_0_773_287%2F773.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=World%20carbon%20emissions%20stopped%20growing%20in%202015%2C%20says%20BP&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fworld-carbon-emissions-stopped-growing-in-2015-says-bp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=World%20carbon%20emissions%20stopped%20growing%20in%202015%2C%20says%20BP&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fworld-carbon-emissions-stopped-growing-in-2015-says-bp%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda4853d12cf9ccb57a875619d6c3406990077201%2F0_0_773_287%2F773.jpg>
 Factors behind the slowdown in carbon emissions growth worldwide in 2015, 
according to the BP Statistical Review of World Energy, published on 8 June 
2016. Photograph: BP 
Coal <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/coal> consumption fell worldwide 
by 1.8% last year even as the price slumped by 20%, the latest BP statistics 
show. Much of the decline was a result of the US switching from its own coal 
supplies to shale gas for generating electricity at power stations.

Oil <https://www.theguardian.com/business/oil> demand grew by 1.9m barrels a 
day in 2015, heavily influenced by the collapse in crude prices. Dale believed 
the cost of Brent blend oil – since recovered from a low of $28 per barrel to 
around $52 – would continue to move upwards in the second half of this year. 
But the chances of a major, sustained bounceback in the short term would be 
undermined by a major stock “overhang” .
 