
A landmark international agreement to create the world’s largest marine park 
in the Southern Ocean has been brokered in Australia, after five years of 
compromises and failed negotiations.

More than 1.5m sq km of the Ross Sea around Antarctica will be protected under 
the deal brokered between 24 countries and theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>. It means 1.1m sq km of it – an area 
about the size of France and Spain combined – will be set aside as a no-take 
“general protection zone”, where no fishing will be allowed.

Significantly, the protections are set to expire in 35 years.

The agreement came on Friday at the conclusion of two weeks of discussions 
between delegates from 24 countries and the EU in Hobart, at the annual meeting 
of the Commission for theConservation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/conservation> of Antarctic Marine 
Living Resources (CCAMLR).

Fears for Antarctic penguins as new bird flu strain reaches frozen continent
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/20/fears-for-antarctic-penguins-as-new-bird-flu-strain-reaches-frozen-continent>
Evan Bloom from the US state department, the head of the US delegation to the 
meeting, told the Guardian he was “thrilled”.

“I think it’s a really significant moment,” he said. “We’ve been working 
towards this for many years. It’s taken time to get consensus but now we have 
established the world’s largest marine protected area.”

It is the first marine park created in international waters and will set a 
precedent for further moves to help the world achieve the International Union 
for the Conservation of Nature’s recommendation that 30% of the world’s oceans 
be protected.

The Antarctic protections had been urgently sought because of the importance 
of the Southern Ocean to the world’s natural resources. For example, scientists
have estimated 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v427/n6969/full/nature02127.html> that 
the Southern Ocean produces about three-quarters of the nutrients that sustain 
life in the rest of the world’s oceans. The region is also home to most of the 
world’s penguins and whales.

The Ross Sea is a deep bay in the Southern Ocean that many scientists consider 
to be the last intact marine ecosystem on Earth – a living laboratory ideally 
suited for investigating life in the Antarctic and how climate change is 
affecting the planet.

Andrea Kavanagh, the director of Antarctic and Southern Ocean work for the Pew 
Charitable Trusts, which has been working for years to achieve today’s result, 
said: “Today, CCAMLR made history by declaring the planet’s largest marine 
protected area in the Ross Sea.

“This landmark decision represents the first time that nations have agreed to 
protect a huge area of the ocean that lies beyond the jurisdiction of any 
individual country and shows that CCAMLR takes its role as protector of 
Antarctic waters seriously.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fworlds-largest-marine-park-created-in-ross-sea-in-antarctica-in-landmark-deal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12b432bed5ec44a44a160b509631d37a2f411d76%2F0_0_4754_4181%2F4754.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=World's%20largest%20marine%20park%20created%20in%20Ross%20Sea%20in%20Antarctica%20in%20landmark%20deal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fworlds-largest-marine-park-created-in-ross-sea-in-antarctica-in-landmark-deal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=World%27s%20largest%20marine%20park%20created%20in%20Ross%20Sea%20in%20Antarctica%20in%20landmark%20deal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fworlds-largest-marine-park-created-in-ross-sea-in-antarctica-in-landmark-deal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12b432bed5ec44a44a160b509631d37a2f411d76%2F0_0_4754_4181%2F4754.jpg>
 A map released by WWF showing the protected area of the Ross Sea 
The protections will not decrease the total amount of fish that are allowed to 
be caught in the Ross Sea, but it will move the industry away from the most 
crucial habitats close to the continent itself.

Russia has an industry catching antarctic toothfish there and the changes will 
push the fleet into waters where they will catch fewer immature fish, and where 
they won’t compete with as many orcas, who also rely on toothfish for food.

The agreement also establishes a large 322,000 sq km “krill research zone” 
that will allow for research catching of krill, but prohibit toothfish 
catching. Additionally, a 110,000 sq km “special research zone” will be 
established on the outside of the no-take zone, allowing catching of krill and 
toothfish only for research purposes.

“Today’s agreement is a turning point for the protection of Antarctica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/antarctica> and the Southern Ocean,” said 
Chris Johnson, WWF-Australia’s ocean science manager. “This is important not 
just for the incredible diversity of life that it will protect, but also for 
the contribution it makes to building the resilience of the world’s ocean in 
the face of climate change.”

But the expiry of the protections in 35 years was a significant compromise. It 
came after five years of failed negotiations, with opposition from China and 
Russia which have fishing industries in the region.

The World Conservation Union definition of a marine protected area requires it 
to be permanent. “WWF has concerns that the Ross Sea agreement does not meet 
this standard,” Johnson said.

“We are optimistic that after years of deadlock at the annual CCAMLR meeting, 
today’s decision will spark renewed momentum for CCAMLR members to achieve 
permanent protection for the Ross Sea in coming years and also deliver marine 
protected areas in East Antarctica and the Weddell Sea.”

The Guardian understands that a proposal for 50 years of protection had been 
tabled but Russia wouldn’t agree.

Bloom said while the US and other countries preferred permanent protections, 
the compromise “was necessary in order for this to be adopted”.

Kavanagh said: “It can’t be overstated how difficult these negotiations were.”

“It took five years of talking about this one proposal exclusively to get it 
across the table. And if you look at other marine reserves that are permanent, 
they’re in one exclusive economic zone – it’s only one country that has to make 
the decision.

“And I’m positive that in 35 years, the conservation values that come out of 
the Ross Sea, the protections will be renewed. The world will be a different 
place in 35 years.”

The campaign group Avaaz had, with Leonardo DiCaprio, launched a petition 
calling for CCAMLR to establish “the world’s largest network of marine 
protected areas in the Southern Ocean, starting with the Ross Sea and East 
Antarctica”. It received more than 2m signatures, Avaaz said.

“There’s massive momentum in the world right now to protect our oceans,” said 
Luis Morago, campaign director at Avaaz. “Governments have just set the 
landmark target of protecting 30% of our oceans, and millions of people all 
over the world are pushing for more protected areas to achieve that goal. The 
Ross Sea is just the start.”
 