
The world’s oldest known orca – a century-old matriarch of a small population 
of endangered Puget Sound orcas – has been missing for months and is presumed 
dead by researchers in what is being described as a tremendous blow to an 
already struggling population.


Known as Granny and believed to be 105 years old, the orca has not been seen 
by researchers since mid-October, according to the Centre for Whale Research in 
North America’s Pacific Northwest.

“With regret we now consider her deceased,” researcher Ken Balcomb, who has 
studied the population for four decades,wrote in a post on the group’s website 
on Saturday <http://www.whaleresearch.com/j2>. He had last seen Granny leading 
her pod north through the Haro Strait as they searched for food.

In recent years researchers had observed Granny take the helm of the J-pod, 
one of three family groups that make up the Southern Resident Killer Whale 
population – a genetically unique population of some 80 or so orcas that is 
classified as endangered in bothCanada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> and the US. 

Easily recognisable by a half-moon nick on her dorsal fin, Granny was first 
identified by researchers in the 1970s. It was later estimated she had been 
born in 1911 – one year before the Titanic sank – with a 12-year margin of 
error.

Big oil v orcas: Canadians fight pipeline that threatens killer whales on the 
brink
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/16/canada-oil-pipeline-expansion-killer-whales-kinder-morgan>
Her disappearance capped off a year that has been a challenging one for the 
orcas of the Salish sea, with six other whales from the population reported 
missing or presumed dead by researchers. It was a contrast to one year earlier, 
in 2015, when the population welcomed eight newborn orcas.

The loss of Granny left Balcomb worried about the health of the pod going 
forward. “She kept on going like the Energizer Bunny,” he wrote. “Who will lead 
the pod into the future? Is there a future without food? What will the human 
leaders do?”

The population has long had a fraught relationship with its West Coast 
neighbours. In the late 1960s and early 70s, dozens of orcas were captured and 
sold to aquariums and theme parks around the world. Those who remained were 
exposed to runoff chemicals used in local industry, making them some of the
world’s most contaminated marine mammals. 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/british-columbia/resident-orca-whales-suffer-triple-threat-of-pollution-noise-and-lack-of-food-u-s-study-1.2692785>

In recent years, the orcas’ struggle to survive has intensified amid dwindling 
salmon stocks and increasing vessel traffic through their waters. Researchers 
in Canada have alsowarned that plans for a pipeline project, recently approved 
by the Canadian government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/16/canada-oil-pipeline-expansion-killer-whales-kinder-morgan>
 and that would send oil tanker and barge traffic soaring nearly sevenfold 
through the orcas’ habitat, could further threaten the population.
 