
The cost of fines, legal bills and customer compensation racked up by the 
world’s 20 biggest banks over the five years to the end of 2015 amounted to 
£252bn, according to new research.

So called “conduct costs” for the 20 banks 
<http://ccpresearchfoundation.com/noticeboard?item=30635-conduct-costs-report-2015>
 rose 4.1%, or £10bn, compared with the previous rolling five-year period, 
2010-2014. UK-based financial institutions Lloyds Banking Group, Royal Bank of 
Scotland and Barclays accounted for £11.3bn of extra costs while charges at 
five other banks fell.

The figures were compiled by the CCP Research Foundation 
<http://ccpresearchfoundation.com/>, one of the few organisations to collate 
data published by banks. The numbers include money set aside for future 
penalties by the 20 banks, selected because they are important for the 
stability of the financial system.

The five-year total is up almost 28% on CCP’s first survey, which covered 2008 
to 2012 and began in the early stages of the financial crisis. Costs have 
increased as regulators have clamped down and unearthed scandals such as the 
rigging of Libor rates and foreign exchange markets.

However, after rising for the previous four years, the single-year total for 
all banks in the survey fell in 2015 to £28bn from a peak of £63.6bn in 2014.


CCP provisions against future costs of £66bn meant the costs of misconduct 
would continue to affect banks’ profits. But fines against banks appear to have 
peakedwith the record $5.7bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/20/banks-hit-by-record-57bn-fine-for-rigging-forex-markets>
 (£4.3bn) doled out last year to six banks for rigging foreign exchange, 
including £1.5bn for Barclays and £430m for RBS.

British banks were responsible for £66.5bn of the total, up from £54.6bn in 
the previous five-year period. The main contributor to the rise was Lloyds, 
where costs rose £4.7bn to £20.2bn – the biggest increase in the survey. The 
bank haspaid large fines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/04/lloyds-fine-mishandling-ppi-payouts-financial-conduct>
 andtook a £4bn charge last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/25/lloyds-hands-chief-executive-85m-pay-package>
 for mis-selling of payment protection insurance.

RBS’s costs had the next biggest increase, up £3.8bn to £14.7bn, while 
Barclays’ costs rose £2.8bn to £15.4bn. Taken together, the three British 
banks’ conduct costs rose 29%. HSBC’s costs rose £1.2bn to £9.9bn and 
Santander’s fell by £720m to £6.23bn.

Barclays’ increase was matched by Deutsche Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/deutschebank>, whose costs rose to 
£12.2bn from £9.4bn. All other banks had smaller increases or falling costs. 
Bank of America had the biggest decrease, with costs dropping almost £10bn to 
£54.8bn, although that was the biggest total.

Roger McCormick, CCP’s managing director and head of the conduct costs report, 
said: “It remains to be seen whether banks can truly claim that these problems 
are now behind them (whether or not the costs themselves may be) and reassure 
us that they are legacy issues.

“We look forward to the time when we can report on marked and sustained falls 
in conduct costs. Not even the largest banks can now settle for regarding them 
merely as costs of doing business. The public would hardly condone such an 
attitude or see it as consistent with a desire to regain trust.”

Fines imposed by the UK’s Financial Conduct Authority plunged more than 99% in 
the first half of 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/03/city-regulator-fca-fines-drop-from-819m-pounds-to-7m-pounds-in-a-year>
 to £7.2m from £819m a year earlier. CPP said this suggested provisions were 
for costs other than fines.

The FCA, whose chief executive Andrew Bailey started on 1 July, may face 
questions on the drop-off in fines at its annual public meeting on Tuesday.
 