
Bear with me, because this is difficult. Baring the soul is always difficult. 
But one reaches the point where the suppression itself causes more damage than 
the revelation. So here goes: we need to talk about Donald.

You saw that video, when Trump bragged about using his fame to assault women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
, and you’ve heardthe racism 
<http://www.politicususa.com/2016/08/22/trump-ad-libs-racism-african-americans-ohio-speech.html>
 – about African Americans,Mexicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/16/donald-trump-mexico-presidential-speech-latino-hispanic>
.

The backlash against feminism has hit a new low with Donald Trump | Suzanne 
Moore
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/12/backlash-against-feminism-new-low-donald-trump-republicans-women>
You saw Sunday’s debate when he menaced and threatened and swaggered and lied 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/10/debate-donald-trump-threatens-to-jail-hillary-clinton>
. I saw it too, but not perhaps as you saw it, for I spent much of the time 
looking at his suit and feeling a tad embarrassed. It was quite a nice blue 
suit. Until recently, I had one quite similar. Not just alike in terms of cut 
or colour; mine actually had his name on it. Not Tom Ford, or Paul Smith, or 
Hugo Boss (as if I could afford that). This was aDonald J Trump brand 
<http://www.trump.com/merchandise/signature-collection/> suit.

It was pinstriped with fairly big lapels and turn-ups on the trousers. I liked 
it because it reminded me to some extent of the dramatic cloth-rich baggy suits 
my father and hisWindrush generation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/23/immigration-windrush-west-indians-jamaica-britain>
 used to wear. And so, on a visit to New York a few years ago, I bought it from 
Macy’s department store. It wasn’t cheap, but it didn’t break the bank.

It was always problematic. I didn’t know much about Trump. I didn’t know he 
made suits, for a start, or that – much more likely – he had textile workers in 
Bangladesh, China, maybe Mexico to make them for him. I knew he was a bit naff 
and that his association with my suit was no kind of fashion statement, but I 
really did like it so I kept the sole mention of his name – the rectangular 
label sewn within the jacket, with “Donald J Trump” in gold letters – close to 
my chest, as it were.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-suit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd34a77e56cc720b27f42f7569e717e2570c8dec3%2F0_153_1283_1602%2F1283.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Would%20you%20wear%20a%20Donald%20Trump%20suit%3F%20%7C%20Hugh%20Muir&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-suit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Would%20you%20wear%20a%20Donald%20Trump%20suit%3F%20%7C%20Hugh%20Muir&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-suit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd34a77e56cc720b27f42f7569e717e2570c8dec3%2F0_153_1283_1602%2F1283.jpg>
 ‘People thought the suit was great. If anyone asked for details, I’d just say 
I got it in New York.’ Photograph: Hugh Muir 
People thought the suit was great. If anyone asked for details, I’d just say 
“I got it in New York” and the vagueness of that declaration would always deter 
further inquiry. But that’s the problem with deception. Even for the most 
skilled practitioner, the inner doubts never really go away. And so it was with 
me and my suit from the Trump Collection. As a garment it seemed fine, but how 
to wear it without thinking of his preposterous bird’s-nest hair, his 
ridiculous self-regard, his place in American culture while hosting The 
Apprentice as joke fodder for every late-night comedian?

The doubts ate steadily away at me just as moths might happily have eaten away 
at the suit. Finally the troubling ratio: outward elegance set against the 
inner degradation, tilted irretrievably. A year ago, I took the Donald suit to 
the charity shop. Now, when the world knows all it needs to know about his 
depravity and lunacy, that seems to me a lucky escape.

I understand that it may not seem that way to everyone, for in a modern world 
where celebrity and commerce skip hand-in-hand, we all buy products created or 
promoted by famous people we don’t know. Some may be admirable, some may 
privately be rogues. They may be liberal; they may be illiberal.

Our purchase decision may be driven by the association of the product with the 
celebrity or may just be a statement about the excellence of the item itself. 
But whatever we think of it, the link is there and from time to time that can 
be problematic. How many lucky enough to have anything designed by John 
Galliano reached for the scissorswhen he was convicted in 2011 for hurling 
racist and antisemitic abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/sep/08/john-galliano-guilty-racism-antisemitism>
?

In 2012 French anti-racist groups called for a boycott of the perfume maker 
Jean-Paul Guerlain 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2010/WORLD/europe/10/23/france.guerlain.protest/index.html>
after he used the N-word on national television. How many poured his expensive 
potions down the sink? Does Gary Lineker induce you tobuy more crisps 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/3am/celebrity-news/gary-lineker-admits-always-most-7830878>
 or Davina McCall tochange your hair dye 
<http://www.garnier.co.uk/hair-colour/beauty/garnier/nutrisse-cream/davina-mccall>
? If George Clooney turned out to be a cad, would you stopdrinking his coffee 
<http://fortune.com/2015/11/03/george-clooneys-nespresso-ad/>? Our status as 
consumers interconnecting with the famous as we shop can present dilemmas.

I dodged the bullet with Trump’s suit, but feel bad even now, because when I 
handed it to the charity shop, where I was praised for my benevolence, I didn’t 
declare it. I didn’t say, “This may look nice and it’s in good nick, but there 
is a darkness to it and anyone who buys it must be wary.” It was donated “as 
seen”, which might have been OK at the time, when Trump was just a bit 
ludicrous, but now feels akin to passing on a nasty virus. Someone, somewhere 
may now be wearing that suit, weighed down by its associations. If so, I 
apologise and hope they dispose of it more responsibly than I did.

But then there is another possibility that someone – a Trumpite – now wears 
that suit with pride, as a symbol of all that links them with the man who has 
brought politics lower than any of us thought it could ever spiral. Cowardly 
perhaps, but I prefer not to dwell on it.
 