
The construction of a 3km canal in Indonesia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia> has led Greenpeace and WWF to 
suspend its partnership with one of Indonesia’s biggest pulp and paper 
companies.

Riau Andalan Pulp and Paper (Rapp), a subsidiary of Asia Pacific Resources 
International Limited (April), dug the canal through thick peat forest on the 
island of Pedang, just off the east coast of Sumatra.

In doing so, April not only flouted its own sustainability standards but went 
against government regulations and a letter of instruction issued by the 
Ministry of Environment and Forestry last year asking companies to block 
existing canals.

Drainage canals dry out peatland, releasing carbon emissions and creating the 
conditions for forest fires. Before last year, companies used to dig canals 
through deep peat forests in Sumatra with impunity, transforming once wild 
landscapes into monoculture acacia and palm plantations for the paper, pulp and 
palm oil industries. Both palm and acacia require good drainage.

But then came the catastrophic fires of 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/nov/11/indonesia-forest-fires-explained-haze-palm-oil-timber-burning>
 that spread a toxic, yellow haze across Indonesia and its neighbours. The 
fires burned up2.6m hectares and cost the country $16.1bn (£12.8bn) 
<http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/643781465442350600/Indonesia-forest-fire-notes.pdf>
 [pdf], according to the World Bank. Arecent study 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/19/haze-indonesia-forest-fires-killed-100000-people-harvard-study>
 calculated the pollution from the fires may have led to 100,000 early deaths.

In October 2015, President Joko Widodo called for blocking all canals as a way 
to restore degraded, fire-prone landscapes by lifting water tables, making it 
harder for fire to start and stay ignited.

Indonesia forest fires: has this Sumatran village got the solution? #palmoil
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/sep/14/indonesia-forest-fires-palm-oil-sumatra-climate-change-peat-companies-unep>
April insists the construction of the canal this year was due to a 
misunderstanding of government regulations. In minutes of a Stakeholder 
Advisory Committee (SAC) meeting posted for about half an hour on the April 
website, the company said it misinterpreted a government decree and “mistakenly 
concluded this canal was mandated by government regulations”.

Indeed, a report 
<http://www.aprildialog.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/IPEWG-Summary-Report-Meeting3.pdf>
 [pdf] published in August by April’s Independent Peat Expert Working Group 
(IPEWG) suggests canals could be used to combat fires, which is in fact the 
exact opposite of the government’s regulations.

“[April] wanted to create the impression that canal construction was seen as 
part of these regulations, whereas the regulations actually refer to canal 
blocking,” says Andy Tait, senior campaign adviser at Greenpeace.

Tony Wehas, the president and director of Rapp, has insisted building the 
canal and planting acacia in the cleared peatlands was legal because the plan 
had been approved by the Indonesian government back in 2013. But that approval 
was given before the fires, the government’s new decrees, and April’s tougher 
sustainability commitment. Wenas alsosaid 
<http://www.straitstimes.com/asia/se-asia/pulp-firm-halts-work-in-riau-over-building-of-illegal-canals>
 the new canal was built as a fire break and not for drying out the peatland.


Yet the minutes of the SAC meeting said the company “made mistakes” in 
constructing the canal. “April has apologised to all parties concerned and is 
preparing a full explanation,” reads the minutes.

In response to the construction of the canal and deforestation in the region, 
the government gave April a verbal censure but has not taken any further action.

The incident – and rising mistrust – has led Greenpeace and WWF 
<http://awsassets.wwf.or.id/downloads/wwf_advisory_to_buyers_and_investors_of_rge_april_1.pdf>
 [pdf] to suspend their work on April’s SAC. Both groups say they can no longer 
work with a company they feel is not being forthright. Tait says Greenpeace has 
been concerned for some time about April’s limited follow up on key parts of 
its sustainability policy.

Owned by Royal Golden Eagle, April has long been a target of environmental 
groups for forest destruction and conflict with locals. Its concession on the 
island of Pedang has proven one of the most controversial due to opposition by 
the majority of villages in the area.

The company is also known for its obfuscation. In 2013 then-external affairs 
director David Goodwin asked Guardian journalist John Vidal to “pause” filming 
when asked very basic questions about April’s operations, such as how many 
trees were cut down over the last year.

“We’re not involved in deforestation,” Goodwin said, despite the fact that the 
company had been cutting down natural rainforest and planting monoculture 
plantations for over a decade.

After years of targeted campaigns, the company appeared to have a change of 
heart in 2015. It strengthened its sustainability policy enough to bring on 
board longstanding critics Greenpeace and WWF. The new policy included no new 
clearing of forests on peatlands and an investment of $100m over 10 years for 
peatland restoration and conversation.

But, within months, the company fell foul of environmental groups after it was 
caught clearing the forest 
<https://news.mongabay.com/2015/10/april-clearing-forest-in-breach-of-sustainability-policy-ngo/>
 on Pedang, the same concession where it would be caught with a giant canal 
several months later.

“April needs to admit that draining peatland for pulp plantations is 
unsustainable and instead block its drainage canals and announce a major 
investment in plantation species that don’t require drainage,” says Tait.

April has yet to reply to the Guardian’s request for comment.

Sign up to be a Guardian Sustainable Business 
<https://register.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/> member and get more 
stories like this direct to your inbox every week. You can alsof 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>ollow us on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>.
 