
Not since the communist era has a Polish government faced as much criticism 
from the west as the one in charge today. It is now exactly a year since Law 
and Justice (PiS), a socially conservative, Eurosceptic and nationalist party,
swept to power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/27/poland-law-justice-party-wins-235-seats-can-govern-alone>
, winning a parliamentary majority with 37.5% of the vote. This followed the 
triumph of PiS’sAndrzej Duda <https://www.theguardian.com/world/andrzej-duda> 
in the earlier presidential election, giving the party full control over 
Poland’s executive arm of government.

Since then, the ruling party has come under heavy fire 
<http://www.politico.eu/article/poland-democracy-failing-pis-law-and-justice-media-rule-of-law/>
 fromwestern media 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/europe/rule-no-1-for-polands-new-right-wing-government-ignore-the-critics/2016/02/14/d3e5124a-c9bb-11e5-b9ab-26591104bb19_story.html>
 and institutions, which have accused it of dismantling democracy with policies 
designed to limit civil liberties, control media, politicise the civil service 
andneuter judicial independence 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-03-11/polish-government-battles-to-blunt-critical-rule-of-law-report>
. In July this year, the European commission issued Warsaw with a three-month 
ultimatum to address threats to the rule of law or face potential sanctions. 
PiS reacted scornfully, with party leader Jarosław Kaczyński calling the
commission’s ultimatum “amusing” 
<http://www.politico.eu/article/polish-leader-commission-criticism-amuses-me-jaroslaw-kaczynski-beyong-eu-treaty-power/>
. Kaczyński has also been widely criticised in Europe for claiming migrants 
arriving on the continentcould cause “epidemics” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/24/law-and-justice-poland-putin-russia>
 due to “various parasites and protozoa, which don’t affect their organisms, 
but which could be dangerous here”.

Poland's abortion ban proposal near collapse after mass protests
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/05/polish-government-performs-u-turn-on-total-abortion-ban>
Yet, despite the barrage of critical opinions from the western world, which 
Poles have historically aspired to, PiS remains the most popular party in 
Poland,currently polling at 38% 
<http://www.parlamentarny.pl/sondaze/cbos-pis-z-38-proc-poparciem-nowoczesna-16-proc-po-15-proc,115.html>
, which is higher than the combined support of all other parliamentary parties 
put together. There are several reasons for this, revealing dynamics observable 
not only in the wider eastern European region, but further west as well.

While PiS is strongly rightwing on social issues, its economic approach can be 
described as leftist. It emphasises the need to tackle inequality and 
propagates strong welfare policies. It introduced unconditional monthly cash 
payments equivalent to £100 for all parents who have more than one child 
towards the upkeep of each subsequent child until he or she is 18. So if you 
have three children, you get £200 per month and so forth. For parents with one 
child, the payment is conditional on low income.

No previous government ever embarked on such a generous social programme. 
PiS’s approach puts many Polish leftists in a bind. On the one hand, they 
deplore the party’s unashamedly xenophobic rhetoric; on the other, they like 
its economic views, especially in comparison to the main opposition parties, 
Civic Platform and Nowoczesna, both dominated by folk still enamoured withHayek 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Friedrich_Hayek>. In effect, some on Poland’s 
left are not as mobilised against PiS as they could be.

While the west may have considered post-communist Poland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/poland> a model of free-market success, many 
Poles felt marginalised in a society where successive governments espoused a 
“sink or swim” attitude towards citizens, irrespective of whether it was the 
left or the right in power. Individual success was emphasised above all. PiS’s 
more communitarian approach is appealing to many Poles who feel they now have a 
government interested in more than just macro-economic indicators.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fpoland-right-law-justice-party-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F877a7f5cf416e0a7e6c164c42dcb0473106b7a6f%2F0_0_2211_2497%2F2211.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Xenophobic%2C%20authoritarian%20%E2%80%93%20and%20generous%20on%20welfare%3A%20how%20Poland%E2%80%99s%20right%20rules%20%7C%20Remi%20Adekoya&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fpoland-right-law-justice-party-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Xenophobic%2C%20authoritarian%20%E2%80%93%20and%20generous%20on%20welfare%3A%20how%20Poland%E2%80%99s%20right%20rules%20%7C%20Remi%20Adekoya&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fpoland-right-law-justice-party-europe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F877a7f5cf416e0a7e6c164c42dcb0473106b7a6f%2F0_0_2211_2497%2F2211.jpg>
 ‘Jarosław Kaczyński has been widely criticised in Europe for claiming migrants 
arriving on the continent could cause ‘epidemics’.’ Photograph: Kacper 
Pempel/Reuters 
A second factor in PiS’s continued popularity is that western Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, where most criticism of the 
ruling party stems from, is now viewed far more critically than before by many 
Poles. PiS and its rightwing media allies are successfully portraying it as a 
den of politically correct madness, where hopelessly naive policies have put 
Europeans at increased risk of Islamic terrorism and being overrun by migrants. 

EU elites are portrayed as fanatical multiculturalists and secularists who are 
furious that a traditionally oriented, non-politically correct government is in 
control of Poland. Meanwhile, Kaczyński insists: “It is completely untrue that 
to achieve western levels of development, we have to adopt their social models. 
That is hogwash.” He insists Poland can achieve western-level economic 
development while maintaining age-old traditional Polish values and remaining a 
homogenous white Catholic country. In an age when much of Europe is facing an 
identity crisis, this message is resonating.

A few years ago, no Polish government would have been able to get away with 
openly defying EU institutions without losing credibility domestically. But 
western opinion no longer has that kind of influence in Poland, especially 
among the numerically dominant conservatives. This is one of the most 
significant mental shifts in contemporary Poland and signals a new era in 
societal attitudes towards the west, one in which its economic development 
remains admired, but its cosmopolitan liberal values are largely rejected.

PiS also remains popular because while Kaczyński is highly controversial and 
generally disliked, the official faces of the government, Beata Szydło, the 
prime minister,  and Duda, the president, are both personable unassuming types 
who help the party maintain a folksy image. There is currently no leftist party 
in parliament and the liberal opposition is weak and divided. Moreover, both 
opposition party leaders, Grzegorz Schetyna of Civic Platform and Ryszard Petru 
of Nowoczesna, are nauseatingly opportunistic, the kind of politicians who 
won’t take a public stance on any issue till they’ve seen at least half a dozen 
opinion polls. People are sick of sly, calculating politicos; these days people 
value authenticity, even if they disagree with their views. PiS employs crude 
rhetoric, but comes across as authentic.

Barring any major political or economic earthquakes, PiS will likely rule 
Poland for a while to come, providing momentum to the generally Eurosceptic, 
illiberal and authoritarian tendencies currently triumphing in eastern Europe. 
Its success should serve as a warning bell to liberals and leftists in the 
whole of Europe. A growing number of people are becoming increasingly willing 
to tolerate authoritarian and xenophobic tendencies from parties that offer 
them a sense of community and security.

Ignoring this reality won’t make it go away. On the contrary, if we don’t 
respond adequately to this dynamic, we might all soon wake up in a Europe where 
parties similar to PiS have suddenly become the mainstream.
 