
Chinese leader Xi Jinping <https://www.theguardian.com/world/xi-jinping> will 
lead an 80-strong delegation of business executives and billionaires to the 
annual gathering of the powerful and super-rich in Davos next week.


Xi will be the first Chinese president to attend the World Economic Forum (WEF)
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/11/inequality-world-economy-wef-brexit-donald-trump-world-economic-forum-risk-report>
 and lead the country’s biggest-ever delegation to the celebration of 
capitalism in the Swiss Alps as a statement of intent that China wants to 
assume a global leadership role as other world powers struggle with domestic 
tumult.

Xi’s entourage will include some of the country’s most powerful businessmen 
including Jack Ma, founder of internet group Alibaba; Wang Jianlin, chairman of 
property developer Dalian Wanda; and Zhang Yaqin, president of web services 
firm Baidu. Ma and Wang are China’s two richest people, with fortunes estimated 
at $34.5bn (£28.5bn) and $30.5bn, respectively, according to the Bloomberg 
billionaires index.

In an opening address to the conference in the exclusive ski resort, Xi will 
defend globalisation asUS President-elect Donald Trump’s threatens trade 
barriers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/28/donald-trump-foreign-policy-speech-tpp-china-free-trade>
 and a US retreat from international deals. Xi will warn other world leaders, 
business executives and celebrities that the rise of populism could lead to 
“war, poverty, confrontation and domination” as he takes on the mantle of 
defending globalisation.


Rising inequality threatens world economy, says WEF
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/11/inequality-world-economy-wef-brexit-donald-trump-world-economic-forum-risk-report>
David Aikman, the WEF’s chief China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> 
representative, said this year’s Bejing delegation was so large that Chinese 
voices would be present in nearly all discussions at Davos and other 
participants want “to know China’s view on global and regional issues”.

Xi will push for greater international cooperation, development and economic 
globalisation to help build “a human community with shared destiny”.

Jiang Jianguo, the head of China’s state council information office, said: 
“With the rise of populism, protectionism, and nativism, the world has come to 
a historic crossroad where one road leads to war, poverty, confrontation and 
domination while the other road leads to peace, development, cooperation and 
win-win solutions.”

China’s vice foreign minister Li Baodong told a briefing in Davos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos> that Xi would set out Beijing’s 
views on how to “steer economic globalisation towards greater inclusiveness”.

The Chinese leader will also speak out against Trump’s accusations that China 
is a “big abuser” of free trade deals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/22/brutal-amoral-ruthless-cheating-trumps-trade-industrial-peter-navarro-views-on-china>
 by artificially depressing its currency to boost exports at the expense of US 
jobs. Trump has vowed to impose import tariffs on Chinese goods. Li said 
Trump’s attacks were unjustified and warned that “trade protectionism will lead 
to isolation and is in the interest of no one.

Li suggested that Xi would be happy to meet members of Trump’s transition team 
in Davos. “The channels of communication are open,” Li said. Trump will not 
attend Davos, which starts just three days before his inauguration. The 
president-elect will be represented at Davos byAnthony Scaramucci 
<https://twitter.com/scaramucci?lang=en>, a multi-millionaire hedge fund 
manager and member of Trump’s presidential transition team.

Scaramucci, founder of hedge fund SkyBridge Capital and lavish Las Vegas 
investment conference Salt <http://www.saltconference.com/>, is expected to 
this week be given an official White House role advising Trump on business 
affairs 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/the-mooch-earns-the-ear-of-donald-trump-1484065795>
.

Xi is attending Davos as part of a three-day state visit to Switzerland, 
including a speech to the United Nations in Geneva on Wednesday.


 