
The Yellowstone river has its headwaters in the mountain streams and snowy 
peaks of the famous US national park with the same name, and makes an 
unfettered downhill run all the way to the Missouri river, nearly 700 miles 
away. It is the longest undammed river in the Lower 48 states.

Last August, the Yellowstone made national headlines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/21/yellowstone-fish-deaths-183-miles-of-river-closed-to-halt-spread-of-parasite>
 when a parasite killed thousands of fish, mostly whitefish. Fear of spreading 
the parasite to other waterways forced Montana officials to close the river to 
fishermen, rafters, and boaters. At the height of summer, the stunningly 
scenic, trout-rich river was eerily deserted. Fishing re-opened in the fall, 
but the parasite has been found in other Montana waterways.

That a non-native parasite somehow got into a river may seem like an 
unremarkable occurrence. But a new, expansive model of gravel-bed river systems 
in mountainous areas, such as the Yellowstone, depicts a more complex scenario 
in which a host of human activities combine to degrade river systems and render 
them more vulnerable to destructive outside influences such as parasites. This 
body of research – 40 years in the making, but much of it summed up in arecent 
paper <http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/2/6/e1600026> – rewrites the 
understanding of the ecological dynamics of these rivers. And it casts a harsh 
light on human river valley activities such as homebuilding, dam construction, 
irrigation, and channelization that may be slowly choking highly dynamic river 
systems – and the biodiversity that depends on them – to death.

The waters of the Yellowstone, for example, have been diverted for irrigation, 
and the course of the river has been altered by channelization for flood 
control and the placement of boulder breakwaters, or riprap, which landowners 
install to stem erosion. Although the Yellowstone is undammed, these other 
human activities can slow and change the river’s flow and, most significantly, 
alter the complex interaction between the above-ground course of the river and 
the unseen currents that stream beneath the Yellowstone Valley’s broad gravel 
and cobble bottom. Such human alterations to a river can impair its dynamism 
and resilience, especially in combination with rising temperatures from climate 
change and reduced water flows because of increased evaporation and irrigation.

In effect, these myriad human activities contribute to the weakening of the 
“immune systems” of rivers like the Yellowstone, making aquatic organisms more 
vulnerable to stresses like fish-killing parasites. The paper said these 
pernicious changes are being experienced in waterways across western North 
America and in other mountain river systems, including some found in Europe, 
the Andes, the Himalayas, and the high country of New Zealand.

Most of the world’s gravel-bed rivers have experienced degradation, and in 
many places managers are trying to walk back the damage. On the Snake river 
near Jackson, Wyoming, for example, local and federal officials are working to
restore riparian habitat 
<http://www.jhnewsandguide.com/news/environmental/county-zeros-in-on-snake-levee-projects/article_cd2e1daf-3941-58d2-8d23-9ea286d08a0a.html>
 damaged by the construction of 22 miles of 15-foot-high flood-control levees 
in the mid-20th century. The levees enabled some construction to take place in 
the floodplain, but deprived the river of its ability to flood and carry out 
other ecological functions.

In Europe, most mountain rivers have been tamed dramatically over the past 
several centuries. The Drava river – which flows out of the Alps through 
Croatia and Austria and into the Danube – has been constrained historically by 
farming, hydroelectric dams, and flood control. In recent years, however, 
conservationists and government officials have launchedmajor restoration 
programs 
<http://croatia.panda.org/en/what_we_do/freshwater/drava_life___integrated_river_management/>
 to reconnect tributaries and floodplains and to restore riparian areas of the 
Drava.

The life that depends on healthy, mountain river systems is legion. The recent 
paper, published in the journal Science Advances, brought together an array of 
researchers from different disciplines, from bear biologists, to 
ornithologists, to ungulate biologists. They were surprised to find the large 
number of species that rely heavily on the biodiversity generated by the 
Yellowstone ecosystem, not just fish and other aquatic species.

Although river floodplains themselves make up only roughly 3% of many river 
valleys, “these gravel-bed river systems are where the magic happens,” said 
Richard Hauer, a professor of limnology at the University of Montana and lead 
author of the paper. “Two-thirds of species spend part of their lives in the 
floodplain.”

Some 70% of bird species in mountain river valleys, for example, rely on 
habitat created by the river system.

In the new model set forth in the Science Advances paper, melting snow and 
groundwater flow down the channel of the river, but the vast majority of the 
water in the system is moving far more slowly through the labyrinthine 
underground networks of cobbles, gravel, and sand that make up the entire 
valley bottom, from the base of one mountain range to the other.

This subterranean habitat is far more biologically productive than previously 
thought and is home to microbes and aquatic insects, such as stoneflies, which 
are critical to a river’s food chain. Water is constantly flowing through the 
matrix of rock and sand, which filters out organic material and releases 
nitrogen, phosphorous, and other nutrients that well up through the entire 
system. These nutrients then are made available to plants and insects on the 
surface – a jolt of biological adrenaline.

This nutrient pulse is the foundation of a food chain that creates 
biodiversity in the entire valley, nourishing willows, cottonwood, and aspen, 
which in turn draw birds and beavers, elk and caribou. Wolves and grizzly bears 
then are drawn to the prey.

This is a far more expansive and detailed picture of river ecosystems than 
previous models. Until this work began in the 1970s, researchers thought the 
hyporheic zone – the groundwater that is part of the river system – lay within 
just a meter or so of the river bottom and banks. Now it’s clear it takes up 
most of the river valley.

“I’ll never look at a river the same way again,” said Michael Proctor, an 
independent grizzly bear biologist in British Columbia who is one of the 
paper’s authors. “It gives my argument to protect river valleys for grizzlies a 
powerful punch, because I am not just arguing for bears, but for a wide 
diversity of nature.”

These river systems play other roles. The above-ground river continually jumps 
channels and makes networks of new ones. Abandoned channels, meanwhile, become 
covered with gravel and are transformed into important habitat for stoneflies 
and other insects that feed fish. Water flowing through the gravel beneath the 
valley floor surfaces in a myriad of places along the floodplain, creating a 
constantly changing assortment of ponds, seeps, springs, and other important 
habitat.

Interaction between water in the river and groundwater is fundamental to the 
river ecosystem. During the winter, cold water is stored in the rock and 
gravel, surfacing in the summer to moderate warm temperatures. Pools of warmer 
water in winter and cool water in summer create refuges for fish and other 
species.

This mix of water plays a role in preventing disease, which is part of the 
story of the incursion of parasites into the Yellowstone. As water is withdrawn 
for irrigation and structures such as riprap are installed, the mixing between 
groundwater and river water is reduced. That means less cold water is stored in 
the gravel to cool the river in summer and warm the river in winter.

“There’s a whole suite of really bad things that happen from this hardening 
that directly affects the fishery,” says Hauer. “[Fish] pool in warmer water 
and are stressed.” Their metabolism increases in warmer water, “and they are 
not able to eat enough food and they are not healthy. That makes them really 
vulnerable to disease.” Crowding in the cool water that remains may bring them 
into contact with more parasites, while warmer water may favor increased 
populations of parasites.

Meanwhile, invasive zebra and quagga mussels – a growing problem in the 
western US that upsets the ecology of freshwater ecosystems – also favor warmer 
water. The degradation of river ecosystems may help them thrive, research shows.

These harmful effects – coupled with reduced water flows from climate change, 
longer summers, and warmer water and air temperatures – are greatly diminishing 
the resilience of gravel-bed rivers, Hauer says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fyellowstone-fish-deaths-point-to-huge-toll-of-human-activity-on-rivers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d65e0fd41374dc2e3b1c29de054b7023843413a%2F0_0_3000_1987%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Yellowstone%20fish%20deaths%20point%20to%20huge%20toll%20of%20human%20activity%20on%20rivers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fyellowstone-fish-deaths-point-to-huge-toll-of-human-activity-on-rivers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Yellowstone%20fish%20deaths%20point%20to%20huge%20toll%20of%20human%20activity%20on%20rivers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fyellowstone-fish-deaths-point-to-huge-toll-of-human-activity-on-rivers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d65e0fd41374dc2e3b1c29de054b7023843413a%2F0_0_3000_1987%2F3000.jpg>
 Dead whitefish float in the Yellowstone river in August 2016. Photograph: 
Matthew Brown/AP 
Another important feature of a free-flowing, gravel-bed river is their 
unruliness. They are physically disruptive, constantly churning, tearing 
riparian habitat apart, rebuilding and renewing the system, especially during 
high water.Rivers <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/rivers> wash 
topsoil, gravel, and woody debris from one spot to a new home downriver, which 
creates an array of new ecosystems. That, in turn, restarts plant succession. 
This blends with existing habitat – everything from mature cottonwood forests 
to grasslands – to fashion a complex patchy mosaic that increases biological 
richness.

“If you take the power out of the river with a dam or riprap,” says Hauer, 
“there’s no renewal – the river doesn’t move gravel around and doesn’t create 
new mosaics of habitat. Nutrients are not dispersed. Everything gets locked in 
place and starts getting old and declines.”

The implications of this new model for conservation are enormous – and could 
make the conservation of rivers more difficult since it implicates human 
activity on a much broader scale. Scientists say that if we continue to take 
bits and pieces out of these ecosystems, rivers such as the Yellowstone will 
continue to decline, especially as the effects of climate change mount.

“People don’t like to hear that what they are doing is killing the river,” 
Hauer said. But he maintains that society needs to know how its activities are 
altering the natural world if it hopes to fix ecological problems. “The first 
thing an alcoholic has to do is stand up and say ‘Hi my name is Ric and I’m an 
alcoholic,’” said Hauer.
 