
From an Illinois state senator to a failed campaign for the House of 
Representatives, to a successful campaign to become a senator, to running and 
being elected the first African-American president of the United States, one 
word has come to characterise Barack Obama: hope. Along with one phrase: “Yes 
we can.”

So the question is, did hope materialise, and did “Yes we can” become “Yes we 
did 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/11/barack-obama-final-speech-as-president-video-highlights>
”, especially with respect to race relations?

Barack Hussein Obama was, by birth, residence and experience, uniquely 
situated to understand and reconcile the races. He was born to a white Kansas 
mother and a black Kenyan father. He was raised and loved by white grandparents 
who nonetheless exposed him to their own negative racial stereotypes. He lived 
in the mostly white state of Kansas, then for a time in the mostly Muslim 
country of Indonesia, and finally in the mainly Asian but also the most 
racially diverse state in the US, Hawaii.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fbarack-obama-final-speech-as-president-video-highlights&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama's%20farewell%20speech%3A%20'Yes%20we%20did'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fbarack-obama-final-speech-as-president-video-highlights>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barack%20Obama%27s%20farewell%20speech%3A%20%27Yes%20we%20did%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fbarack-obama-final-speech-as-president-video-highlights&media=>
Barack Obama’s farewell speech: ‘Yes we did’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/11/barack-obama-final-speech-as-president-video-highlights>
As a young man he had to engineer his way through all these racial and 
cultural diversities. He mastered what is generally known as theHegelian 
dialectic 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dialectic&action=edit&section=8> – 
rejecting two opposites in an attempt to seek a middle ground that reconciled 
both.

Such a view was revealed during the 2008 presidential campaign, when Obama had 
to deal withRev Jeremiah Wright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/mar/18/barackobama.uselections20083>. 
His former pastor’s remarks on race threatened to derail the campaign, and he 
said that they “weren’t simply a religious leader’s efforts to speak out 
against perceived injustice. Instead, they expressed a profoundly distorted 
view of this country – a view that sees white racism as endemic, and that 
elevates what is wrong with America above all that we know is right with 
America” – his effort to balance and reconcile two truths about America.

Obama believed politics could be conducted on a high moral plane, with 
dignity, rational discourse on ideological differences, and bipartisanship. He 
soon learned that 15 Republican leaders had conspired in a Washington DC 
restaurant on his inaugural night to undermine his administration by opposing 
everything he supported – even Republican ideas. Senate majority leader Mitch 
McConnell said his priority was making Obama a one-term president – not jobs, 
education, healthcare or housing. During a state of the union address, South 
Carolina Republican congressmanJoe Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/sep/10/you-lie-joe-wilson-obama-speech> 
called out “You lie!” in the middle of his speech – then raised over $1m for 
his campaign on the back of it. Welcome, Barack, to US racism.

When Trayvon Martin was shot dead by a volunteer vigilante, Obama said if he 
had a son, ‘he would look like Trayvon'

Obama also soon learned that the first black president had to govern on 
eggshells when he referred to his friend Prof Henry Louis Gates’sarrest for 
trying to enter his own home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2009/jul/22/henry-louis-gates-michael-white>
 as “stupid” . That resulted in a “beer summit” between the president, Gates 
and the arresting officer.

When teenager Trayvon Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trayvon-martin> was shot dead by a 
volunteer vigilante in Florida, the president said if he had a son, “he would 
look like Trayvon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2012/mar/24/barack-obama-trayvon-martin-video>
”. Many white Americans reacted negatively, implying that Obama was siding with 
Trayvon Martin and against the shooter, George Zimmerman.

Some black people criticised him for not doing more in directly addressing 
black political conditions and concerns. For some, in some areas, conditions 
actually worsened. But Obama consistently stated he had been elected president 
of all Americans, not just black Americans. With that premise, he tried to 
improve the conditions of all under the affordable care act – believing 
correctly that many African Americans’ lives would benefit from it.

How Barack Obama paved the way for Donald Trump | Gary Younge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/16/how-barack-obama-paved-way-donald-trump-racism>
The LGBTQ community made tremendous progress under Obama, including a supreme 
court decision that legalised same-sex marriage. Hispanics, too, progressed 
with the deferred action for childhood arrivals law that granted 800,000 
children brought to the US by parents at a young age two years’ delay in 
deportation, and the right to work. TheDream Act 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/DREAM-Act-WhiteHouse-FactSheet.pdf>
, a bill that set out a process for immigrants to gain permanent residency, 
didn’t pass; nor did they get their highest priority: comprehensive immigration 
legislation.

But this is complicated. African Americans got nothing comparable to LGBTQ and 
Hispanic communities in terms of legislation addressing their concerns. But 
both of them marched, protested and pressured the Obama administration. For a 
variety of reasons, black people mostly didn’t protest against Obama, and the 
consequences were we didn’t get anything specific.

But just having a scandal-free African American family in the White House, who 
conducted themselves and fulfilled their responsibilities with competence, 
dignity and grace, shouldn’t be underestimated. The clouds of racial limits 
were permanently removed from the minds of black people, especially the young, 
and expanded white minds as well.

I believe history will judge Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> to be a very good president 
who, in the long run, did improve race relations.
 