
One day in March an entire country decided to outlaw all zero-hours contracts. 
No ifs, no buts, no opt-outs. Yes, I’m talking about the same kind of 
zero-hours contracts that Sports Direct – which today agreed topay more than 
1,000 illegally underpaid workers around £1m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/15/sports-direct-staff-to-receive-back-pay-unite-hmrc>
 in backpay – inflicts on about90% of its staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jul/28/sports-direct-staff-zero-hour-contracts>
. The deal that means your boss or agency can offer you however many hours 
whenever they like. The same arrangement on whicha million Britons have to 
manage 
<http://news.sky.com/story/zero-hours-contracts-for-one-million-britons-10438278>
 a weekly shop, the rent and a family.

Sports Direct warehouse workers to receive back pay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/15/sports-direct-staff-to-receive-back-pay-unite-hmrc>
And no, the zero-hours ban wasn’t brought in by a nation that was famed for 
its progressive liberalism. The banhappened in New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/11/zero-hour-contracts-banned-in-new-zealand>
, which politically and economically is a kind of mini-Britain. We had 
Thatcherism; they hadRogernomics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/jul/03/newzealand.transport> and
Ruthanasia 
<http://www.nzherald.co.nz/nz/news/article.cfm?c_id=1&objectid=10418702>. In 
the Kiwi battle for fairer work nothing was predictable, and everything was up 
for grabs.

Two years ago hardly anyone in New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/newzealand> knew what zero hours were. The 
battle was led by a trade union that just a few years ago had a mere 100 
members – and on this issue never expected half of what it ended up with – and 
relied on the bravery and organisation of a group of workers who are usually 
waved away as the most lumpen of the proletariat: the staff of McDonald’s, 
Burger King and the rest of New Zealand’s fast-food outlets.

A few weeks ago I met three of the people in this fight, who told me how 
they’d pulled off such a coup. I think their story is worth reading now for two 
main reasons.

First and most vital is that British workplaces are now battlefields in a way 
they haven’t been since Tony Blair went into Downing Street. Just look at the 
last few days’ headlines: as well as those Sports Direct workers winning 
backpay, Deliveroo drivers have besieged the firm’s HQ over a change in their 
pay, and stretches of Britain’strain network have been shut down by strikes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/21/southern-scotrail-train-strikes-hit-tens-thousands-passengers>
. And add to that the revelations about working conditions forHermes delivery 
drivers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/18/life-as-a-hermes-driver-they-offload-all-the-risk-on-to-the-courier>
; the increasingly successfulbattle of cycle couriers for better pay 
<https://rosslydall.wordpress.com/2016/04/04/cycle-couriers-launch-legal-action-to-win-better-wages-holidays-and-sick-pay/>
 and conditions; and the firstjunior doctors’ strike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/live/2016/jan/12/junior-doctors-strike-in-england-live-updates>
 in 40 years. Many of these workers are from companies in the “new economy”: 
casualised, insecure and un-unionised.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fmission-impossible-the-truth-about-being-an-online-delivery-driver-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mission%20impossible%3F%20The%20truth%20about%20being%20an%20online%20delivery%20driver%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fmission-impossible-the-truth-about-being-an-online-delivery-driver-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mission%20impossible%3F%20The%20truth%20about%20being%20an%20online%20delivery%20driver%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fmission-impossible-the-truth-about-being-an-online-delivery-driver-video&media=>
Mission impossible? The truth about being an online delivery driver - video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/video/2016/jul/18/mission-impossible-the-truth-about-being-an-online-delivery-driver-video>
This new fractiousness around work looks set to continue, for one reason: as 
even the most plodding of economists and politicians are recognising, the old 
rule that work always pays no longer applies. Workers are still bumping around 
the same pay rates as they were before the 2008 crash; as the Institute for 
Fiscal Studies and others show,working middle-income families are the new poor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/19/middle-income-families-poverty-ifs-report>
.

More unhappily, all these labour struggles are taking place outside 
Westminster – because mainstream politicians, Labour and Tory, are desperately 
trying to keep their party coalitions from disintegrating. While Jeremy Corbyn 
has referred to the Kiwi battle against zero hours, I can’t see his party 
getting itself together to do anything about them.

So if you want to see how a social crisis can lead to serious political 
action, I’d urge you to look a long way south. The story in New Zealand begins 
with a trade union called Unite. Unlike the behemoth over here run by Len 
McCluskey, just over a decade ago its Kiwi namesake was “a union without any 
members”, as Mike Treen, now its deputy head, remembers.

As even the most plodding economists and politicians recognise, the old rule 
that work always pays no longer works

That changed in two stages. First, from 2005 Treen and his colleagues went all 
out to recruit workers from the industries other unions weren’t touching: 
takeaway chains, casinos, hotels. They did so with imaginative, demotic 
activism. The campaign to get union representation in the fast-food industry 
was called, with a wink to a Morgan Spurlock film,Supersizemypay 
<https://www.greenleft.org.au/node/54180>.

Its highpoint came with a mass picket of burger restaurants led not by union 
grizzlies, but schoolkids in uniform. After all, they ate there – so why not 
form an alliance between customers and workers? Telegenic unrest made for 
excellent union marketing.

Second came the battle over zero-hours contracts. Two years ago, Treen 
recalls, this was a term known only by the country’s well-read – and they used 
it to refer to the parlous labour practices of the foggy old mother country, 
without recognising how widespread it was at home.

Even after years at McDonald’s, Victoria Hopgood had no idea her contract – 
requiring her to be employed but not promising her any work – was not the norm, 
but a new and pernicious thing. Once she got that, and heard there was a union 
campaigning against it, she dived in.

Crucial to this battle was the teatime TV show Campbell Live 
<http://www.newshub.co.nz/topics/tv-shows/campbell-live>. Imagine liberal uncle 
Jon Snow crossed with the accessible campaigning zeal of Esther Rantzen and 
you’re most of the way to the presenter John Campbell. In 2015 his team was 
facing the axe – and yet it still took up the issue of employment contracts as 
a campaign, appointing a correspondent to work on it full time, the show doing 
stunts on a nightly basis. Campbell recalls: “The kind of people who were 
driving Audis to dinner parties to drink pinot noir were decrying zero hours 
around their dinner tables.”

Middle-income families in UK resemble the poor of years past, says IFS
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/19/middle-income-families-poverty-ifs-report>
Treen and his colleagues had one major problem remaining: they still couldn’t 
get enough workers into their union. Another McDonald’s worker, Alistair Reith, 
says: “I was born in 1991 – among my mates I was the oddball who’d heard of 
trade unions.” Chatting to a colleague on the drive-thru, he asked: “Are you in 
the union?” She replied: “Oh, no. I play rugby league.”

In an industry marked by a high number of Indian-origin workers, Unite did 
something else unusual: it asked Indian community groups to help with 
mobilising. Few had heard of the Bhagat Singh society, for instance, but it was 
large and active – and took its ideal from the eponymousrevolutionary socialist 
who was executed 
<http://www.sikh-history.com/sikhhist/personalities/bhagat.html> by the British 
Raj.

Not everything in this story can be readily applied to Britain. Unlike New 
Zealand, we don’t offer our unions access to workplaces so they can inform 
non-members of their rights. I can’t see either Channel 4 News, or our 
equivalent of the rightwing parties that in New Zealand actually drafted the 
ban, playing the kind of role they did there.

But it does go to show what imaginative activists can do when they move into 
areas of life that strike the institutional dinosaurs as being a bit too much 
like hard work.
 