
Theresa May’s Brexit strategy, it would be fair to say, is not going well. It 
is hard to imagine how it could: there’s not exactly a Baedeker guide of the 
best options, because there aren’t any. There is no good Brexit strategy. The 
best we can hope for is a not-catastrophic one.

Yesterday, against a ludicrous backdrop of a desert-blue sky and tanks 
improbably arranged on the deck of a Royal Navy ship – May is on atour of the 
Gulf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/07/theresa-may-calls-on-gulf-leaders-to-press-on-with-economic-reforms>
 – she declared she was not going to have a hard Brexit or a soft one, but a
“red, white and blue” Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/theresa-may-calls-for-red-white-and-blue-brexit>
.

This fatuous statement can most charitably be understood as a kind of come-on 
to the Ukip-leaning tendency in Lincolnshire. There is abyelection in Sleaford 
tomorrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/sleaford-and-north-hykeham-voters-express-impatience-over-brexit-byelection-theresa-may-eu>
, and it may have been hoped that voters there would be susceptible to the 
sight of their leader looking leader-ish, in a very, very remote echo of 
Elizabeth I, the first captain of Galleon Britain, and abandon any thought of 
sending an “out, now!” Ukippy message.

Sleaford ​​and North Hykeham voters express impatience over Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/sleaford-and-north-hykeham-voters-express-impatience-over-brexit-byelection-theresa-may-eu>
That was the message from Bahrain. In Westminster, a quite different game was 
being played in May’s name. Under pressure from the threat of a backbench 
revolt in the Commons today, where a Labour debate was threatening to become an 
early test of cross-party support for a soft Brexit, Downing Street conceded 
that there would be at least anoutline proposal of a Brexit negotiation strategy
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/07/tory-backbenchers-demand-brexit-plans-theresa-may-government-article-50-anna-soubry>
 before article 50 is triggered. In return, triggered it would be, by the end 
of March.

Neither of these was a very elegant move. They both felt too obviously 
tactical, and insufficiently as if they were elements of a purposeful strategy. 
But they are absolutely standard political manoeuvres, familiar from the 
repertoire of successive prime ministers trying to stay ahead of an 
increasingly sceptical electorate.

What is unusual – apart from the utterly depressing and irrelevant 
conversation about thecost of a pair of trousers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/theresa-may-sidesteps-question-about-995-pound-leather-trousers>
 May recently wore – is that they are accompanied by a low background 
muttering, the drone of male – almost all male – voices, asking that awful 
question: the ‘is she up to it?’ question.

Is she up to it? A question without an answer; a question that is not intended 
to have an answer, for to ask it is to answer it. Often it is “asked” with a 
hesitant, even an apologetic tone, as in, I don’t really want to suggest it, 
and obviously I raise it reluctantly because I know how it will seem (subtext: 
I don’t want you to think I’m in any remote way misogynistic) but all the same, 
is she up to it?

Labour rebels refuse to back Tory amendment on Brexit motion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/07/tory-backbenchers-demand-brexit-plans-theresa-may-government-article-50-anna-soubry>
Ask Google, that great instant polling machine, whether Theresa May is up to 
the job and there is the Scottish Daily Record asking the question 
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/news/politics/theresa-up-job-inside-mind-8409461> 
on the very day she became prime minister. Search for Hillary Clinton and it 
was alive issue almost to polling day 
<http://insider.foxnews.com/2016/09/04/mike-huckabee-hillary-clinton-would-be-disaster-country>
. Ask if Trump is up to the job and …silence 
<https://www.google.co.uk/webhp?sourceid=chrome-instant&ion=1&espv=2&ie=UTF-8#q=is+trump+up+to+the+job>
.

Being up to the job is nothing to do with actually being any good at it. No 
one ever asks if David Cameron was up to the job, even though he staked the 
country on his capacity to win things, and lost. Even after Iraq, no one ever 
suggested Tony Blair was just not up to it.

It’s all about whether you emanate the kind of pheromones that make people 
think you are, about whether you embody the look. So that people don’t ask 
whether that really is a Richard James suit that Cameron’s wearing (starting 
price £3,350) because that’s the sort of suit that Tory prime ministers wear.

On the wall above my desk hangs a brilliant Steve Bell cartoon. It dates back 
to the end of 2002 when Estelle Morrisresigned as education secretary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2003/jan/09/schools.uk>, saying she 
thought she wasn’t up to the job. Or rather, she “admitted” she wasn’t up to 
the job. Thecartoon 
<http://www.belltoons.co.uk/bellworks/index.php/leaders/2002/1833-25-10-02CHARLESCLARKE>
 shows her successor, Charles Clarke, inflated with testosterone, bellowing: 
“So I’m not up to the job either? How dare you assume I give a shit!!”

So do, please, stop asking if May is up to the job. She’s doing it, right?

• You can catch up on the discussion on this article and others on our Your 
Opinions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/07/your-opinions-may-the-accidental-europe-wrecker-and-identity-politics-in-sleaford>
 thread
 