
A radical appraisal of Britain’s defence and foreign policy has led a group of 
YoungConservatives <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> to 
conclude that commitment to Europe is at once our only choice and our greatest 
opportunity.

“If we are to play any role in the world it must be within a community of 
European nations which would form an equal partnership with the United States, 
sharing the defence of freedom by protecting itself, and the Mediterranean, and 
leaving the Far East to the United States, in concert with possibly aMAPHILINDO 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maphilindo> (Malaysia, Philippines, and 
Indonesia) alliance.”

This is the view of Mr John Selwyn Gummer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/dec/30/john-gummer-to-stand-down>, 
chairman of the Young Conservatives’ foreign affairs group, in a pamphlet, 
“Europe: No other choice” published yesterday, price 3d, by the Conservative 
Central Office. He argues that Britain’s military, economic and political 
interests compel her totry to enter the EEC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/25/how-britain-negotiated-its-entry-to-the-eec-then-failed-to-play-its-part>
.

‘Long dead myth’ 
“That long dead myth of the ‘special relationship’ between John Bull and Uncle 
Sam must finally be buried ... Outside the Common Market we can only expect the 
leftovers of capital from the US and elsewhere, and we shall have fewer of the 
new techniques which American money in particular brings in its train.”

He says that Britain, outside the Common Market, would be more and more 
dependent on the Communist countries and South Africa. “A neutralist stand 
would be necessary if our economy was to depend upon supplying to Mr Vorster 
and Dr Ulbricht materials which no other Western power will sell them.”

The pamphlet’s views are not necessarily official party policy. Mr Gumrner 
argues that there are so many oil suppliers in the world that the possibility 
of a total stop on supplies is too remote to demand the continued presence of 
British forces in the Middle East. This is not Tory party doctrine, although Mr 
Enoch Powell has seen the force of it.


Britain could ‘bridge the gap’ between Russian and US
By our own Reporter 

Mr [Reginald] Maudling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/dec/11/highereducation.biography1>, the 
deputy Leader of the Opposition, yesterday forecast the end of the special 
Anglo-American relationship in the field of nuclear weapons and of defence 
arrangements outside the European theatre.

Britain, as a European nation, and preferably as a member of the European 
Economic Community, should help to provide a bridge between the United States 
and Russia, he said at a lunch given in London by the United States Chamber of 
Commerce (United Kingdom).

“I would like to see the Atlantic Alliance develop in a form which would 
recognise the new strength ofEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, and which would at the same 
time acknowledge the standing importance of American-Russian relations.”

It was very much in the interest of Europe that there should be a 
rapprochement between the United States and Russia, and that Europe should be 
involved, in any such rapprochement. The NATO structure must be revised, Mr 
Maudling said, to take into account the changing nature of the threat to the 
Western world and its movement, by and large, from Europe to the East. There 
could be little doubt that the pattern of relationships between the major 
Western Powers in these matters was in a phase of transition.

Entry ‘right’ 
He also supported British entry into EEC as right for the Commonwealth, for 
Europe, and for the development of Atlantic relationships.

On the Chrysler-Rootes negotiations, Mr Maudling said they had always been 
strongly in favour of American investment in Britain, and British investment in 
the United States. Subject to natural limitations, foreign investment brought 
great benefits to both parties, but it was important for the British to rely on 
themselves to provide capital and know-how for the development of their own 
industry.
 