
Alisa Shevchenko is a talented young Russian hacker, known for working with 
companies to find vulnerabilities in their systems. She spends her winters in 
Asia, meditating and training in Thai kickboxing.

US officially accuses Russia of hacking DNC and interfering with election
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/07/us-russia-dnc-hack-interfering-presidential-election>
She is also, the White House claims, guilty of helping Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> interfere in the US election.


Her company was a surprise inclusion on the US sanctions list 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2016/12/29/fact-sheet-actions-response-russian-malicious-cyber-activity-and>
 released last week, alongside top officers in Russia’s GRU military 
intelligence agency and two well-known criminal hackers. The company “provided 
the GRU with technical research and development”, according to the fact sheet 
released by the White House. No further details were given.

In addition to the sanctions, the US expelled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/29/barack-obama-sanctions-russia-election-hack>
 35 Russian diplomats from the country, and said it would take further, 
non-public measures in response.

After a week in which Russian interference in the election – apparently with 
the goal of helping Donald Trump to victory – has dominated the news agenda, 
Shevchenko has spoken out to decry the sanctions against her.


Shevchenko told the Guardian she was furious at her company’s inclusion on the 
list, and denied ever having knowingly worked for the Russian government. She 
communicated via encrypted email, from a location she said was “a wild 
countryside area a few hours away from Bangkok”.


In answers that were defiant, and occasionally abrasive, she decried the 
“insane level of hysteria around the entire ‘Russian hacking’ story”.

She suggested that the US authorities were guilty either of “a technically 
incompetent misinterpretation of the facts” or had been fooled by a 
“counterfeit in order to frame my company”. Those who could have had an 
interest in framing her could include competitors, US intelligence or Russian 
intelligence, with the goal of screening the real culprits, Shevchenko said.


“A young female hacker and her helpless company seems like a perfect pick for 
that goal. I don’t try to hide, I travel a lot, and am a friendly communicative 
person. And most importantly, I don’t have any big money, power or connections 
behind me to shrug off the blame. So really, it could be anyone.”

US intelligence believes the Democratic party’s servers were hacked by a group 
known alternatively as Fancy Bear, APT 29 or Sofacy, which they say was working 
for the GRU, Russia’s military intelligence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/29/cozy-bear-fancy-bear-russia-hack-dnc>
. In the private sector, attribution directly to the GRU comes most clearly 
from US firm CrowdStrike, which is influential in US security circles. The US 
government believes the hacked emails were then leaked – possibly through an 
intermediary – to Julian Assange and WikiLeaks.


Russian treachery is extreme and it is everywhere | Nick Cohen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/07/russian-treachery-extreme-and-everywhere>
Putin has denied all Russian interference in the election, suggesting the 
blame has fallen on Moscow due to sour grapes from the losing side. Putin has 
expressed hope that under Trump, who hasrepeatedly praised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/30/russia-plans-immediate-counter-measures-us-diplomats>
 Russia and the president personally, relations between the two countries will 
improve.


Russian authorities are known to offer a mixture of carrot and stick to engage 
prominent hackers in work for the state, and third-party contracting of state 
information security tasks is common in most countries. A number of Russian 
security experts declined to comment, citing the sensitivity of the subject.


“Pretty much everyone in the community has done some work for their government 
at some point,” said Dave Aitel, who runs Immunity, a US software security 
company. He described Shevchenko as “extremely well known in the information 
security community”.


Shevchenko described herself as “a typical introverted computer geek” who is 
largely self taught. She declined to say how old she was, deeming it an 
“impolite question”, saying instead: “If you really need a number then go ahead 
and make it up based on my photographs”.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Frussian-hacker-putin-election-alisa-shevchenko%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5dd6ba4751af36dbd8dbf1035c44218fe50909c7%2F0_1219_2988_1793%2F2988.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Young%20Russian%20denies%20she%20aided%20election%20hackers%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20never%20work%20with%20douchebags%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Frussian-hacker-putin-election-alisa-shevchenko%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Young%20Russian%20denies%20she%20aided%20election%20hackers%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20never%20work%20with%20douchebags%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Frussian-hacker-putin-election-alisa-shevchenko%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5dd6ba4751af36dbd8dbf1035c44218fe50909c7%2F0_1219_2988_1793%2F2988.jpg>
 Shevchenko: ‘a typical introverted computer geek’. Photograph: Alisa Shevchenko
She said she dropped out of three different universities, as she was 
passionate about learning but did not enjoy the structure of a university 
course. Around 2004, she joined Kaspersky Lab, a high-profile Russian 
cybersecurity firm.


She left to set up her own company, initially called Esage Lab (“I was 
thinking of something ‘sage’, as in a wizard or a magician,” she said). Later, 
she changed its name to ZOR. Both names are on the US sanctions list.

Shevchenko specialises in finding so-called “zero-days”, previously 
undisclosed software bugs that could leave companies vulnerable. “We have not 
only searched for bugs but exploited them, but only with the customer’s 
sanction,” she said. She said she never hired anyone she knew to have a 
criminal background for her companies.

Shevchenko said she had been approached repeatedly by people she believed to 
be from the Russian government. She insisted, however, that she had always 
rejected the advances. She said she had not been threatened or intimidated as a 
result.


A 2014 profile of Shevchenko in Russian Forbes magazine noted that she worked 
with DialogNauka, a Russian company that listed among its clients the Russian 
ministry of defence and parts of the security services. Questioned by the 
Guardian, she insisted that none of her own work for DialogNauka “was even 
remotely possible to use as a nation-state attacks supply”.

Shevchenko said she had turned down plenty of offers of work on ideological 
grounds: “I never work with douchebags. I only work with honest and open people 
that I feel good about.” Asked directly if she had ever worked on a government 
contract in any capacity, she answered “not that I know of”.

Shevchenko said ZOR was closed more than a year ago, because it was difficult 
and expensive to do the requisite public relations work required to drum up 
business. She now works as a “one-man army”, she said.

Many analysts have said it seems very likely that Russian state actors are 
behind Fancy Bear, but concede that the publicly released evidence does not 
include a smoking gun.

Cozy Bear and Fancy Bear: did Russians hack Democratic party and if so, why?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/29/cozy-bear-fancy-bear-russia-hack-dnc>
The former NSA contractor-turned-whistleblower Edward Snowden, who currently 
lives in Russia,wrote <https://twitter.com/Snowden/status/814877772191592448> 
on Twitter: “Few techs doubt that Russians could have a hand in hacks, but 
public policy requires public evidence.”

Brian Bartholomew, of Kaspersky Lab’s US office in Massachusetts, said the 
biggest clue was an in-house piece of software called XAgent, which he had 
never seen elsewhere.

“Assange said it could have been a 14-year-old hacker – if you look at the 
collective operations of this group, there’s no way a 14-year-old has this much 
money, time and effort to conduct all of these operations together,” he said.

Of the entities on the sanctions list, including Shevchenko’s company, 
Bartholomew said: “There’s probably a good reason that those names were put in 
the document.”


Aitel said he had no doubt Russian intelligence was behind the hack and said 
authorities would certainly use third-party contractors for operations, but he 
added that it was problematic to sanction individuals without releasing 
evidence. “No matter what she did technically, she’s not a policy maker. It 
doesn’t make much sense to sanction individuals on the basis that ‘we know 
something secret so we’re going to sanction you’.”

Only Shevchenko’s company – rather than Shevchenko personally – is on the US 
treasury’s list of specially designated nationals (SDNs), which are subject to 
an asset freeze in any dealings with US persons or the US financial system.

“If she starts a new company, then that company is clean, but a lot of people 
might not want to do business with her if they do their due diligence and find 
that she’s one step removed from an SDN,” said Louis Rothberg, an expert in 
export control with the international law firm Morgan Lewis & Bockius.


Shevchenko said she assumes it is “not possible” for her to travel to the US 
now, and she does not particularly want to.

“I am now de facto blocked from the world’s major information security 
market,” Shevchenko said.

On the other hand, she allowed, there was apparently a certain cachet in being 
named as someone who hacked a US election. “I have received a number of 
employment, business partnership or collaboration offers” in the days since the 
sanctions list was released, she said.
 