
Soon enough, we will see the first obituaries for openness, free trade and 
globalisation. When those writers ponder how wealthy countries turned towards 
the politics of Donald Trump and Nigel Farage, they should devote a large 
chapter toApple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple>. Because the 
world’s richest company is a textbook example of how the promises made after 
the fall of the Berlin Wall have been made a mockery of.

In the rush for the latest gimmick, we are losing the joy of ‘things’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/18/are-we-losing-the-love-of-things>
Whatever marvels have been shoved into the new iPhones, the devices serve to 
increase the gulf between the super-rich and the rest of us, bilk countries of 
rightful tax revenues, and oppress Chinese workers even while depriving 
Americans of high-paying jobs. Arrogant towards critics and governments, 
glutted with cash and yet plainly out of ideas, Apple is elegant shorthand for 
a redundant economic system.

None of this is how we’re meant to think of Apple, the multinational that is 
both on your side yet restlessly questing ahead. While launching theiPhone 7 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone-7> this month, its marketing 
chief, Phil Schiller, explained why this model came without a earphone socket: 
“It really comes down to one word: courage. The courage to move on, do 
something new, that betters all of us.” Such patchouli-scented Californian 
dipshittery was lapped up by the 7,000-strong crowd and lightly mocked by the 
press – but it also helps to obscure some of the less tolerable aspect of the 
iPhone business model, such as the conditions in which it is made.

If you own an iPhone it was assembled by workers at one of three firms in 
China: Foxconn, Wistron and Pegatron. The biggest and most famous, Foxconn,came 
to international prominence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/jan/16/foxconn-suicide-china-society>
 in 2010 whenan estimated 18 of its employees 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foxconn_suicides#2010> tried to kill themselves. 
At least 14 workers died 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/aug/05/woman-nearly-died-making-ipad>
. The company’s response was to put up suicide nets, to catch people trying to 
jump to their death. That year, staff at Foxconn’s Longhua factory made137,000 
iPhones a day 
<http://fortune.com/2010/09/10/this-man-makes-137000-iphones-a-day/>, or around 
90 a minute.

One of those attempted suicides, a 17-year-old called Tian Yu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/aug/05/woman-nearly-died-making-ipad>
, flung herself from the fourth floor of a factory dormitory and ended up 
paralysed from the waist down. Speaking later to academic researchers, she
described her working conditions 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ntwe.12007/full> in remarkable 
testimony that I thencovered for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/aug/05/woman-nearly-died-making-ipad>
. She was essentially a human battery hen, working over 12 hours a day, six 
days a week, swapped between day and night shifts and kept in an eight-person 
dorm room.

After the scandals of 2010, Apple vowed to improve conditions for its Chinese 
workers. It has since published a number of glossy brochures extolling its 
commitments to them. Yet there is no evidence that the Californian firm has 
given back a single penny of its gigantic profit margins to its contractors to 
ensure better treatment of the people who actually make its products.

Over the past year, the US-based NGO China Labor Watch has published a series 
ofinvestigations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/jul/29/apple-investugates-claims-china-factory>
 into Pegatron, another iPhone assembler. It sent a researcher on to the 
assembly line, interviewed dozens of Pegatron staff and analysed hundreds of 
pay stubs. Among itsfindings 
<http://www.chinalaborwatch.org/pdf/apple_s_unkept_promises.pdf> are that staff 
still work 12 hours a day, six days a week – one and a half hours of that 
unpaid. They are forced to do overtime, claims the NGO, and provided with 
illegally low levels of safety training.

The researcher was working on one iPhone motherboard every 3.75 seconds, 
standing up for the entirety of his 10.5-hour shift. Such is the punishment 
endured at Apple’s contractors to make a living wage, apparently.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fyour-new-iphone-features-oppression-inequality-vast-profit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ad9092ebb230915f866f5450b65a7d6bbb5e2db%2F0_102_3958_2375%2F3958.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Your%20new%20iPhone%E2%80%99s%20features%20include%20oppression%2C%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20and%20vast%20profit%20%7C%20Aditya%20Chakrabortty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fyour-new-iphone-features-oppression-inequality-vast-profit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Your%20new%20iPhone%E2%80%99s%20features%20include%20oppression%2C%20inequality%20%E2%80%93%20and%20vast%20profit%20%7C%20Aditya%20Chakrabortty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fyour-new-iphone-features-oppression-inequality-vast-profit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ad9092ebb230915f866f5450b65a7d6bbb5e2db%2F0_102_3958_2375%2F3958.jpg>
 Tim Cook with dancer Maddie Ziegler. The Apple CEO ‘rejects a €13bn tax bill 
from the EU as ‘political crap’’. Photograph: Josh Edelson/AFP/Getty Images 
The Shanghai local government has raised the minimum wage over the past year; 
Pegatron has responded by cutting subsidies on things such as medical insurance 
so that the effective hourly pay for its staff has fallen.

When questioned about these reports, Pegatron provided a statement that read 
in part: “We work hard to make sure every Pegatron facility provides a healthy 
work environment and allegations suggesting otherwise are simply not true … We 
have taken effective measures … to ensure employees do not work more than 60 
hours per week and six days per week.”

At another of Apple’s major contractors, Wistron, a Danish human-rights NGO 
last yearfound extensive evidence  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/oct/06/hp-and-dell-suspend-use-of-interns-in-chinese-factories>
of forced student labour. Teenagers doing degrees in accountancy or business 
management were sent for months to an assembly line at Wistron. This is a 
serious violation ofInternational Labour Organisation 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Labour_Organization> convention, 
yet investigators for Danwatch found evidence that thousands of students were 
doing the same work and backbreaking hours there as the adults – but costing 
less.

The teenagers told Danwatch that they were working against their will. “We are 
all depressed,” one 19-year-old girl said. “But we have no choice, because the 
school told us that if we refused, we would not get our diploma.” Despite 
several requests for comment, Wistron did not respond.

That investigation was not at a factory making iPhones, but Apple confirmed 
that Wistron and Pegatron were two of their major assemblers inChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>. While it did not wish to say 
anything on the record, Apple’s press officers pointed me to the audits it had 
commissioned into its supplier factories. Yet the inspections are almost 
conveniently skimpy.

Look at the report Apple commissioned into Foxconn in 2012, after those 
suicide attempts. Foxconn is the largest private employer in China, with around 
400,000 workers at the Longhua factory alone. Yet the report for Apple, 
complementary toan investigation already being carried out 
<http://www.fairlabor.org/sites/default/files/documents/reports/foxconn_investigation_report.pdf>
 by the Fair Labor Association, admits to looking at just three of those plants 
for three days apiece.Jenny Chan <http://apjjf.org/-Jenny-Chan/4372>, one of 
the foremost scholars of Chinese labour abuses and co-author of the forthcoming
Dying for an iPhone <http://www.ccsp.ox.ac.uk/dying-iphone-jenny-chan>, calls 
it “parachute auditing – a way to allow ‘business as usual’ to carry on”. A 
very profitable way, as it happens. While iPhone workers for Pegatron saw their 
hourly pay drop to just $1.60 an hour, Apple remained the most profitable big 
company in America, pulling in over $47bn in profit in 2015 alone.

Apple ordered to pay up to €13bn after EU rules Ireland broke state aid laws
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/30/apple-pay-back-taxes-eu-ruling-ireland-state-aid>
What does this add up to? At $231bn, Apple has a bigger cash pile than the US 
government 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/timworstall/2014/04/13/fun-number-apple-has-twice-as-much-cash-as-the-us-government/#7ca774e2386d>
, but apparently won’t spend even a sliver on improving conditions for those 
who actually make its money. Nor will it make those iPhones in America, which 
would create jobs and still leave it as the most profitable smartphone in the 
world.

It would rather accrue more profits, to go to those who hold Apple stock – 
such as company boss Tim Cook, whose hoard of company shares is worth $785m. 
Friends of Cook point to his philanthropy, but while he’s happy to spend on pet 
projects, he rejects a€13bn tax bill from the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/30/apple-pay-back-taxes-eu-ruling-ireland-state-aid>
 as “political crap” – whileboasting 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/sf/business/wp/2016/08/13/2016/08/13/tim-cook-the-interview-running-apple-is-sort-of-a-lonely-job/>
 about how he won’t bring Apple’s billions back to the US “until there’s a fair 
rate … It doesn’t go that the more you pay, the more patriotic you are.” The 
tech oligarch seems to think he knows better than 300 million Americans what 
tax rates their elected government should set.

When the historians of globalisation ask why it died, they will surely find 
that companies such as Apple form a large part of the answer. Faced with a 
binary choice between an economic model that lavishly rewarded a few and a 
populism that makes lavish promises to many, between Cook on the one hand and 
Farage on the other, the voters went for the one who at least didn’t bang on 
about “courage”.
 