
Welcome to our space – open every Wednesday from 10am to 2pm – for discussing 
the day’s Opinion articles. We’d like to begin today with two articles on 
Brexit.

First up is George Monbiot on the referendum result’s impact on the British 
countryside. He argues that removing the dependency on European money will be 
painful for rural Britain, but it could be just what our wildlife and 
agriculture need. Monbiot writes:

European measures protecting the natural world, such as the habitats and birds 
directives, are likely tobecome zombie legislation 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201617/cmselect/cmenvaud/599/59902.htm>
 in the UK after Brexit, as the institutions required to enforce them will no 
longer exist. With Andrea Leadsom in charge of farming and Liam Fox in charge 
of trade, everything could go. Both farmers and conservationists should 
fiercely resist these outcomes.

The only fair way of resolving this incipient crisis is to continue to provide 
public money, but only for the delivery of public goods – such as restoring 
ecosystems, preventing flooding downstream, and bringing children and adults 
back into contact with the living world. This should be accompanied by rules 
strong enough to ensure that farmers can no longer pollute our rivers,strip the 
soil from the land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/25/treating-soil-like-dirt-fatal-mistake-human-life>
, wipe out pollinators and other wildlife, and destroy the features of the 
countryside with impunity.

Read the full article here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/11/farmers-fear-brexit-save-british-countryside-european-subsidy-wildlife-agriculture>
.

What do you think? Are you a farmer? What are your worries? What needs to be 
done to ensure the sector and our wildlife are protected?


Elsewhere Nesrine Malik talks about the impact of the Brexit vote on European 
Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> nationals in the UK. Malik argues 
that they are discovering that the Home Office is driven not by reason but by 
keeping numbers down. She writes:

The Home Office in particular, and the immigration system in general, has long 
made decisions not on the basis of merit or reason, but as a way of filtering 
out as many applicants as possible – either via exhaustion of resources or 
impossibly high barriers. This is whyEU citizens who have lived here for decades
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/29/home-office-reform-permanent-residency-application-process-eu-nationals>
, and are now applying for UK citizenship but neglect to include their 
passports (not actually a requirement, but a handy excuse familiar to anyone 
who has dealt with the Home Office), are not only having their applications 
rejected, they’re being told to prepare to leave the UK, despite already being 
entitled to permanent residency.

Read the full article here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/11/brexit-uk-immigrants-eu-nationals-home-office>

What do you think? Do you think we’re treating EU nationals badly? What should 
we be doing? Do you have any personal stories to share?

 * Nesrine Malik will join us below the line to discuss this article at 
11.40am.

This page will be updated throughout the morning with new articles for 
discussion. Get involved below the line now.
 