
Welcome to our space – open every Wednesday from 10am-2pm – for discussing the 
day’s top Opinion articles. We’d like to begin today with three articles.

First off is Rafael Behr on how an excitement for Brexit has gripped the 
Conservative party’s grassroots, affirmed by Theresa May’s embrace of it this 
week. Behr likens her to a preacher, leading the party’s reformation, with 
ripples of ecstasy washing across members as the prime minister affirmed her 
commitment to Brexit. He writes:

The Tories do not speak for all of England, but in the absence of credible 
opposition they feel as if they do, and will act accordingly. To those millions 
who did not vote to leave the EU, the message is clear: you are free to pray 
for whatever you like. Your antique rites will be tolerated. But do not expect 
your concerns to be represented in the court of Queen Theresa.

What do you think? How do you feel about May’s zeal for hard Brexit? Are we 
witnessing a reformation in the Church of Conservatism, with the authority of 
Brussels cast as a modern-day Rome? What did you make of May’s remarks this 
week?

Click here to be directed to this discussion below the line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/05/your-opinions-brexit-relish-southern-rail-chaos-and-the-decline-of-democracy#comment-84684833>
.


Read the full article here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/05/birmingham-witnessing-tory-reformation-conservative-conference-brexit>
.

Elsewhere George Monbiot has expressed concerns about whether direct democracy 
in fact works anymore. He said that people power can challenge the status quo, 
but only if we understand our political system has inherent flaws. He writes:

Direct democracy – referendums and citizens’ initiatives – seems to produce 
even worse results. In theUS initiatives are repeatedly used by 
multimillion-dollar lobby groups to achieve results that state legislatures 
won’t grant them 
<http://www.sfgate.com/opinion/article/A-long-way-from-the-grassroots-3190565.php>
. They tend to replace taxes with user fees, stymie the redistribution of 
wealth and degrade public services. Whether representative or direct, democracy 
comes to be owned by the elites.

What do you think? What if democracy doesn’t work? What if it never has and 
never will? What if government of the people, by the people, for the people is 
a fairytale?


Click here to be directed to this discussion below the line. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/05/your-opinions-brexit-relish-southern-rail-chaos-and-the-decline-of-democracy#comment-84684475>


Read the full article here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/04/democracy-people-power-governments-policy>
.

Finally, Catherine Shoard wrote about Southern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> Rail, saying now is the time to 
stand up for the conductors, guards and station staff as more rail operators 
chase greater profits. She writes:

If the Southern Rail fiasco has taught us anything it’s surely that travellers 
need to stand (conveniently) shoulder to shoulder against operating companies, 
rather than maintain their usual mutual aloofness.An attempt by Southern to get 
passengers to tweet angrily against the RMT union backfired spectacularly 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-37538391>when 90% of the responses called 
Southern out for their own incompetence. Such groupthink points the way, for as 
more companies chase greater profits, conductors, guards and station staff will 
be endangered across the network. If we value them, we need to pull together. 
Budging up a bit is also appreciated.

What do you think? Do commuters need to stand together? What can we do to 
improve the rail systems? What are your experiences?


Click here to be directed to this discussion below the line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/05/your-opinions-brexit-relish-southern-rail-chaos-and-the-decline-of-democracy#comment-84685036>
.


Read the full article here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/05/commuters-southern-rail-trains-rmt>
.

This page will be updated throughout the morning with new articles for 
discussion. Get involved below the line now.
 