
Welcome to our space – open every Wednesday from 10am-2pm – for discussing 
Opinion articles. We’re starting to start today with two articles.

First is Jonathan Lis on Ivan Rogers, the UK’s former ambassador to the EU, 
who has just resigned. He says the government must get it right when appointing 
Rogers’ successor or a Brexit disaster could follow. Lis writes:

The greatest risk, both to the government and the negotiations, is that Rogers 
is replaced by a yes-man (or woman), afraid to speak truthfully or plainly for 
fear of upsetting the bosses. Brexit can be achieved, but only if the 
challenges are explicitly exposed, analysed and interrogated at every turn. We 
can rest assured that on the other side, thecommission’s negotiator, Michel 
Barnier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/eus-chief-divorce-negotiator-michel-barnier-to-make-first-brexit-statement>
, will be up to the task.

Read the full article here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/04/all-aboard-failing-train-service-lack-of-accountability-commuters>
.

What do you think? Who would be a good person for this job? What do they need 
to do? How do you feel about Rogers’ resignation?

Elsewhere, Rafael Behr <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/rafaelbehr> talks 
about trains. He says that as commuters face strikes and price rises it’s clear 
that a key problem is the lack of accountability. He argues, however, that 
renationalisation is not the answer. Behr writes:

Britain’s railways do not suffer from a shortage of state involvement but from 
the lack of accountability. There is no quick mechanism by which passengers’ 
experience of bad service becomes an incentive for providers to raise their 
game. The old state monopoly was no better. We took what we were given then 
too. If the public is receptive to renationalisation – andopinion polls suggest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/29/labour-promises-to-renationalise-english-railways>
 the idea can be popular – it is because the status quo is miserable enough for 
any radical-sounding alternative to acquire some allure, not because the 
proposed remedy fixes the problem. And if the policy gains wider support it 
will be in spite of trade union enthusiasm, not because of it.

Read the full article here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/04/all-aboard-failing-train-service-lack-of-accountability-commuters>

What do you think? Is lack of accountability the real problem? What are your 
views on renationalisation? Let us know below the line.

This page will be updated throughout the morning with new articles for 
discussion. Get involved below the line now.
 