
Zimbabwe’s wildlife agency has sold 35 elephants to China, saying the measure 
was intended to ease overpopulation and raise funds for conservation, amid 
criticism from animal welfare activists that such sales are unethical.

This once prosperous country’s economy has fallen apart, and Zimbabwe’s 
government has said it needs to sell wildlife to support its people and 
conservation efforts. The government also has sought to sell its ivory 
stockpile for millions of dollars.

The Zimbabwe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/zimbabwe> parks and wildlife 
management authority did not say how much China paid for the 35 elephants but 
said on Tuesday it was “turning to friendly countries to extract value out of 
our wildlife”.

Zimbabwe ships live elephants to wildlife parks in China
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/23/zimbabwe-ships-live-elephants-to-wildlife-parks-in-china>
This is the first time Zimbabwe has confirmed the 23 December sale since 
activists announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/23/zimbabwe-ships-live-elephants-to-wildlife-parks-in-china>
 a plane was carrying the animals to China.

The wildlife agency didn’t say whether the elephants were adults, which has 
been a concern for some conservation groups.

“Why is it done clandestinely and then announced two weeks later? Because we 
know that at times calves have been taken away from their mothers, conditions 
have been atrocious and the money, no one really knows how it is used,” said 
Johnny Rodrigues, whose ZimbabweConservation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/conservation> Taskforce has been vocal 
about elephant sales to China.

A similar outcry followed such sales in 2015.

The statement by Zimbabwe’s wildlife agency said its conservation efforts have 
been affected by restrictions on selling the country’s ivory stockpile and on 
trophy hunting of certain species. Zimbabwe’s government budgets nothing for 
conservation, and the wildlife agency is self-sustaining.

In 2014, the US banned the import of sport-hunted elephant trophies from 
Zimbabwe, citing a lack of transparency in the use of conservation funds 
generated by their export.

Zimbabwe’s wildlife agency has said this wildlife-rich southern African 
country has 36,000-plus more elephants than it can support.

The 35 elephants were captured from Hwange national park and flown to China’s 
Shanghai Exhibition Park, Beijing Wildlife Park and HangzhouWildlife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/wildlife> Park, the agency said. It 
said it followed international regulations in the sale, adding that it 
previously sold other animals to Europe and the US.
 