
More than 30 wild elephants were being readied on Friday evening for an 
airlift fromZimbabwe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/zimbabwe> to captivity 
in China, according to wildlife advocates.

The founder of Zimbabwe Conservation Task Force 
<http://www.zctfofficialsite.org/>, Johnny Rodrigues, said on Friday that their 
plane was still at Victoria Falls airport because officials could not find 
scales big enough to weigh the animals, which were confined inside heavy crates.

But once that was accomplished, he added, “they’re gone”. Some of the 
elephants are reportedly as young as three years of age.

The live export of elephants is controversial, although legal. Wildlife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/wildlife> advocates argue that 
elephants do not belong in captivity and the practice of wild capture disrupts 
the social structure of their herds.

“Everything is wrong with [elephant exports],” said Daniela Freyer of the 
German-based conservation groupPro Wildlife <https://www.prowildlife.de/>, 
“starting from the welfare perspective. But also the conservation aspects are 
really important. There is a high mortality rate during capture and in 
transport and in captivity. It is morally not acceptable and not sustainable.”

Dallas Zoo, which recently imported a number of wild elephants from Swaziland, 
says on its website 
<http://zoohoo.dallaszoo.com/2016/03/17/qa-dallas-zoo-rescues-swaziland-elephants/>
 that “those claims are unsubstantiated by science. Much of the information 
being cited is old, and doesn’t take into account the current methods of human 
care of elephants.”

Zimbabwe Parks and Wildlife management authority (ZimParks) announced in 
August that it would be capturing elephants from Hwange National Park in a 
conservation scheme that it said would repopulate another park in the country. 
But wildlife groupssaid at that time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/29/zimbabwe-accused-of-preparing-to-ship-dozens-of-young-elephants-to-china>
 that they suspected the country was planning to export the elephants to China.

Zimbabwe’s environment minister, Oppah Muchinguri, recently said: “Zim must 
sell its elephants because not only are they a global resource but also a local 
one, as it [the sale] will support the livelihoods of our local communities and 
for future generations.”

Sharon Pincott, an elephant conservationist who monitored a clan of elephants 
in Hwange for 13 years, said: “What Zimbabwe is doing may be legal but it is in 
no way ethical, especially given all we know about elephant families today: 
their deep family bonds, their indisputable level of intelligence, the way they 
grieve.”

Pincott said she did not know if some of the elephants being sent abroad could 
be the ones she studied for more than a decade. She also noted that the 
fragility of the young elephants could not be overstated as they were being 
deprived of their mothers’ milk.
 A young elephant in a holding pen in Hwange national park earlier this year. 
It is now en route to China 
Patricia Awori of the African Elephant Coalition 
<https://www.africanelephantcoalition.org/> (AEC) Secretariat, a coalition of 
29 countries that has proposed a ban on the export of African elephants outside 
their natural range, said: “The essence of being an elephant is that they live, 
function within and are shaped by their environment. Foraging for and consuming 
food, rolling in the mud, and frolicking with its siblings is an essential part 
of being an elephant. An elephant that ceases to be wild ceases to be.”

The elephants will most likely be sent 
<http://conservationaction.co.za/media-articles/baby-elephants-zimbabwe-headed-chinese-zoos/>
 to theShanghai Wild Animal Park <http://en.shwzoo.com/> and the Yunnan Wild 
Animal Park <http://www.ynzoo.cn/index.html>, according to Chunmei Hu, 
currently with the advocacy group the Endangered Species Fund in China.

Hu has closely followed a previous export of wild Zimbabwe elephants to China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> in 2015. As of August, she said, the 
elephants were still in quarantine and she believes at least one of them is 
dead.


Other zoos in China have requested African elephants, including the North 
Forest Zoo in Harbin,Ordos Zoo 
<http://www.china.org.cn/travel/2013-07/05/content_29331159_4.htm> in inner 
Mongolia, andBeijing Wildlife Park 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-china-tiger-attack-idUSKCN12E08E>, she added.

Iris Ho, wildlife campaign manager at Humane Society International 
<http://www.hsi.org/>, said she was highly concerned over the elephant export: 
“The sales of baby elephants and other animals from Zimbabwe to China are 
possibly the worst-case scenario for wildlife caught in shady deals.”

On the demand side, Ho said, “We have a country that continues to attract 
international condemnation for its deplorable treatment of iconic wild animals 
in captivity, from Pizza the polar bear in a Guanzhou shopping mall, to 
elephants forced to perform or languish in captivity.”

And on the supply side, “We have a corrupt regime that disregards human rights 
and freedom, and that is selling its wildlife to the highest bidder with no 
meaningful oversight.”

Efforts to reach ZimParks for comment were not responded to. Neither was an 
email to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species authority 
in Beijing.
 