
Zsa Zsa Gabor, who has died at 99, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/19/zsa-zsa-gabor-actor-and-socialite-dies-aged-99>
 isn’t really being remembered for her film roles, which were minor. Instead, 
she is beingcelebrated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/19/zsa-zsa-gabor-her-best-and-most-memorable-quotes>
 now for one major performance. Being Zsa Zsa Gabor. She created the role, and 
she lived it, playing it to perfection. This Hungarian woman – who lost her 
virginity at 15 to Kemal Atatürk, the founder of modern Turkey – rose from 
beauty queen to actor, then became a TV personality and full-time celebrity.

In the staid 1940s and then 50s, Zsa Zsa, a green-eyed blonde, became a hugely 
entertaining presence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gallery/2016/dec/19/zsa-zsa-gabor-a-life-in-pictures>
, poured into extravagant gowns accessorised with diamonds, furs, tiny dogs and 
the exaggerated “Dahlink” she used to address everyone. It was her lifestyle 
rather than any talent that kept her in the public eye. Of course, people were 
interested in her nine marriages but it was actually her wit and cleverness 
that kept the show on the road.

Zsa Zsa was one of the first people to be famous for being famous, ushering in 
the new era of celebrity. To call her a proto-Kardashian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/kim-kardashian> though is to 
underestimate her charm and her stamina. My mother and her friends loved Zsa 
Zsa because at a time when women were meant to be passive and grateful to be 
married at all, Zsa Zsa was always talking about marrying for money rather than 
romance: “Diamonds are a girl’s best friend and dogs are a man’s best friend. 
Now you know which sex has more sense.” She married nine times and divorced 
seven. “I’m a great housekeeper,” she quipped. “Every time I get a divorce, I 
keep the house.”

Zsa Zsa Gabor dies aged 99
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/19/zsa-zsa-gabor-actor-and-socialite-dies-aged-99>
Her excessiveness was part of her “brand”. Flaunting conspicuous consumption, 
dripping with jewels, her image was that of a woman who knew how to get what 
she wanted. And before the 1960s and the sexual revolution, she was open about 
liking sex. Her lovers included Sean Connery and Frank Sinatra, and she claimed 
to have spurned the advances of John F Kennedy, Elvis Presley, John Huston and 
Henry Fonda. Greta Garbo once kissed her “straight on the mouth,” she said. 
“And I couldn’t help kissing back because she was so overwhelmingly strong and 
beautiful.” When asked how many husbands she had had, she used to say: “You 
mean other than my own?”

Although her actual husbands included the actor George Sanders and the 
hotelier Conrad Hilton, she lived in a world of self-parody, gossip and 
knowingness about the lifestyles of the rich and famous. She was adored rather 
than resented because she was always tipping us a wink.

Beneath the glamour, as with so many of these female stars, we now sense the 
power, control, and sheer stamina they needed to keep going. Zsa Zsa was a 
woman who could laugh at herself and her embodiment of that special kind of 
female camp; she was her own special creation. In her heyday, if she turned up 
at a premiere, she would get more attention than the stars of the film. She 
certainly knew how to work it, as they say, even proffering advice to other 
women in books that includedHow to Catch a Man, How to Keep a Man, How to Get 
Rid of a Man <https://www.abebooks.com/book-search/isbn/0671772945/>.

Gabor once described herself as unconventional and true to herself. Therein 
lay her fabulousness. She was arch about both love and money. She was acerbic, 
flamboyant, she kicked against tradition and sometimes won. Like many women of 
her generation she understood that femininity is always a performance, and she 
performed it to the hilt. She was always winning, never a victim. As camp as 
Christmas, her seeming frivolity hid the sharpness and strength that made her 
name.

What a broad.
 