
On 22 June 2015, Xavier Justo, a 48-year-old retired Swiss banker, walked 
towards the front door of his brand new boutique hotel on Koh Samui, a tropical 
Thai island. He had spent the past three years building the luxurious 
white-stone complex of chalets and apartments overlooking the shimmering sea 
and was almost ready to open for business. All he needed was a licence.

Justo had arrived in Thailand four years earlier, having fled the drab world 
of finance in London. In 2011, he and his girlfriend Laura toured the country 
on a motorbike and, two years later, they got married on a secluded beach. The 
couple eventually settled down in Koh Samui, a tourist hotspot, just an hour’s 
flight south of Bangkok. After trying out a couple of entrepreneurial ventures, 
Justo eventually decided that he would go into the hotel business. He bought a 
plot with an imposing house and began building: adding a gym, villas and a 
tennis court.

The Guardian view on Malaysian politics: a scandal meriting the world’s 
attention | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/28/the-guardian-view-on-malaysian-politics-a-scandal-meriting-the-worlds-attention>
That June afternoon, he was expecting a visit from the tourism authorities to 
sign off on the paperwork. Instead, a squad of armed Thai police burst through 
the unlocked door, bundling Justo to the ground. The officers tied their 
plastic cuffs so tightly around Justo’s wrists that he bled on the dark tiled 
floor. The police quickly moved into his office, ripping out the computers and 
emptying the filing cabinets.

After two days in a ramshackle local jail, Justo was flown to Bangkok and 
paraded before the media, in a press conference befitting a mafia kingpin. 
Still wearing shorts and flip-flops, he was flanked by four commandos holding 
machine guns, while a quartet of senior Royal Thai Police officers briefed the 
assembled reporters on the charges against him.

Justo was charged with an attempt to blackmail his former employer, a 
little-known London-based oil-services company named PetroSaudi. But behind 
this seemingly mundane charge lay a much bigger story.

Six months earlier, Justo had handed a British journalist named Clare 
Rewcastle Brown thousands of documents, including 227,000 emails, from the 
servers of his former employer, PetroSaudi, which appeared to shed light on the 
alleged theft of hundreds of millions of dollars from a state-owned Malaysian 
investment fund known as1MDB <https://www.theguardian.com/world/1mdb>.

The documents that Justo leaked have set off a chain reaction of 
investigations in at least half a dozen countries, and led to what Loretta 
Lynch, the US attorney general, described last week as “the largest kleptocracy 
case” in US history.

According to lawsuits filed last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/20/us-justice-department-1mdb-fund-seizure-fraud-investigation>
 by the United States Department of Justice (DoJ), at least $3.5bn has been 
stolen from 1MDB. The purpose of the fund, which was set up by Malaysia’s prime 
minister, Najib Razak, in 2009, was to promote economic development in a 
country where the median income stands at approximately £300 per month. 
Instead, the DoJ alleged that stolen money from 1MDB found its way to numerous 
associates of Prime Minister Najib, who subsequently went on a lavish spending 
spree across the world. It also accused Najib of receiving $681m of cash from 
1MDB – a claim he denied. Money from 1MDB, the US also claimed,helped to 
purchase luxury apartments in Manhattan 
<https://www.justice.gov/opa/file/877436/download>, mansions in Los Angeles, 
paintings by Monet, a corporate jet, and even financed a major Hollywood movie.

The US justice department breaks the alleged theft down into three distinct 
phases: the first $1bn defrauded under the “pretence of investing in a joint 
venture between 1MDB and PetroSaudi”; another $1.4bn, raised by Goldman Sachs 
in a bond issue, misappropriated and fraudulently diverted to a Swiss offshore 
company; and $1.3bn, also from money Goldman Sachs raised on the market, which 
was diverted to a Singapore account.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2F1mdb-inside-story-worlds-biggest-financial-scandal-malaysia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6e3fa7737ca923c10d8b9cfb559b2377cc9d1e3%2F2616_815_2606_1883%2F2606.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=1MDB%3A%20The%20inside%20story%20of%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20financial%20scandal%20%7C%20Randeep%20Ramesh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2F1mdb-inside-story-worlds-biggest-financial-scandal-malaysia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=1MDB%3A%20The%20inside%20story%20of%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20financial%20scandal%20%7C%20Randeep%20Ramesh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2F1mdb-inside-story-worlds-biggest-financial-scandal-malaysia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6e3fa7737ca923c10d8b9cfb559b2377cc9d1e3%2F2616_815_2606_1883%2F2606.jpg>
 United States Department of Justice alleges that money from 1MDB was used to 
buy Claude Monet’s Nymphéas Avec Reflets de Hautes Herbes, valued at $57.5m. 
Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
“A number of corrupt 1MDB officials treated this public trust as a personal 
bank account,” Lynch told the press last week. “The co-conspirators laundered 
their stolen funds through a complex web of opaque transactions and fraudulent 
shell companies, with bank accounts in countries around the world, including 
Switzerland, Singapore and the United States.” PetroSaudi, which is not a party 
to the lawsuit, denied the US allegations and said that the DoJ’s 
asset-forfeiture claims are “no more than untested allegations”.

Najib, who has used every ounce of his power to obstruct investigations into 
thescandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/28/the-guardian-view-on-malaysian-politics-a-scandal-meriting-the-worlds-attention>
 – a charge he denies – is not mentioned by name in the US lawsuits, which 
refer to him as “Malaysian Official 1”. But the man at the centre of the 
intricate swindle depicted in the US lawsuits is an adviser to Najib: Jho Low, 
a Harrow-educated 29-year-old friend of the prime minister’s stepson. Low, a 
babyfaced young man who likes to party with Lindsay Lohan and Paris Hilton – 
and calls his Goldman Sachs banker “bro”, according to the DoJ – is accused by 
the US of masterminding the theft of $2bn from 1MDB, which was sent to bank 
accounts in Switzerland, Singapore and the Virgin Islands. Low has said that he 
has not broken any laws and was not being investigated.

Jho Low likes to party with Lindsay Lohan and Paris Hilton – and calls his 
Goldman Sachs banker 'bro'

Low’s sidekick is Riza Aziz, Najib’s stepson. Riza produced The Wolf of Wall 
Street – Martin Scorsese’s tale of corruption, decadence and greed – and both 
he and Low were thanked by namein Leonardo DiCaprio’s Golden Globes acceptance 
speech <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0E1gaVl99AQ> for best actor. In 2011, 
Low took a 20% stake in EMI, the world’s largest music-publishing company, for 
$106m – in the same year, he bought a $30m penthouse for his father at the Time 
Warner Center in Manhattan, overlooking Central Park. Riza’s Hollywood 
production company has said: “There has never been anything inappropriate about 
any of Red Granite Pictures or Riza Aziz’s business activities.”

All this and more is laid out in the US filing, which details claims of an 
amazing heist, carried out by conspirators who rinsed billions from the people 
ofMalaysia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> through offshore 
accounts and shell companies in tax havens such as the Seychelles and British 
Virgin Islands. The scale of the enterprise echoes Balzac’s maxim that behind 
every great fortune lies a great crime.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2F1mdb-inside-story-worlds-biggest-financial-scandal-malaysia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63fb07ecab937e597223c0294182b522f370ac49%2F27_140_2731_1639%2F2731.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=1MDB%3A%20The%20inside%20story%20of%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20financial%20scandal%20%7C%20Randeep%20Ramesh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2F1mdb-inside-story-worlds-biggest-financial-scandal-malaysia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=1MDB%3A%20The%20inside%20story%20of%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20financial%20scandal%20%7C%20Randeep%20Ramesh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2F1mdb-inside-story-worlds-biggest-financial-scandal-malaysia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63fb07ecab937e597223c0294182b522f370ac49%2F27_140_2731_1639%2F2731.jpg>
 Jho Low with Paris Hilton at an event in Paris. Photograph: GoffPhotos.com 
The global effort to uncover Malaysia’s missing billions began with Xavier 
Justo. He leaked 90GB of data, including 227,000 emails, from his former 
employer PetroSaudi, an oil services company that had signed the first major 
deal with 1MDB. (PetroSaudi denies any wrongdoing.) Without these files, there 
would have been no reckoning.

Justo’s connection to PetroSaudi was his long friendship with one of the 
company’s two founders, a Saudi national named Tarek Obaid. The two men had met 
back in the late 1990s, when they both partied regularly in the nightclubs of 
Geneva. By 2006, the two men were inseparable: Justo had become an established 
businessman, running a large financial services firm, Fininfor, and the owner 
of a Geneva nightspot named the Platinum Club. Justo regarded Obaid as a 
“younger brother”, and in 2008, lent him $30,000 and a desk in the Fininfor 
offices to help start up PetroSaudi.

Obaid and Justo were an unlikely pair, brought together by a love of the high 
life. Justo, the son of Spanish immigrants to Switzerland, did not go to 
university. Obaid is a graduate of Georgetown University’s prestigious School 
of Foreign Service. His brother, Nawaf, served as a special adviser to the 
Saudi ambassador to the UK. Obaid’s PetroSaudi co-founder, Prince Turki bin 
Abdullah, is the seventh son of the late King Abdullah bin Abdulaziz, who ruled 
Saudi Arabia from 2005 until his death in 2015.

When Justo left Geneva in 2009, PetroSaudi was little more than a name on a 
calling card, formally incorporated in London with an address at an anonymous 
business unit near Victoria. Two years later, it had taken in $1.83bn.

PetroSaudi’s business was access capitalism: opening doors with the help of 
friends in high places. The basic idea was to capture a piece of the huge oil 
revenues being generated by state-owned firms in developing countries – 
treasure chests waiting to be unlocked by a firm that was a “vehicle of the 
Saudi royal family”, which could count on the “full support from the kingdom’s 
diplomatic corps”. PetroSaudi told potential partners that it controlled oil 
fields in central Asia, which it would put up as collateral to secure cash from 
state investors.

This was the pitch that landed PetroSaudi’s founders a meeting with the 
Malaysian prime minister in August 2009. Aboard a 92m megayacht off the coast 
of Monaco, Obaid and Prince Turki spent the day with Najib, his adviser Jho 
Low, and other members of the prime minister’s family. Snapshots taken at the 
meeting have the look of a holiday cruise – baseball caps and shorts – but 
their discussion was serious business. What resulted was a decision for Low and 
Obaid to work together on a deal that would allow them both to control 
mind-boggling sums of money.

Although Low held no formal position in the Malaysian government, he had 
become a trusted confidant to the prime minister. Despite his youth, Low had 
been instrumental in working with Goldman Sachs to set up a sovereign wealth 
fund to invest the revenues of an oil-rich Malaysian state.

Around the time that Low and Najib went boating with the PetroSaudi founders, 
the Malaysian central government took control of the wealth fund – which was 
soon renamed as1Malaysia Development Berhad <http://www.1mdb.com.my/> (1MDB) 
and given a mandate to promote economic development in Malaysia. The fund had 
more than $1bn to spend, andPrime Minister Najib 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/01/more-than-1bn-deposited-malaysian-prime-minister-account-najib-razak>
 had the sole power to approve investments and to hire and fire board members 
and managers. Low appeared to facilitate transactions – according to the DoJ, 
he even attended board meetings of 1MDB and acted as a link with the PM.

The new fund’s first major deal was signed a few weeks after the meeting with 
PetroSaudi – a $2.5bn joint venture agreement between PetroSaudi and 1MDB, 
inked during a visit by Najib to Saudi Arabia in September 2009. The press 
release said that the joint venture would “make strategic investments in 
high-impact projects” and “underscored the confidence Saudi Arabia has in 
Malaysia”.

But, according to the US justice department, the deal was merely a “pretence” 
for “the fraudulent transfer of more than $1bn from 1MDB to a Swiss bank 
account” controlled by Low – “a 29-year-old with no official position with 1MDB 
or PetroSaudi”. PetroSaudi has always maintained that all 1MDB funds were paid 
to entities owned by its shareholders.

The multibillion-dollar joint venture deal was completed with extraordinary 
speed – in less than a month. Shortly after the yacht meeting, on 28 August 
2009, Obaid had introduced Low to Patrick Mahony – the company director who 
handled PetroSaudi’s business affairs. According to documents seen by the 
Guardian, Low and Mahony met for lunch in New York on 9 September to discuss 
the joint venture.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2F1mdb-inside-story-worlds-biggest-financial-scandal-malaysia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd79af26d258cf78a7706d4bf713d0155aeca700%2F161_180_2141_1342%2F2141.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=1MDB%3A%20The%20inside%20story%20of%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20financial%20scandal%20%7C%20Randeep%20Ramesh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2F1mdb-inside-story-worlds-biggest-financial-scandal-malaysia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=1MDB%3A%20The%20inside%20story%20of%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20financial%20scandal%20%7C%20Randeep%20Ramesh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2F1mdb-inside-story-worlds-biggest-financial-scandal-malaysia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd79af26d258cf78a7706d4bf713d0155aeca700%2F161_180_2141_1342%2F2141.jpg>
 This drawing by Vincent Van Gogh, worth $5.5m, was allegedly bought with money 
from 1MDB, according to the US authorities. Photograph: Frank Baron for the 
Guardian 
After dining at Masa – a sushi restaurant where the set menu costs $540 a head 
– Mahony emailed Low the next day with an offer: “We know there are deals you 
are looking at where you may want to use PSI [PetroSaudi] … we would be happy 
to do that. You need to let us know where.” PetroSaudi said the documents seen 
by the Guardian are unreliable, stolen, fake and that they have been 
selectively quoted.

Less than three weeks later, the deal was done. PetroSaudi would contribute 
$1.5bn in oil and gas assets to the joint venture, while 1MDB would inject $1bn 
in cash.

According to the US court filing, 1MDB transferred $300m into an account 
belonging to the PetroSaudi joint venture, but the remaining $700m was sent to 
a Swiss account at RBS Coutts, controlled by a Seychelles-registered shell 
company named Good Star. The US justice department complaint alleges that Jho 
Low, and not PetroSaudi, was the beneficial owner and sole authorised signatory 
of Good Star. US authorities claim that officials at 1MDB provided false 
information to banks about the ownership of the Good Star account in order to 
divert the $700m.

In documents seen by the Guardian, on 30 September 2009 PetroSaudi appears to 
direct that the $700m be paid into an account controlled by the company – but 
three days later, when the compliance department at RBS Coutts requested 
further details about the name of the beneficiary account, the address given by 
1MDB was the Good Star account. On the same day, 2 October, Low emailed Mahony 
to say “Shld be cleared soon”. PetroSaudi told the Guardian: “No money put into 
the joint venture by 1MDB was misappropriated or is missing. Its investment was 
repaid with profit … All transfers from 1MDB were paid with the full approval 
of the 1MDB board.”

According to documents seen by the Guardian, the Good Star transaction made 
Obaid, then 32, and Mahony, then 33, very rich men. Records indicate that on 30 
September 2009, Good Star agreed to pay $85m to Obaid, which the Seychelles 
company described as a fee for “brokering services”. The money was deposited 
into Obaid’s Swiss JP Morgan account. At the same time, emails and legal 
documents indicate that Mahony was given a contract as “investment manager” for 
Good Star. On 20 October, Obaid emailed his contact at JP Morgan to request 
that $33m be transferred into an account belonging to Mahony.

Four days later, Mahony began discussions to set up an offshore company to buy 
a £6.7m townhouse in Notting Hill – and by 12 November, contracts for the house 
had been exchanged. The former banker created a numbered bank account in 
Switzerland, and all payments for the purchase were made from this account, via 
a British Virgin Islands company that Mahony had set up.

In response to questions from the Guardian, PetroSaudi said the payment to 
Obaid was not a brokerage fee and that the transfer of $33m to Mahony had 
nothing to do with the PetroSaudi-1MDB joint venture.

Laura and Xavier Justo were blissfully unaware of their friend Obaid’s 
changing fortunes. The couple were sunning themselves on Thailand’s Andaman 
coast in December 2009 when Obaid rang Justo offering him a director’s position 
in London with PetroSaudi. He told Justo the company had become an overnight 
success, but it needed someone who could help it grow.

Justo rejected Obaid’s initial offer, but he was eventually persuaded by the 
temptation of a well-paid “adventure”. According to Justo, Obaid promised him a 
salary of £400,000, “millions in bonuses” and the perk of a £10,000-a-week flat 
in Mayfair, central London. Justo pitched up in London in spring 2010, and by 
June was a PetroSaudi director. But he was kept out of the lucrative Asian 
business. Instead, Justo, a native Spanish speaker, was tasked with launching a 
new operation in Venezuela, and spent much of 2011 flying between London and 
Caracas.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2F1mdb-inside-story-worlds-biggest-financial-scandal-malaysia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd76a9a5e019719ee4dc8142ad3e726c544b8094%2F0_288_3456_4320%2F3456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=1MDB%3A%20The%20inside%20story%20of%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20financial%20scandal%20%7C%20Randeep%20Ramesh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2F1mdb-inside-story-worlds-biggest-financial-scandal-malaysia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=1MDB%3A%20The%20inside%20story%20of%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20financial%20scandal%20%7C%20Randeep%20Ramesh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2F1mdb-inside-story-worlds-biggest-financial-scandal-malaysia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd76a9a5e019719ee4dc8142ad3e726c544b8094%2F0_288_3456_4320%2F3456.jpg>
 Xavier and Laura Justo. Photograph: Javier Justo for the Guardian 
Between September 2010 and May 2011, 1MDB agreed to lend an additional $830m 
to the joint venture with PetroSaudi – bringing 1MDB’s total investment to 
$1.83bn. Of these new payments, US officials allege, $330m was paid into the 
Swiss account they say was controlled by Low, on the basis of a request by 
Obaid – who is identified in the US legal complaint as “PetroSaudi CEO”.

Emails and bank records seen by the Guardian suggest that in the nine months 
from September 2010, Obaid transferred $77m from his Swiss JP Morgan account to 
his PetroSaudi co-founder, Prince Turki bin Abdullah. According to the US 
authorities, banking records show that in the spring of 2011, Prince Turki also 
received $24m from the Good Star account controlled by Low – and that “within 
days”, $20m from these funds was transferred to an account belonging to the 
Malaysian prime minister, Najib.

Meanwhile, Low was becoming known on the New York club scene as a fixer for 
the global super-rich – snapped by paparazzi swigging magnums of Cristal with 
R&B singers and Hollywood stars. According to US authorities, Low spent $100m 
from the joint venture transactions on properties in Hollywood and $40m on New 
York apartments. The funding for The Wolf of Wall Street, the US complaint 
alleges, can be directly traced to the billion dollars diverted from the 
PetroSaudi joint venture.

In the meantime, Justo was growing disaffected with working conditions at 
PetroSaudi. According to his wife, Laura, the first sign of discontent was his 
discovery that his salary payments were only about half of what Justo said 
Obaid had offered him – a slight that was compounded when he learned that the 
promised multimillion-pound bonus would be considerably less than that – more 
like six figures than seven.

There were other niggles, too. He complained to Laura that he was often paid 
late, and sometimes not at all. He claimed that he ended up paying rent on the 
flat in Mayfair that was supposed to be covered by his employers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2F1mdb-inside-story-worlds-biggest-financial-scandal-malaysia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81f7b77265b303cb37f0ffdc4e1d004e550612f7%2F0_116_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=1MDB%3A%20The%20inside%20story%20of%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20financial%20scandal%20%7C%20Randeep%20Ramesh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2F1mdb-inside-story-worlds-biggest-financial-scandal-malaysia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=1MDB%3A%20The%20inside%20story%20of%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20financial%20scandal%20%7C%20Randeep%20Ramesh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2F1mdb-inside-story-worlds-biggest-financial-scandal-malaysia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81f7b77265b303cb37f0ffdc4e1d004e550612f7%2F0_116_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
 Leonardo DiCaprio in The Wolf of Wall Street. Photograph: Allstar/Paramount 
Pictures 
At first, Justo told Laura, he thought these were just mishaps – nothing 
malicious, just poor corporate bookkeeping. But he became increasingly dismayed 
by Obaid’s behaviour. Justo told friends that Obaid had become “arrogant” after 
striking it rich. Justo was especially disturbed by what he described as 
changes in his younger Saudi friend – telling other people that Obaid had 
become irrational, and displayed “uncontrollable” rage.

Justo and Obaid’s long friendship, stretched to breaking point over 12 months 
of highly charged corporate life, finally snapped. At the end of 2010, Justo 
missed a flight for an important meeting. He apologised to Obaid, but according 
to Justo, his friend “went mad”, sending him a stream of abuse, via text 
messages and emails.

Sick with worry, Justo decided to resign in March 2011. In the angry email 
exchanges that followed, Obaid called Justo “arrogant” and a “smart ass”. In 
April, things came to a head in Mayfair. Amid the marble, dark leather and 
metal art deco detailing of the exclusive Connaught hotel bar, Mahony and Justo 
hammered out the terms of his departure. According to Justo, Mahony had agreed 
to pay him about 6.5m Swiss francs (£5m) in severance. However, in the midst of 
a heated conversation, Mahony’s phone rang. It was Obaid, who apparently told 
Mahony to settle on 5m Swiss francs (£3.85m). Justo, who had poured his heart 
out to Mahony, telling him he was at his “lowest point emotionally”, shed 
tears. A day later, Justo claims that he was told his severance package would, 
in fact, be 4m Swiss francs (£3m).

As the rancour set in, Justo took a copy of the data on the PetroSaudi 
servers. In September 2013, a little more than two years after he had left 
PetroSaudi, Justo sent a fateful email to Mahony. Justo was insistent that he 
be paid what was owed to him, warning that he had a file of information on 
PetroSaudi. “The official side paints a nice picture but the reality is 
commissions, commissions, commissions,” he wrote.

What troubles me so much is the way in which I see this situation ending – 
with the destruction of you
Patrick Mahony 
In the furious exchanges that followed, Mahony accused Justo of blackmail. 
Mahony presciently told his former colleague: “What troubles me so much is the 
way in which I see this situation ending – with the destruction of you.”

A few months later, over a Chinese meal in London, the journalist who would 
break open the 1MDB scandal first heard rumours about an extraordinary heist in 
Malaysia. Clare Rewcastle Brown met a contact at a restaurant in Bayswater who 
showed her screen grabs of internal documents from PetroSaudi: on a single 
printed page, there were highlights of PetroSaudi’s dealings with 1MDB, under 
the heading “Thousands of documents related to the deal (emails, faxes and 
transcripts)”. She recognised the names and the deal. Her heart skipped a beat. 
“A bomb went off in my head,” Brown recalled. She knew right away that this was 
a huge story.

Rewcastle Brown is a classic British rebel at the heart of the establishment. 
She was born on the island of Borneo – part of which now belongs to Malaysia – 
when it was still part of the British empire, where her father was a colonial 
policeman and head of the local intelligence service. Her brother-in-law is the 
former British prime minister Gordon Brown. After working as a reporter for the 
BBC, in 2010 Rewcastle Brown set upSarawak Report 
<http://www.sarawakreport.org/>, a website dedicated to uncovering corruption 
in the place of her birth.

Working out of her tiny kitchen in central London, she published story after 
story exposing corruption in the timber and oil industries that were despoiling 
the country’s rainforests for profit.Her email was hacked and she received 
death threats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/jul/28/british-journalist-im-being-followed-in-london-by-teams-of-stalkers>
, but she carried on, regardless. Early in 2013, Malaysian politicians labelled 
her an “enemy of the state”. Rather than be cowed, she considered this a badge 
of honour. In person, Rewcastle Brown is a curious mix of the bawdy and the 
brave, almost to the point of recklessness. Her mantra: “I just want the story.”

After the meeting in Bayswater, Rewcastle Brown knew she needed to get the 
1MDB documents. The first hurdle was that the source of the PetroSaudi papers 
apparently wanted millions for the information. It was money she did not have.

Another stumbling block was that no journalist in Malaysia wanted to touch the 
story. In Malaysia, Prime Minister Najib had just won a tightly contested 
election, and was flush with power. Rumours were swirling around the cache of 
PetroSaudi documents – some said the Russian mafia was behind the data dump, 
while others speculated that it might be an elaborate trap, set by the prime 
minister to ensnare his critics.

Undeterred, Rewcastle Brown arranged with her contact to meet the source in 
Thailand. In October 2014, she pitched up at the lobby of the Plaza Athénée 
hotel, in Bangkok. She had told her husband she was hoping to meet a “balding 
bespectacled short Swiss guy”. Instead, into the foyer stepped Xavier Justo – 
muscular and 6ft 6in tall. Rewcastle Brown was faced with a “physically 
imposing, extremely elegant” man. “Oh my God,” she thought. “This guy is going 
to duff me up.”

But Justo admitted that he was just as scared as she was. According to 
Rewcastle Brown, he seemed “very, very nervous” and repeatedly warned her that 
“the people we were dealing with were ruthless, had huge amounts of money and 
were very, very powerful – and they could do what they liked to us”.

Justo told Rewcastle Brown that he wanted $2m in exchange for the 
PetroSaudi-1MDB documents. It was, he said, the money he should have been paid 
when he left PetroSaudi.

Although he shared a few documents at the meeting, Justo was adamant: no cash, 
no data. Rewcastle Brown needed to find a rich person prepared to pay for the 
papers.

At around this time, concerns about 1MDB had begun to spread in Malaysia. 
Financial analysts pointed out that the fund was not generating enough cash to 
cover interest payments on the billions of dollars of debt it had acquired. The 
hundreds of millions that had been spent on art work, jewellery, real estate, 
gambling and parties did not realise any return on the “investment”. By 2014, 
Prime Minister Najib’s political opponents had taken to taunting him with the 
accusation that the wealth fund should be renamed “1Malaysia’s Debt of 
Billions”.

In August 2014, Najib received another political blow. Mahathir Mohamad, the 
towering figure of modern Malaysian politics who served as prime minister from 
1981 to 2003, announced that he was withdrawing support for Najib, his former 
protege. In the weeks that followed, Mahathir became more vocal in his 
criticism, warning that 1MDB was adding to Malaysia’s dangerously high debt 
levels.

This warning went unheeded. The fund’s debt swelled. By November 2014, 1MDB 
owed almost $11bn. Najib, who chaired the fund’s advisory board, appeared 
unconcerned, telling the state news agency that the government was not liable 
for the debt if the fund went bankrupt. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2F1mdb-inside-story-worlds-biggest-financial-scandal-malaysia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7169cd9a1dee4905edfbfc9b6d6ef84c16c1b1c%2F0_400_4096_5120%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=1MDB%3A%20The%20inside%20story%20of%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20financial%20scandal%20%7C%20Randeep%20Ramesh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2F1mdb-inside-story-worlds-biggest-financial-scandal-malaysia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=1MDB%3A%20The%20inside%20story%20of%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20financial%20scandal%20%7C%20Randeep%20Ramesh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2F1mdb-inside-story-worlds-biggest-financial-scandal-malaysia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7169cd9a1dee4905edfbfc9b6d6ef84c16c1b1c%2F0_400_4096_5120%2F4096.jpg>
 The journalist Clare Rewcastle Brown helped uncover the Malaysian money trail. 
Photograph: Felix Clay for the Guardian 
As the crisis deepened, Rewcastle Brown continued her quest for a person 
willing to pay Justo for the PetroSaudi-1MDB documents. She noticed that some 
of the most searching reporting on the scandal had appeared in Malaysia’s 
best-selling business weekly,the Edge <http://www.theedgemarkets.com/en>. 
Sensing that she may have found a wealthy ally, Rewcastle Brown contacted the 
Edge’s owner, Tong Kooi Ong, a former banker turned media tycoon, who owned a 
number of business publications.

In January 2015, Tong, Rewcastle Brown and Justo met in a five-star Singapore 
hotel, the Fullerton. Tong booked a conference room, and brought a number of IT 
experts, as well as the editor of the Edge, Kay Tat. At the meeting, Justo laid 
out the 1MDB joint venture, making the same claims that the US Department of 
Justice would set out 18 months later: namely that hundreds of millions of 
dollars that were intended for economic development in Malaysia had instead 
been diverted into a Seychelles-based company. The man at the centre of the 
transaction was alleged to be Najib’s adviser and family friend, Jho Low.

It was a potentially huge scoop. Tong agreed to pay Justo $2m. Tong and 
Rewcastle Brown were immediately handed disk drives with the data. But the 
payment was never made. Justo did not want the money in cash, and he worried 
that a large transfer of funds into his account would look suspicious. Tong 
offered Justo one of his Monets as collateral – but Justo declined, and said 
“no, I trust you”. Rewcastle Brown finally had the documents she had been 
chasing for more than six months.

On 28 February 2015, Rewcastle Brown posted the first big story online – under 
a typically unrestrained headline: “HEIST OF THE CENTURY!” The article claimed 
to show how $700m had disappeared from the 1MDB joint venture and found its way 
into various offshore companies and Swiss bank accounts.

The impact of the article was felt around the world. In the US, law 
enforcement officials who had been alerted to reports that Low was spending 
huge amounts on New York apartments now had a fix on the possible source of his 
wealth.

While researching the story, Rewcastle Brown had teamed up with the Sunday 
Times, which helped her decrypt the files Justo had given to her. The paper ran 
an interview with Mahathir, the former Malaysian prime minister, who called for 
an immediate investigation and a full audit. “Somebody must be doing something 
stupid to part with $700m for no very good reason as far as I can see,” he said.

In Malaysia, the response was immediate. On 1 March 2015, 1MDB’s management 
claimed that it had exited the joint venture in 2012, and that it had received 
back its investment in full, with an additional profit of $488m. PetroSaudi 
claimed that the $700m had all gone to “PetroSaudi-owned entities” – denying, 
in other words, that companies controlled by Jho Low had received payments in 
the deal.

Not long before Rewcastle Brown’s story broke, 1MDB’s bonds had been 
effectively downgraded to junk. After another £200m of Malaysian government 
funds were required to plug a hole in 1MDB’s finances, Najib bowed to the 
inevitable and ordered investigations by the country’s auditor general and the 
parliamentary accounts committee. Soon, the country’s central bank and 
anti-corruption agency were also looking at 1MDB. Malaysia’s top policeman was 
reported as saying that the prime minister would also be investigated.

Najib tightened his grip on power. As prime minister and finance minister, he 
wielded enormous authority: in April, the government pushed through harsh 
penalties and restrictions on free speech, particularly on social media. Five 
executives of Tong’s The Edge Media Group – which had also published details of 
the PetroSaudi deal – were arrested for sedition. The government also 
introduced a new law, ostensibly aimed at terrorists, which allowed suspects to 
be detained indefinitely. In July 2015, the Edge weekly was banned from 
publishing.

Although the scandal only seemed to be getting bigger, it had not ensnared 
Prime Minister Najib personally. Then, on 2 July, Rewcastle Brown and the Wall 
Street Journal reported that Malaysian government investigators had discovered 
that$681m from banks, agencies and companies with ties to 1MDB had been 
deposited in Najib’s private accounts in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/26/malaysian-pm-najib-razak-cleared-corruption-gift-saudi-royals>
. A few days later, investigators raided the offices of 1MDB.

Najib was now at the centre of a corruption probe relating to allegations that 
billions of dollars had disappeared from a Malaysian investment fund he 
controlled. Deputy Prime Minister Muhyiddin Yassin, once a supporter of Najib, 
publicly called on him to answer questions about the fund. It seemed thatNajib 
was cornered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/09/najib-razaks-political-respite-will-only-last-so-long>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2F1mdb-inside-story-worlds-biggest-financial-scandal-malaysia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31b52e5a5e29f8521c5bda982b4b88b10aad86d9%2F0_51_2800_1680%2F2800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=1MDB%3A%20The%20inside%20story%20of%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20financial%20scandal%20%7C%20Randeep%20Ramesh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2F1mdb-inside-story-worlds-biggest-financial-scandal-malaysia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=1MDB%3A%20The%20inside%20story%20of%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20financial%20scandal%20%7C%20Randeep%20Ramesh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2F1mdb-inside-story-worlds-biggest-financial-scandal-malaysia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31b52e5a5e29f8521c5bda982b4b88b10aad86d9%2F0_51_2800_1680%2F2800.jpg>
 Malaysia’s Prime Minister Najib Razak strengthened his grip on power as the 
1MDB scandal gathered pace. Photograph: Reuters 
On the morning of Monday 28 July, the attorney general, Abdul Gani Patail – a 
party loyalist who had previously gone after the prime minister’s opponents – 
arrived at his office expecting to finalise corruption charges against Najib. 
The indictment, which Rewcastle Brown later obtained and published, would have 
charged the prime minister with corruption resulting from the investigations 
into 1MDB.

The attorney general never got to press those charges. On reaching his office, 
he was summarily dismissed by a civil servant. In a public statement, Najib 
said the country’s top legal officer was too ill to continue in the role. Also 
relieved of their posts were the head of special branch and the deputy prime 
minister. Meanwhile, four members of the investigating parliamentary accounts 
committee were promoted, without any choice, to cabinet positions, which left 
them with no power to continue investigating, and the committee’s work was 
declared suspended. The next day, a mysterious fire swept through police 
headquarters, where records of white-collar crimes were kept.

It seemed that Najib was in control again.

The crackdown revealed a ruthless side to Najib. However, there was a loose 
end that could unravel everything: Xavier Justo. Not only had Justo leaked 
information about 1MDB’s dealings with PetroSaudi, he was also a potential star 
witness in any future court proceedings about the financial scandal.

Justo was placed in a cell with 70 other prisoners. The floor was covered with 
sweat and urine

After Justo was arrested for blackmail and flown to Bangkok in June 2015, he 
was placed in a cell with 70 other prisoners. The floor was covered with sweat 
and urine, and the room was so tightly packed that prisoners could not sleep on 
their backs. According to Justo’s wife Laura, her husband’s first foreign 
visitor was his former friend, colleague and PetroSaudi director, Patrick 
Mahony. Smooth and charming, Mahony flashed a smile and said he was there to 
help.

Laura says that Mahony offered Justo a deal: confess and plead guilty, and 
PetroSaudi will get you out of here by the end of the year. Justo reluctantly 
agreed. He signed a confession – without a lawyer present – which claimed that 
he had attempted to blackmail his former employers, and apologised to Mahony 
and Obaid “for the harm stress and anxiety I caused them”. According to Laura, 
a man who claimed to be a Scotland Yard detective – and later told her he had 
been hired by PetroSaudi – took down Justo’s confession. (PetroSaudi told the 
Guardian that Justo had “illegally obtained commercially sensitive, 
confidential and private documentation” and was in prison for “blackmail and 
extortion”.)

Justo was sentenced on 17 August 2015 at Southern Bangkok criminal court. At 
the trial he was granted a translator, but his lawyer did not turn up, sending 
an assistant instead. The trial and sentencing took 15 minutes. Justo got three 
years in a Thai jail for attempting to blackmail a UK company out of $2m.

Life behind bars in Klong Prem Central prison, where Justo is incarcerated, is 
not for the fainthearted. In a city where temperatures rarely drop below 26C, 
Justo shares a cramped “VIP” cell with 25 other prisoners. Breakfast is at 7am. 
Water is rationed. Prisoners have no food after 3pm. There is a small bathroom 
area at the rear of the cell, which consists of a tap and a hole in the floor 
for a lavatory.

As 2015 wore on and it became clear that her husband was not going to be out 
of jail by the end of the year, Laura grew increasingly suspicious of her 
contacts at PetroSaudi. A series of stories in the Swiss and Malaysian press 
purporting to tell Justo’s side of the story depicted him as an unwitting pawn 
in a political plot against the Malaysian prime minister. Things were not 
getting better for Justo – they were getting worse. In his prison cell, Justo 
was now sleeping on a thin blanket – his mattress was withdrawn a few months 
after he arrived, as was his exercise hour.

Laura came to believe that Justo was a victim of a deceit by his former 
friends, who tricked him into confessing and handing over copies of 
PetroSaudi’s servers, in an attempt to protect themselves and their Malaysian 
associates by burying the case. In May 2016, in a last-gasp effort to save her 
husband, Laura turned to the one person who she knew Justo trusted: Rewcastle 
Brown, who brought her to the Guardian.

When I met Laura in June 2016, she was at first calm and composed, but broke 
into tears when speaking about her husband, her voice cracking with emotion. 
Justo has not seen their son since he was eight months old. “I only want 
justice to be done,” Laura recently wrote in an email. “Xavier was no thief, he 
was only asking for what he had been promised. Even through this darkest and 
most difficult time of his life, which is right now, he writes to me that he is 
keeping strong for our son and I – that he will fight for us whatever it takes.”

Since reaching out to Rewcastle Brown and the Guardian, Laura has handed over 
notes smuggled out of prison in which Justo says he has been framed. Laura 
believes that Patrick Mahony of PetroSaudi has controlled Justo’s life behind 
bars, deciding how comfortable his living space would be and who could visit 
him. (Foreign prisoners have a list posted outside the prison of permitted 
visitors. Mahony is listed as number two. Laura is number five.)

Laura says she has emails and WhatsApp messages, as well as recordings of 
phone calls from last year that suggest that Mahony is under increasing 
pressure from Najib, on one hand, and from US and Swiss investigators combing 
through 1MDB’s deals, on the other.

In taped telephone conversations with Laura, Mahony appears obsessed with 
Rewcastle Brown, whom he refers to as a “bitch”. In a recorded conversation 
with Laura from November 2015, Mahony refers obliquely to a powerful person 
whom he claims could help reduce Justo’s sentence: “I told you the other 
evening, who the ultimate person is controlling this, and I am due to have 
another meeting with him soon … This guy is still stressed because it’s his 
political career on the line. He’s in deep shit and that’s all he cares about, 
nothing else.”

When Laura asks what she should tell her husband, Mahony says: “The only way 
that you can show that you’re on his side – to be a team player – is if you’re 
ready to put yourself out in the media. You are ready to denounce all the 
people who are conspiring against him … I am not going to lie to you … You can 
help the situation or you cannot help the situation.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fpatrick-mahony-calls-xavier-justos-wife-laura-audio&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Patrick%20Mahony%20calls%20Xavier%20Justo's%20wife%2C%20Laura%20%E2%80%94%20audio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fpatrick-mahony-calls-xavier-justos-wife-laura-audio>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Patrick%20Mahony%20calls%20Xavier%20Justo%27s%20wife%2C%20Laura%20%E2%80%94%20audio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fpatrick-mahony-calls-xavier-justos-wife-laura-audio&media=>
Patrick Mahony calls Xavier Justo’s wife, Laura — audio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/jul/28/patrick-mahony-calls-xavier-justos-wife-laura-audio>
When Laura presses for Justo’s release, Mahony snaps. “I’m still dealing with 
this shit every day. You need to remember we are all in the shit. I know he’s 
in prison and you are alone with the baby. And I looked at you the other day 
and I told you I feel for you. But me, I’m also in the shit. And a lot of other 
people are in the shit. A prime minister of a country is in deep shit because 
he has been put in this shit.”

By December, Mahony admits in another phone call that he had been to the US, 
where “the FBI is looking at all this shit” and that he had been pulled in by 
the Swiss attorney general’s office. “The Swiss are continuing to really give 
us shit … They know they have nothing … But they say they are fearful of being 
accused of not doing anything.” PetroSaudi said that it will cooperate with any 
official authority in any jurisdiction and added that it is not the subject of 
any investigation in any jurisdiction. Mahony has not been interviewed by US or 
Swiss officials.

The consequences of Justo’s leaks are still reverberating around the world. 
When the US Department of Justice laid out the case against 1MDB last week, it 
pulled no punches. “The Malaysian people were defrauded on an enormous scale,” 
said Andrew McCabe, the FBI’s deputy director. US officials told the Guardian 
that any party who wanted to contest the attorney general’s claim must file a 
response in a federal court within 60 days to answer the factual allegations.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2F1mdb-inside-story-worlds-biggest-financial-scandal-malaysia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95738090922bf82b74747bbfff865367e77cd251%2F0_74_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=1MDB%3A%20The%20inside%20story%20of%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20financial%20scandal%20%7C%20Randeep%20Ramesh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2F1mdb-inside-story-worlds-biggest-financial-scandal-malaysia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=1MDB%3A%20The%20inside%20story%20of%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20financial%20scandal%20%7C%20Randeep%20Ramesh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2F1mdb-inside-story-worlds-biggest-financial-scandal-malaysia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95738090922bf82b74747bbfff865367e77cd251%2F0_74_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Xavier Justo leaves court in Bangkok on August 17, 2015. He was jailed for 
three years and remains in prison. Photograph: Pornchai Kittiwongsakul/AFP 
In a separate case, the DoJ is also investigating whether Goldman Sachs 
violated US banking law in its handling of $6.5bn in bond offerings that it 
carried out for 1MDB. The Wall Street behemoth earned $593m in fees for the 
issue. Goldman Sachs denied any wrongdoing. The bank told the Guardian: “We 
helped raise money for a sovereign wealth fund that was designed to invest in 
Malaysia. We had no visibility into whether some of those funds may have been 
subsequently diverted to other purposes.”

Most important was that the DoJ allegations directly contradicted repeated 
assertions by Prime Minister Najib about the origins and purpose of hundreds of 
millions of dollars that ended up in his personal bank accounts – which he had 
claimed wasa gift from a Saudi benefactor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/26/malaysian-pm-najib-razak-cleared-corruption-gift-saudi-royals>
.

The DoJ filing was released at a critical moment for democracy in Malaysia. On 
1 August, a draconian national security act introduced by Najib comes into 
force – allowing the Malaysian government to establish martial law in any 
designated geographic area. The law will dramatically expand the powers of 
Malaysia’s security forces – allowing for arrests, searches and seizures 
without warrants and the bulldozing of buildings.

But in the rest of the world, investigations into the sprawling corruption 
scandal are continuing to expand. In Switzerland, the US justice department 
identified RBS Coutts and Rothschild Bank as conduits for transactions in the 
corruption complaint. The Swiss attorney general is probing the billion-dollar 
fraud. The banks declined to comment when contacted by the Guardian.

Singapore found “lapses and weaknesses” in anti-money-laundering controls at 
major banks. For the first time in the island state’s history, the authorities 
shut down a merchant bank. In April the United Arab Emirates froze hundreds of 
millions of dollars in accounts held by alleged conspirators in the 1MDB fraud 
and banned the account holders from travelling abroad.

The board of 1MDB said that it was “confident that no wrongdoing had been 
committed” but as a “precautionary measure”, its accounts for 2013 and 2014 
should no longer be “relied on by any party”. Najib has said that he did not 
commit “any offence or malpractice”. His attorney general cleared him of 
corruption earlier this year.

For now, the man whose revelations enabled the exposure of this vast fraud 
remains in a Bangkok prison. Xavier Justo was motivated by a mixture of 
morality and revenge – the desire to settle scores with a friend who betrayed 
him. To get even, he chose to blow the whistle, for a price. He may not go down 
in history as a hero who selflessly risked ruin to expose the truth. But in 
doing so, he did unwittingly sacrifice himself. 

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/@gdnlongread>, or sign up to the long read weekly email 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>.

 * On 7 October 2016 Mr Obaid and Mr Mahony stated through their lawyers that 
they strongly deny claims that they deceived Mr Justo into confessing to the 
Thai authorities in order to bury the case, and that Mr Justo confessed because 
he knew there was no way out of the charges he was facing. They also deny 
having any control over Thai judicial or penal authorities, Mr Justo’s prison 
conditions or the length of his sentence. They also state that as regards his 
employment at PetroSaudi, Mr Justo was always paid on time and in accordance 
with his contract, left by mutual agreement and was paid 4 million Swiss francs 
under a binding severance agreement. 
 * 23 December 2016: PetroSaudi, Mr Obaid and Mr Mahony also deny that a 
confession by Mr Justo was taken down by a former Scotland Yard detective hired 
by them.  