
Imagine that you have nurtured an ambition for 25 years to head up an 
expedition to the last unexplored planet in the solar system. You’ve worked 
your way up and through countless other suborbital, orbital and planetary 
missions. You’ve written scores of scientific papers. Finally, you are the 
principal investigator on Nasa’s New Horizons mission toPluto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/pluto> – that mysterious little entity, a 
third of the size of our moon, that is located, depending on orbital position, 
between 2.6bn and 4.7bn miles from Earth.

In January 2006, your probe leaves Earth on its nine-year journey to its 
historic destination. It is the crowning moment of your career, a landmark 
project; you’ve reached the peak of your profession. Then, seven months later, 
with your spacecraft still in the early stages of its odyssey, it is announced, 
following a vote at a meeting of the International Astronomy Union (IAU) in 
Prague, thatPluto is no longer a planet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2006/aug/25/starsgalaxiesandplanets.spaceexploration>
.

As the consequence of the findings of an ambitious planetary astronomer, the 
elite group of nine planets has overnight shrunk to eight, and your mission is 
now heading towards a “dwarf planet”, just another piece of ice and rock in the 
vast Kuiper belt, the band of mostly small bodies that forms the perimeter, the 
unglamorous outer suburbs, of the solar system. That’s exactly what happened to 
Alan Stern a decade ago.

Science isn’t about voting. We don’t vote on the theory of relativity. We 
don’t vote on evolution
Alan Stern, aerospace engineer and planetary scientist 
Shift forward nine years, and New Horizons has just stunned the world with the 
clarity and drama of theimages of Pluto sent back from its flyby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jul/14/nasas-new-horizons-probe-makes-pluto-flyby-nine-years-after-leaving-earth>
. Hundreds of millions of people go online to look at them. Stern is the 
subject of international attention, feted, apparently vindicated, a man who 
appears to have answered his critics about the relevance of Pluto.

But then, out of the blue, the same astronomer whose original research 
prompted the demotion of Pluto announces that he’s discoveredevidence of Planet 
Nine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jan/20/ninth-planet-solar-system-edge-discovery-pluto>
, a major planet somewhere between the size of Earth and Neptune, that could 
take the place of Pluto – the original ninth planet – in the known planetary 
system. That is exactly what Mike Brown did.

Planetary science is a competitive field that, like any area of learning, can 
throw up bitter rivalries, but the stellar careers of Stern and Brown seem to 
be plotted along some kind of interplanetary collision course. When Brown made 
his announcement about Planet Nine, Stern tweeted: “Hype. There is no 
discovery.” To say there is no love lost between the two scientists would be an 
exercise in colourless understatement.

But their dispute is more than a clash of personalities, or even professional 
one-upmanship. It is about the nature of reality, how we make sense of the 
universe, the things in heaven and earth that are dreamt of in our philosophy.

Stern is a small man with a big office, located in the Southwest Research 
Institute <http://www.boulder.swri.edu/> in Boulder, Colorado. A neatly 
groomed, 58-year-old ball of energy, he is an aerospace engineer, trained pilot 
and very proud and angry Pluto advocate.

Stern is proud because New Horizons, which is continuing its journey beyond 
Pluto into the furthest reaches of the Kuiper belt, has been a huge success and 
will almost certainly transform our understanding of our cosmic surroundings. 
He is angry because he believes Pluto has been the victim of a personal 
vendetta and a shady conspiracy.

Stern rejects the IAU vote that demoted Pluto to the status of dwarf planet.

“Science isn’t about voting,” he says. “We don’t vote on the theory of 
relativity. We don’t vote on evolution. The image of scientists voting gives 
the public the impression that science is arbitrary.”

As far as he is concerned, the vote was the final stage of a campaign to 
discredit Clyde Tombaugh, the son of Kansas farmers who, as a 24-year-old 
researcher, discovered Pluto in 1930.

“There was an astronomer named Brian Marsden who for decades had a grudge 
against Tombaugh. He had public fights that many people observed. Tombaugh died 
in 1997 and Marsden went on a jihad to diminish his reputation by removing 
Pluto from the list of planets. He eventually found a way to do that at a 
convention of astronomers, a meeting with thousands of people, of which a very 
small fraction – 4% – went to a room where the vote was taken.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fmay%2F01%2F2006-space-oddity-pluto-debate-row%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f4c6f9971103ba6208f781b5cf03a83e4897f7a%2F875_136_2908_1745%2F2908.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2006%3A%20a%20space%20oddity%20%E2%80%93%20the%20great%20Pluto%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fmay%2F01%2F2006-space-oddity-pluto-debate-row%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2006%3A%20a%20space%20oddity%20%E2%80%93%20the%20great%20Pluto%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fmay%2F01%2F2006-space-oddity-pluto-debate-row%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f4c6f9971103ba6208f781b5cf03a83e4897f7a%2F875_136_2908_1745%2F2908.jpg>
 A view of Pluto’s rugged, icy mountains and flat ice plains captured by Nasa’s 
New Horizon’s spacecraft. Photograph: JHUAPL/SwRI/Rex Shutterstock 
Marsden, who was director of the IAU’s Minor Planet Center 
<http://www.minorplanetcenter.net/iau/mpc.html> in 2006, is himself dead, and 
it is impossible to prove or disprove Stern’s allegations. But 10 years on, the 
decision taken that day still rankles with Stern. It annoys him that the 
science press didn’t question the process. But what really gets to him is that 
the people who voted were astronomers and not, by and large, planetary 
scientists. He argues that they had little or no expertise in the field.

“Just as you shouldn’t go to a paediatrist for brain surgery, you shouldn’t go 
to an astronomer for expert advice on planetary science. My field is called 
planetary science. It involves the word planet in the name. As planetary 
scientists we should be able to understand what is and isn’t the central object 
of the field. It isn’t called ‘things in space’. It’s called planetary science. 
Its about planets.”

Essentially, the IAU laid down three criteria 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IAU_definition_of_planet> for planetary status. 
The object has to be in orbit around the sun. It must have sufficient mass to 
assume hydrostatic equilibrium, meaning it must be spherical by force of its 
own gravity. And it must have “cleared the neighbourhood” around its orbit, 
which is to say that it must be gravitationally dominant over surrounding 
objects. Pluto, the elliptical orbit of which is affected by Neptune’s gravity, 
fails this test.

Pluto is essentially this insignificant chunk of ice that really is of no 
consequence in the solar system
Mike Brown, Brown is professor of planetary astronomy, CalTech 
Stern dismisses this criterion as too vague, arguing that it means Neptune 
shouldn’t qualify as a planet. “If Neptune had cleared its zone,” he has said, 
“Pluto wouldn’t be there.”

“Mike Brown and some other people who for some reason would like to manage the 
number of planets to be small use a location-based definition, which is about 
what has cleared its zone. But it’s a very poor scientific concept. I’ll tell 
you why.”

He says the criterion means the physical properties of a given object are 
rendered meaningless because location determines classification. “If you accept 
at face value the zone clearing criteria, you can write down an equation for 
it. That equation depends upon several things, including the mass of the star 
it is orbiting, its distance from the star and how old it is. The most 
sensitive parameter is distance. As you go outward, the clearance zone gets 
bigger. And as you go outward the orbit speeds get progressively slower. So it 
takes a more and more massive object to clear the zone as you move farther out. 
Which means that objects that classify as planets close to a star cannot 
classify as a planet far from a star.”

Stern says that if Earth was located in Pluto’s position in the solar system 
it also wouldn’t qualify as a planet. “It’s ridiculous,” he says. He even 
claims that, according to the maths, Brown’s Planet Nine would not quality for 
planetary status, “no matter how massive it is”.

Brown’s response is dismissive. “Earth in the Kuiper belt? That would be 
fascinating, but there is no Earth in the Kuiper belt. Why not? Probably 
because the formation of the solar system has prevented such a thing from 
happening.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fmay%2F01%2F2006-space-oddity-pluto-debate-row%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8230d5b7ce0629a82eabf81986b669c68232db22%2F0_267_4578_2747%2F4578.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2006%3A%20a%20space%20oddity%20%E2%80%93%20the%20great%20Pluto%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fmay%2F01%2F2006-space-oddity-pluto-debate-row%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2006%3A%20a%20space%20oddity%20%E2%80%93%20the%20great%20Pluto%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fmay%2F01%2F2006-space-oddity-pluto-debate-row%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8230d5b7ce0629a82eabf81986b669c68232db22%2F0_267_4578_2747%2F4578.jpg>
 New Horizons team members count down to the spacecraft’s closest approach to 
Pluto in July 2015. Photograph: Bill Ingalls/AP 
“The solar system is so cleanly sorted into gravitationally dominant things 
(planets) and the tiny things that flit around between them (not planets), that 
that is telling us something truly interesting about the formation of the solar 
system.”

As for the notion that Planet Nine is disqualified from planetary status by 
the same criterion that disqualified Pluto, Brown says: “This is, of course, 
not true – and I’m pretty sure Alan knows this. There is an elegant set of 
calculations by Jean-Luc Margot which attempts to put real math behind the 
vague ‘cleared out the orbits’ language. Planet Nine easily fulfils Margot’s 
mathematical constraints.”

Yet the question remains, if the formation of the solar system prevented an 
Earth-size planet from being in the Kuiper belt, why didn’t it prevent the 
still larger Planet Nine? The most likely theory is that, if it does exist, 
Planet Nine began its orbital life much closer to the sun and then crossed 
paths with a planet like Jupiter, which sent it spiralling into the outer 
reaches.

Two more different characters than Stern and Brown it would be hard to 
conceive. When I visited Boulder, snow was on the ground, and there was 
something coiled and defensive about Stern, as if he were used to fighting for 
scare resources in a harsh environment.

Brown is professor of planetary astronomy <http://web.gps.caltech.edu/~mbrown/>
 at the California Institute of Technology (Caltech) in Pasadena, California. 
In Pasadena, the sun shone and the temperature was in the high 70s.

Brown is Stern’s junior by eight years, but they seem not just a generation 
but a whole culture apart. Brown was wearing shorts, Birkenstocks and a goatee 
beard when I visited his light-filled office on the Caltech campus. If the 
choice of epithets for the two men came down to “uptight” and “laid back”, it 
wouldn’t be hard to assign them.

Ever since Tombaugh first discovered it, Pluto has held an uncertain position 
in planetary science. Initially it was thought to be roughly the mass of the 
Earth, owing to its presumed gravitational effect on Neptune and Uranus. But 
over the years that estimate was downgraded until now it is thought to be about 
one five-hundredth of the Earth’s mass.

In 2005, Brown discovered an object in the Kuiper belt that had greater mass 
than Pluto. This new body, called Eris, presented a classification problem. 
Either it was a 10th planet or, if it was not a planet, then neither was Pluto. 
Although he had always dreamed of finding a planet, Brown was inclined to the 
latter opinion.

“Pluto,” as he tells me, “is essentially this insignificant chunk of ice that 
really is of no consequence in the solar system.”

He felt pleased when its planetary status was removed.

“It was immensely satisfying to have the solar system described correctly for 
the first time. It’s painful every time I see something that gives the wrong 
impression of reality.”

But a lot of people were sentimentally attached to the idea of Pluto and took 
against Brown’s position. He wrote an entertaining and enlightening memoir 
about the experience of becoming a hate figure, entitledHow I Killed Pluto and 
Why It Had It Coming.

Stern believes the book has undermined Brown’s objectivity. Interestingly, 
both Stern and Brown challenge each other’s opinions on similar grounds. Both 
think the other is compromised by personal involvement, and each believes the 
other is responding irrationally owing to emotional reasons.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fmay%2F01%2F2006-space-oddity-pluto-debate-row%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a44d61b0c2ccaec48a2b224d3d76ded67475b6a%2F0_141_3888_2332%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2006%3A%20a%20space%20oddity%20%E2%80%93%20the%20great%20Pluto%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fmay%2F01%2F2006-space-oddity-pluto-debate-row%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2006%3A%20a%20space%20oddity%20%E2%80%93%20the%20great%20Pluto%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fmay%2F01%2F2006-space-oddity-pluto-debate-row%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a44d61b0c2ccaec48a2b224d3d76ded67475b6a%2F0_141_3888_2332%2F3888.jpg>
 New Horizons principal investigator Alan Stern, left, celebrates the New 
Horizons mission with colleagues Ralph Semmel, centre, and Will Grundy. 
Photograph: Nasa/Rex Shutterstock 
“Mike’s written a very successful book,” Stern told me, “so he’s made a lot of 
money out of this. I don’t get paid more or less depending on what I say, but 
he clearly does. So there’s a bit of a conflict of interest. He’s never going 
to change his mind because it will kill his book’s sales.”

I checked Brown’s Amazon bestseller position. His book was at 131,246 on the 
list – not a ranking likely to represent large or profitable sales.

For his part, Brown says of Stern: “We should discount him. He’s got a 
spacecraft that flew by Pluto. You kind of fall in love with the things you 
spend a spacecraft to. It matters to him personally that it’s a planet. So 
ignore him.”

The two men accuse each other of suffering from nostalgia for a bygone age of 
certainties. In Stern’s case, Brown says he wants a return to a time when Pluto 
was part of the canon, one of the dominant objects. Stern argues that, on the 
contrary, he believes in a whole new paradigm in which the solar system 
contains many planets – probably, be says, about 1,000. And it is Brown, he 
says, who is holding on to a vanishing past of few planets for fear that 
“schoolchildren won’t be able to remember their names”.

Stern reaches for a geographical analogy. “We don’t limit the number of 
mountains or rivers of the Earth,” he says.

Brown counters with his own bit of geography. “It think it’s important to us 
that there aren’t that many planets. I think the word planet is like the word 
continent. There needs to be a smallish number of them. If every island was a 
continent, it wouldn’t mean anything.”

Ultimately, he concedes, it comes down to what we want to believe. He says he 
asked a philosopher friend what does a word – like planet, for example – mean.

“He said the word ‘planet’ means what people think about when they say the 
word ‘planet’, and I was like, ‘Shut up!’ But then I realised it’s true. And 
the word ‘planet’ means, in our heads, a small number of large bodies in the 
solar system. I don’t think it means everything round. It doesn’t mean 
everything that goes round the sun.”

The official designation for Pluto, Eris, and several other objects found in 
the Kuiper Belt is dwarf planet. But of course, in an obvious sense, whatever 
we call Pluto doesn’t change what it is. And what it is, according to Stern, is 
something of a surprise.

“Number one surprise,” he says, “is that Pluto is so complex. If you plot the 
numbers of different kinds of geology we see on the surface, it rivals Earth 
and Mars. Generally, the smaller objects are simpler. Pluto is completely 
anomalous in that respect. And we didn’t expect Pluto to be active 
geologically, four and half billion years after its birth. The heart-shaped 
region we callSputnik Planum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/video/2015/jul/24/pluto-nasa-flyover-icy-plains-video>
 is a million square kilometres. It is the scale of the state of Texas and it 
was born yesterday. We can’t find a single crater on it.”

To say that Pluto is an insignificant chunk of ice and rock may be true in the 
grand scheme of things, but meaning is not immanent in any planet or dwarf 
planet: it comprises what we impose on it. And Pluto is part of our history, a 
touchstone in our scientific journey outwards.

There is probably no definition of the word planet that suits everyone. By 
Brown’s understanding a planet can cease to be a planet if, for whatever 
reason, it changes location, while by Stern’s reckoning the moon is a planet. 
As Brown says: “Does any scientist anywhere other than Stern think that the 
moon should be called a planet? I think this is the strongest argument against 
a geophysical definition.”

The latest research suggests that Brown’s speculations about the existence of 
Planet Nine, based on the strange alignment of other bodies, may well be 
correct. If Pluto is ruled out, there have been only two planets discovered, 
other than by the naked eye, in human history: Uranus in 1781 and Neptune in 
1846. So it would be a rare achievement to uncover a third. Brown says it is 
hard not to be aware of the historical significance. But Stern is having none 
of it.

“It’s not the ninth planet, right. I think it’s a really insensitive 
terminology because it trashes Tombaugh’s reputation. Either that or he’s 
clueless. I don’t know, ask him.”

I did.

“I think that’s a desperate stretch,” says Brown.

And so it goes on, the two esteemed planetary scientists, circling one another 
like two great bodies struggling for gravitational superiority, both hoping to 
see the other’s argument propelled out into the forgotten depths of oblivion. 
And all because of a disagreement about a tiny rock more than 3bn miles away. 
That, and the unending search for cosmic truth.

A brief history of Pluto
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F24%2Fpluto-nasa-flyover-icy-plains-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nasa%20unveils%20Pluto's%20icy%20plains%20in%20simulated%20flyover%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F24%2Fpluto-nasa-flyover-icy-plains-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nasa%20unveils%20Pluto%27s%20icy%20plains%20in%20simulated%20flyover%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F24%2Fpluto-nasa-flyover-icy-plains-video&media=>
Nasa unveils simulated flyover of Pluto’s icy plains 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/video/2015/jul/24/pluto-nasa-flyover-icy-plains-video>
1906 Wealthy polymath Percival Lowell speculates on the possibility of “Planet 
X”, a ninth planet affecting the orbits of Neptune and Uranus. In 1915, his 
observatory unwittingly photographs Pluto, but the planet remains undiscovered 
and Lowell dies the following year.

1929 Self-taught junior astronomer Clyde Tombaugh is hired by the Lowell 
Observatory. He locates Pluto the following year, in roughly the position where 
Lowell thought “Planet X” should be, by painstakingly comparing numerous 
photographs of the night sky.

1930 Eleven-year-old Oxford schoolgirl Venetia Burney suggests the new planet 
be named after Pluto, the elusive Roman god of the underworld. Her father 
conveys the suggestion to the astronomy community and the name is adopted.

1978 Charon, one of Pluto’s five known moons, is discovered by James Christy 
of the United States Naval Observatory. The finding allows astronomers to more 
accurately gauge Pluto’s mass, proving that it is too small to have affected 
the orbits of other planets. Lowell’s hypothetical “Planet X” is eventually 
declared non-existent; its proximity to the real Pluto a mere coincidence.

Pluto's story keeps evolving with latest New Horizons climate data
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/mar/21/plutos-story-keeps-evolving-with-latest-new-horizons-climate-data-nasa>
1992 MIT scientists Jane Luu and David Jewitt find conclusive evidence of a 
dense disc of celestial bodies at the edge of the solar system, now known as 
the Kuiper belt. Objects of a similar size and mass to Pluto, in a similar 
vicinity, begin to appear.

2005 A team of Caltech astronomers – led by Mike Brown - discover Eris, a 
celestial body in the Kuiper belt with a mass greater than Pluto’s. The 
argument against Pluto’s classification as a planet gathers momentum.

2006 In January, the New Horizons space probe is launched to study Pluto. In 
August, the International Astronomical Union announces its criteria for 
“planet” status. Pluto fails to qualify, and is officially demoted to the 
status of “dwarf planet”. Scientists are divided on the matter - Alan Stern 
says the agreement “stinks”.

2008 A three-day “Great Planet Debate” is held at Johns Hopkins University to 
decide on a more satisfactory definition of a planet. The conference reaches no 
firm conclusion.

2015 New Horizons reaches Pluto after nearly 10 years in space, providing some 
of the most arresting and detailed photographs ever taken within the solar 
system.

2016 Mike Brown announces that by using computer modelling he has found 
evidence for a “Planet Nine”, which has a mass around 10 times that of Earth 
and an orbit 20 times further from the Sun than Neptune.Kit Buchan
 