
POLITICS

Daniel Boffey, policy editor, sees a tough year ahead for the two main party 
leaders

Earlier this month, David Cameron gave the clearest hint 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/18/david-cameron-hints-eu-referendum-could-be-held-next-summer>
 yet that thein/out EU referendum will take place in 2016, probably in June or 
July. “I believe 2016 will be the year we achieve something really vital, 
fundamentally changing the UK’s relationship with the EU and finally addressing 
the concerns of the British people about our membership,” said the prime 
minister of his planned renegotiations, which will be followed by the poll on 
whether the British public is happy to stay in on the new terms, whatever they 
may be.

Over the past two years Cameron has headed off (just) the break-up of the UK 
through Scottish independence and enjoyed what he called his “sweetest” 
electoral victory. Dashing Ed Miliband’s hopes, of a shift leftwards in British 
political thinking, he delivered the first Tory majority government since New 
Labour pushed John Major out of Downing Street in 1997. But the nerves are 
jangling about this one.

A series of polls in recent weeks place those who support leaving the EU quite 
comfortably ahead of those who would stay in. The Conservative pollster Lord 
Ashcroft has 47% of British voters keen to leave, markedly more than the 38% 
who said they wanted to maintain Britain’s membership.

It is true that the standing of pollsters took a hit when the general election 
result bore little similarity to their predictions. It is also true that 
Cameron has yet to unveil, or indeed strike, a deal that renews Britain’s 
relationship with the EU. But even given these caveats, Downing Street aides, 
and those at the top of the Labour party, say they fear the result of the EU 
referendum may be frighteningly close.

Cameron’s renegotiation with EU member states is scheduled to come to a close 
in February. A key test for many will be whether he is able to offer the 
British public any hope thatmigration within the EU can be controlled.

The scenes witnessed on the fringes of Europe – on the Greek island of Lesbos, 
and elsewhere – where thousands of refugees have flocked to find security and 
build a new life have done little to assuage fears that the UK is currently 
incapable of looking after its borders. Cameron’s Plan A on EU migration – a 
ban on EU nationals claiming in-work benefits for their first four years in the 
UK – isunlikely to find many supporters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/17/david-cameron-compromise-eu-migrants-benefits-summit>
. A compelling alternative has yet to emerge.

From the EU poll result, much else will follow. Should the country choose to 
leave the EU against Cameron’s recommendation, it is inconceivable that he 
would stay on for very long, having already said he will leave by 2020. That 
will fire the starting gun proper on the Tory leadership contest. The shadow 
boxing between the chancellor George Osborne, home secretary Theresa May, 
London mayor Boris Johnson and education secretary Nicky Morgan, among others, 
will become a full-on blood sport.

Should Britain stay in the EU, one can expect the prime minister to leave his 
departure to late in the five-year parliament, but the jockeying for position 
among the candidates could well prove debilitating for the government and for 
Cameron, who will struggle to dispel the impression that he is a lame-duck 
prime minister.

Meanwhile, on the subject of leadership, the challenge for Jeremy Corbyn – 
after he (just about) overcame early hurdles including the Oldham byelection – 
will come in theMay local elections and the London mayoral election. A loss of 
Labour councils and the defeat of Labour’s Sadiq Khan to the old Etonian Zac 
Goldsmith would be a tremendous blow to Corbyn’s claims to represent a new 
politics, capable of galvanising the non-voters. It would be the time for the 
plotters, and they are many, to strike. But only time will tell if Corbyn can 
upset the odds in 2016 as he did in 2015. Or, indeed, whether the plotters have 
the will to act when it comes to doing so.

SCIENCE

This could be the year dark matter comes in from the cold, writes Robin McKie

The hunt is closing in on dark matter. And 2016 may well be the year in which 
this elusive set of particles, which account for a vast, invisible chunk of the 
universe’s mass, are detected. If so, one of the holy grails of modern physics 
will finally have been achieved.

It is a prospect backed by Cambridge astrophysicist Gerry Gilmore. “Next year 
we will see a major transition in the hunt for dark matter,” he says. “Until 
now, the odds of finding it have been around one in 100. Next year, they will 
jump to one in five or better – so we could easily find dark matter in 2016.”

Most of the universe’s mass – about 85% – is thought to be made of dark 
matter, a rain of invisible particles that provide galaxies with sufficient 
gravitational force to hold themselves together. This is the dark side of the 
force – in this case of the force of gravity – though the impact of dark matter 
is actually benign. Without it, galaxies would fly apart. We therefore owe our 
existence to dark matter, although the stuff has proved to be awkwardly elusive 
to date.

However, three very different projects have reached fruition and could 
transform scientists’ fortunes in 2016. The first is the Large Hadron Collider, 
which has been upgraded since it was used to discover the Higgs boson in 2012.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Fdec%2F26%2F2016-year-ahead-living-precariously-politics-sport-arts-environment-science%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f0dca9fcc03ff239368fe3581fdb27bcc79baa4%2F0_118_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%3A%20The%20year%20of%20living%20precariously&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Fdec%2F26%2F2016-year-ahead-living-precariously-politics-sport-arts-environment-science%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%3A%20The%20year%20of%20living%20precariously&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Fdec%2F26%2F2016-year-ahead-living-precariously-politics-sport-arts-environment-science%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f0dca9fcc03ff239368fe3581fdb27bcc79baa4%2F0_118_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 Tim Peake returns to Earth after his six-month tour of duty on the 
International Space Station. Photograph: Dmitry Lovetsky/AP 
“It should start to generate particles that could include some of those 
responsible for dark matter – and in the very near future,” says Gilmore.

In addition, underground laboratories are now being built with increasing 
sensitivity and could soon pinpoint naturally occurring dark matter particles 
as they fly through the Earth. At the same time, the European star-mapper 
satellite, Gaia, will this summer produce details of two million stars whose 
movements have been charted with extraordinary precision. These results will 
help scientists understand the influence of dark matter in the area of the 
galaxy around our solar system, and help refine the hunt. Intriguingly, the 
particles believed to make up dark matter are known as Weakly Interacting 
Massive Particles, which means – if dark matter is found in the next 12 months 
– that 2016 would become the Year of the Wimp. “It’s a real prospect,” says 
Gilmore.

Closer to home, the European Space Agency will be returning to Mars with the 
launch, in March, of its first ExoMars mission. Scheduled to reach the red 
planet in October, the robot craft will study the Martian atmosphere in a bid 
to identify trace gases, in particular methane – the latter being a possible 
signature of primitive, bacteria-like life forms that might be thriving on 
Mars. The mission will then be followed in 2018 with a second, even more 
ambitious ExoMars probe – one that will land a robot rover on the planet’s 
surface. Fitted with a drill and a suite of instruments, it will attempt to 
pinpoint and study any lifeforms.

There will be two other highlights for space travel in 2016. The first will be 
the return to Earth ofTim Peake, Britain’s first official astronaut, after his 
six-month tour of duty on the International Space Station. He is scheduled to 
land in mid-June after completing a mission that is expected to include space 
walks and other activities. Then, in July, the US Juno probe will reach Jupiter 
after a five-year journey. The craft will study Jupiter’s atmosphere and its 
water content, its magnetic and gravity fields, and its deep structure in order 
to improve our understanding of the origins of the solar system.

Back on Earth, in the wake of this month’s climate negotiations, government 
and companies will be trying to turn the promises that were made in Paris into 
reality. One focus of attention will be a Swiss company which, according to the 
journalNature, is set to become the first firm to capture carbon dioxide from 
the air and sell it on a commercial scale, a key step that could become a 
useful tool in combating global warming. Around July, Climeworks will start 
capturing around 75 tonnes of CO2 per month at its plant near Zurich before 
selling the gas to greenhouses to boost crop growth.

ARTS

Vanessa Thorpe, arts correspondent, looks ahead to a year of anniversaries

The blizzard of cultural anniversaries marked in recent months might have 
induced a certain fatigue, but 2016 does promise several dates that will be 
hard to ignore. Looming large are the400th anniversary of Shakespeare’s death 
and the Brontë Sisters’ bicentenary (marking 200 years since Charlotte’s 
birth). Stratford-upon-Avon and Haworth Parsonage, the two geographical centres 
for fans of the Bard and the Brontës respectively, have been gearing up for 
these landmarks for months.

William Shakespeare, who died in April 1616, quite possibly while he was 
celebrating his 52nd birthday, will be honoured in a show at the British 
Library calledShakespeare in Ten Acts 
<http://www.bl.uk/events/shakespeare-in-ten-acts>, running from 15 April to 6 
September. It will examine 10 key performances in his life, with displays of 
diary entries, playbills, and the only surviving script in his own hand. The 
National Archives in London will get in a month earlier with a rare opportunity 
to look at the playwright’s will and other personal documents. The Kenneth 
Branagh Theatre Company will be bringing Shakespeare into cinemas in July with a
live broadcast <http://www.branaghtheatre.com/branagh-theatre-live.php> of a 
new production of Romeo and Juliet at the Garrick, starringLily James and 
Richard Madden, last seen swirling around together in Branagh’s film Cinderella.

There is further anniversary competition from two giants of British children’s 
literature: 2016 is the100th anniversary of the birth of Roald Dahl and the 
150th of Beatrix Potter’s and both lives will be widely celebrated. Cardiff, 
Dahl’s schoolboy home, is launching a series of events calledCity of the 
Unexpected <http://wmc10.org.uk/blog/city-unexpected>, while in February the 
Beatrix Potter Gallery in Hawkshead, Cumbria, will mount a show calledRealism 
and Romance: Beatrix Potter 
<http://lakesculture.co.uk/celebrating-beatrix-potter-150th-anniversary-of-a-lake-district-icon/>
, a life inspired by nature.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Fdec%2F26%2F2016-year-ahead-living-precariously-politics-sport-arts-environment-science%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff63b3672b4eca4397d16cb20457bdf242c13499b%2F0_0_1600_1068%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%3A%20The%20year%20of%20living%20precariously&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Fdec%2F26%2F2016-year-ahead-living-precariously-politics-sport-arts-environment-science%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%3A%20The%20year%20of%20living%20precariously&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Fdec%2F26%2F2016-year-ahead-living-precariously-politics-sport-arts-environment-science%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff63b3672b4eca4397d16cb20457bdf242c13499b%2F0_0_1600_1068%2F1600.jpg>
 KAWS’ monumental art will go on show at the Yorkshire Sculpture Park near 
Wakefield. Photograph: Courtesy the artist and YSP 
Egyptian history stays in vogue, with the British Museum following its 
successful shows of Egyptian artefacts by bringing up morebooty from underwater 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/nov/30/british-museum-egpyt-sunken-treasures>
. Sunken Cities: Egypt’s Lost Worlds opens on 19 May.

There will be extra Egypt at London’s Coliseum in March, when the English 
National Opera stagesPhilip Glass’s Akhnaten 
<https://www.eno.org/whats-on/15-16/akhnaten>, a study of the pharoah’s life, 
for the first time in London in almost three decades. Conductor Karen Kamensek, 
a Glass specialist, will make her ENO debut.

The South Bank of the Thames will be shaken up on 17 June with the opening of 
Tate Modern’s grand extension into the old Switch House, increasing its display 
space by 60%. Meanwhile its sister, Tate Britain, will be looking back at the 
early days ofConceptual Art in Britain 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-britain/exhibition/conceptual-art-britain-1964-1979>
, from 1964-1979. The show will remind us of the deeper roots of this 
provocative school of work, and feature artists Michael Craig-Martin and 
Richard Long among many.

In the summer the National Gallery will take the imaginative step of looking 
at the great art owned by other famous painters. Visitors will see Van Dyck’s 
Titian, Joshua Reynold’s Rembrandt, and Matisse’s Degas. We will learn how they 
got hold of these works and what influence they had in Painters’ Paintings, 
which opens on 22 June.

At the Yorkshire Sculpture Park near Wakefield, the monumental style of the 
American artist known asKAWS <http://www.ysp.co.uk/exhibitions/kaws> will go on 
display from 6 February. Street art, designs, murals and large sculptures have 
made the Brooklyn-based pop artist a star, and his bright canvases and towering 
glass-fibre forms will be on show for the first time in Britain at the Longside 
Gallery.

While the 40 years that have passed since the birth of the punk movement are 
to be celebrated across London next year (especially at theBritish Library show 
Punk 1976-78 from May), the biggest headlines in the capital are likely to be 
inspired either by the Rolling Stones showExhibitionism 
<http://www.saatchigallery.com/current/rolling_stones.php>, running from April 
at the Saatchi Gallery in Chelsea, or by the Victoria and Albert museum’s 
naughty exhibition Undressed: A Brief History of Underwear, which also starts 
in April.

It looks as if the singer/songwriter trend will still be shaping rock and pop 
in the next 12 months. Highlights are likely to include Jake Bugg’s third album 
in the spring and appearances from James Bay at some of the big summer 
festivals, such as Manchester’s Sounds of the City in July, where he will join 
Guy Garvey of Elbow fame.

Among the newcomers in this moody, but crowded, field are Barns Courtney, who 
was sleeping rough in London until earlier this year. He is now widely tipped 
to do exciting stuff in 2016 with a sound that has been likened to a blend of 
Johnny Cash and Beck, incorporating the American influences he picked up as a 
child living for a while in Seattle. Also coming up fast is British hip-hop 
performer Loyle Carner, while Norwegian DJ Kygo is a good bet to become the 
fastest artist ever to reach a billion Spotify streams. The music site named 
him as its breakthrough artist of the year. Kygo has already sold 1.4m singles 
in Britain and his two tour shows in Brixton, south London, in April are sold 
out.

Anticipation is building among Libertines fans ahead of their January tour, 
while Elvis Costello’s loyal followers will have to wait until May for his four 
dates at the London Palladium.

The Beliebers have a much longer wait before Justin Bieber’s’s much hyped 
Purpose World Tour makes it to London and then Birmingham in October.

TECHNOLOGY

Facebook will try to make our lives even easier, says Ian Tucker, but at a 
price

There are now over 600 million people using Facebook’s Messenger – last year 
it was the fastest-growing app in the US, with a31% increase in users 
<http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/news/2015/tops-of-2015-digital.html>. 
That’s an awful lot of people enjoying #topbantz, but if all goes to Facebook’s 
plan this coming year, the throng will be joined by an increasing number of 
business and services wanting to chat, too. How might this work? Imagine you 
and your Messenger pals are organising an evening out on the town. You need to 
book taxis, find a table at a restaurant and reserve a VIP area and several 
chilled magnums at your favourite after-party venue – wouldn’t it be easier if 
you could make your arrangements not only with your friends but also with taxi 
companies, restaurants and bars without leaving the app? That way all your 
friends could have a say in how the evening’s schedule takes shape, without 
entrusting the arrangements to one person and their dubious decision-making 
skills. As Jessica Ekholm of technology research company Gartner explains: “We 
are moving towards the post-app era, moving away from apps as channels towards 
a seamless experience – you can do several things from within the application 
rather than opening other apps.”

Linking up with Messenger appeals to businesses because their data tells them 
that every prompt to download an app, register and input payment details leads 
to potential customers bailing out. It is fairly typical that 50-60% of an 
online retailer’s traffic is on mobile but that mobile only accounts of 10-12% 
of sales. Merchants need to convert smartphone users into buyers.

Moreover, Facebook would like to keep you glued to its app to maximise the 
amount of data they can harvest from you for the purposes of placing more ads 
in front your eyeballs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Fdec%2F26%2F2016-year-ahead-living-precariously-politics-sport-arts-environment-science%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcae704f6b695e270c6abf2b9a50c27d4aee0344%2F0_0_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%3A%20The%20year%20of%20living%20precariously&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Fdec%2F26%2F2016-year-ahead-living-precariously-politics-sport-arts-environment-science%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%3A%20The%20year%20of%20living%20precariously&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Fdec%2F26%2F2016-year-ahead-living-precariously-politics-sport-arts-environment-science%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcae704f6b695e270c6abf2b9a50c27d4aee0344%2F0_0_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 5G technology will provide a major boost for driver-less cars. Photograph: 
Bloomberg/Bloomberg via Getty Images 
Somewhat predictably, one of the first services to pop up inside Messenger is 
Uber, which hasbeen announced 
<http://newsroom.fb.com/news/2015/12/introducing-transportation-on-messenger/> 
as Messenger’s first transportation partner. It’s currently available only in 
selected US cities, but once the service is rolled out, users will be able to 
book a ride mid-convo and monitor its progress. That’s the first phase; the 
second would be corresponding with Uber customer services in chat-bubble style. 
A similar arrangement is soon tobe launched by the airline KLM 
<http://www.telegraaf.nl/digitaal/24614638/__KLM_wil_klantenservice_via_Facebook_Messenger__.html>
. Book your ticket, change your itinerary, check-in and receive your boarding 
pass – all in a few blobs of Messenger. Plenty of other retailers and brands 
are sure to follow – often with the chat being provided by AI rather than 
humans.

But this enhanced Messenger poses a problem for businesses: do they bother 
trying to encourage people to download their app or just insert themselves into 
Messenger’s ready-made 600-million-strong market place? As Andreessen Horowitz 
analyst Benedict Evans haspointed out, 
<https://soundcloud.com/a16z/a16z-podcast-messaging-is-the-medium?in=benedictevans/sets/be-a16z-podcasts>
 if you plug your startup into Messenger, “you’re not going to be a $10bn 
company because they aren’t your users; they are all Facebook’s users”.

No wonder some commentators have suggested that Messenger could be the app 
that destroys the app ecosystem.Wired UK 
<http://www.wired.co.uk/magazine/archive/2015/11/features/inside-facebook-messenger>
 suggested Messenger could be “one app to run your life”.

And if users are spending the majority of their smartphone time on Facebook 
and Messenger, Zuckerberg’s employees are gatekeepers to what we see and which 
businesses can flourish on mobile. They will be setting the terms by which we 
experience the mobile internet.

Also look out for Oculus Rift, Facebook’s much anticipated and delayed virtual 
reality headset, which is due to be launched in the first quarter of 2016, 
according to some recent tweets from founder Palmer Luckey. It’s expected to 
cost around £250 and you will also need a high-end PC to power it. Expect more 
news to emerge about the Oculus and the rival PlayStation VR and HTC Vive 
headsets at the CES electronics trade show taking place in Las Vegas in the 
first week of January.

And 2016 may be the year 5G comes of age. The latest turbo-charged version of 
the mobile network will begin initial testing in the US byVerizon in 2016 
<http://www.cnet.com/uk/news/verizon-to-hold-worlds-first-crazy-fast-5g-wireless-field-tests-next-year/>
. Aside from being around 100 times faster than 4G, the new technology will 
stabilise the operation of self-driving cars and other devices connected to the 
“internet of things”. Mobile providers in South Korea and Japan also have plans 
to trial 5G – if all goes to plan it should be generally available by 2020.

SPORT

Fifa and the Olympics both have tarnished reputations to repair, writes Owen 
Gibson

The two biggest international sporting events of 2016 – football’s European 
Championship in France and the Olympic Games in Rio de Janeiro – will begin 
with clouds over them, albeit for very different reasons.

In France, Euro 2016 has become an exercise in defiance. Despite the travails 
afflicting Fifa, the championship was supposed to be the last grand party 
before international supporters packed their bags for the expense of the World 
Cup in Russia in 2018 and the unknown of the tournament in Qatar in 2022.

The events of 13 November changed all that, with fears that what promised to 
be a freewheeling celebration of football across 10 French cities – featuring 
unlikely qualifiers including Iceland, Wales and Albania – would have to be 
cloaked in heavy security. But at December’s group draw, French ministers and 
football officials were insistent that fans should travel in large numbers in 
defiance of the terrorists that tried to attack the Stade de France.

On the pitch, the expansion to 24 teams that has enlivened the qualification 
process has given rise to a format that could prove somewhat turgid in the 
group stage but does at least give England, Wales, Northern Ireland and Ireland 
a chance of progressing.

A few weeks later, more than 10,500 athletes will converge on Rio for the 
first Olympics in South America. When, in 2009, the city won the right to host 
the biggest jamboree in sport, it was supposed to signal Brazil’s coming of age 
as an economic superpower on the international stage. It hasn’t quite worked 
out that way, with an ongoing economic slump forcing budget cuts and giving 
rise to fears over poor ticket sales. Alongside the now traditional uncertainty 
over whether the venues will be ready on time, there is a mix of corruption 
probes, worries over human rights issues and concerns about the pollution in 
the bay where the sailing will take place. This has left the feelgood buzz that 
the organisers were hoping for a long way off.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Fdec%2F26%2F2016-year-ahead-living-precariously-politics-sport-arts-environment-science%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2aa3f332c51c3ad9694e1f0b9936553b55a5f523%2F0_0_4968_2980%2F4968.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%3A%20The%20year%20of%20living%20precariously&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Fdec%2F26%2F2016-year-ahead-living-precariously-politics-sport-arts-environment-science%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%3A%20The%20year%20of%20living%20precariously&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Fdec%2F26%2F2016-year-ahead-living-precariously-politics-sport-arts-environment-science%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2aa3f332c51c3ad9694e1f0b9936553b55a5f523%2F0_0_4968_2980%2F4968.jpg>
 Usain Bolt is planning to go out on a high at the Rio Olympics. Photograph: 
Ian Walton/Getty Images 
As with the World Cup in Brazil in 2014, the hope is that Rio’s natural beauty 
and the welcoming nature of the hosts will carry the event, even if concerns 
over an Olympic legacy are more deep-seated than ever, given the growing 
antipathy towards hosting so-called “mega-events” in many cities around the 
world. For Team GB, with funding from the lottery and the Treasury recently 
guaranteed, the task will be to ensure that the heroics of the Games in Beijing 
in 2008 and London in 2012 don’t come to be seen as a high-water mark in 
performance terms.

Yet there will also be important issues on the track, with the International 
Association of Athletics Federations (IAAF) facing a crucial decision in March 
over whether to re-admit Russia after it was suspended as a member in November 
over a doping scandal.

With athletics fans around the world nursing suspicions over the action in 
front of them, it is possible that not even more heroics from Usain Bolt – 
competing in his final Games – will be enough to dispel the ill feeling.

Forced into action by a dogged investigation by German journalist Hajo 
Seppelt, and the bravery of Russian whistleblowers, the World Anti-Doping 
Agency (Wada) commissioned an inquiry headed by Dick Pound that uncovered the 
scale of doping in Russia and alleged corruption at the highest levels of the 
IAAF.

Faced with cleaning up a mess created when he himself was vice-president, the 
IAAF’s new president, Sebastian Coe, has instead found himself increasingly 
drawn into the crisis.

The second part of Wada’s report is due early in the new year and a French 
criminal investigation into the former IAAF president, Lamine Diack, and his 
coterie continues. For Coe, too, the glow of London 2012 will feel a long way 
away.

In Switzerland and the US, meanwhile, criminal investigations into the conduct 
of Fifa executives past and present continue: 35 football officials have 
already been charged with crimes including money laundering, racketeering and 
tax evasion.

Sepp Blatter, the disgraced Fifa overlord, and his one-time heir apparent, the 
Uefa president Michel Platini, have both been given lengthy bans from football. 
But the backdrop of sleaze and suspicion will hang over the game’s governing 
body long after a new president is elected at the end of February.

Structural reform is promised, but without a parallel overhaul of culture and 
personnel, it is unlikely to have the desired result. For optimists, the hope 
is that the new year will bring a turning point in the way global sport is run.

ENVIRONMENT

2016 is all about following up on this year’s historic climate deal, writes 
John Vidal

So will it be Gatwick or Heathrow? The big cliffhanger of 2016 will be the 
location of a major new runway in south-east England. The inevitable air and 
noise pollution resulting from tens of thousands of extra flights a year will 
be a deciding factor. Whichever airport is chosen, the decision – which will 
probably be taken in the summer after the government called for more 
consultation – will inevitably divide the Tory party and lead to protests, 
resignations, recriminations and evictions.

All four leading candidates in May’s London mayoral elections are, 
unsurprisingly, campaigning hard in favour of Gatwick; George Osborne and David 
Cameron are known to favour Heathrow on economic grounds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Fdec%2F26%2F2016-year-ahead-living-precariously-politics-sport-arts-environment-science%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f98f5a895eeece18113f095e79df5c09e8b3162%2F0_434_5020_3012%2F5020.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%3A%20The%20year%20of%20living%20precariously&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Fdec%2F26%2F2016-year-ahead-living-precariously-politics-sport-arts-environment-science%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%3A%20The%20year%20of%20living%20precariously&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Fdec%2F26%2F2016-year-ahead-living-precariously-politics-sport-arts-environment-science%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f98f5a895eeece18113f095e79df5c09e8b3162%2F0_434_5020_3012%2F5020.jpg>
 Air pollution, the world’s biggest killer in 2015, is expected to be a 
priority. Photograph: Kevin Frayer/Getty Images 
Two international agreements, if secured, will also have long-lasting effects 
on the British environment. If a referendum on Europe is called, the Brexit 
camp will have to decide whether to dismantle European environmental 
legislation, which has set progressively higher standards for air and water 
pollution, and ruled on matters such as habitat protection, energy efficiency, 
waste, recycling, noise and farming. If Britain really does leave Europe, much 
of this could be up for grabs, with deregulation and lower standards a real 
possibility.

Negotiations for a Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, a 
free-trade agreement between the US and EU, should be concluded in 2016. The 
two sides have made limited progress after 11 negotiating rounds, with food, 
farming and the environment the thorniest issues left to decide. So far, no 
obligations to ratify international environmental conventions are proposed, and 
means of enforcing goals on biodiversity, chemicals and the illegal wildlife 
trade are absent. Campaigners fear that existing rights of countries or regions 
to regulate industries such as fracking, farming, and food imports could be 
swept away.

Globally, 2016 is expected by the Met Office and others to be the warmest year 
on record, largely as a result of El Niño, which has led to droughts and food 
shortages across Africa, Latin America and Asia. It will peak in the next few 
weeks but can be expected to lead to floods and humanitarian disasters 
throughout the first half of the year.

Following the Paris agreement this month, climate change commitments will drop 
down the agenda for many pressure groups. In their place are likely to come 
older, more immediate issues that have been overlooked or played down in the 
push to get a new climate deal.

Air pollution, confirmed as the world’s greatest environmental killer in 2015 
by the World Health Organisation, will rise up the agenda, as will conservation 
and nature protection, which have been slashed to the bone by austerity cuts. 
Next year will also see a new push by campaigners to ensure adherence to strict 
EU air pollution laws. Many cities can expect to see new low-emission zones 
imposed, better air quality monitoring and greater traffic regulation. In 
London, there will be a fight over proposals for new Thames river crossings and 
the expansion of City Airport.

The future of the Hinkley Point nuclear power station in Somerset will finally 
be settled, with China expected to demand even greater financial guarantees if 
it is to help to build other nuclear power stations in the UK. The Treasury, 
which has come under attack for the £24bn deal done with French company EDF 
Energy on Hinkley, may have to give ground.

Ash dieback and other tree and plant diseases are expected to accelerate in 
2016 and Britain will see badger culling extended beyond Devon, Somerset and 
Gloucestershire. If the price of milk does not rise significantly, Britain 
could see a massive reduction in the number of small dairy farms.

One issue that could go on to the back burner is fracking. Although the UK 
government is the most enthusiastic advocate of fracking in Europe, it is 
unlikely to take off in Britain until the oil price recovers.

FASHION

Modesty is set to be the new buzzword on the catwalk, writes Hannah Marriott

Fashion has never been short of divas, egos or peacocks. So it is heartening 
that the designer most likely to set the agenda in 2016 is a low-key 
34-year-old who slouches about in hoodies and trainers, carries his belongings 
in a paper shopping bag and is barely known outside of the industry.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Fdec%2F26%2F2016-year-ahead-living-precariously-politics-sport-arts-environment-science%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee653b59bac3370a1b72f66cdc1383ef7a457083%2F0_0_1996_2996%2F1996.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%3A%20The%20year%20of%20living%20precariously&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Fdec%2F26%2F2016-year-ahead-living-precariously-politics-sport-arts-environment-science%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%3A%20The%20year%20of%20living%20precariously&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Fdec%2F26%2F2016-year-ahead-living-precariously-politics-sport-arts-environment-science%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee653b59bac3370a1b72f66cdc1383ef7a457083%2F0_0_1996_2996%2F1996.jpg>
 Vetements is challenging the way we think about clothes. Photograph: Kay-Paris 
Fernandes/Getty Images 
Demna Gvasalia – the unassuming Georgian at the helm of Vetements, the cult 
Parisian design collective – will present hisfirst collection for Balenciaga 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/news/2015/10/07/balenciaga-new-designer-demna-gvasalia-of-vetements>
 in March. Not only does his appointment signal a new direction for one of 
fashion’s most historic and influential houses, it also highlights wider 
preoccupations about the way that we think about clothes and what the role of a 
fashion designer should be.

Gvasalia has recently been eulogised by those in the know for producing 
weirdly fascinating designs –reconstructed fire service T-shirts 
<http://www.vogue.com/fashion-shows/fall-2015-ready-to-wear/vetements/slideshow/collection#3>
 andfloral plastic-coated aprons 
<http://www.vogue.com/fashion-shows/spring-2016-ready-to-wear/vetements/slideshow/collection#15>
 – at Vetements, a label that has wowed the industry while confounding its 
expectations. While most fashion houses aim to create dreams and narratives 
with their collections, Vetements focuses on the nuts and bolts of products. 
While others look to esoteric references and exotic illusions, Vetements takes 
inspiration from the street. And while most Parisian fashion houses present 
their collections in the sumptuous antechambers of historic buildings, 
Vetements’ shows feature non-professional male and female models in slightly 
grubby venues – most recently drawing fashion editors and Kanye West to an 
out-of-town Chinese restaurant. “For me, fashion is something practical,” 
Gvasalia recently told fashion trade journalWWD. “It’s made to be worn rather 
than to change things, otherwise you will be an artist.I think and consider 
myself more like a dress-making brand 
<http://wwd.com/fashion-news/fashion-features/demna-gvasalia-balenciage-vetements-10279574/>
.”

Perhaps the biggest departure from the norm is Vetements’ collaborative ethos: 
the label is a collection of almost 20 designers, from all corners of the 
world, many of whom – like Gvasalia – previously worked at Maison Martin 
Margiela. This ego-free approach to running a label is at odds with the more 
traditional model of razzle-dazzle showman designer as the sun around which the 
rest of the team must orbit. Gvasalia’s predecessor at Balenciaga, Alexander 
Wang, was a young, well-connected selfie-snapping designer with the world’s 
best-known model on speed dial. Tellingly, when François-Henri Pinault, boss at 
Balenciaga’s parent company, Kering, announced Gvasalia’s appointment, he 
praised him for remaining “humble and rigorous in his creative work”.

Hiring a “humble” designer to focus on clothes, not fanfare, is something much 
of the industry is now considering following the huge and unexpected success of 
thehitherto unknown Alessandro Michele at Gucci 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/sep/23/alessandro-michele-gucci-milan-fashion-week>
. After a raft of departures at fashion’s biggest names in 2015 –Raf Simons 
left Dior 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/dec/10/dior-the-rise-of-the-in-house-design-team>
 in the hands of its in-house creative team in October; Lanvin is short of a 
creative director after theacrimonious departure of Alber Elbaz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/oct/28/alber-elba-leave-lanvin-fashion-14-years-creative-director>
 – the big question will be whether these houses will turn to similarly 
under-the-radar names to safeguard their futures. In any case, the biggest 
fashion buzzwords of 2016 – modesty, anonymity, industry – are likely to be 
delivered in a whisper.

ECONOMICS

Phillip Inman forecasts another year of rising house prices and low interest 
rates

George Osborne has set a path for steady expansion built on slightly looser 
austerity (after the Lords’ tax credit victory), ushering in another year of 
surging house prices and the likelihood of a bumper year for migrants after 
Britain reached another employment milestone in 2015 – a record 31 million 
people in work. Net migration surged past the 300,000 barrier this year and is 
expected to do so again in 2016.

As usual, house prices will be a major talking point, largely as a result of 
Britain’s stuck-in-the-mud housebuilding industry and ultra-low interest rates. 
Ministers have, with little to show for their efforts, tackled one supply-side 
blockage after another in an effort to boost house building.

As most people in the industry recognise, a doubling of the current 130,000 
new homes a year to meet new targets is going to need a massive injection of 
funding to the public sector and housing associations, which is not planned 
until 2020.

Another spur for house prices will be the Bank of England’s ultra-low interest 
rates, which will stay in place for another year. There may be a rise of 0.25 
percentage points in line with the recent US rate increase, but that is 
unlikely to deter first-time buyers.

Nesta, the innovation thinktank, said in its look ahead to 2016 that the pace 
of change in the economy is only likely to get faster. It said some 
headline-grabbing companies, which have disrupted longstanding rivals to make 
their profits, are going to be disrupted themselves. It believes the likes of 
Amazon, eBay, Uber and the Chinese trading site Alibaba, which have done so 
much to undermine the revenues of high street shops and traditional black cabs, 
could come under attack from software that dispenses with the need for 
intermediaries.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Fdec%2F26%2F2016-year-ahead-living-precariously-politics-sport-arts-environment-science%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca366748af8857f106777482e09197a5a4689ff1%2F0_0_5033_3019%2F5033.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%3A%20The%20year%20of%20living%20precariously&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Fdec%2F26%2F2016-year-ahead-living-precariously-politics-sport-arts-environment-science%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%3A%20The%20year%20of%20living%20precariously&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2015%2Fdec%2F26%2F2016-year-ahead-living-precariously-politics-sport-arts-environment-science%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca366748af8857f106777482e09197a5a4689ff1%2F0_0_5033_3019%2F5033.jpg>
 A significant increase in new homes building will be needed as net migration 
continues to grow. Photograph: David Burton/Alamy 
“What if there were a technological solution to fully disintermediate between 
people wishing to transact with each other?” it asks. “A way of directly 
transacting with anyone, in a way that was invulnerable to fraud, in a system 
that nobody actually owned, so no one took a commission?” That day is not far 
off.

Solar power is another “disruptive” that Osborne decided might disturb his 
plans for mass fracking in the north, west and across the South Downs. The 
chancellor cut the subsidies to solar generators by 65%; he originally proposed 
slashing them by 85%. But solar panels can now be made so cheaply that they 
will become an ordinary sight in many countries, especially those within 30 
degrees of the equator.

• This article was amended on 28 December 2015. 2016 marks the 400th 
anniversary of Sharkespeare’s death, not his birth as we had it in the original 
version of this story.
 