
You could not have predicted, looking at the January 2016 issue of British 
Vogue, that this was the dawn of most tumultuous year in its century-long 
history. Gigi Hadid smiled out from her first cover, wholesomely covered-up in 
a weather-appropriate Breton-striped knit and classic black leather jacket, 
while coverlines promised to help you in the traditional post-Christmas 
challenge to find your waist and to discover the best cold-weather skincare. So 
far, so Vogue.

Traditionally, it is the European editions that get the magazine’s name in the 
headlines. The nipple count in any summer issue of French Vogue is enough to 
get the internet hot under the collar on any slow news day, although nothing 
can match the furore around the infamous 2010 shoot featuring 
primary-school-age girls in heavy eye makeup, low-cut dresses and high heels. 
Italian Vogue got into hot water in 2012 for a “Haute Mess” shoot, which drew 
accusations of racism for its dabbling in the imagery of ghetto fabulousness; 
two years earlier, Steven Meisel shot Kristen McMenamy as a glamorously dead 
bird, an homage to the animals killed by the Deepwater Horizon oil spill which 
wasn’t to everyone’s taste.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2F2016-the-year-that-vogue-went-rogue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F103ace8d7f3ff01598ae40b38fa1975b3fef28c3%2F0_0_3898_3139%2F3898.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%3A%20the%20year%20that%20Vogue%20went%20rogue&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2F2016-the-year-that-vogue-went-rogue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%3A%20the%20year%20that%20Vogue%20went%20rogue&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2F2016-the-year-that-vogue-went-rogue%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F103ace8d7f3ff01598ae40b38fa1975b3fef28c3%2F0_0_3898_3139%2F3898.jpg>
 Alexandra Shulman in a promotional shot for Absolutely Fashion: Inside British 
Vogue.
 Photograph: Linda Brownlee/BBC/Lightbox Entertainment/Linda Brownlee 
But in 2016 the upset became the norm, and this year it was the British and 
American issues of Vogue ruffling feathers. British Vogue pulled off an 
audacious centenary coup in landing the Duchess of Cambridge in her first ever 
turn as a cover girl. This seemingly inoffensive portrait of a smiling young 
royal in a sensible hat was to become the focus of controversy. Critics seized 
on it as dull and lacking in edge – unflattering comparisons were made with 
Princess Diana’s seminal 1991 cover, The cloak-and-dagger manoeuvring to keep 
the royal cover a secret lent a distinctly frosty edge to the BBC’s Inside 
Vogue documentary. Programme maker Richard Macer took offence at what he felt 
to be a breakdown of trust with editor Alex Shulman, with the result that the 
neutral tone usual for a fly on the wall documentary shifted into something 
unexpectedly cantankerous.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2F2016-the-year-that-vogue-went-rogue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0ca02cfc36da07fb3cea720fec0f0d81d0e6a97%2F0_0_1856_2784%2F1856.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%3A%20the%20year%20that%20Vogue%20went%20rogue&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2F2016-the-year-that-vogue-went-rogue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%3A%20the%20year%20that%20Vogue%20went%20rogue&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2F2016-the-year-that-vogue-went-rogue%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0ca02cfc36da07fb3cea720fec0f0d81d0e6a97%2F0_0_1856_2784%2F1856.jpg>
 Anna Wintour attends Hillary Victory Fund - Stronger Together concert in 
October. Photograph: James Devaney/GC Images  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2F2016-the-year-that-vogue-went-rogue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7af6f6afdb72e0beea019d062793a47293809dfa%2F0_0_2350_3000%2F2350.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%3A%20the%20year%20that%20Vogue%20went%20rogue&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2F2016-the-year-that-vogue-went-rogue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%3A%20the%20year%20that%20Vogue%20went%20rogue&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2F2016-the-year-that-vogue-went-rogue%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7af6f6afdb72e0beea019d062793a47293809dfa%2F0_0_2350_3000%2F2350.jpg>
 Hillary Rodham Clinton and Anna Wintour in Arkansas. Photograph: Wesley 
Hitt/Getty Images 
Meanwhile, uptown: never one to be outdone, Anna Wintour was the subject of 
another documentary, the feature-length First Monday in May, which followed the 
development of the 2015 Costume Institute Exhibition and its mega opening 
party, the Met Gala. That film underscored the alpha status of Wintour, who 
effortlessly stole the show despite sharing the screen with Rihanna and Kanye 
West. In one memorable scene, Wintour bats away the concerns of museum 
employees who question the necessity of closing a wing of New York’s largest 
museum for an entire Sunday for rehearsals, with a haughty and decisive 
statement that “the public will come back next week.” And while Wintour is 
certainly dragon lady in chief, her staff have joined her in breathing fire 
this year. Just in case the impression left by Emily Blunt and co in The Devil 
Wears Prada that the American Vogue office is inhabited by the scariest women 
on planet earth was in danger of fading, senior staffers used an innocuous 
fashion week wrap-up as a platform for a diatribe against bloggers, calling 
them “pathetic.”

Sadly, Vogue’s influence has its limits. Even the first-ever endorsement of a 
presidential candidate by Vogue could not win the election for Hillary Clinton. 
Which means that having spent the last eight years closely allied with the 
White House, Wintour’s Vogue enters 2017 as something of an enemy of Trump’s 
state. Watch this space.
 