
Publishing

Authentic voices and undiluted stories
By Jonny Geller

The great thing about living through such a turbulent year as 2016 is that all 
bets are off in terms of what people will want to read in 2017. All we thought 
we knew about how people think, receive news and trust authority has changed. 
This must, and will, have a direct impact on what stories we want to read. Will 
it lead to more escapism? Or, conversely, will we seek complexity and 
disruption to make sense of the new order? After the first world war, modernism 
sprang up, and after 11 September there was an explosion of superhero franchise 
movies. Big moments in history are reflected back on us through our culture.

Fear is always a good starting point. On television, Westworld, Humans and Mr 
Robot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/19/rise-of-the-robots-how-tech-took-over-tv-in-2016>
 all showed up our fears of a world run by artificial intelligence or by 
computers out of control. Culture reflects our deepest fears, so I imagine 
publishing will be looking for worlds where our deepest desires, fears and 
impulses are released; where repressed forces come to the fore.

Publishing, like Hollywood, is intensely reactive. Something unlikely will 
become a success and then define the next wave.Dan Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/28/dan-brown-returns-to-da-vinci-decoder-for-new-novel-origins>
 caught the wave of uncertainty post 9/11 with thrillers that linked us back to 
a mythical past, unlocking secrets to reveal more about who we thought we were.
Gillian Flynn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/may/01/gillian-flynn-bestseller-gone-girl-misogyny>
,Paula Hawkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/21/the-girl-on-the-train-paula-hawkins-new-gone-girl-female-thriller-authors-gillian-flynn>
 and evenEL James 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/18/fifty-shades-of-grey-the-series-that-tied-publishing-up-in-knots>
 unlocked our darkest, most intimate feelings about our own domestic 
arrangements.

I think the next big idea will be a move toward authentic voices and 
experiences. I think people will want undiluted stories that reflect their 
lives, experiences and emotions, unfiltered. I believe, too, that voices from 
outside the urban centres will push their way through the white, middle-class 
wall of London publishing. Alongside this, there is also growing evidence of 
more hyperrealism, and satires being written; of naturalism (similar to the 
wave in theatre in late-19th century) where big issues will be explored in a 
recognisable setting. I am very excited by possibilities of 2017 as writers 
reflect the changes in narrative form.

Jonny Geller is a writer, book agent and joint chief executive of Curtis 
Brown, the literary and talent agency.

UK politics

The rise of a northern Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> 
party
By John Harris

A statement of the bleeding obvious, to start with. The Labour party is in a 
mess: apparently sliding towards the mid-20s in the polls, reeling from its 
poor showing in recent byelections, and riven by a split between supporters of
Jeremy Corbyn and many Labour MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/20/mps-plotted-coup-jeremy-corbyn-coup-where-are-they-now>
. Most of all, it is spooked by what happened in the EU referendum, when most 
of its traditional “core” areas voted for Brexit, highlighting both the 
cultural gap between the party’s supposed heartlands – south Wales and the 
north of England – and the potential threat to Labour from Ukip, and/or the 
“people’s movement” that will be launched in the new year by the Brexit 
mega-donor Arron Banks.

So far, this tension hasn’t been reflected in any clear factional divides 
inside the party, but in 2017 that will change. In May, there will be a handful 
of elections for England’s new metropolitan mayors, including a contest in 
Greater Manchester. There, Labour’s dead-cert candidate is the twice-failed 
leadership candidate Andy Burnham, who has decided to call time on his 
Westminster career and have a crack at leading a swath of the country with a 
population of 2.8 million. And in the buildup to the campaign, with the tacit 
support of some MPs, he has come up with a new definition of what he wants to 
represent: “Northern Labour” – which, he says, “needs to speak very directly to 
people and represent them properly in terms of the way [they] think and feel”.

This does not take much decoding. While Corbyn and his inner circle have 
rejected any calls for Labour to sound tougher on immigration, Burnham has been 
on manoeuvres, controversially claiming that Labour’s stance is undermining 
“the safety of our streets” and the vote to leave the EU was partly about “more 
control in our immigration system”. What he and his allies are aiming at is 
pretty clear: an offshoot of the Labour party that will try to reconnect with 
its lost territories, will often speak with a self-consciously working-class 
voice and brazenly position itself against London. How this will sit with a 
cosmopolitan, 21st-century city such as Manchester remains unclear. But be in 
no doubt: in contrast to the Corbyn version, a different vision of Labour’s 
future is about to take root 200 miles from the capital, with big political 
consequences.

John Harris is a journalist and author who writes for the Guardian about 
politics, popular culture and music.

Fashion

All hail Statue of Liberty green
By Jess Cartner-Morley
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2F2017-big-ideas-part-two-northern-labour-party-fighting-cancer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff60884722a25798a2919046c94b092225e111626%2F0_0_2606_3909%2F2606.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2017%E2%80%99s%20big%20ideas%20%E2%80%93%20part%20two%3A%20from%20a%20northern%20Labour%20party%20to%20fighting%20cancer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2F2017-big-ideas-part-two-northern-labour-party-fighting-cancer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2017%E2%80%99s%20big%20ideas%20%E2%80%93%20part%20two%3A%20from%20a%20northern%20Labour%20party%20to%20fighting%20cancer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2F2017-big-ideas-part-two-northern-labour-party-fighting-cancer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff60884722a25798a2919046c94b092225e111626%2F0_0_2606_3909%2F2606.jpg>
 An Emilia Wickstead dress at London fashion week. Photograph: Estrop/Getty 
Images 
We have passed peak avocado, but the colour wheel has not spun far. The shade 
of 2017 will be Statue of Liberty green. The colour came into focus in 
September, when theNew Yorker ran a lyrical piece 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/09/19/the-statue-of-libertys-beguiling-green>
 in praise of New York City’s “secret, sustaining colour”. Soon, the colour was 
everywhere: in thehigh-necked, floor-length dress 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/shows/spring-summer-2017-ready-to-wear/emilia-wickstead/collection/>
 that opened the Emilia Wickstead show at London fashion week;painted on the 
walls 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/shows/spring-summer-2017-ready-to-wear/jw-anderson/collection/>
 at the JW Anderson show.

In naming the wasabi-hued “greenery” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/dec/08/pantones-greenery-can-it-bring-hope-and-colour-to-2017>
 its symbolic colour of 2017, Pantone championed the power of green “to provide 
us with the reassurance we yearn for amid a tumultuous social and political 
environment”. In nature, green represents hope and renewal. Our green, however, 
is a touch more complicated. At a time when US politics has become larger than 
life, breaking out of its Washington bubble to touch every part of popular 
culture, Statue of Liberty green is a political colour. That the copper statue 
had turned from brown to green within 20 years of its unveiling in 1886 means 
that this colour stands for change and the unstoppability of decay. So, while 
the symbol is everywhere – the Starbucks logo, if you ask me,although they are 
coy about it <https://www.starbucks.com/blog/so-who-is-the-siren> – it can 
stand for despair as well as pride. In the aftermath of November’s election, a 
crying Statue of Liberty, and riffs on the Planet of the Apes image of the 
statue half-buried in the sand, became popular anti-Trump memes on social media.

Statue of Liberty green is a colour that no one planned – indeed, when the 
oxidisation process became evident, politicians argued over whether a paint job 
was called for – and that changed our landscape. It is the colour of endurance 
and of change. It stands for “American values” and for liberal ones. (The 
inscription on the pedestal, after all, includes the lines: “Give me your 
tired, your poor / Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free.”) It is a 
colour nobody saw coming, and one that represents conflicting views. What could 
be more 2017?

Jess Cartner-Morley is the Guardian’s associate editor, fashion.

Cancer

Immunology brings successes and sobering news
By Siddhartha Mukherjee

Can the human body be taught to reject cancer cells? The biggest idea in 
cancer this year – and perhaps the most exhilarating idea in all of medicine – 
was that a dormant immune system could be roused to attack cancer.

It is an idea with a tortured history. In the 1890s, William Coley, a New York 
scientist and surgeon, had proposed injecting cancer patients with a mixture of 
bacterial toxins (called Coley’s toxins) to elicit animmune response that would 
attack cancer cells 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/06/what-is-immunotherapy>. But 
Coley’s initial results were hard to interpret and reproduce, and enthusiasm 
for the toxins waned. When I began to study immunology at Oxford in the 1990s, 
the field of cancer immunology was, frankly, languishing in neglect.

In the late 90s, however, the discipline took a surprising turn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jun/01/immunotherapy-the-big-new-hope-for-cancer-treatment>
: scientists working on the immune system (led, particularly, by the visionary 
immunologist James Allison) began to discover that some tumour cells expressed 
specific factors to inactivate the immune system or render themselves invisible 
to immune cells. These invisibility proteins offered an opportunity for a 
counter-attack: specific factors were created to inactivate these cloaking 
signals so that tumours would become visible again. The first such drugs were 
deployed against melanomas, and some patients showed durable responses, albeit 
with severe side-effects.

Since those initial trials, dozens of strategies to activate the immune system 
have been discovered, and fleets of new immunomodulatory drugs have appeared in 
the clinic. In another twist on the same theme, a patient’s own immune cells 
were brought out of the body, manipulated with gene therapy to arm them to 
attack cancer cells, and reintroduced to the patient. These cells grow in the 
body once reintroduced, making them exemplars of a new generation of “living 
drugs”, as Michel Sadelain, one of the pioneers of this strategy, has described 
them.

Immunotherapy for cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/04/revolutionary-drug-immune-system-advanced-cancer>
 has had some sentinel successes – notably against melanoma, lung cancer, 
lymphomas and some leukemias. But this year also brought sobering news about 
unexpected side-effects of these drugs: patients suffered inexplicable fevers 
or life-threatening colitis. Broader questions about efficacy and cost remain. 
Are these drugs going to be useful to treat only a small fraction of tumours? 
How much will they cost – and can that be contained?

One strange effect of immunotherapy is that tumours can often swell and become 
larger during the early course of treatment, as immune cells infiltrate the 
tumours and create inflammation. For decades, the traditional metric to judge 
tumour responsiveness was to measure the size of the tumour – yet here the 
cancers seemed to grow before some of them finally responded to the therapy. 
Will traditional metrics of tumour responsiveness need to be re-evaluated with 
immunotherapy? How will we understand why and when these cancers relapse – and 
can the immune system be retrained, over and over, to attack such perennially 
evolving cancers?

Siddhartha Mukherjee is an assistant professor of medicine at Columbia 
University and the Pulitzer prize-winning author of books including The Gene 
and The Emperor of All Maladies: A Biography of Cancer.

Restaurants

The rise of regional bistro culture
By Angela Hartnett

London is not the centre of the universe any more, and what we are seeing and 
– I hope – will continue to see is more chefs moving out of the city and 
encouraging the growth of local restaurants, which can have positive effects on 
places and communities, and which increase access to good, affordable food.

Gary Usher has done this really well with Sticky Walnut in Chester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/feb/14/sticky-walnut-chester-restaurant-review>
. Then, he crowdfunded the next two –Burnt Truffle on the Wirral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/20/burnt-truffle-restaurant-review-wirral-jay-rayner>
 and now Hispi in south Manchester. They are affordable little bistros that do 
really well.

Mitch Tonks is doing it brilliantly, too. He started with The Seahorse in 
Dartmouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/aug/24/restaurants.foodanddrink> 
and has opened Rockfish restaurants in seaside towns. And if someone starts it 
off, other things happen – so there’s now a crab festival and a food festival 
in Dartmouth. It happened in Abergavenny, too, starting withthe Walnut Tree 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/mar/22/foodanddrink.restaurants>.

We should have affordable restaurants throughout the country. But to make a 
restaurant work as a business, you have to be busy on a wet Tuesday night, not 
just twice a week. That’s hard to do, but with a bit of effort and imagination, 
it is possible.

Angela Hartnett is a chef and chef-patron at Murano, her Michelin-starred 
restaurant in London.

Geopolitics

A new ideological spectrum 
By Chris Anderson
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2F2017-big-ideas-part-two-northern-labour-party-fighting-cancer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04c16125f6638ec5ee004f5677d4481f476145e2%2F618_0_2147_5510%2F2147.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2017%E2%80%99s%20big%20ideas%20%E2%80%93%20part%20two%3A%20from%20a%20northern%20Labour%20party%20to%20fighting%20cancer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2F2017-big-ideas-part-two-northern-labour-party-fighting-cancer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2017%E2%80%99s%20big%20ideas%20%E2%80%93%20part%20two%3A%20from%20a%20northern%20Labour%20party%20to%20fighting%20cancer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2F2017-big-ideas-part-two-northern-labour-party-fighting-cancer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04c16125f6638ec5ee004f5677d4481f476145e2%2F618_0_2147_5510%2F2147.jpg>
 Donald Trump in Tampa, Florida. Photograph: Gregg Newton/AFP/Getty Images 
We have just ended a year of political shock. Thanks to Brexit and Trump, the 
comfy consensus around an ever-more global, tech-powered world delivering 
bounty to all has been blown up. And the old political left-right spectrum has 
been replaced by a new spectrum. Some would sneeringly call it that of tribal v 
global, xenophobic v embracing, backward v forward. But there is a more 
generous, more productive, framing: protect v connect.

From that standpoint, the mistake made by the political/capitalist status quo 
these past years has been that in rushing towards an ever-more connected world, 
we failed to protect. We let millions of people come to fear the loss of their 
jobs, their dreams, and the cultural norms with which they were familiar. And 
in the process, aided by an out-of-control social media landscape, we have 
become disgusted by each other.

We urgently need new ways to find common ground and recreate a vision for the 
future worth pursuing. The jolt has been dramatic enough that it has sparked 
numerous ideas to help achieve this. At a minimum, it’s going to take:

⇾ An assault on fake news. The knowledge era needs knowledge, not clickbait. 
Look for new, self-correcting systems that tap into crowd wisdom, not 
mob-powered rumour-mongering.


⇾ A vision for the future of meaningful work for humans in a world filled by 
increasingly intelligent agents.

⇾ Education reforms that prepare our kids to thrive in that future.

⇾ New economic ideas, such as universal basic income.

⇾ A new articulation of globalist thinking. It should not be driven by 
faceless global elites, but by individuals connecting with each other across 
the planet and discovering just how much we can learn from each other.

Once we can start listening to each other again, there is a real discussion to 
be had on how we avoid sleepwalking into a future that humanity can’t handle. 
We want to be amazed and delighted. But not to lose our souls in the process. 
Let’s get that conversation rebooted!


Chris Anderson is a former technology publisher and the owner of TED 
<https://www.ted.com/> (technology, entertainment, design), the global 
conference and media initiative.

Human rights

An app to record abuse anonymously
By Helena Kennedy

I co-chair the International Bar Association’s Institute of Human Rights, 
which champions the rule of law and human rights around the world. Next year, 
we shall launch a fabulous new tool that will help in the pursuit of justice 
for breaches of human rights. It will make it possible, for those who witness 
horrifying events, to film and document them and thensend them to an archive 
for use as evidence in trials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/08/eyewitness-to-atrocities-the-app-aimed-at-bringing-war-criminals-to-justice>
. The phone app, for which the IBA director, Mark Ellis, found the funding, 
will allow people to film ghastly stuff and then send the footage directly to a 
repository.

The time and location coordinates of filming will be attached at the time, 
helping to later validate the film. The immediate depositing of the film means 
there can be no accusations of tampering or editing. A second tap of the app 
will remove the film from the phone that was used to make the recording, so 
that the owner cannot be caught in possession of incriminating material.

This development came as a result of people sending anonymous film to news 
outlets; without authentication of place and time and proof of 
non-interference, the IBA has been struggling with the issue of admissibility 
of such evidence in a court of law. This will be an exciting development that 
will help prove that abuses happen all too often.

Another sign of hope for 2017: people are sensibly talking about the creation 
of progressive alliances 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/28/is-progressive-alliance-only-way-stop-hard-right-populism>
 to combat the ghastly politics of this government. We should all see that this 
is the way to go.

Helena Kennedy is a QC and member of the House of Lords.

Scientific research 

Gene editing brings a world of extraordinary possibilities
By Henry Marsh

I wouldn’t be so bold as to predict any immediate big breakthroughs in medical 
neuroscience, but in an increasingly depressing and frightening world, I derive 
great pleasure, solace and a sense of wonder from the constant advance of 
science.

One of the great things about science is that it turns up ideas and solutions 
that are novel, and sometimes unexpected – and I find that spiritually 
uplifting in a very worrying world politically, socially and environmentally. 
Who would have thought thatParkinson’s disease is probably caused by gut 
bacteria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/aug/25/gut-reaction-surprising-power-of-microbes>
, or thata feathered dinosaur tail would be found in a piece of amber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/dec/08/dinosaur-tail-trapped-in-amber-offers-insights-into-feather-evolution>
, preserved for 99m years? These are both recent discoveries.

Then there are the extraordinary opportunities that Crispr gene-editing 
technology <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CRISPR> has opened and the potential 
for it to help us defeat a whole range of incurable illnesses. Of course, what 
is desperately needed is an effective cure or prevention for Alzheimer’s, and a 
lot of people are working extremely hard on that.

I think a lot of non-scientists struggle to understand that there is a deep 
spiritual and mystical element to science, just as there is in mathematics.A 
good mathematical proof is elegant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/nov/21/magic-numbers-can-maths-equations-be-beautiful>
, an object of aesthetic beauty that appeals to a deep level of the psyche. The 
idea of a division between the emotional and the rational is totally false. 
Doctors think with feelings rather than in terms of pure abstract, 
dispassionate processes; we are not calculating machines.

This helps because it helps fuel progress in science, which is unstoppable - 
and it has to be. I don’t want to be Pollyanna-ish about it, but I think we 
have to be positive about the future because if we’re not, bad things will 
certainly happen. If we think the future is bound to be awful, we won’t do 
anything about it.

We have to think positively and act positively rather than be carried away 
with despair.

Henry Marsh is a pioneering British neurosurgeon and the author of the 
bestselling book Do No Harm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/30/do-no-harm-stories-brain-surgery-review-henry-marsh>
.










Part one: from driverless cars to interstellar travel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2017/jan/02/big-ideas-2017-driverless-cars-interstellar-travel-invention>

 * This article was amended on 4 January 2017 to correct our wording of the 
inscription on the pedestal of the Statue of Liberty. The “huddled masses” are 
“yearning to breathe free”, not “break free”, as we had it.  