
Transport 

Mass production of driverless cars 
By Jimmy Wales

The human brain is an amazing machine. It can make an unperceivable number of 
calculations a second. This outstanding ability is widely implemented during 
one of the most neurologically challenging actions people are engaged with on a 
daily basis: driving.

Several areas of the brain act in collaboration in order to receive, process, 
prioritise and implement real-time data perceived during driving. These complex 
processes may pass unnoticed by the driver, but their uninterrupted functioning 
is crucial.

The difference between life and death might be determined by a delay of only 
100 milliseconds in response time. At high speeds, this micro timeframe can 
translate into several feet, which may in turn be the difference between 
avoiding danger and a fatal crash. Such a minor delay may be caused by any 
minimal distraction: a sudden noise, a quick glance at the phone or a random 
thought.

So what I am most excited about for 2017 is the groundbreaking invention that 
has the ability to minimise these dangers and potentially save millions of 
lives on the road:driverless cars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/self-driving-cars>.

We are getting closer than we thought, faster than we imagined, to having mass 
production of safe and reliable driverless cars. Many people have heard about 
this innovation, but not many realise how fast it is coming and how 
dramatically it is going to change society.

In 2016, it is estimated that worldwide automobile accidents claimed the lives 
of more than 1.1 million people, while more than 31 million people were 
injured. Once this technology is commonplace and driverless cars are 
ubiquitous, those numbers will shrink to a tiny fraction of what they are today.

The social impact will be even greater, to an extent that is very hard to 
fully imagine right now. Driverless cars will make car-sharing so much easier 
and more efficient that we could make do with 80% fewer cars. That would 
translate into less environmental pollution by decreased fuel consumption, less 
traffic congestion, fewer hours wasted on the roads and less need for car 
parks. Roads could be laid out very differently, making traffic more efficient 
and safer for passengers and pedestrians.

Modern technology excels in saving us precious time and making our daily lives 
easier. The next technological innovation will also make our roads much safer.

Jimmy Wales is an American internet entrepreneur and the co-founder of 
Wikipedia and Wikia.

Diet 

Food goes back to basics
By Thomasina Miers

The past few years has been all about fad diets, cutting out food groups, and 
buying expensive ingredients to chase superfoods and super health. None of this 
is realistic. And after a year in which our foundations have been rocked, I 
feel that dieting adds an unhealthy uncertainty to our lives that we really 
don’t need.

Food should not be about denial, guilt or killing ourselves. It is about 
nurturing, comfort and spending time with people who are important to us. It is 
about comradeship and community and breaking down barriers. We need that more 
than ever.

Next year will be about simplifying and going back to basics in the kitchen. 
The healthiest way to eat is to go as close to the source as possible. Lots of 
vegetables, which are cheap; lots of grains and beans. Meat only occasionally, 
and when it has been well looked after. My point isn’t that we spend hours or a 
fortune in the kitchen, just that we adopt an old-fashioned approach where we 
avoid processed food. I have three children and zero spare time, but we eat 
well. Dinner is often just kale sauteed in garlic and olive oil on toast with a 
fried egg on top.

I think we’ll see this in restaurants, too. When was the last time you heard 
anyone raving about a 20-course tasting menu? It feels as though that is from 
the last decade. Now it’s all short menus and home cooking and milk from cows 
who might actually have eaten some grass in their lives. There is a comfort in 
that, and I think it plays into deeper insecurities many of us are experiencing.

Thomasina Miers is a cook, food writer and broadcaster, and the founder of the 
Wahaca chain of Mexican restaurants.

Astronomy

The Cassini misson’s grand finale from Saturn
By Jim Al-Khalili
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fbig-ideas-2017-driverless-cars-interstellar-travel-invention%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F044cb3d10a921d3e06e897a0df8230fbcd2cf0f8%2F247_0_2271_1364%2F2271.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2017%E2%80%99s%20big%20ideas%20%E2%80%93%20part%20one%3A%20from%20driverless%20cars%20to%20interstellar%20travel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fbig-ideas-2017-driverless-cars-interstellar-travel-invention%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2017%E2%80%99s%20big%20ideas%20%E2%80%93%20part%20one%3A%20from%20driverless%20cars%20to%20interstellar%20travel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fbig-ideas-2017-driverless-cars-interstellar-travel-invention%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F044cb3d10a921d3e06e897a0df8230fbcd2cf0f8%2F247_0_2271_1364%2F2271.jpg>
 An image of Saturn from the Cassini mission. Photograph: Nasa/AP 
When it comes to physics and astronomy, there have been a number of important 
stories in recent years that captured the public’s imagination. Look no further 
than the discovery of the Higgs boson at the Large Hadron Collider in 2012 or 
the first detection of gravitational waves in 2016: ripples in the fabric of 
space itself due to the collision of two black holes more than a billion light 
years away. Cool stuff. And who knows what might be just around the corner? 
While I cannot predict what discoveries will be made in 2017, I can say with 
some confidence that there is one science story guaranteed to make waves around 
the world.

Of all the planets in the solar system, Saturn, with its beautiful rings, is 
without doubt the most enigmatic and mysterious, and in recent years we’ve had 
the privilege of being able to study it up close and personal thanks to the 
pictures beamed back to us by the Cassini spacecraft.

The Cassini mission to the giant planet has provided us with jaw-droppingly 
stunning colour images of Saturn’s surface, its rings and its many moons. And 
we’ve also made some astonishing discoveries. For example, it has revealed jets 
of water vapour and organic material shooting out of the south pole of 
Enceladus, creating tremendous excitement that this tiny moon might even be 
able to support microbial life beneath its icy surface.

But rest assured, the best is yet to come. In 2017, Cassini will come to the 
end of its mission, 20 years after it was launched in 1997. Nasa is calling 
this the Grand Finale, and it’s going to be pretty spectacular … In tighter and 
tighter orbits, over several weeks, the spacecraft is going to squeeze inside 
the innermost ring, skimming the surface of the planet ever more closely before 
finally disappearing beneath the clouds and plummeting to its death.

For the Nasa scientists, it is going to be a huge challenge to collect as much 
data as possible during those final days, and there is no guarantee that 
Cassini’s instruments will work in the increasingly hostile conditions. They 
are hoping it will continue to beam back what it sees for as long as it can 
before being ultimately crushed by the incredible density and pressure within 
the gas giant. Cue tingles down spines, lumps in throats and tears in eyes all 
round.

Jim Al-Khalili is a broadcaster and a professor of physics and public 
engagement in science at the University of Surrey.

Environment

A solution for overfishing
By Sir James Dyson

2017 promises to be an exciting year for SafetyNet, a fishing net with a 
series of escape rings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/nov/08/humane-fishing-net-dyson-award>
 that help prevent young and endangered fish being caught. The invention, which 
is engineered by Dan Watson, won the James Dyson award in 2012 because it helps 
to address the very real problem of overfishing.

SafetyNet exploits the escape behaviour of fish. Small and medium-sized fish 
swim upwards when stressed, whereas larger fish tend to swim downwards. 
SafetyNet has illuminated escape rings on its top side, which act like an 
emergency exit sign for the smaller fish. Water flowing through the wide-open 
meshes guides them to freedom, while the larger ones are retained in the net.

Since winning the award, SafetyNet has been getting ever closer to making a 
global impact. Trials show that the number of undesired fish caught is reduced 
by more than half when SafetyNet is used. With trials set to continue around 
the world in 2017, I hope that the next round of testing will continue to build 
awareness of the terrible problem of overfishing.

In 2017, SafetyNet technology will also go on sale to fishermen for the first 
time, with the first batches available in the middle of the year. But Watson 
also has his sights set on influencing the wider industry for the better. He 
will give a presentation on the topic of overfishing to the directorate-general 
for maritime affairs and fisheries in Brussels, to attract the attention of 
industry regulators and potentially shape future legislation.

Nearly half of fish caught are thrown back into the sea because they are not 
suitable to be sold, and many don’t survive. If a significant number of young 
fish are being killed unnecessarily, this has an impact on the overall fish 
population. The best inventions use engineering and technology to solve 
existing problems and make the world a better place. SafetyNet shows how young 
graduates such as Watson can tackle global issues, all too often ignored by 
established industries, in new and inventive ways.

James Dyson is a British inventor and industrial designer, and the founder of 
Dyson.

Neuroscience


Neural networks and their effect on Alzheimer’s disease
By Prof May-Britt Moser

In this post-fact era, I believe that scientists’ engagement with society will 
be more important than ever before. We need to do our part in building public 
trust in science, by ensuring that our papers and talks are as solid and true 
to data as possible, but also by making sure the knowledge we produce is made 
accessible for people.

I am excited about the novel results from our lab that we will share with the 
world in 2017. In our everyday lives, we rely on our ability to navigate and 
remember. Inside the brain, these cognitive functions have a physiological 
correlate as specific patterns of activity among nerve cells. Networks of 
communicating nerve cells form activity maps that each give rise to a specific 
function. In 2017, we will share new insights into the emergence and maturation 
of the cells and neural networks that give rise to higher cognitive functions 
like self-location and memory. These cells are also ground zero, and the very 
first to be affected by neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s. Knowing 
about how these cells develop into functional networks, giving rise to 
cognition and behavior, may help us understand what goes wrong when memory and 
navigation breaks down in people who are diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease.

May-Britt Moser is a Nobel prize-winning psychologist and neuroscientist at 
the Norwegian University of Science and Technology in Trondheim.

The arts

The documenta exhibition revives the notion of utopia for a dystopian world
By Stefan Kalmár

In 1955, art professor and curator Arnold Bode founded the documenta art 
exhibition in the West German city of Kassel, once considered by Hitler for the 
German capital.

Documenta was originally initiated to introduce, or rather reintroduce, art 
formerly branded by the Nazis as degenerate to the postwar German public. This 
exhibition has, over the past 61 years, becomethe Olympus of all exhibitions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2002/jul/23/artsfeatures>. It is not a 
biennial; it is a vision, a proposition and a utopia in a hopelessly dystopian 
world.

Adam Szymczyk, the curator of documenta 14 <http://u-in-u.com/documenta/2017/>
, which runs from 10 April to 17 September 2017, decided to stage, for the 
first time in the exhibition’s history, one half in another European city: 
Athens. By doing so, he has mapped the field that best describes the 
dialectical tension in modern democracy today.

On one side is Kassel’s documenta: a post-fascist vehicle that believed in the 
transformative power of contemporary art. On the other side is Athens, the 
birthplace of democracy, which in recent years has become synonymous with the 
friction between democracy, national sovereignty and late capitalism.

In my lifetime, I have not experienced a more complex and greater existential 
crisis than today – but a complex time can only be responded to in equally 
complex propositions. Documenta is a vehicle that affordsthe complex engagement 
with art and culture as what it is 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/jun/11/documenta-13-review>: a 
manifestation that responds to the sociopolitical conditions of our time. It is 
this that makes documenta, and particularly this documenta, so important, as it 
attempts to mediate between western democracy and capitalism in a state of 
crisis.

Stefan Kalmár is a veteran art industry and gallery insider and the new 
director of the Institute of Contemporary Arts, London.

Architecture
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fbig-ideas-2017-driverless-cars-interstellar-travel-invention%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facdcd4ebd55df4ccfa7333af7acbad694380298c%2F0_25_5033_3019%2F5033.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2017%E2%80%99s%20big%20ideas%20%E2%80%93%20part%20one%3A%20from%20driverless%20cars%20to%20interstellar%20travel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fbig-ideas-2017-driverless-cars-interstellar-travel-invention%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2017%E2%80%99s%20big%20ideas%20%E2%80%93%20part%20one%3A%20from%20driverless%20cars%20to%20interstellar%20travel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fbig-ideas-2017-driverless-cars-interstellar-travel-invention%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facdcd4ebd55df4ccfa7333af7acbad694380298c%2F0_25_5033_3019%2F5033.jpg>
 MAAT in Lisbon, designed by AL_A. Photograph: Paulo Coelho/EDP Foundation 
Centuries-old ideas show us how to define public space
By Amanda Levete

There has never been a more important time to find ways of bringing people 
together. We need public spaces in our cities and our buildings to unite 
people, spaces where everyone has the chance to gather and to celebrate what we 
have in common. I’m hopeful that 2017 will see the flickering resurgence of 
outdoor civic spaces blossom into something more profound and lasting.

As citizens, we have perhaps been taking them for granted, but now we are 
actively recognising the roles played by these vital parts of the urban fabric, 
and demanding that our cities and institutions protect and expand them.

In 2017 and beyond, we will be seeing cultural projects as urban projects – 
ones that engage with cities and their unrestrained, slightly messy, vibrancy. 
I’d like to think thatMAAT, a new museum we designed in Lisbon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/06/maat-lisbon-museum-amanda-levete-architect>
, where the roof is a new place for people to appropriate as they like, is just 
one example of many more to come. It is used by lingering couples enjoying the 
sunset over the Tagus, by kids who just want to run up and down the steps, and 
by runners, cyclists and skateboarders.

There is something visceral about physical interaction that people are coming 
to value even more with the rise of the digital. There will be a return to 
looking at Italian urban planning, such asthe Nolli map of Rome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2012/nov/22/planning-diagrams-urban-design-cities>
 that allowed us to see the open public spaces connecting a city, or the Piazza 
del Popolo of Todi, the city’s spiritual, civic and cultural heart, where 
everyone contributes to the sense of community and has done so for generations.

Of course, these are centuries-old ideas and, in 2017, I hope there will be an 
increased humility in the architectural community in acknowledging our 
inspirations and inheritances as well as a renewal of that post-war idealism 
when architects thought architecture could help make a better society. 
Sometimes, looking back can be a more radical move than the advent of virtual 
or augmented reality – but it is an approach that architects and cities will 
increasingly pursue.

Amanda Levete is a Stirling prize-winning British architect and the founder 
and principal of AL_A, whose new entrance and courtyard at the Victoria and 
Albert Museum, London, opens in 2017.

Space

The Starshot project and solar sail technology
By Maggie Aderin-Pocock

I’ve been celebrating 50 years of Star Trek this year. I used to watch it as a 
child and thought, “Oh yes, this is for me.” I wanted warp drive, I wanted to 
travel to other planets and star systems. But as I grew older, I realised that 
our technology is so far from making interstellar travel possible – until now.

Last April, the Starshot project was announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/apr/12/stephen-hawking-and-yuri-milner-launch-100m-star-voyage>
. It will use very high-powered lasers to accelerate solar sails on tiny 
spacecraft, sending them at a fifth of the speed of light to Alpha Centauri, 
our closest star system, in just 20 years. After the announcement, we 
discovered Proxima Centauri b, an Earth-like exoplanet orbiting Proxima 
Centauri itself. So it gets even more exciting. It pushes the technology we 
have at the moment to the limit, but the huge challenges are not 
insurmountable. I think we can do this, and work starts in 2017. We have a 
chance to take a closer look at an exoplanet, and perhaps even to find signs of 
life.

Solar sail technology will also allow us to study our solar system in far 
greater time. We sent the New Horizons probe to Pluto and it took almost 10 
years. With solar sails, we could zip across the solar system in a matter of 
weeks and see what’s out there.

As a child, I thought all this was possible, and when I started studying it, I 
reined in my expectations. But this year, for the first time, I’m letting the 
dream continue. It is incredibly challenging, but when we look at what we’re 
achieving in miniaturisation and technology, I believe that in the next 15 to 
20 years, we might have our first interstellar probe setting off for that 
20-year journey to another star system. That puts it within my lifetime.

Maggie Aderin-Pocock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/video/2016/nov/23/beautiful-equations-emc2-explained-in-two-minutes>
 is a space scientist and honorary research associate at the UCL department of 
physics and astronomy.

Developmental biology

A leap forward in embryo technology
By Dr Jim Smith

Science sometimes appears to advance in great leaps, but each of those leaps 
is usually based on years of painstaking and often unheralded work – work based 
on nothing more than curiosity about how the world works. My area of research 
is developmental biology: the question of how the fertilised egg becomes an 
adult organism with all the right cell types in the right place. Of course, it 
had occurred to me that developmental biology research might one day have 
practical benefits, but this was not why I did it – I did it because the 
problem is so intriguing.

But, as is often the case, this sort of “discovery” science is yielding 
extraordinary benefits. For example, the ability of developmental biologists to 
culture, manipulate and fertilise embryos in a petri dish, then to transfer the 
embryos to a mother, led to “test-tube babies”. And this year, thanks to 
pioneering work by Doug Turnbull, it has inspired the decision to allow doctors 
to apply for a licence to create “three-person babies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/27/worlds-first-baby-born-using-dna-from-three-parents>
”, thereby providing, for the first time, hope to mothers carrying 
mitochondrial disease.

Now we know so much about what happens during normal embryonic development, we 
are in the extraordinary position of being able to recapitulate it and even to 
reverse it. Doug Melton has shown how stem cells from patients with type 1 
diabetes can beturned into pancreatic beta-cells 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/feb/09/smart-insulin-may-ease-burden-of-type-1-diabetes-patients-research-suggests>
; many researchers are making “organoids”, three-dimensional stem cell cultures 
that will allow the design of personal treatment regimes and generate new cells 
for gene editing and transplantation. Equally exciting is the recent discovery 
by Juan Carlos Izpisua Belmonte, inspired by his work on newt limb 
regeneration, thatit may even be possible to reverse ageing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/dec/15/ageing-process-may-be-reversible-scientists-claim>
.

As we understand more about development, now using techniques from chemistry, 
mathematics, engineering and physics, we can expect even more remarkable 
discoveries and treatments. This year, Magdalena Zernicka-Goetz managed to 
increase by 50% the length of time we can keep human embryos alive in a dish – 
I can’t wait to see what we’ll learn about ourselves.

Jim Smith is a developmental biologist and the new director of science at 
Wellcome, the science and health foundation.

Part two: from a northern Labour party to fighting cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2017/jan/02/2017-big-ideas-part-two-northern-labour-party-fighting-cancer>
 