
As the cold rustle of conkers start to hit the pavements and a new generation 
of pencil cases bulge under the weight of novelty felt-tips, it must be the 
start of a new term. Sadly, we can’t all be going back to school. But that 
doesn’t mean we need to let our brains fester like an opened tub of yoghurt on 
a hot day. The audio wonderland of modern podcasts is ripe with all the 
insight, analysis, facts, statistics and research you need to at least blag a 
GCSE. Here is a rundown of some of the best podcasts to make you feel (if not 
actually sound) like a genius:

Geography

The weekly stories from This American Life <http://www.thisamericanlife.org/> 
often spread beyond traditional state borders – their recent episodes from 
Greece’s refugee camps were brilliant, with reports on romance, wild pigs, 
women doing their laundry in a baseball stadium locker room and what it’s like 
to live in a former psychiatric hospital. You can also trawl the archive for 
stories from Haiti,the lie that saved Brazil’s economy 
<http://www.thisamericanlife.org/radio-archives/episode/423/the-invention-of-money>
 and even the odd look at Europe (yes, they too covered Brexit).

A weekly listen to From Our Own Correspondent 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006qjlq> will do more for your understanding 
of global news than my curriculum ever managed, whileThe Documentary 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p02nq0lx/episodes/downloads> podcast from BBC 
World Service can cover anything from protest in Putin’s Russia to Syria’s 
secret library and incubator babies on display in Coney Island.

English

The New Yorker Fiction Podcast 
<http://www.newyorker.com/series/fiction-podcast> is like the greatest book 
group, English seminar and public lecture you never joined. Each month the 
magazine’s fiction editor, Deborah Treisman, invites a different New Yorker 
author to choose and read aloud a story from the magazine’s archive then 
discuss it. I started withAM Homes reading Shirley Jackson’s short story The 
Lottery 
<http://www.newyorker.com/podcast/fiction/a-m-homes-reads-shirley-jackson>, set 
in a sinister village, and it haunts me still.

Is English language your bag? Then Helen Zaltzman’s The Allusionist 
<http://www.theallusionist.org/> is the etymology party you’ve been waiting 
for. After all, who knew a simple word like please could have such completely 
different meanings and uses on either side of the Atlantic?

If you like your journalism lengthy, perhaps the Longform 
<https://longform.org/podcast> interviews with journalists such as Malcolm 
Gladwell and Kathryn Schulz, speechwriters like Jon Favreau who worked with 
President Obama and editors like David Remnick will tickle your pickle, or the 
Guardian’s own excellentLong Reads audio series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/the-audio-long-read>. After all, 
reading’s for squares, I heard.

Science

There are some amazing science stories in the RadioLab 
<http://www.radiolab.org/> archive, from a genuinely terrifying exploration of 
the howling, spit-thickening spread of rabies, tothe woman put in a coma as an 
experiment <http://www.radiolab.org/story/312245-rodney-versus-death/> and a 
look atthe day the dinosaurs died <http://www.radiolab.org/story/dinopocalypse/>
.

You can go a long way at a dinner party with a couple of the BBC’s Inside 
Science <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b036f7w2> episodes under your belt, 
and first dates will whizz by with the science anecdotes afforded by the last 
season ofInvisibilia <http://www.npr.org/podcasts/510307/invisibilia>. Not to 
mention the unending popularity of Prof Brian Cox and Robin Ince’sInfinite 
Monkey Cage <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00snr0w/episodes/downloads>.

History

If Melvyn Bragg had been my history teacher, rather than a woman who decorated 
her classroom with warnings about the dangers of ragwort, I may have ended up 
with quite a different degree.In Our Time 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006qykl/episodes/downloads> will teach you 
more about world history than most museums – and you don’t even need to pack a 
lunch. I’m particularly enjoying the latest series on the history of The North.

Elsewhere, Stuff You Missed in History Class <http://www.missedinhistory.com/> 
will give you a good grounding in everything from China’s Great Leap Forward to 
the Matchgirls Strike and the Anglo-Cherokee war.

For those who prefer their history a little more specific, I’m a huge fan of 
Great Lives <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006qxsb/episodes/downloads>, in 
which a notable modern figure looks at a person from the past who has inspired 
or excited them – try Sara Pascoe on Virginia Woolf or Anthony Horowitz on 
Alfred Hitchcock.

The 50 podcasts you need to hear
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/14/fifty-best-podcasts-bob-mortimer-john-oliver-jemaine-clement-serial>
Art

If The Essay <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006x3hl> from BBC Radio 3 was a 
country, I’d move there. There are amazing features on everything from British 
film comedians to Dadaism, great sonnets, and the artistic impact of the fall 
of the Berlin Wall.Adventures in Design <http://aidpodcast.libsyn.com/> is a 
topical (if now behind-paywall) look at modern graphic design, whileSong 
Exploder <http://www.maximumfun.org/shows/song-exploder> invites musicians and 
songwriters to pick apart their compositions in forensic detail. And if you 
want to delve into the world buildings-first, then99% Invisible 
<http://99percentinvisible.org/> is far more than just an architecture podcast.

Sport

What I know about sport could fill the sweaty confines of a Slazenger Classic 
Abdo Guard, but even I have been known to laugh at theArseBlog 
<http://arseblog.com/> podcast. Particularly when Irish writer and presenter, 
Andrew Mangan, described striker Olivier Giroud as “a big fucking ride”.

Maths

The murky subjects of toxic debt, trading in oil, the economy of housing, 
Brexit and how to count your bitcoins are made more comprehensible thanks to 
NPR’sPlanet Money <http://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money/>. It won’t 
teach you how to do long division, but it will give you some prime number chat. 
Also worth a listen is the BBC’s mathematics showMore or Less 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p02nrss1/episodes/downloads>, hosted by the 
Undercover Economist Tim Harford, which takes a look at the real stories behind 
the statistics found in the news.

General studies

Whether you’re dating, starting a new job, or just want something new to say 
to your pets, you can learn a lot from theThe Inquiry 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p029399x>, which has programmes on everything 
from coral reefs to putting solar panels in the Sahara desert. TheMiddle East 
Week <http://middleeastweek.org/> podcast will give you a great grounding on 
some of the world’s most controversial issues,More Perfect 
<http://www.wnyc.org/shows/radiolabmoreperfect> is a fascinating look at the 
American justice system and you can get to grips with some serious 
international relations viaGlobal Dispatches 
<http://www.globaldispatchespodcast.com/>. Little Atoms <http://littleatoms.com>
, from Resonance FM, will help you scrub up on politics, literature, science, 
art and comedy, and I have learned pretty much everything I know about farming, 
food, technology, growing vegetables and the rural economy thanks toThe Archers 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006qpgr> (not to mention the rigours of 
baking ginger scones).
 