
What do operating systems, browsers and search engines all have in common? It 
seems to be a ratio of 90:9:1 between the key players. One player dominates; 
then others get a minimal share.

Take mobile OSs: This week the Mozilla Foundation pulled the plug on Firefox OS
 
<http://techcrunch.com/2015/12/08/mozilla-will-stop-developing-and-selling-firefox-os-smartphones/>
 – the mobile OS which could have replaced native apps with HTML-based apps – a 
final death throe in the mobile OS wars. There are now three main platforms – 
Google’s Android, Apple’s iOS and Microsoft’s Windows Phone – for which 
worldwide shipments are currently runningin a ratio of about 85:14:1 
<http://www.idc.com/prodserv/smartphone-os-market-share.jsp> respectively.

Now look at desktop OS sales: the ratio stands in the most recent quarter 
<http://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS25955515> at about 91:8:1 
between Microsoft’s Windows, Apple’s Mac OSX, and “self-build” machines which 
probably get Linux.

It’s oddly reminiscent of the “1% rule” 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1%25_rule_(Internet_culture)> – a rule of thumb 
observed as far back as 2006, which states that if you have a group of 100 
people interacting online, then one will generate some content, nine will 
provide feedback, and 90 will simply consume it. (Studies have broadly 
confirmed that principle.)

In the PC and smartphone worlds, the 90:9:1 ratio has each time come about 
after a sort ofCambrian explosion 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/evolution/library/03/4/l_034_02.html> in the early 
stages, as different players rushed to capitalise and try to be dominant.

On PCs, there were DR-DOS, MS-DOS, CP/M, GEM, Amiga, and later on BeOS and 
Linux (to name just a few).


On smartphones there were Symbian, Meego, Windows Mobile, Asha, BlackBerry 7, 
BlackBerry 10 (now effectively dead, as BlackBerry has moved to Android), and 
of course Firefox OS, as well as Jolla (whichlooks to be nearly dead 
<http://www.fiercewireless.com/story/sailfish-os-backer-jolla-lay-half-its-staff-it-hunts-new-funding/2015-11-20>
) and Samsung’s Tizen (which isn’t).


In both cases the explosion was enabled by the growing commoditisation of 
components but because maintaining an operating system and an app ecosystem, 
whether on PC or smartphone, is an expensive business, there was a shakedown. 
BlackBerry, for example, gave up on BB10 because, chief executive John Chen 
hinted, it cost too much to write drivers for different chips; by going to 
Android, that challenge is abstracted away to Google.

Now look at search engines. In Europe, Google gets nearly 90% of all desktop 
searches,according to data from Statcounter 
<http://theeword.co.uk/info/search_engine_market/> (and other measures agree). 
Microsoft’s Bing gets 7.3%. Yahoo brings up the rear with 3.5%, and the 
remaining 1.2% goes to a host of “others”. For mobile, according to the same 
dataset, it’s 94% Google, 3% Yahoo, 2% Bing and 0.3% “other”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F12%2Fratio-technology-mozilla-firefox-os-90-9-1%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a9dbcd203ac686a7101f2baaab59456d3e50907%2F0_0_833_500%2F833.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=90%3A9%3A1%20%E2%80%93%20the%20odd%20ratio%20that%20technology%20keeps%20creating&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F12%2Fratio-technology-mozilla-firefox-os-90-9-1%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=90%3A9%3A1%20%E2%80%93%20the%20odd%20ratio%20that%20technology%20keeps%20creating&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F12%2Fratio-technology-mozilla-firefox-os-90-9-1%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a9dbcd203ac686a7101f2baaab59456d3e50907%2F0_0_833_500%2F833.jpg>
 Top 5 desktop, tablet & console browsers from July 2008 to November 2015 
Photograph: StatCounter 
How about browsers? In 2002-3 Microsoft’s Internet Explorer held prime 
position: its various versions peaked with a 95% share in those years, as 
Netscape faded and before Apple’s Safari and thenFirefox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/firefox> (the browser) arrived in 2003 
and 2004 respectively.


Firefox became the “9%” player, and gained ground rapidly, peaking at about 
24% of browser use in November 2009 
<http://www.technewsworld.com/story/68599.html>; there were times when the 
release of a new version of Firefox wasan internet event 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/technology/7457503.stm>.


But just as Internet Explorer fell away, Google Chrome arrived in September 
2008 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2008/sep/04/google.software> - and 
quickly became an important player. Now the desktop browser market is in 
upheaval, according to Statcounter’s numbers; Chrome is taking over, while 
Firefox and Internet Explorer are shrinking.


There were times when the release of a new version of Firefox was an internet 
event

The more you look for it in networked environments, the more frequently some 
sort of 90:9:1 ratio seems to emerge once the market matures. Certainly there 
are variations: slightly more iPhone users and slightly fewer Mac users than 
the rule of thumb predicts, for example, while the dramatic shifts in the 
browser market come because Chrome has a platform for promotion almost 
comparable with Microsoft’s Windows: it is the only product that has ever been 
advertised on Google’s front page.

But why should browsers and search engines come close to that ratio? They 
don’t require commodity manufacture; their costs of deployment and maintenance 
are hidden from the consumer, who only has to use them. But they’re 
comparatively easy to build, and network effects from their use will tend to 
help those that do well.

Notably, all of these products are part of the networked world, and each is a 
mutually-exclusive activity – that is, you can only use one at a time. Nobody 
(to a good enough measure) buys or uses two smartphones for themselves at once. 
Hardly anyone uses two desktop OSs. You can only do a search on one search 
engine at a time. You only use one browser at a time.

There is one notable technology hardware space where 90:9:1 clearly doesn’t 
apply: games consoles. In the previous generation of consoles (Nintendo Wii v 
PlayStation 3 v Xbox 360) total sales were 101.2m to 85.9m to 84.9m – nearly an 
equal split. The current generation continues to deviate from the rule. One 
possible explanation is that games consoles have never had their 
“commoditisation” moment: there’s only one manufacturer for each, whereas there 
are multiple makers of PCs and smartphones. Thus games consoles could never see 
the consolidation around one platform or another, as long as the rival 
platforms could come up with compelling content. (Sega’s inability to do so led 
to its downfall as a hardware vendor.)

There’s another area where the ratio doesn’t hold: Social networks. You can 
belong to and use Facebook and Twitter, and Instagram and Snapchat and dozens 
of others, and send the same content to each. In the messaging space, you can 
use WhatsApp and BBM and Google Hangouts and Skype. User numbers for those 
networks and apps don’t follow that rule even approximately, even for daily 
users.

In their non-exclusivity, social networks seem very different from those 
task-based products – search engines, browsers, PCs and smartphones.

So is 90:9:1 an incontrovertible law for products? That remains to be seen; 
but it may be a guide to the future on mutually exclusive activities. Will 
“taxi” companies (Uber, Lyft, Hailo) follow the same path? Or machine-learning 
algorithm deployment? It might be worth checking back in a few years.
 