
It is the government department tasked with delivering the chancellor’s 
“northern powerhouse” agenda and devolving power to cities and regions. But 
97.6% of senior civil servants at the Department forCommunities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/communities> and Local Government (DCLG) 
are based in London, the government has admitted.

Just 2.4% of the DCLG’s most powerful public servants work outside the 
capital, according to Brandon Lewis, a DCLG minister and Tory MP for Great 
Yarmouth.

More and more senior civil servants across all government departments are 
based in London, another minister admitted. On 1 April 2010, 65.1% worked from 
London, compared with 67% five years later, said Matthew Hancock, minister for 
the Cabinet Office.


The admissions come after the government decided to close the Sheffield office 
of the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/29/government-accused-of-contempt-for-north-over-sheffield-office-closure>
. The outpost in the steel city had become a centre of policymaking expertise, 
with 300 staff leading on delivering billions in research to universities in 
particular. They were partly responsible for the funding given toSheffield 
University that led to the discovery of gravitational waves last month 
<https://www.sheffield.ac.uk/news/nr/einstein-was-right-gravitational-waves-detected-1.549342>
 – a key prediction of Einstein’s general theory of relativity.

The figures were released in response to questions by Louise Haigh, Labour MP 
forSheffield <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/sheffield> Heeley. She said they 
undermined the government’s “northern powerhouse” agenda. “How can the Tories 
possibly claim devolution of power and investment tops their agenda, when they 
increasingly insulate themselves in a London bubble of policy advisers and 
decision makers? With policies driven from Whitehall not the town hall, it’s no 
wonder that cities across the north are forced to rely on scraps,” she said.

“Moving the civil service out of London has been a positive trend spanning 
decades, giving government eyes and ears around the country, but astonishingly 
the Tories have reversed that policy, revealing their utter contempt for the 
perspective of people from cities and regions outside of the capital. They have 
even scrapped their minister for decentralisation, suggesting they can’t even 
be bothered to keep up the pretence.”

By its own definition, the senior civil service is the interface between 
politicians and the public administration. They are responsible for the 
implementation of legal instruments and political strategies. They are also 
responsible for the coherence, efficiency and appropriateness of government 
activities.

A DCLG spokesman said: “The reality is senior civil servants account for less 
than 5% of the department’s workforce, while over a quarter of our staff work 
across the country.

“The northern powerhouse is about empowering local people, not relocating 
civil servants from London to tell them what to do. We are determined to 
rebalance the economy through the devolution of powers away from Westminster.”
 