
A partnership worth $10m (£8.1m) to increase the uptake and awareness of a 
vaccine to protect girls from cervical cancer, which has higher death rates in 
sub-SaharanAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> than any other 
cancer, was launched on Tuesday.

Gavi, the vaccine alliance <http://www.gavi.org/>, announced it is joining 
forces with theGirl Effect <http://www.girleffect.org/> to increase the demand 
for thehuman papillomavirus <http://www.who.int/immunization/topics/hpv/en/> 
(HPV) vaccine in Rwanda, Ethiopia and Malawi.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fa-girls-life-how-inequality-starts-before-birth-video-international-day-of-the-girl&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20girl's%20life%3A%20how%20inequality%20starts%20before%20birth%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fa-girls-life-how-inequality-starts-before-birth-video-international-day-of-the-girl>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20girl%27s%20life%3A%20how%20inequality%20starts%20before%20birth%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fa-girls-life-how-inequality-starts-before-birth-video-international-day-of-the-girl&media=>
A girl’s life: how inequality starts before birth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2016/oct/11/a-girls-life-how-inequality-starts-before-birth-video-international-day-of-the-girl>
The partnership, launched to mark International Day of the Girl, will 
challenge the myths and misconceptions about the vaccine. The fact that HPV is 
transmitted through sexual contact had raised concerns thatthe vaccine would 
encourage promiscuity 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/health/hpv-vaccination-concerns-about-promiscuity-deemed-unwarranted-1.2864264>
.

While Gavi will ensure the vaccine is available in each country, the Girl 
Effect will use its networks to promote the vaccine to girls and their families 
via social media, radio shows, magazines, drama and mobile apps.

The HPV vaccine protects girls against 70% of incidences of cervical cancer, 
which claims the lives ofan estimated 266,000 women and girls 
<http://globocan.iarc.fr/old/FactSheets/cancers/cervix-new.asp> a year, about 
85% in poorer countries. Sub-Saharan Africa, the Caribbean and Latin America 
have the highest incidences. Left unchallenged, there are fears that by 2035 
the number of deathscould rise to 416,000 
<http://globocan.iarc.fr/old/burden.asp?selection_pop=224900&Text-p=World&selection_cancer=4162&Text-c=Cervix+uteri&pYear=23&type=1&window=1&submit=%C2%A0Execute>
, more than 95% of those in developing countries, which would make cervical 
cancer a bigger killer of women than childbirth.

“Cervical cancer is a scourge that kills women in the prime of their lives, 
depriving families of mothers, aunts, grandmothers and wives,” said Dr Seth 
Berkley, CEO of Gavi. “TheHPV vaccine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/hpv-vaccine> is a vital tool in the battle 
against cervical cancer, especially in countries where lack of access to 
screening and treatment is a major issue. Our partnership with Girl Effect is 
an opportunity to bring this vaccine to the attention of girls who are at risk 
of missing out on its lifesaving impact.

“Everybody in sub-Saharan Africa will know people who have died of cervical 
cancer. They don’t die late in life, but at their peak.” He said diagnosis 
often comes at the end stage “where virtually nothing can be done”.

US ranks lower than Kazakhstan and Algeria on gender equality
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/11/us-united-states-ranks-lower-than-kazakhstan-algeria-gender-equality-international-day-of-the-girl>
Farah Ramzan Golant, CEO of the Girl Effect, said: “In this unusual 
partnership with Gavi, we’re pioneering an integrated approach to tackle a 
complex development issue. Gavi will ensure life-saving vaccines are available, 
while Girl Effect will use the power of our brands, drawing from popular 
culture and harnessing new technology, to drive behaviour change at scale, to 
ensure girls are informed and empowered to actively take up these vaccines.

“We want to create a ‘new normal’ for girls, where they’re visible and vocal 
participants in society and actively supported by their communities – a world 
where they have the information and inspiration they need to seek out the 
services they need and deserve.”

National rollouts of the HPV vaccine have already been launched in Rwanda, 
Uganda and Honduras, while immunisation programmes have been set up in other 
countries, including Kenya.Malawi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malawi>, 
one of the target countries in the partnership, has one of the highest 
mortality rates from cervical cancer in the world.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2F10m-dollar-campaign-targets-cervical-cancer-girls-sub-saharan-africa-international-day-of-the-girl%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff97cca85037673265894311e1c34aa1bfd4aad34%2F0_0_6144_3686%2F6144.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%2410m%20campaign%20targets%20cervical%20cancer%20among%20girls%20in%20sub-Saharan%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2F10m-dollar-campaign-targets-cervical-cancer-girls-sub-saharan-africa-international-day-of-the-girl%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%2410m%20campaign%20targets%20cervical%20cancer%20among%20girls%20in%20sub-Saharan%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2F10m-dollar-campaign-targets-cervical-cancer-girls-sub-saharan-africa-international-day-of-the-girl%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff97cca85037673265894311e1c34aa1bfd4aad34%2F0_0_6144_3686%2F6144.jpg>
 A nurse in Mbale, eastern Uganda, counsels patients ahead of a cervical cancer 
screening. Photograph: Jake Lyell/Alamy 
Setting up vaccine programmes for adolescent girls, particularly in rural 
areas, will be challenging – both logistically in getting to hard-to-reach 
places to conduct vaccine programmes, but also in finding a suitable location 
to administer the vaccine and encouraging girls to take part. Conducting 
programmes in schools has proved more successful than trying to get girls to 
attend clinics.

“[The programme] in Uganda started out in schools, then they tried health 
centres as it’s cheaper,” said Berkley. “But that did not work out very well, 
so they are going back to schools.”

Girl Effect is already supporting girl-led projects in Rwanda and Ethiopia. In 
Rwanda,Ni Nyampinga <http://www.girleffect.org/what-we-do/ni-nyampinga/> (which 
means “beautiful girl inside and out who makes good decisions” in Kinyarwanda) 
is an educational platform offering advice on sexual health and showcasing role 
models for girls. About 500,000 girls have read its magazine or listened to its 
radio shows. Messages about HPV will feature on the platform.

If the partnership proves successful in the three initial countries, Gavi and 
Girl Effect want to use the lessons learned to promote the vaccine in others. 
Nigeria, for example, would be high on the list.

“If we can debunk some myths, the world is our oyster,” said Golant.
 