
The European Central Bank has phased out the €500 (£400) note, nicknamed the 
“Bin Laden” because of itsassociation with money-laundering and terror financing
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/12/eu-finance-ministers-call-for-restrictions-on-500-euro-note-crime>
 – and because while many people know what it looks like, few have ever seen 
one.

The ECB announced on Wednesday that the fuchsia-coloured bills, the highest 
denomination of the eurozone’s seven banknotes, would no longer be printed or 
distributed from 2018, on the grounds that they are too often used to finance 
crime.

The move, approved by the bank’s governing council meeting in Frankfurt, comes 
after months of mounting pressure from France – which has been working to clamp 
down on terrorist financing in the wake of last year’s attacks in Paris – but 
equally stiff opposition fromGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>
.

EU finance ministers call for restrictions on €500 note over crime fears
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/12/eu-finance-ministers-call-for-restrictions-on-500-euro-note-crime>
The €500 note, reportedly so prized by criminals that it trades above its face 
value, is “used more for hiding things than buying them”, the French finance 
minister, Michel Sapin, said earlier this year. “It is used more to facilitate 
transactions that are not honest than to allow you and me to buy food to eat.”

According to ECB statistics, €500 bills account for only 3% of the total 
number of euro banknotes in circulation, but nearly 30% of the €1tn in use last 
year. A survey in 2011 found that 56% of EU citizens had never actually used 
one.


Although there is no specific data to establish that €500 bills are widely 
used for illicit activities, an EU action plan found last year that the notes 
were “in high demand among criminal elements … due to their high value and low 
volume”.

The ECB said 
<https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2016/html/pr160504.en.html>: “The 
issuance of the €500 will be stopped around the end of 2018, when the €100 and 
€200 banknotes of the Europa series are planned to be introduced. The other 
denominations – from €5 to €200 – will remain in place.

“In view of the international role of the euro and the widespread trust in its 
banknotes, the €500 will remain legal tender and can therefore continue to be 
used as a means of payment and store of value.”

A recent Harvard University study also concluded that the notes were “the 
preferred payment mechanism of those pursuing illicit activities, given the 
anonymity and lack of transaction record they offer and the relative ease with 
which they can be transported and moved”.


A million euros in €500 notes weighs just 2kg, compared with 22kg for the same 
amount in $100 bills. Studies by the EU police agency Europol and the UN Office 
on Drugs and Crime have also linked them to crime, though the evidence is 
mainly anecdotal.


Europol – which points out that the number of €500 notes has multiplied by six 
since the single currency’s creation, while the number of €10 and €20 notes has 
remained largely stable – went as far as to say the ECB should scrap them 
unless it could show there was a legitimate use for them.

“The links between organised crime and cash are multiple,” said Igor Angelini, 
the head of Europol’s financial intelligence unit. “Criminals need cash at some 
point in order to cut the trails that could lead back to them,” he told the
specialist news outlet EurActiv 
<http://www.euractiv.com/section/euro-finance/news/suspicious-bank-notes-lead-to-luxembourg/>
.

Big bucks: high denomination banknotes - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/gallery/2016/feb/08/big-bucks-high-denomination-bank-notes-in-pictures>
With electronic payments increasing and the anonymity conferred by cash 
causing growing global concern, banks have also been keen to see the end of the 
€500 note, one of the highest-value banknotes in the world along with the 1,000 
Swiss franc (£720) bill.

A former senior executive at Standard Chartered, Peter Sands, called in 
February for the abolition of both, along with the US$100 (£70) bill and the 
British £50 note, saying they played “little role in the functioning of the 
legitimate economy … and a crucial role in the underground economy”.

Moves to scrap the note, however, have met with stiff resistance in Germany, 
where anestimated 79% of all transactions are conducted in cash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/08/german-plan-prohibit-large-5000-cash-transactions-fierce-resistance>
 and the ECB’s move has been seen as an affront to the nation’s right to use it.

Berlin pushed hard for a €500 bill when the euro was born because Germans 
wanted an equivalent to their 1,000 Deutschmark note.

Opposition to the note’s disappearance has been further fuelled by growing 
mistrust of the eurozone’s central bank, and arguments that when interest rates 
are low, with bank deposits not rewarding and financial markets looking 
uncertain, a €500 note has a legitimate purpose to store value.

Privacy advocates argue that any measure that makes it harder to store money 
in cash will automatically end up pushing savers into the financial system and 
thus towards electronic payments, which are recorded on banks’ databases and 
can be monitored by authorities.

Some experts have suggested that doing away with the €500 note would not be 
particularly effective in fighting crime anyway.

“Organised crime isn’t stupid,” said Friedrich Schneider, an expert on the 
black economy at Johannes Kepler University of Linz in Austria. “Most money is 
laundered without cash via bogus companies.”
 