
Liverpool, Saturday
Beyond the gangway was a private world, where the adult stranger was likely to 
suffer the fate of the middle-aged chauffeur from Doncaster who sat gloomily at 
a porthole as if yearning for home and more familiar surroundings. When a 
teddyboy peered through the porthole at the darkness and asked, “Where are we, 
mister?” he stared at the couples jiving near him and said with ironic 
laughter, “Tha’ guess is as good as mine.”

On guard over this private world was a tall, thin man in the black shirt and 
suit of a Mississippi gambler, who carefully examined you before allowing you 
aboard. Next to him was a trumpeter, red-faced already from his exertions, who 
played a welcome in choice jazz that must have been audible on the opposite 
bank of the river Mersey. You were a guest at the coronation of the “King of 
Jive” and as close to the “beat generation” as you might get.


After three hours of jazz afloat with several hundred young couples keeping 
time on the four decks to the beat, it was easy to understand why this is the 
“beat generation.” Hands clapped, glasses rattled, and feet stamped to the beat 
all evening long. The glasses indeed rattled and the bars from experience 
demanded a deposit of 6d on all glasses, but in fact, from casting off to 
docking at closing time, there was no real drunkenness on any of the decks. The 
few couples who towards the end staggered and flopped down on the benches, 
gasping like long-distance runners were more likely to be suffering from 
exhaustion. Crowning the “King” was a strenuous and dedicated ceremony.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fthe-northerner%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fbeat-generation-jive-dancing-liverpool-archive-1958%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F586806f28e9fae497dce1fff272b5301f8249042%2F0_343_3544_2127%2F3544.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Beat%20generation'%20at%20sea%20-%20archive%2C%2028%20April%201958&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fthe-northerner%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fbeat-generation-jive-dancing-liverpool-archive-1958%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Beat%20generation%27%20at%20sea%20-%20archive%2C%2028%20April%201958&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fthe-northerner%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fbeat-generation-jive-dancing-liverpool-archive-1958%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F586806f28e9fae497dce1fff272b5301f8249042%2F0_343_3544_2127%2F3544.jpg>
 A Mersey ferry with the Liver building in the background, Liverpool, 1954. 
Photograph: Bert Hardy/Getty Images 
The ten-knot blues
The procession to the throne was up the river Mersey at a steady ten knots and 
then down again towards the sea, the captain turning the ship around whenever 
the rough waves threatened to upset the delicate balance of the dancers. Jazz 
from a seven-piece band came through the loudspeakers over the dark choppy 
water, with the lights ofLiverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool> 
in the background, and the crews of several loitering vessels rushed to the 
rails in wonder as the Royal Iris (1,234 tons) passed them to the beat of 
“Where did you stay last night?”

The Lancashire Society of Jazz Music was experimenting to find out if the 
great days of the Mississippi showboats and the “blues” could be recaptured on 
the Mersey, and the enthusiasts - the “cats” - had come from as far as London 
to do their best. The chauffeur from Doncaster had brought over a party of a 
dozen “cats” and was driving them back as soon as the Royal Iris docked.


Hardly anyone was over 20. Their concentration was astonishing. The sweat 
rolled down their faces and they carried on dancing, puffing and panting as 
they touched hands and turned, too weary to talk, and often towards the end 
chewing gum with the grimness of war-time fighter-pilots to keep going. At 
last, after more than an hour of this, their numbers were reduced to the best 
six couples, who then jived for a little longer while the judges selected the 
“King.”


He was Wally Blasbery, aged 20, who had already won several prizes for jiving 
and had competed for a world championship in London. His face was bathed in 
sweat like a boxer’s after a morning in the gym, and he emphasised how fit he 
had to be for jiving. To keep in training for dancing three nights a week he 
swam, played football, and regularly took part in athletics. He worked as a 
driver for a bread firm in Liverpool. What was his ambition? asked a reporter 
as if this might be the key to the “beat generation.” The “King” replied: 
“Well, my present job. I’m just a driver now but when I turn 21 I become a 
salesman. That can lead to anything, see.”


At ease
Why did he devote so much of his spare time to dancing? He did not even have 
to ponder over his reply. “It makes me feel at ease.” His only concern was that 
he had not been at his best because of the rough state of the Mersey and the 
occasional rolls of the ship. “ It’s all balance,” he said.

That was a question for experts; for the ordinary dancers the floor might have 
been on dry land and they did not even bother going up on the top deck to look 
at the stars. But when they left the confines of the dancefloor for a brief 
rest they usually descended to the fish-and-chip shop on “D” deck where 
extractor fans prevented the smells from penetrating to the dancefloor.


Coming home over the dark Mersey to the pier head after a trip upriver almost 
as far as Eastham towards the entrance to the Manchester Ship Canal, someone 
tried to start a chorus of “Old Man River,” but the call of the band was too 
strong, and the solitary figure was left on the top deck, a black silhouette 
looking like one of the Negro slaves at the birth of the blues, while the “beat 
generation” rushed for a last dance before returning to the reality of shore.

 