
On Wednesday morning, gynecologist Deborah Ottenheimer went to work determined 
not to talk about the election. “I never do that,” she says. “You just never 
know where people are at.” But as her doors opened, she quickly realised she 
wouldn’t have a choice. “Every single patient that walked in burst into tears,” 
she says. “Women and girls were sobbing. Just sobbing. Everybody was wrecked.”

Ottenheimer’s New York City clinic treated nearly 40 patients the day after 
Donald Trump was elected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-wins-us-election-news>
, and the only thing more unusual than their tears was that so many of them had 
the same question: “Should I get an IUD?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fbirth-control-political-trump-contraception-iuds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2029b5941b7c39fe4e56131678ff424cf7d5f41c%2F0_119_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Birth%20control%20is%20a%20political%20act'%3A%20the%20pre-Trump%20contraception%20rush%20starts%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fbirth-control-political-trump-contraception-iuds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Birth%20control%20is%20a%20political%20act%27%3A%20the%20pre-Trump%20contraception%20rush%20starts%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fbirth-control-political-trump-contraception-iuds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2029b5941b7c39fe4e56131678ff424cf7d5f41c%2F0_119_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
 Feminists, queer and transgender activists gather to protest against Donald 
Trump. Photograph: Pacific Press/LightRocket via Getty Images 
This tiny T-shaped plastic-and-copper coil, designed to stop an egg and sperm 
from surviving in the womb, has become an unlikely weapon on the frontline of 
women’s rights. “These are not people who were thinking about it already – or 
were unhappy with their current method,” says Ottenheimer. “These people were 
afraid.”

In fear of what a Trump presidency might mean for reproductive rights, 
thousands of women on social media haveurged each other to seek out access to 
IUDs <https://twitter.com/search?q=iud&src=typd>, a form of birth control that 
can last anywhere from three to 12 years. Trump has promised to defundPlanned 
Parenthood <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/planned-parenthood>, the 
reproductive health organisation that provides contraception to many women 
around the US, and dismantle theAffordable Care Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/live/2015/jun/25/supreme-court-rules-obamacare-healthcare-law>
, which guarantees access to contraception. Depending onthe brand 
<http://nymag.com/thecut/2016/11/the-5-kinds-of-iud-birth-control-and-their-side-effects.html>
, an IUD inserted before Trump’s inauguration guarantees that a woman is 
protected from unwanted pregnancy for the duration of his presidency and 
beyond. “It’s a ‘fuck you’ to this president to get birth control that will 
outlast him,” says Margot Judge, a 25-year-old from New York who is considering 
getting an IUD this week.

Since the election, Ottenheimer says she has continued to be overwhelmed with 
requests about the device, and she is not alone.Planned Parenthood has reported 
a spike 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-election-plannedparenthood-idUSKBN13709V?feedType=nl&feedName=ustopnewsearly>
 in inquiries whileGoogle reported a “massive peak” 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2016/11/11/501611813/women-rush-to-get-long-acting-birth-control-after-trump-wins>
 in searches for “IUD” this week. And while this step towards self-protection 
is a measure of reassurance, plenty of women remain deeply uncertain about what 
the future holds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fbirth-control-political-trump-contraception-iuds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3cb8ac47033b0e801a20eb9227fc00a9a5f4840%2F0_52_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Birth%20control%20is%20a%20political%20act'%3A%20the%20pre-Trump%20contraception%20rush%20starts%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fbirth-control-political-trump-contraception-iuds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Birth%20control%20is%20a%20political%20act%27%3A%20the%20pre-Trump%20contraception%20rush%20starts%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fbirth-control-political-trump-contraception-iuds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3cb8ac47033b0e801a20eb9227fc00a9a5f4840%2F0_52_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Planned Parenthood supporters rally for reproductive healthcare. Photograph: 
Nick Ut/AP 
“For me, my motivation is fear,” says Jennifer, 35, from Maryland. “For the 
past eight years, we’ve seen expanded healthcare and more acknowledgement of 
reproductive rights – but I rememberhow tense things were under George Bush 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/jun/15/worlddispatch.janemartinson>. 
So, for me, there’s a sense that I need to protect myself because I don’t think 
lawmakers will.”

Jennifer has thought about getting an IUD before, but feels urged to get one 
now. She says that the panic she has noticed among women after the election has 
left her feeling unsettled about making a decision. “I don’t like the feeling 
of being painted into a corner. I feel like I am being rushed, like I’m having 
to make a decision right now that I would like to be more thoughtful about.”

Even without the threat of a pussy-grabbing president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
, IUDs make a lot of women anxious. They are thethird most popular form of 
contraception in the US 
<https://www.guttmacher.org/fact-sheet/contraceptive-use-united-states> – and 
the most effective form of reversible contraception available – but it requires 
a medical procedure, and tales ofperforated uteruses 
<http://www.xojane.com/it-happened-to-me/i-had-an-iud-perforate-my-uterus>, 
heavy bleeding 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/TwoXChromosomes/comments/164eqi/my_periods_have_been_so_heavy_and_disastrous/>
 andpainful cramps 
<http://www.elle.com/beauty/health-fitness/a27525/iud-questions-doctor-answers/>
 have long sent women running to the pill instead.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fbirth-control-political-trump-contraception-iuds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7efd9aa048ce85d05eae9d5d01d0b30fbf4aada3%2F0_0_5000_3337%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Birth%20control%20is%20a%20political%20act'%3A%20the%20pre-Trump%20contraception%20rush%20starts%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fbirth-control-political-trump-contraception-iuds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Birth%20control%20is%20a%20political%20act%27%3A%20the%20pre-Trump%20contraception%20rush%20starts%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fbirth-control-political-trump-contraception-iuds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7efd9aa048ce85d05eae9d5d01d0b30fbf4aada3%2F0_0_5000_3337%2F5000.jpg>
 A mass rally on the fourth day after the election. Photograph: Pacific 
Press/LightRocket via Getty Images 
However, gynaecologists insist complications are rare 
<http://www.womenshealthmag.com/health/iud-complications>. Ottenheimer says 
that, while there are other forms of long-term birth control such asthe implant 
<http://www.nexplanon.com/> (inserted in the arm, lasting up to 3 years), IUDs 
are a “really good option” for most women. Clare Lyons, a registered nurse who 
urged women to get an IUD on the night of the election, says that IUDs are 
“incredibly safe” and that women should get informed about whether it might be 
a good option for them. “Ultimately, my message is to make an appointment with 
a provider; figure out what is best for you.”

Ayelet Bitton, a 25-year-old software engineer from San Francisco, has read a 
few horror stories about IUDs, which have always held her back from getting 
one. But now she is re-evaluating. “I used to say I didn’t want to deal with 
getting it inserted, or the fear that it might be dislodged. But now I want to 
reconsider all of that,” she says. “Because the stress of something going wrong 
with my IUD is a lot less than the stress I’ll have if this other stuff 
happens.”

Hannah Weinberger is also reconsidering the downsides. The 26-year-old from 
Amaeus, Pennsylvania, is an avid cyclist. She was once put off having the 
procedure to avoid physical side-effects that could stop her from cycling. But 
now that has changed. “My strong feelings about being able to take control of 
my body mean that temporary discomfort doesn’t [matter] very much to me any 
more.”

Most women cite two reasons for wanting to get an IUD: wanting to take 
advantage of their current right to free contraception, and uncertainty about 
rising costs of contraception in the future. But there’s another reason, too.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fbirth-control-political-trump-contraception-iuds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6386c2b01bfa0a4bcf13356afef04c79832f19b%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Birth%20control%20is%20a%20political%20act'%3A%20the%20pre-Trump%20contraception%20rush%20starts%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fbirth-control-political-trump-contraception-iuds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Birth%20control%20is%20a%20political%20act%27%3A%20the%20pre-Trump%20contraception%20rush%20starts%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fbirth-control-political-trump-contraception-iuds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6386c2b01bfa0a4bcf13356afef04c79832f19b%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A #GOPHandsOffMe protest outside Trump Tower. Photograph: Pacific 
Press/LightRocket via Getty Images 
“Contraception is a feminist issue,” says Weinberger. “Getting an IUD means I 
have a tool in my body that the government can’t touch. Making my own choice 
about what my body can and cannot do in the face of an administration that 
wants to change that is a political act.”

Planned Parenthood is 100 years old, but the fight for reproductive rights 
goes on | Alexander Sanger
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/16/planned-parenthood-100-years-old-reproductive-rights-margaret-sanger>
And let’s be clear, this administration does very much want to change that. 
Although Trump has flip-flopped on abortion and hasseemingly softened his 
perspective on Obamacare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/donald-trump-appears-to-soften-stance-on-range-of-pledges>
,Mike Pence <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mike-pence>, his beady-eyed 
running mate, has beenvehemently opposed to reproductive rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/19/mike-pence-republicans-defund-planned-parenthood-abortion>
 throughout his political career. He signed a whoppingeight anti-abortion bills 
<https://www.plannedparenthoodaction.org/blog/8-outrageous-facts-about-mike-pencerecord-reproductive-rights>
 into law in fewer than four years as governor of Indiana, includingone that 
mandated women hold funerals for their aborted foetuses 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2016/05/state-mandated-mourning-for-aborted-fetuses/482688/>
 and allowed hospitals to deny abortions to womeneven if they would die without 
care 
<https://www.plannedparenthoodaction.org/blog/8-outrageous-facts-about-mike-pencerecord-reproductive-rights>
.

So, while an IUD is a form of armour that women can use to shield themselves 
against Pence and Trump’s crusade to control their bodies, there’s still reason 
for women to be anxious about their future in Trumpland.

“Even if I decide to get an IUD today,” says Jennifer, “how do I know that in 
a few years I’ll be able to see someone to get it taken out?”
 