
“The whole thing is absolutely crazy,” Ian St John says as he mulls over the 
possibility ofDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> 
becoming US president. “There surely must be someone inside the Republican 
party who’s a more suitable candidate than him – they’d only need half a brain.”

Sadly not, it seems, and in two weeks’ time Trump could be elected to become 
the most powerful man on the planet. It’s unlikely but possible and St John is 
among the thousands on both sides of the Atlantic shaking their head in 
bafflement at the prospect.

Thunderous: a history of Manchester United v City League Cup derbies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/26/manchester-united-manchester-city-league-cup-efl-history>
“Someone like Donald shouldn’t be able to get anywhere near becoming president 
but he knows how to get to the top so I guess it’s not a big surprise,” St John 
adds with a sigh. “Let’s just hope Hillary Clinton stops him getting to the 
very, very top.” We can only hope, Ian, we can only hope.

What’s that you’re asking? Why on earth am I discussing Donald Trump’s 
presidential ambitions with the former Scotland and Liverpool striker Ian St 
John? Because he met him, 25 years ago, in New York, and for the fifth-round 
draw of the Rumbelows Cup.

You may well have seen the clip by now given it’s been doing the rounds for 
some time, spreading across social media and feeling like an almighty trick of 
the mind. But it’s real enough – Donald Trump, he of the scaremongering and 
frankly absurd bid for the White House, pulling the names of Norwich City, 
Nottingham Forest (or Southampton), Middlesbrough and Manchester United out of 
a small green bag.

St John was there with Jimmy Greaves, which for anyone of a certain age will 
immediately spark memories of Saint and Greavsie, thehugely popular Saturday 
afternoon show <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ehAbY96AA_4> hosted by the two 
legendary former players. Running from 1985 to 1992, it consisted of 
interviews, previews, goals, gaffes and, at seemingly regular intervals, St 
John chuckling at his television partner’s attempts at what would now be 
referred to as “banter”.

It was a winning combination and in December 1991 led to the most unlikely of 
meetings.

“We were in New York to film the qualifying draw for the 1994 World Cup 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yKVt1pAiqSM>, which was to be held in 
America,” St John, now aged 78, remembers. “It was the idea of our producer, 
Bob Patience, who is sadly no longer with us, and I was really excited by going 
over. ‘That’ll do me!’ I said to Bob.

“There was a problem, though – Jimmy hated flying. As a player he used to get 
the train everywhere, even for games abroad with the likes of Tottenham and 
England. He’d only fly if he could have a drink first but Jimmy was teetotal at 
the time so that wasn’t an option.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fdonald-trump-rumbelows-cup-saint-and-greavsie-ian-st-john-jimmy-greaves%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa24cfa805cb73dddb0e22830a8610ad6002a525%2F40_290_5720_3433%2F5720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Donald%20Trump%20had%20no%20idea%20what%20the%20Rumbelows%20Cup%20was.%20We%20didn%E2%80%99t%20explain%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Sachin%20Nakrani&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fdonald-trump-rumbelows-cup-saint-and-greavsie-ian-st-john-jimmy-greaves%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Donald%20Trump%20had%20no%20idea%20what%20the%20Rumbelows%20Cup%20was.%20We%20didn%E2%80%99t%20explain%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Sachin%20Nakrani&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fdonald-trump-rumbelows-cup-saint-and-greavsie-ian-st-john-jimmy-greaves%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa24cfa805cb73dddb0e22830a8610ad6002a525%2F40_290_5720_3433%2F5720.jpg>
 Ian St John, left, and Jimmy Greaves during a recording of Saint and Greavsie, 
which ran for seven years up until 1992. Photograph: ITV/Rex/Shutterstock 
St John eventually persuaded Greaves to board the plane to New York – “I told 
Jimmy I’d hold his hand during the flight” – and the pair attended the draw, 
which, rather grandly, wasstaged at Madison Square Garden and hosted by I Dream 
of Jeannie star Barbara Eden 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1991/12/09/sports/soccer-world-cup-94-genie-is-out-of-the-bottle.html>
.

That done, St John and Greaves had another, less glamorous task to undertake 
while in New York – sorting out the fifth-round/quarter-final ties of that 
season’s League Cup, which at the time was sponsored by Rumbelows, an 
electronic retailers that back in the day rivalled Currys and Dixons.

David Dent, the secretary of the Football League, had by now also travelled to 
the US and the only thing left to organise was a venue for the Saint and 
Greavsie crew to film the event. “Bob thought it would be a good idea to do it 
from inside the Trump Tower as it was such an iconic building in New York,” 
recalls St John.

Step forward you-know-who.

Trump’s involvement in the draw came about through a freak coincidence. His 
secretary at the time was English and upon spotting St John and Greaves in the 
lobby of Trump Tower as Patience sought permission to film there, she wandered 
over for a chat. Rapport developed, she then asked the old pros if they’d like 
to meet the boss and see if he wanted to appear on their programme. They 
quickly said yes.

“The plan was to do an interview but then Bob had another great idea – let’s 
ask Donald if he wants to get involved with the draw,” says St John, who won 21 
caps for Scotland and was a member of the Liverpool team that won two league 
titles and the FA Cup under Bill Shankly. “He agreed, even though he clearly 
knew nothing about football. I think the appeal for Donald was being on a TV 
show that had a large audience in Britain. He saw it as an opportunity to 
promote himself and his company.

David Squires on … the League Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/picture/2015/feb/25/david-squires-on-the-league-cup>
“To be fair to Donald, he was really good with us. He respected the fact Jimmy 
and I were former pros and asked about that as the crew set up to film the 
draw. We also had a good chat about golf as he was really into that and we 
played a bit. But, as I say, he had no idea about football and certainly no 
idea what Rumbelows was. We didn’t bother explaining it to him.”

The draw took place in Trump’s boardroom, or perhaps one of his boardrooms 
given we’re talking about a68-storey building here 
<http://www.trump.com/real-estate-portfolio/new-york-ny/trump-tower/>. It’s not 
made clear in the clip but, either way, Greaves was certainly impressed with 
his surroundings. “I haven’t seen a boardroom like this since I was in Doug 
Ellis’s at Aston Villa!” he’s seen saying in the now widely watched clip of the 
draw, which leads to collective laughter, with no one laughing harder than 
Trump despite the fact he clearly has no idea what the Englishman across the 
glistening oak table was talking about.

Trump is dressed in a light blue shirt and a dark blue tie and first grabs our 
attention with a smug look to camera. He looks really young, despite the fact 
he was 45 at the time. His skin is smooth, his eyes twinkly, his body 
relatively slim and the only thing truly linking him to the scorched-skinned 
potato monster of today is that trademark back-combed haircut. Ridiculous now, 
ridiculous then.

Dent doesn’t waste any time getting proceedings under way. After a quick 
introduction to camera he states Greaves, who is sitting to his left, will draw 
the home teams while Trump, who is to his right, will draw the away teams. St 
John, meanwhile, can be seen hovering in the background with microphone in 
hand, a position he maintains for the duration of the recording.

We’re all set:
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRRMJ3ftUtnw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRRMJ3ftUtnw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRRMJ3ftUtnw&media=>
 The draw for the fifth-round of the 1992 Rumbelows Cup. Donald Trump will draw 
the away teams. 
First out of the green bag: No4 – Tottenham Hotspur. Greaves has got his old 
club a home tie. Nice one, Jimmy.

Trump makes his first move: No7 – Norwich City.

An all-Division One tie between two sides hovering in mid-table. A solid if 
unspectacular start.

Back to Greaves: No3 – Swindon Town or Crystal Palace.

Back to Trump: No8 – Nottingham Forest or Southampton.

A horribly indecisive tie and no doubt very confusing for Trump given the 
involvement of four teams, one of which sounds like a glass castle.

Tie three and finally some excitement as Greaves pulls out No2 – Peterborough 
United. “Well done Jim, that’s a good one for them,” says St John out of shot.

Peterborough were in the Third Division at the time and had reached the 
quarter-finals courtesy of a shock 1-0 victory over Liverpool in the previous 
round. That had taken place at London Road and now they had another home tie – 
the Wembley dream was well and truly on.

Who would they get next? Over to you Trump: No1 – Middlesbrough.

“Interesting,” says Greaves and interesting it indeed was given Boro were then 
just one division above Peterborough. This was a winnable tie for Posh.

Pulses finally racing, we come to what proved to be the main event: No5 – 
Leeds United.

Trump digs his hand into the little green bag … No6 – Manchester United.

“Ooh, Donald!” exclaims St John, again out of shot. As the camera then pans 
out, Greaves leans forward, looks directly at Trump and says: “You don’t 
realise what you’ve done there!”

Football quiz: name the League Cup sponsor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/25/football-quiz-name-the-league-cup-sponsor>
And here, for perhaps the only time in history, it feels appropriate to use 
the phrase “in fairness to Donald Trump” given a) he didn’t set out to pair 
United with Leeds, who that season battled it out for the Division One title, 
withHoward Wilkinson’s side coming out on top 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2008/jul/17/leedsunited>, and b) there 
was only one little red cube left in the bag, so he had no other choice.

“That’s a biggy, that sounds like the type of game I want to go to,” Trump 
says in a nod to the reaction around him but again with the look of someone who 
has no idea what the hell is going on.

Greaves doesn’t help the situation with his next intervention: “I tell you 
what Donald, are you thinking of opening a store in England? Take my advice, 
you can open one in Leeds but don’t go to Manchester!”

By now Greaves is on a roll and takes it upon himself to ask Trump if he’s 
ever played football before. “I used to play,” the tycoon replies. “It’s a 
great game, I love soccer, I played actually in high school.” He sounds 
convincing but given the things we’ve heard from the 70-year-old’s mouth during 
the presidential campaign it’s probably best to take the idea of a teenage 
Trump shouting: “Get it in the mixer, lads!” with a pinch of salt.

There’s also some talk about the upcoming World Cup – “It’ll be interesting to 
see how it catches on in the United States,” Trump muses – before Greaves draws 
proceedings to an end by presenting the host with a Saints and Greavsie mug. 
“This is the most prestigious award in footballing history,” the former 
goal-scorer says before informing Trump that if he pours hot coffee into the 
vessel, “Funny Old Game” will appear on one side.

“President Bush or Frank Sinatra haven’t got one of those,” Greaves adds as 
Trumps accepts his new gift and, remembering the moment, St John lets out one 
of his trademark chuckles. “Jimmy’s the biggest piss taker I’ve ever met and 
Donald wouldn’t know a piss taker if he tripped over one!”

“But he took it all in good spirits and afterwards shook our hands and thanked 
us for coming. We appreciated him giving over his time so willingly, even if it 
was all about getting on television and promoting himself.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fdonald-trump-rumbelows-cup-saint-and-greavsie-ian-st-john-jimmy-greaves%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc7f67c9a33e3e40da4bd3b933f8fe47c984928d%2F0_287_4914_2948%2F4914.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Donald%20Trump%20had%20no%20idea%20what%20the%20Rumbelows%20Cup%20was.%20We%20didn%E2%80%99t%20explain%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Sachin%20Nakrani&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fdonald-trump-rumbelows-cup-saint-and-greavsie-ian-st-john-jimmy-greaves%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Donald%20Trump%20had%20no%20idea%20what%20the%20Rumbelows%20Cup%20was.%20We%20didn%E2%80%99t%20explain%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Sachin%20Nakrani&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fdonald-trump-rumbelows-cup-saint-and-greavsie-ian-st-john-jimmy-greaves%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc7f67c9a33e3e40da4bd3b933f8fe47c984928d%2F0_287_4914_2948%2F4914.jpg>
 Lee Sharpe, left, and Ryan Giggs celebrate Manchester United’s victory over 
Nottingham Forest in the 1992 Rumbelows Cup final. Photograph: Mark Leech/Getty 
Images 
And now Trump is promoting himself all over again, with the stakes far greater 
than a place in the semi-finals of the 1992 Rumbelows Cup, which incidentally 
waswon by Manchester United after they beat Forest 1-0 in the final thanks to a 
14th-minute goal from Brian McClair 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xBqvCj4ps-Y>.

“If someone told me then that all these years later Donald would be running 
for president I wouldn’t have believed them,” says St John, who remains 
involved in the media in his role as a well-established, highly respected voice 
on the Liverpool-based Radio City Talk. “I certainly wouldn’t have thought he 
would say the type of daft things he has during his campaign. When Jimmy and I 
met him he came across as very polite, so much so that Jimmy called him ‘my 
mate Donald afterwards’, even though he was probably taking the piss again.”

St John lets out another of his infectious chuckles, but his mood becomes 
instantly sombre when he speaks about how Greaves remains “very ill” following 
thesevere stroke the 76-year-old suffered in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/04/jimmy-greaves-severe-stroke-intensive-care-england>
 and how the pair, once so close, on and off screen, have not been in each 
other’s company for longer than he’d care to remember. “I’ve offered to go down 
and see him but been told it’s not worth it as he wouldn’t know I’m there, or 
if he did, he wouldn’t be able to say much to me,” St John adds with an 
unmistakable sadness in his voice. “I think about Jimmy all the time and just 
pray he gets better.”

And what does St John think Greaves, the winner of 57 England caps and 
regarded as one of the finest finishers of his generation, would make of 
Trump’s presidential campaign? “Well, if we were still doing the show he’d 
probably try and get him on!” the Scot replies with another of those chuckles. 
“And if that wasn’t possible we could have a special section called: ‘What daft 
thing has Jimmy’s old mate Donald said now!’”
 