
For a newspaper to cover food these days is regarded as a necessity. When the 
Observer started doing so, in the early 1950s, it was a move so brave it was 
verging on the foolhardy. Yes, there were the stirrings of a postwar food 
culture. Raymond Postgate had published his firstGood Food Guide 
<http://www.thegoodfoodguide.co.uk/> in 1951 and the following year George 
Perry-Smith opened The Hole in the Wall in Bath, a restaurant like no other. It 
served risotto and goulash, quiche lorraine and bouillabaisse. But sugar 
rationing did not end in Britain until September 1953 and meat was still on 
ration until July 1954. Food had been, and in many ways remained, a matter of 
national survival.

And yet in 1952, the Observer began publishing a cookery column by one 
Ernestine Carter, and it was not about getting by on meagre supplies. It was, 
as food has always been for this paper, a celebration. She was offering recipes 
for chicken hollandaise with a side dish of avocado mousse, followed by a 
coffee soufflé. That said, she did have a modern dislike for faff and bother. 
“Beware,” she wrote in July 1952, “of any cookery book that uses the word 
‘lovingly’. It is simply a euphemism for ‘long’.” Quite.

Carter’s column suggested a now familiar belief that food was as worthy a 
subject for analysis as anything on the literary or foreign pages. It was not 
always shared. When she moved off to work elsewhere she was replaced by a 
writer who insisted upon a pseudonym, perhaps out of embarrassment. For a few 
years our food column ran under the name Syllabub, though it was an altogether 
more masculine affair than the lightness of the word might suggest. He – and we 
know it was a he – wrote about the appeal of roasted mutton with a good layer 
of fat, to be served with onion sauce, and a watercress soup made less dainty 
by the addition of eggs and significant dollops of cream.

Throughout the 1960s, the thriller writer Len Deighton was much more upfront. 
Indeed, the whole point of his contributions to theObserver, his Basic French 
Cookery Course, presented in a ground-breaking comic strip form, was to 
demystify the kitchen for men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/14/len-deighton-observer-cookstrips-michael-caine-1960s>
. It was no accident that for all his talents in the intelligence business, 
Deighton’s most famous character, the spy Harry Palmer, was also a dab hand in 
the kitchen. (TheObserver Food Monthly once again publishes comic strips by 
Deighton.) Meanwhile, the great Katharine Whitehorn wascontributing columns 
that would eventually becomeCooking in a Bedsitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/27/interview-katharine-whitehorn-cooking-in-a-bedsitter-book-radio-comedy-beattie-edmondson-sue-teddern>
, a volume seemingly given to almost every new student setting off for 
university.

But without doubt it was the late Jane Grigson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/mar/15/jane-grigson-her-life-and-legacy>
 who established this newspaper’s reputation as a publication that was serious 
about its food, with the recipe column that she wrote from 1968 right up until 
her death in 1990. Not that her writing was worthy or stolid; quite the 
reverse. She had a lightness of touch. But she came to writing about food from 
a life in scholarship, and that intellectual curiosity was soaked into every 
paragraph. She was never just interested in how a dish was made. She also 
wanted to know where dishes came from and why. Her columns, including her 
pullout series, in turn spawned books –Good Things in 1971, for example, or 
English Food in 1974 – which are now considered classics and are still very 
much referred to. The chef Jeremy Lee features a bunch of Grigson recipes on 
his menu at the Soho restaurant, Quo Vadis.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fobserver-at-225-food-writers-jay-rayner%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcabad8fa2c1a7dce86c3b73efe2e09716d93af6a%2F0_292_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Food%20writing%20was%2C%20as%20it%20has%20always%20been%20for%20the%20Observer%2C%20a%20celebration%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fobserver-at-225-food-writers-jay-rayner%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Food%20writing%20was%2C%20as%20it%20has%20always%20been%20for%20the%20Observer%2C%20a%20celebration%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fobserver-at-225-food-writers-jay-rayner%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcabad8fa2c1a7dce86c3b73efe2e09716d93af6a%2F0_292_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Nigel Slater joined the Observer in 1993. Photograph: Julian Broad for the 
Observer 
In the 1980s, Grigson was joined by Paul Levy, another escapee from the world 
of literature, who wrote one of the first non-recipe-based food columns in a 
newspaper. He bestowed upon this paper the dubious honour of being the source 
of the word “foodie” when, in 1984, he co-authoredThe Foodie Handbook with the 
paper’s esteemed features editor, Ann Barr. (As it happens, Barr was also 
responsible for co-authoring theSloane Ranger Handbook, and therefore for 
coining that term, too.) More usefully, at least for me, Levy convinced his 
editors to let him review restaurants so that, along with Jonathan Meades at the
Times, he became one of this country’s first national newspaper restaurant 
critics. In time, Levy would be replaced as restaurant critic by the likes of 
novelist John Lanchester, Kate Flett and, for one curious period,Will Self 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/willself>.

Over a decade ago we launched OFM, giving us a terrific platform from which to 
view the world of how and what we eat in all directions. But without doubt the 
modern story of theObserver’s food coverage was defined by the arrival in 1993 
of the brilliant Nigel Slater. He shares Grigson’s intellectual curiosity and 
deftness of prose, alongside Ernestine Carter’s suspicion of the kitchen as a 
place of chores. But he brings something else that’s entirely his own: an 
instinctive understanding of how ingredients work together and when; a 
gloriously emotional connection to food. You can recognise a Nigel recipe even 
without seeing his name on it.

And so this account would not be complete without one of his: a gloriously 
wintry dish of long-braised beef cheeks with prunes and anise…

Beef cheeks with prunes and anise

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fobserver-at-225-food-writers-jay-rayner%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc94256ff7c326fa2526344fbe5532c0b8594926f%2F0_0_4032_6048%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Food%20writing%20was%2C%20as%20it%20has%20always%20been%20for%20the%20Observer%2C%20a%20celebration%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fobserver-at-225-food-writers-jay-rayner%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Food%20writing%20was%2C%20as%20it%20has%20always%20been%20for%20the%20Observer%2C%20a%20celebration%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fobserver-at-225-food-writers-jay-rayner%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc94256ff7c326fa2526344fbe5532c0b8594926f%2F0_0_4032_6048%2F4032.jpg>
 Photograph: Jonathan Lovekin for the Observer 
As the cheeks cook, they may become very dark in colour. Don’t worry, just 
turn them over in the sauce and leave to cook until tender. I like to serve 
these with fat, floury boiled potatoes. You will need a spoon for the “gravy”.

Serves 3

olive oil 2 tbsp

beef cheeks 2, large (about 900g total weight)

banana shallots 6, medium

carrots 250g, young and small

sake 400ml

beef stock 500ml

prunes 150g

star anise 4

coriander leaves a large handful

Directions

Brown the cheeks in the oil over a moderate heat, letting them colour on both 
sides. Lift the cheeks out of the pan and set aside. Peel the shallots and cut 
each in half from root to tip. Add the shallots to the pan and let them colour 
lightly on both sides.

Heat the oven to 160C/gas mark 3.

Scrub the carrots, add them to the shallots, then pour in the sake and stock. 
Tuck in the prunes and the star anise. Season with salt and pepper, then cover 
with a lid and slide into the oven. Bake, turning over from time to time, for 
three hours until tender.

Add the coriander leaves and serve with lightly steamed greens, such as bok 
choi or spring cabbage.

 * This article was amended on 4 December 2016 to correct an editing error 
that confused Paul Levy with Ann Barr.  