
Outside the Builders Arms Hotel on Gertrude Street, Fitzroy, Gary Foley ties 
his pushbike to a post. “I never used to lock my bike up,” he says, “but it’s a 
white area now.”

From the ‘Parkies’ to the plaques, the Fitzroy of Gary Foley and Gary Murray’s 
youth is almost gone. The ‘Parkies’sit, sing, yarn and drink  
<http://mpegmedia.abc.net.au/rn/360/videos/2009/2539580/parkies.mp4>around 
Smith Street, as they have done for decades, where small brown plaques have 
been affixed to buildings – brief and unremarkable reminders of the black 
history of the inner-city Melbourne suburb.

“This is symbolic of the gentrification of Fitzroy,” says Foley. “Blackfellas 
have been pushed out and physically dispersed yet again, and now we’re being 
erased from memory.”

An afternoon pub crawl along ‘The Dirty Mile’ with Murray, a former Fitzroy 
resident and Black Power activist, is illustrative. On the way from the 
Builders Arms to the Grace Darling Hotel, Murray pauses at 108 Smith Street. It 
was the parent organisation, explains Murray, where Bruce McGuinness’ National 
Aboriginal Conference met. In the old days, those who had a key and a few too 
many pints in them would crash here for the night. Now it’s a trendy cafe.


 From the Grace Darling to the Union Club Hotel, Murray shows me Sir Doug 
Nicholls’ church on Gore Street. Nicholls is Murray’s matrilineal grandfather, 
and years ago, he says they tried to buy the family church back from Michael 
Caton, the actor in the iconic Australian film The Castle. The price was set at 
$1.2 million, well out of their range. The Castle, of course, is a film about a 
white Australian family’s fight for their humble home. Murray chuckles at the 
irony. “These are the battles,” he shrugs.


 As we return from the Union to the Builders Arms, Murray leans in to push 
open the door of the Gore Street entrance, but we’re locked out. We enter at 
another door to find the Gore Street entrance has been boarded up on the inside 
by black tiles. Murray shakes his head, astounded. With it’s white walls and 
gourmet menu, this pub looks and feels nothing like the old days.

“It never ceases to amaze me that black people never owned a pub,” Murray says 
of the Builders Arms. “We had a sense of ownership – whitefellas knew that and 
respected it. There was a Croatian bouncer… I’ve never seen anyone with a head 
as big as his, he was a good fella and he always sorted us out. There was a 
good multicultural mix long before ‘reconciliation’ was invented.”

These facades, like the Gore Street entrance, serve as indulgent props for the 
people that have re-colonised Fitzroy, but they betray the memories of 
generations of Aboriginal activists, workers, writers and artists that grew up 
here. These memories connect place to family and culture, and I’m in Fitzroy to 
trace one in particular – the dayMuhammad Ali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/muhammad-ali> came to visit the Aboriginal 
Health Service on Gertrude Street in 1979. “It’s a fuckin’ wine bar now,” says 
Foley plainly, pointing to the building where the Health Service used to be.

There are so few documented records of Ali ever visiting Fitzroy. A few short 
newspaper reports supplement the snippets and flashes of memory of those who 
bore witness tothe boxing champion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/30/-sp-muhammad-ali-through-the-eyes-of-the-photographers-who-know-him-best>
. When I first asked Murray about it, he put up a notice on Facebook, hoping 
for some leads. The comments flooded in, even from the young people who weren’t 
born at the time. The history has been passed down orally – “they can remember 
their mother and father telling them about it,” explains Murray.

Muhammad Ali came to Australia in March, 1979, the same year he retired from 
boxing. The public didn’t take to the exhibition fights – most of which were 
cancelled – but he was a special guest at the Logies television awards in 
Melbourne. In a moment that has gone down in Australian television history, 
host Bert Newton announced “I like the boy” to the captive audience. “Who’d you 
call boy?” asked a shocked Ali.

A pioneer of Australian television, Newton was born in Fitzroy. But Ali didn’t 
go to Fitzroy for Newton, or any other white celebrity. He came to see a 
Fitzroy emboldened by Black Power.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxWKyDGGptA4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxWKyDGGptA4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxWKyDGGptA4&media=>
 Muhammad Ali speaks with host Bert Newton at the 1979 Logies. 
Aunty Alma Thorpe was born in Fitzroy in 1935. Her first job was at Dummett’s 
shoe factory. She was 12 years old, and she kept that job until she got married 
in 1953. Later, she worked at bars and pubs while raising her seven children. 
She now lives about 10km north in Reservoir. “Fitzroy has actually changed to 
me,” she says. “I was born in Fitzroy and I knew every lane, but if I walked 
Fitzroy now, I’d be scared.”


 Aunty Alma’s earliest memories are of hardship. “You know, I’ve sort of grown 
up with a very hard life in Fitzroy,” she says. “I was lucky that I had cousins 
and uncles that I identified with, because I would have been very very lonely.”

Aunty Alma is the daughter of Aunty Edna and James Brown. Aunty Edna came off 
the Framlingham mission to Fitzroy in 1932, before setting up the Aboriginal 
funeral service. James was a worker and a communist. Aunty Alma says the 
communists were the first friends of the Aboriginal people. “The only times we 
received any type of help or mixing with other people, was with the Communist 
Party, the church and the Builders Labourers.”

Removed from their country and their culture, forced off the missions, the 
people of Fitzroy quickly formed a strong sense of community. “We didn’t know 
who we were,” she says. “Aboriginal people, to us, we didn’t even know about it 
because all that was taken and decimated, when they took our culture and killed 
our elders.

“I feel a bit upset because my great-grandmothers were killed. I’m a 
half-caste. I was forced into my situation by that act. I always wondered, all 
my life, who am I really? I always knew I was an Aboriginal person, but I 
wondered where I was going to fit in?”

The Aboriginal population was poor, continually harassed by the “black maria” 
police van, and beset by sickness. Aunty Alma remembers at least 30 of her 
family – grandfathers, aunties, cousins – dying from tuberculosis. “At the 
time, we started thinking something has gotta be done about this,” she 
remembers.

Influenced by the call for self-determination from the Black Power movement in 
America, Aunty Alma, along with her mother and other women in the community, 
set up the Aboriginal Health Service in 1973. The first centre was just over 
the road from the Builders Arms. “People like women’s groups, elders, the 
Briggs’,” she says. “It came out of Aboriginal women who fought the fight for 
many many years.”

From the beginning it was a revolutionary organisation, treating health not 
just as a medical issue but as a social, cultural and educative process. “It’s 
the whole humanity of a people that’s gone under in this country, because of 
the genocide,” Aunty Alma explains. Treating sickness at the Health Service was 
to soothe the intergenerational trauma of dispossession.

Her daughter, Glenda Thorpe, became a health worker. “Primary healthcare 
delivery,” says Glenda. “No good telling me that I need to eat well when I 
can’t afford to. No good telling me that I need a warm home when I haven’t got 
one. There’s all these things around health – legal, housing, emotional 
well-being.”

One of the main issues was that Aboriginal people wouldn’t go to see white 
doctors. In an interview withIndigenousX 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jun/14/indigenous-health-lisa-briggs-indigenous-x>
, Aboriginal health worker Lisa Briggs said that Glenda was the first 
Aboriginal person to treat her as a 12 year old. “I felt proud. From that day 
on, I wanted to be like her and do what she does: helping her people,” said 
Briggs.

“They didn’t give a damn about connection to country and culture,” says 
Glenda. “You were treated as a number.” The Aboriginal Health Service changed 
that. It became a safe space and a meeting place, a focal point for the 
community. Naturally, many of the staff had ASIO files. “They saw us as 
breeding activists,” says Glenda.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fwhen-muhammad-ali-visited-fitzroy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F15%2F1434333143688%2Fbb448890-9fd8-4269-9230-29cd30251c68-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98He%20came%20to%20see%20blackfellas!%E2%80%99%20When%20Muhammad%20Ali%20visited%20Fitzroy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fwhen-muhammad-ali-visited-fitzroy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98He%20came%20to%20see%20blackfellas%21%E2%80%99%20When%20Muhammad%20Ali%20visited%20Fitzroy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fwhen-muhammad-ali-visited-fitzroy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F15%2F1434333143688%2Fbb448890-9fd8-4269-9230-29cd30251c68-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Gary Murray (left) and Gary Foley (right) outside The Builders Arms Hotel, 
Fitzroy. “The Builders was 10 out of 10 for company, three out of 10 for 
facilities,” says Murray. Photograph: photo: supplied 
In 1979 Sharon Thorpe was 19 and working as a receptionist for the Health 
Service. She was still relatively new to Fitzroy, coming up from Gippsland just 
a few years earlier. Now living in Sydney, she remembers the camaraderie among 
the community.

 “Back in those days, everyone knew each other and we were all very close,” 
she says. “We used to party together and drink together, you know, and if 
another blackfella Aboriginal came into town we’d know about it. Everyone stuck 
together, you know, when there was an event on we’d all go and support one 
another… it’s so different now.”

Sharon remembers the group dinners, the evening get togethers, and the card 
games at Aunty Alma’s home in Emmaline Street. Bruce McGuinness was the 
inspiration, she says, leading people to the black is beautiful movement. 
McGuinness organised parties and nights out, often in large numbers in order to 
avoid harassment. “When you’ve got a big mob of blacks walk into a pub or 
restaurant, it was like, woah!” says Glenda.

For Marji Thorpe, Glenda’s sister, their interaction with other migrant groups 
– Greeks, Italians, Macedonians, Lebanese – was particularly powerful. They 
experienced a similar type of racism from white Australians, says Marji. “We 
were eating different foods, he [McGuinness] was exposing us to different 
cultures as well. Most of us had never had Indian curries before. We were 
coming out of the 1950s white Australia, eating mainly white Australian food, 
which was killing us.”

Mao Tse-Tung, Malcolm X, Stokely Carmichael, Franz Fanon and Roosevelt Brown 
were the political influences, and the African-American struggle was always in 
the picture. “We took courage, I believe, from the Black Panther movement,” 
says Aunty Alma. “We took up that theme, and I think a lot of the younger 
people, you know when you think about the time, it was a revolution.”

 In the late 1960s, Aboriginal people seized control of their advancement 
organisations, and by 1972 the Tent Embassy was established on the lawns of 
Parliament House in Canberra. Redfern, South Brisbane and Fitzroy became 
hotbeds of political activism. “The Australian version of Black Power, like its 
American counterpart, was essentially about the necessity for Black people to 
define the world in their own terms, and to seek self-determination without 
white interference,” wrote Foley.

African-American visitors to Australia had always reached out to Aboriginal 
communities. As early as 1907, the famous boxer Jack Johnson – undoubtedly the 
Muhammad Ali of his era – met with Fred Maynard of the Australian Aboriginal 
Progressive Association. Later, entertainers such as Isaac Hayes, The Four 
Tops, Stevie Wonder and the Jackson Five all met with Aboriginal people.

But Ali was the pinnacle. He was a Black Power luminary, a man who spoke up 
for oppressed people all over the world, probably the best known black man on 
the planet at the time. And he was a boxer.Boxing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing>, says Aunty Alma, was a powerful 
force in the Aboriginal community, going back to the Sharman tent boxers. Bruce 
McGuinness was a boxer. So was Gary Murray. Aunty Alma’s favourite, Lionel 
Rose, was a world champion. “I used to love them, it was marvellous, there was 
all these men, these beautiful black men fighting,” she says.

So when Ali came to Melbourne, on Tuesday, March 20 a group of activists 
including Bindi Williams, Mick Edwards, Gary Murray and Kevin Smith decided to 
get him down to Fitzroy. “We grabbed a camera and went to the Hilton Hotel,” 
says Murray. “We put stickers on the camera and on our hats saying ‘Koori 
Press’ so they’d let us into the press conference. We got there at the end and 
we asked if he’d like to meet some black people. He said yes, and to meet him 
around the back in five minutes.”

Out the back of the Hilton, Murray and his cohort gave Ali’s minders 
directions to the Health Service, and not long after, Ali rolled up. “The word 
went around like electricity,” says Foley. “There was a block of trams, you 
couldn’t get near him. You couldn’t get in, the place was chock-a-block.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fwhen-muhammad-ali-visited-fitzroy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F15%2F1434333823468%2Fecefc43a-af40-4535-a4ab-edd100833612-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98He%20came%20to%20see%20blackfellas!%E2%80%99%20When%20Muhammad%20Ali%20visited%20Fitzroy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fwhen-muhammad-ali-visited-fitzroy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98He%20came%20to%20see%20blackfellas%21%E2%80%99%20When%20Muhammad%20Ali%20visited%20Fitzroy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fwhen-muhammad-ali-visited-fitzroy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F15%2F1434333823468%2Fecefc43a-af40-4535-a4ab-edd100833612-680x1020.jpeg>
 “All Ali wanted to do was to see how a black man lives and works in Australia” 
- Muhammad Ali visits the Aboriginal Health Services office in Fitzroy. 
Photograph: The Age 
The women inside the Health Service got a close up. “I had a gold Torana, and 
he come out and signed my car,” says Aunty Alma. Marji says Ali cradled her 
baby, Lydia. “He related to us,” she explains, “I don’t remember words that he 
said, but he sat down inside the place. He sat down and had a conversation.”


Deborah Deacon, at the time a young assistant to Aunty Alma, remembers calling 
her brother, saying “get your black arse down here! Muhammad Ali is on his 
way.” According to a newspaper report from the time in the Age, Turks, Greeks, 
Yugoslavs and “a sprinkling of Timorese” came down to the Health Service to see 
“the world champion strolling in the shadow of the Housing Commission high-rise 
in Gertrude Street.” A “fair-headed Australian” in a Kombi van drove past, 
yelling “Australia for Australians!”.


But Ali was there to meet Aboriginal people. He surely would’ve recognised the 
social, cultural and political role of the Health Service. “These organisations 
were inspired by people in Ali’s home country,” says Foley, who played an 
instrumental role in setting up the Redfern Aboriginal Health Service in 
Sydney. According to Murray, Ali was impressed, and told the crowd gathered on 
the corner outside the Builders Arms: “Let religion be your shopfront and your 
business at the back.”


 Deacon remembers Ali as charismatic, well spoken and handsome. “He’s got a 
very sharp mind and carefully chooses his words,” she says. “He just had this 
impact on all people, black, white, from different socio-economic backgrounds.”

Glenda and Sharon Thorpe got the closest. “I just remember the bodyguard,” 
says Sharon, “I don’t mean to big-note myself or anything, but he came over and 
said ‘Muhammad Ali wants to meet you.’ I said ‘sweet’, you know. He loved 
women.”
 Sharon and Glenda played basketball for the all-Aboriginal Melbourne Blacks, 
and so after their game, they got changed and went in to the Hilton. They were 
invited upstairs to his penthouse suite, where they ate dinner and chatted 
about Aboriginal Affairs. Both women remember Ali as polite, respectful and 
curious about their aspirations. Sharon told him she wanted to be a model, 
Glenda a doctor.

“Oh look, it was absolutely amazing,” says Sharon, who, like Glenda, still 
works in Aboriginal health. “The best thing ever – we couldn’t believe that 
this powerful black man was there. I was overwhelmed and a little bit shy at 
the time. I just couldn’t get over how we just went and played basketball 
before going to meet him, you know?”

“He came to see blackfellas!” says Glenda. “It made people feel special – it 
said to the rest of the world, we got a story, we got something to say and it’s 
not good. That recognition, you know, it was listen to our story. We couldn’t 
get on the international arena anywhere.” Aunty Alma agrees. “It was a great 
day, it really lifted our spirits,” she says. “It became well known then, the 
Health Service. It was just a pokey little place.”

For Murray, a budding boxer at the time, it was an opportunity to meet an 
idol. As a young man he would watch Ali from afar, willing him on to win. “I’d 
just about make myself sick until he pulled out that knockout punch,” says 
Murray. “He’s the only one that could do that.”

But it wasn’t just sport. When Ali refused to fight in the Vietnam War – “man, 
I ain’t got no quarrel with them Viet Cong. No Vietcong ever called me nigger,” 
Ali said – Murray took inspiration. “To see him beat the draft – that war had 
nothing to do with black people,” he says. “Same as here. He bought that 
political perspective. If anything we’d support the Viet Cong because they’re 
Indigenous.”

I ask Murray if he got anything on tape with the ‘Koori Press’ camera. 
Laughing uproariously, he shakes his head – “We had no film in the camera!” In 
the end, all that remains is memory.

“He was articulate, and as strong in his mind as his body,” says Murray. “He 
bewitched the crowd – he was the chosen one. They need to put a plaque where 
the Great Man planted his feet opposite the Builders Arms. It was like a 
meteorite had struck Fitzroy. There won’t be one ever again.”
 