
The death of Raheemullah Oryakhel, a 14-year-boy from Afghanistan, was marked 
last month with just a couple of paragraphs in the French press, under the 
headline “One migrant dead on the port ring road”. There was nothing much to 
excite further interest; the boy was the 12th refugee to die inCalais 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/calais> this year. The news item added that 
Raheemullah’s body had been found on the N216, on a stretch of motorway where a 
number of migrants had previously been run over. Police said he had probably 
been hit by a car. Whoever was behind the wheel had not bothered to stop.

Nor are the details of Raheemullah’s death particularly shocking to the 
handful of relatives and acquaintances he left behind in theCalais 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/calais> camp, a fetid, cramped cluster of 
sagging donated tents and roughly built wooden shacks, now home to an estimated 
9,000 asylum seekers. The idea that vulnerable children, some as young as 
eight, who have mostly fled conflict zones, should spend night after night 
trying to leap on to moving vehicles, in a desperate (and mostly futile) 
attempt to reach the UK, surprises no one. It’s a risky business. Sometimes 
people get suffocated in the trucks, or frozen in refrigerated containers; 
sometimes they choose a different route and drown trying to swim to England or 
get electrocuted on the railway. And sometimes they just get run over.

But there is sadness and some bitterness at the driver’s failure to stop, and 
at the apparently cursory nature of the police investigation. Abdul Wali, an 
older camp resident who helped raise more than €4,000 (£3,516) to send 
Raheemullah’s body back to his parents, says, “Even inAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>, if someone is hit by a car, at 
least the driver will take him to a police station or hospital and say sorry. 
Here, people are dying and no one cares.”

Raheemullah is probably the youngest asylum seeker to die yet, but his death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/18/afghan-boy-killed-in-calais-in-attempt-to-climb-on-to-lorry-to-uk>
 epitomises the risks that hundreds are taking every night on the roads outside 
Calais. As the French government prepares todismantle the camp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/02/france-vows-to-dismantle-jungle-refugee-camp-calais>
 next week, aiming to disperse its residents around the country instead, the 
sense of urgency surrounding the mission to get to the UK has intensified. It 
is an intolerable situation for everyone involved: the lorry drivers, Calais 
residents, local police (who are exhausted by nightly patrols) and, most of 
all, for the camp’s population.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fvery-scared-death-teenage-stowaway%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94a6656e8af9861853476b2fcccd2c2c681da04e%2F23_126_5547_3328%2F5547.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='He%20was%20very%20scared'%3A%20the%20death%20of%20a%20teenage%20stowaway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fvery-scared-death-teenage-stowaway%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27He%20was%20very%20scared%27%3A%20the%20death%20of%20a%20teenage%20stowaway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fvery-scared-death-teenage-stowaway%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94a6656e8af9861853476b2fcccd2c2c681da04e%2F23_126_5547_3328%2F5547.jpg>
 Boys and young men play cricket by the fence that surrounds the Calais camp. 
Photograph: Abbie Trayler-Smith for the Guardian 
The last person to see Raheemullah alive was almost certainly his friend 
Karim, also 14, who was trying to pull him on to the top of a moving lorry 
shortly before dawn on Friday 16 September. “I was saying, ‘Give me your hand’ 
but he didn’t,” Karim says. “He didn’t listen.” It was a terrifying few 
minutes, in total darkness. One second his friend was there, the next he was 
gone.

Until recently, Karim (an assumed name to avoid anything that might complicate 
his asylum claim, should he ever be in a position to make one) was showing 
anyone he met a photograph of his dead friend, taken in the Lille morgue, 
looking as bad as you might expect after a fatal road accident. Volunteers who 
have stepped in to help with the hundreds of children at the camp have since 
persuaded him to delete the image from his phone. They know Karim is 
devastated, but have little at their disposal to cheer him up. One volunteer 
took him out of the camp for an ice-cream; another took him to the donations 
warehouse and got him a new pair of socks.

Because the French authorities are unwilling to recognise the camp, there is 
no UN presence here, and no mainstream children’s charity on site; the 800 or 
so parentless children (a third of them from Afghanistan) are left largely to 
look after themselves. Volunteers with groups such asHelp Refugees 
<http://www.helprefugees.org.uk> do their best, but are dismayed at the 
hopeless inadequacy of what they can offer. “We have a severely traumatised 
child,” one says, “and what can we do? We say: ‘Your friend’s dead, he’s been 
squashed, have an ice-cream.’ It’s awful.”

Two weeks after the accident, Karim sits on a wooden pallet at the edge of the 
camp and explains how he and Raheemullah came to be on the motorway before dawn 
that night. The two boys had walked for an hour along the high barbed-wire 
fencing that separates the camp from the road, to a spot where other asylum 
seekers had dragged some wooden logs into the centre of the road, forcing 
lorries to slow down.

Sometimes there are 100 people by the road, trying to get into the lorries. 
Someone is going to fall over and get hit

Both had made frequent night-time attempts to get to England together. Karim 
has been in the camp since January, trying most nights to make his way across 
the Channel. Raheemullah, who came from the same part of Afghanistan, arrived 
in July, and the two became friends. Most evenings they played cricket and 
volleyball on the wasteland beside the motorway. “He was a good friend,” Karim 
says. “I liked him very much.”

They found a crowd of people hoping to push their way on to the stream of 
heavy goods vehicles as they slowed to navigate the obstacles. Karim and 
Raheemullah followed two older men, climbing on to the axle between the 
driver’s cab and the container section of the lorry. Karim managed to get on to 
the top of the container, but Raheemullah was still on the ledge between the 
cab and the rest of the truck when it began to gather speed. Karim says the 
lorry started swerving abruptly, as if trying to shake off the uninvited 
passengers. He leaned over the edge, offering his friend his hand. “Why didn’t 
he take it?” he asks.

No one knows quite what happened next. One of the older men cut a small hole 
in the roof of the truck (a black vehicle with an enormous red logo on the 
side, Karim says). Karim lowered himself through it into the container, which 
held a consignment of swivelling office chairs, and hid there as the truck 
continued to the port. Some time later, he was discovered by port officials 
before the truck drove on to the ferry. When he returned to the camp, he 
discovered his friend was missing.

***

Raheemullah lived in the camp in a windowless chipboard hut with his first 
cousin, Wahid, 23, and two other men. No one has moved his belongings, a few 
clothes stored in plastic bags. The grubby brown blanket and mattress where he 
slept for the last two and a half months of his life are still there.

Wahid is better able to articulate the loss and anger he feels about his 
cousin’s death. He speaks good English, having spent three years at secondary 
school in Norwich, after fleeing the Taliban when he was 14. He was taken in by 
a foster family, made friends, studied hard, took a part-time job in a Chinese 
takeaway – and then, at 17 and a half, his case was reconsidered and he was 
told he would be deported back to Afghanistan, which the Home Office 
categorises as a safe destination. He spent some time trying to appeal, but 
left forEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> rather than be 
sent back. There are many young Afghan men, with fluent English, in a similar 
situation in Calais.

Wahid’s friend Abdul went to school in Birmingham (also after being threatened 
by the Taliban), before being told at 17 that he was no longer eligible to 
remain in England. Both hope to return to the UK, which is the place they 
consider home, to appeal for leave to stay.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fvery-scared-death-teenage-stowaway%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bbbcb129d21cdba8feb6af431e1b1ea5548a83a%2F0_123_3744_4680%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='He%20was%20very%20scared'%3A%20the%20death%20of%20a%20teenage%20stowaway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fvery-scared-death-teenage-stowaway%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27He%20was%20very%20scared%27%3A%20the%20death%20of%20a%20teenage%20stowaway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fvery-scared-death-teenage-stowaway%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bbbcb129d21cdba8feb6af431e1b1ea5548a83a%2F0_123_3744_4680%2F3744.jpg>
 Wahid in the hut he shared with Raheemullah; his cousin’s bed and clothes have 
been untouched. Photograph: Abbie Trayler-Smith for the Guardian 
Wahid was shocked to see his cousin, whom he had not seen since he was a 
child, arrive in the camp. While ambivalent about Raheemullah’s determination 
to get to England, given his own mixed experiences, Wahid didn’t try to 
dissuade him. “It was not my job to tell him how to decide his life.” Instead, 
he invited him to come and share his hut. Raheemullah had travelled alone from 
Afghanistan, and been badly beaten by Bulgarian police; he was relieved to find 
someone to protect him. For a month, they went out together five nights a week, 
to try to jump on a lorry.

“In the beginning he was happy,” Wahid says. “He said it was good fun. Slowly 
he realised it was not easy, that it was risky. Sometimes I’d say, let’s go 
tonight, and he’d say, ‘No, tomorrow.’ I knew he didn’t want to go. He was very 
scared. It’s a one-hour walk in the dark. You feel scared of the French people. 
You worry that if they see you alone, maybe they will beat you. Sometimes there 
are 100 people by the road, trying to get into the lorries. People are pushing. 
Of course someone is going to fall over and get hit.”

I said, ‘The sooner you can go from here, the better.’ There is fighting. It 
is not a good place for a child

Wahid was also aware the camp wasn’t a safe place for Raheemullah. “That’s why 
I said, ‘The sooner you can go from here, the better.’ There is fighting 
between the Sudanese and the Afghans, between the Afghans and the Afghans – for 
no reason, just because of the tension here. It gets boring. You sleep, wake 
up, sleep, wake up. You can’t shower for a week. People are desperate. It is 
not a good place for anyone, especially not a child.”

He feels anger at how slow the British response has been. Raheemullah had an 
older brother in Manchester, and was in theory eligible to join him in the UK; 
but the process for organising reunification is very slow, bureaucratic and 
hard to understand. It is not clear how much his brother was able to help with 
the application, or if the papers had even been lodged. Charities estimate 
there are 300 to 400 unaccompanied children in Calais with relatives in the UK; 
but even in straightforward cases, the legal process takes between five and 10 
months, during which time the children often give up waiting and start making 
the nightly journey to the motorway instead.

Security has been increased around the port, so that finding a way in has 
become harder and much more dangerous. Work has recently begun ona £1.9m, 
1km-long wall to block off the dual carriageway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/20/work-calais-wall-refugees-lorries-uk>
, half-funded by the UK. Although French president François Hollande has
committed to clearing the camp by the end of the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/02/france-vows-to-dismantle-jungle-refugee-camp-calais>
, there is scepticism about how easy it will be to find homes for everyone. 
Officials believe that people will stay on, and the barriers will still be 
needed. “Why are you spending the money on building a wall?” Abdul wonders, 
sitting with Wahid in a caravan that serves as a clothes distribution point, 
donated tracksuits piled up on the surfaces. “You are wasting money. If they 
hadn’t built these fences, people wouldn’t risk their lives.”

Wahid and Raheemullah managed to get on lorries together three times, but each 
time were pulled off at the border by officials with sniffer dogs. “The police 
were nice with him. And, because of him, they were nice with me as well. They 
take you to the front of the port and say, ‘Go back to the jungle.’” Early last 
month, Wahid hurt his back badly after his friends put a heavy box over him to 
hide him inside a lorry. “I was under it for eight hours. I couldn’t stand [it] 
any more, so I left.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fvery-scared-death-teenage-stowaway%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1507b56f759b027e7d52332dd9392d05ac6720a%2F31_103_5412_3247%2F5412.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='He%20was%20very%20scared'%3A%20the%20death%20of%20a%20teenage%20stowaway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fvery-scared-death-teenage-stowaway%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27He%20was%20very%20scared%27%3A%20the%20death%20of%20a%20teenage%20stowaway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fvery-scared-death-teenage-stowaway%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1507b56f759b027e7d52332dd9392d05ac6720a%2F31_103_5412_3247%2F5412.jpg>
 The Calais camp, home to an estimated 9,000 asylum seekers. Photograph: Abbie 
Trayler-Smith for the Guardian 
When Raheemullah suggested he come with him early on the morning of 16 
September, Wahid said no: his back was too painful. “I told him to be careful. 
He knew it was very dangerous.” The next morning, when it became obvious 
Raheemullah was missing, a youth worker from the camp visited local hospitals 
and police stations to look for him. Later, Wahid went to the morgue to 
identify the body. Raheemullah’s face was so badly damaged, he was 
unrecognisable, except for his clothes and a distinctive mark on his arm. Wahid 
thinks his cousin wasn’t strong enough to pull himself up on to the roof. “He 
was young, he had no muscles.”

Wahid spoke to his uncle, Raheemullah’s father, in Afghanistan, but found 
himself unable to break the news. “They asked what happened, and I said, ‘He is 
injured.’ I told them a lie. His parents are quite old. I didn’t want to hurt 
them.” He assumes their older son called later, from Manchester, to tell them. 
Since the body arrived back in Afghanistan, accompanied by another relative who 
came from Norway to travel with the coffin, Raheemullah’s parents have called 
again to ask how their son died. The calls are distressing: “They keep ringing 
me. I say, ‘You don’t need to know. He is dead.’ Why make them more upset?”

It is still unclear why Raheemullah’s parents sent their son 4,000 miles 
across Europe to try to start a new life in England. Wahid isn’t forthcoming; 
his own experiences of hostile questioning by the Home Office have made him 
wary of the question and he will say only that “it wasn’t an economic problem. 
There was a danger for him.” But Karim thinks the absence of work in postwar 
Afghanistan was a factor. “He was going to send money to his family. His father 
was an old man – he couldn’t work. No one wants to go to England, but if they 
have problems at home, that’s why they go.”

Whatever the reason, the decision to send a child away is never taken lightly, 
Wahid says. “Of course they will be wishing with their hearts now that they 
hadn’t. They didn’t know he was going to die.” His own advice to other parents 
now is not to send their children to Europe, but there is often a reluctance to 
listen. On the whole, children do not tell their parents about the difficulties 
they have encountered, so an unrealistic perception prevails. “Life [in 
Afghanistan] is very hard. There’s Isis and the Taliban, and no security. They 
don’t know anything about the situation in Calais. The parents don’t know about 
the risks.” Abdul has become equally firm. “I have five brothers. They call me 
and ask, shall we come? I say, if you come, you will sleep in the street. 
Please don’t waste your time.”

Volunteers attempt to persuade refugees to claim asylum in France, rather than 
wasting months and risking their lives trying to get to the UK. They point out 
that – particularly for young people from Afghanistan – it makes more sense to 
remain inFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, because there is 
less risk of being deported when they approach 18. But it is hard to persuade 
children whose parents have paid large sums of money to dispatch them across 
Europe. People smugglers operating in the camp also have a vested interest in 
encouraging others to get to the UK, otherwise their business model disappears.

Increasing numbers of camp residents have applied for asylum in France 
<http://www.africanews.com/2016/09/07/more-calais-migrants-give-up-british-dream-seek-asylum-in-france/>
; it is now largely those with relatives in the UK who persist in their 
attempts to join them. But many of those children who decide to stay in France 
are told there is no room for them in the nearby emergency shelter, which is 
turning away between 15 and 35 children a day, so they remain in a dangerous 
limbo. No one knows where the children will be sent once the camp is shut down.

Wahid believes any investigation into his cousin’s death has already been 
closed. No one has come to look for witnesses in the camp. He made one visit to 
the police station when he was searching for Raheemullah, where he says the 
police officer was rude; he is reluctant to go again because of his illegal 
status in France. “They don’t care who has died. To them, we’re just illegal 
migrants, ‘jungly people’.” The prosecutor’s office of Boulogne-sur-Mer did not 
respond to emailed requests for details of the police investigation.

Meanwhile, a minute’s silence was held for Raheemullah in the camp at the end 
of September. Friends who spent time with him inthe Kids’ Cafe 
<https://www.change.org/p/save-the-kids-cafe-sauvons-le-caf%C3%A9-des-enfants>, 
a wooden hut serving free food to unaccompanied children, say he was shyer than 
most. Mary Jones, an English volunteer who runs the cafe, describes him as 
“very quiet and polite”. He attended some of the English lessons given by 
volunteers, who remember him as “reserved, in a well-brought up way” and “very 
determined in everything he did, especially learning English”.

If Raheemullah’s death failed to register more widely in France, it has had a 
quiet but significant impact in the UK – both positive and negative. Some of 
the news reporting prompted delight among the more extreme anti-immigration 
voices on Twitter (even to hardened eyes, to respond to this death by typing 
tweets such as “Can’t they show it happening I would enjoy watching it one less 
to worry about” goes beyond the normal parameters of nastiness).

As the demolition date approaches, concern about the fate of unaccompanied 
children is rising

More constructive was the decision by a group of Conservative MPs to write to 
home secretary Amber Rudd, calling on her to do more to help reunite children 
such as Raheemullah with their families 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/03/tory-mps-urge-amber-rudd-do-more-help-child-refugees-calais>
. The letter, signed by former education secretary Nicky Morgan and nine 
others, told Rudd that Raheemullah had “a legal right to be with his brother” 
but that, “having waited for months in wretched conditions”, he “took fate into 
his own hands with devastating consequences”.

It was discussed at last month’s Labour party conference, too, by Alf Dubs, 
the kindertransport child refugee and Labour peer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/05/disgrace-to-europe-former-child-refugee-lord-dubs-calais-camp>
, who in Mayforced the government to accept an amendment to the Immigration Act 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-europe-migrants-minors-idUKKCN0XT15M>, 
agreeing to give homes to some of the estimated 88,000 unaccompanied asylum 
seekers in Europe. Since his amendment was passed,none of the qualifying 
children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/04/britain-failing-child-refugees-europe-help-them-fast>
 has arrived in the UK. At a conference fringe meeting, Dubs dropped his 
determination to be politely cooperative with the government, describing them 
as “bloody liars” for failing to act.

As the demolition date approaches, concern about the fate of unaccompanied 
children is rising, but a solution has yet to be found. Last time French police 
attempted to demolish the camp, 129 children went missing, according to Help 
Refugees. Karim has promised volunteers that he won’t try climbing on lorries 
again, but they suspect he is still going every night anyway.

On Monday, Rudd told parliament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/10/uk-close-to-deal-for-transfer-of-child-refugees-from-calais-amber-rudd>
 that she wanted to speed up the transfer of those children with family in the 
UK, and that Britain would help to fund a shelter in France for children whose 
cases needed longer consideration. She promised to cut the bureaucracy 
involved, but there were no details of how many children would be given 
sanctuary here, and when they could arrive.

Meanwhile, the bald list of “registered migrant deaths” compiled by the local 
police grows longer, with a 13th death in late September and a 14th death last 
Sunday. This year’s toll includes: “a migrant whose sex could not be identified 
at the time of the discovery of the body, found drowned in Calais port”; “an 
Afghan migrant, 22 years, hit by an HGV on the A16 just before 6am”; “body of a 
migrant found dead around 7am near the port bypass – injuries suggest this 
migrant was hit by a vehicle”; “a Sudanese migrant, 30 years, hit by a freight 
train on the railway, close to the port bypass”; “a migrant of unknown 
nationality on the A16 at the A47 interchange. No witness.” Raheemullah’s death 
is there, recorded succinctly: “Around 5:30am, the lifeless body of a migrant 
found on the port ring road.”
 