
Chadden Hunter: ‘Don’t let a crocodile take your leg off!’

The most hair-raising expedition we had was in the Okavango Delta, Botswana. 
Our aim was to capture Swamp Cats – a remarkable pride of lions that take on 
buffalo five times their size in knee-deep water.


It took us over three months of camping out and hauling boats through tangled 
swamps to witness the watery lion v buffalo battle. Technology couldn’t help 
us; we had to use good old-fashioned bush-craft and patience.


Local cameraman Brad Bestelink said he could get us to the heart of the action 
in his lightweight boat. After hours of winding through narrow channels 
surrounded by towering reeds, our dinghy got stuck in the vegetation. Not a big 
problem usually – but we soon noticed we were surrounded by grumpy hippos.

“Don’t get too close,” warned Brad. “Hippos kill more people in Africa than 
any other animal, and they snapped my last boat in half.” As we waited for them 
to move off, we were eaten alive by so many mosquitos it was a relief to get 
out of the boat and sink into armpit-deep black water.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fplanet-earth-ii-hairiest-moments-david-attenborough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe216fea46bced57be8c2307d5c3d6eb17438b760%2F0_36_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Hippos%20snapped%20my%20last%20boat%20in%20half'%3A%20Planet%20Earth%20II's%20hairiest%20moments&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fplanet-earth-ii-hairiest-moments-david-attenborough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Hippos%20snapped%20my%20last%20boat%20in%20half%27%3A%20Planet%20Earth%20II%27s%20hairiest%20moments&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fplanet-earth-ii-hairiest-moments-david-attenborough%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe216fea46bced57be8c2307d5c3d6eb17438b760%2F0_36_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Photograph: BBC 
We pushed the boat above our heads, while our legs underwater were getting 
slashed to ribbons by sword-grass. Then Brad surprised me. He told me to take 
my shoes off.

“With shoes on you’ll step on a crocodile and press down without knowing. 
It’ll take your leg off!” The look on my face demanded more explanation. “With 
bare feet”, he went on, “you can feel a crocodile’s skin and yank your leg out 
of the way.”


We gingerly pushed the boat on into the night, as long dark shapes lurched out 
of our way in the inky water. I’ve never paid more attention to every footstep.

Finally, we caught up with the Swamp Cats. When the pride started circling a 
lone bull, we knew this might be our one shot. We had just seconds to get as 
close as we could without getting stuck in the swamp ourselves. We knew the 
animals posed no danger to us (when lions and buffalo are focused on their 
gladiatorial battles they pay no attention to humans).

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fplanet-earth-ii-hairiest-moments-david-attenborough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b564bfd300d2c1e04ebad9eb15cc5c645c1c8d1%2F0_0_1920_1080%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Hippos%20snapped%20my%20last%20boat%20in%20half'%3A%20Planet%20Earth%20II's%20hairiest%20moments&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fplanet-earth-ii-hairiest-moments-david-attenborough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Hippos%20snapped%20my%20last%20boat%20in%20half%27%3A%20Planet%20Earth%20II%27s%20hairiest%20moments&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fplanet-earth-ii-hairiest-moments-david-attenborough%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b564bfd300d2c1e04ebad9eb15cc5c645c1c8d1%2F0_0_1920_1080%2F1920.jpg>
 Photograph: BBC 
The 900kg bull was so unfazed he didn’t even run when he saw the lions. He 
knows one flick of a horn could kill them. The lionesses’ only hope is to work 
as a team, one distracting the bull up front while her sisters attack from 
behind. When the lead lioness launched at the buffalo’s back, trying to get her 
claws and teeth into his almost impenetrable hide, I knew we had it. This was a 
clash of titans, played out spectacularly amid sheets of splashing water.


It can be harrowing to watch majestic animals try to kill each other. But 
here, the buffalo prevailed and no animals died. By the end, the lions were so 
exhausted I wondered how they would ever muster the energy to hunt again.

Dr Chadden Hunter is an Australian wildlife biologist and filmmaker. While 
filming arctic wolves for Frozen Planet, he learned that minus 40C was cold 
enough to freeze his eyes shut. He produced the Grasslands episode.

Justin Anderson: ‘When I saw it I actually did a jig of joy’ 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fplanet-earth-ii-hairiest-moments-david-attenborough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3e0b5c23c5ac7af22874f802fd4c06fdf96bfa2%2F0_205_4344_2606%2F4344.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Hippos%20snapped%20my%20last%20boat%20in%20half'%3A%20Planet%20Earth%20II's%20hairiest%20moments&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fplanet-earth-ii-hairiest-moments-david-attenborough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Hippos%20snapped%20my%20last%20boat%20in%20half%27%3A%20Planet%20Earth%20II%27s%20hairiest%20moments&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fplanet-earth-ii-hairiest-moments-david-attenborough%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3e0b5c23c5ac7af22874f802fd4c06fdf96bfa2%2F0_205_4344_2606%2F4344.jpg>
 Photograph: David Willis/BBC 
The singing snow leopard was shot with a remote camera trap up at 4,800m in 
the Himalayas. I didn’t even know this footage existed for several months after 
it was taken.


It took a huge team to pull this off, from our camera crew who designed and 
built the traps (and narrowly missed a rockfall one day), to local guides who 
would climb up there every few weeks to change the batteries. That’s many hours 
of walking in the thin air, often for little reward. But the guides knew which 
rocks the leopards liked to visit. Without them, we would never have known 
where to even start looking.

Our traps were in the field for almost a year. This shot came through right at 
the end, when we were editing. Khenrab, our Ladakhi guide, had been trekking to 
collect the cards from our cameras when he saw the shot on his laptop. He 
immediately phoned me back at home in Bristol to say we had been very lucky.


When I saw it I embarrassingly actually did a little jig of joy. The cat walks 
into shot, stops in frame and starts to call. Between the weather and the 
technology, so much can go wrong – but here the vista, the light and the cat 
are just perfect.


 The locals say if you see a snow leopard it feels like your soul is flying. 
They are so proud that their cats are now global superstars.

Justin Anderson has 18 years of documentary experience. On the first Planet 
Earth, he achieved notoriety for spending two months working in a huge pile of 
bat guano. He produced Mountains.

Ed Charles: ‘We narrowly escaped some armed bandits’

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fplanet-earth-ii-hairiest-moments-david-attenborough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8af303765fdbc34115aab1985872909339dacc27%2F0_219_3692_2215%2F3692.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Hippos%20snapped%20my%20last%20boat%20in%20half'%3A%20Planet%20Earth%20II's%20hairiest%20moments&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fplanet-earth-ii-hairiest-moments-david-attenborough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Hippos%20snapped%20my%20last%20boat%20in%20half%27%3A%20Planet%20Earth%20II%27s%20hairiest%20moments&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fplanet-earth-ii-hairiest-moments-david-attenborough%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8af303765fdbc34115aab1985872909339dacc27%2F0_219_3692_2215%2F3692.jpg>
 Photograph: BBC/Ed Charles 
The locust sequence was the very first shoot of the entire series. We’d heard 
that Madagascar was experiencing an epidemic of plague-like proportions and the 
UN’s Food and Agricultural Organisation (FAO) were already trying to eradicate 
the swarms, so we didn’t have time to hang around.


We had to chase the locusts on a road trip across a country not renowned for 
its roads. It had been a very wet year, so our progress was painfully slow – 
our vehicles were for ever getting stuck on boggy roads. We had a narrow escape 
with some armed bandits who came looking for us at the exact spot we had been 
filming for the last week. Luckily, we’d decided to move the day before.

After three weeks of chasing our tails, we quite literally ran out of road, so 
decided the only way to get ahead of the swarms was by helicopter. With the 
FAO’s help, we took to the air. When we spotted a swarm, we were able to set 
down, get ready and wait.


Very soon, a faint smudge appeared on the horizon, getting closer and closer. 
Suddenly we were surrounded. Being in a swarm of a billion locusts is a surreal 
experience – but not, as you might expect, a grotesque one. Rather than 
crashing into us, they flew around us, like water parting around a rock in a 
stream, and the sound of their wings beating was like a roar of moving air that 
was almost on the edge of hearing.

Ed Charles has worked in wildlife documentary filming for 13 years. He 
produced Deserts.

Elizabeth White: ‘The Medusa’s head was the stuff of nightmares’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fplanet-earth-ii-hairiest-moments-david-attenborough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8944f99da21b178278d7bef89ee7e1e3ee78fc7%2F116_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Hippos%20snapped%20my%20last%20boat%20in%20half'%3A%20Planet%20Earth%20II's%20hairiest%20moments&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fplanet-earth-ii-hairiest-moments-david-attenborough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Hippos%20snapped%20my%20last%20boat%20in%20half%27%3A%20Planet%20Earth%20II%27s%20hairiest%20moments&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fplanet-earth-ii-hairiest-moments-david-attenborough%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8944f99da21b178278d7bef89ee7e1e3ee78fc7%2F116_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 Photograph: BBC 
The baby marine iguanas being hunted by racer snakes has got to be my 
favourite shot. We spent three weeks filming on the uninhabited Galapagos 
island of Fernandina. Marine iguanas have been filmed many times, so we focused 
on the animals that live around them – the crabs that eat their dead skin, the 
lizards that catch flies by them and the predators that hunt them.


We arrived in late May, to coincide with the time the iguana babies hatch and 
head for the beach. Before that, all our kit and clothing had to go into 
quarantine. It was sprayed, frozen and embargoed to avoid any pests or viruses 
or seeds getting accidentally introduced. Our days were spent waiting and 
watching with binoculars. When a baby was spotted, we had to try and predict 
where they would run. To maximise our chances, we had two cameramen, one with a 
long lens that could pick up shots many metres away – essential, as everything 
happened so quickly.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fplanet-earth-ii-hairiest-moments-david-attenborough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9fb3faa6b2c6a3b827987d14760635b6113a8387%2F1_0_2558_1536%2F2558.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Hippos%20snapped%20my%20last%20boat%20in%20half'%3A%20Planet%20Earth%20II's%20hairiest%20moments&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fplanet-earth-ii-hairiest-moments-david-attenborough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Hippos%20snapped%20my%20last%20boat%20in%20half%27%3A%20Planet%20Earth%20II%27s%20hairiest%20moments&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fplanet-earth-ii-hairiest-moments-david-attenborough%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9fb3faa6b2c6a3b827987d14760635b6113a8387%2F1_0_2558_1536%2F2558.jpg>
 Photograph: BBC 
We’d expected to find a few snakes lying in ambush, but were amazed by the 
sheer number of them. And the competition between them was far more dramatic 
than we could ever have imagined. When we first saw a “Medusa’s head” of snakes 
emerge from the rocks, it was both incredible and also the stuff of nightmares. 
(I should point out that the snakes are not really venomous, so they were not a 
direct threat.) Although we were there to film predation, we were all rooting 
for the iguanas.

It was almost impossible to know if we’d got our shots in focus, so there was 
a nerve-racking pause while we played back the footage. You often come home 
from a trip feeling you’ve captured something incredible, but you can lose your 
sense of perspective. It’s only when you look again in the cold light of day 
and if you still get excited, you know you’ve done it.


Dr Elizabeth White is a former research biologist who has worked for the BBC 
for 13 years, on series such as Frozen Planet. She produced Islands.

Emma Napper: ‘Jaguars are phantoms of the forest, seldom seen. I was astounded’

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fplanet-earth-ii-hairiest-moments-david-attenborough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb741f12e805e0d94d3f76b872f6cdf86966d790%2F21_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Hippos%20snapped%20my%20last%20boat%20in%20half'%3A%20Planet%20Earth%20II's%20hairiest%20moments&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fplanet-earth-ii-hairiest-moments-david-attenborough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Hippos%20snapped%20my%20last%20boat%20in%20half%27%3A%20Planet%20Earth%20II%27s%20hairiest%20moments&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fplanet-earth-ii-hairiest-moments-david-attenborough%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb741f12e805e0d94d3f76b872f6cdf86966d790%2F21_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 Photograph: BBC 
While researching, I came across reports of jaguars in Brazil hunting some 
very unusual prey. Jaguars are phantoms of the forest, seldom seen. Being able 
to film them at all is rare – so the chance to perhaps see new predation 
behaviour was so exciting.


We chose an area of the forest intercut with rivers, the perfect place for 
jaguars to look for prey and for us to see them along the relatively open 
banks. The jaguars could be spread over hundreds of kilometres, so we spent 10 
hours a day in a boat looking for them. We saw signs of them several times a 
week, but often it was just a tail twitching in the trees or an ear poking out 
of the undergrowth.

We spent six weeks sitting and waiting in that boat. We had to keep still and 
quiet so as not to disturb them – and quickly became food for swarms of 
mosquitos and flies. Your skin gets so sore and you can’t even use much insect 
repellent in case the jaguars smell you.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fplanet-earth-ii-hairiest-moments-david-attenborough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd279fe9c1716b5183f3dfb9ba101e9cbe40f9774%2F100_0_695_417%2F695.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Hippos%20snapped%20my%20last%20boat%20in%20half'%3A%20Planet%20Earth%20II's%20hairiest%20moments&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fplanet-earth-ii-hairiest-moments-david-attenborough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Hippos%20snapped%20my%20last%20boat%20in%20half%27%3A%20Planet%20Earth%20II%27s%20hairiest%20moments&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fplanet-earth-ii-hairiest-moments-david-attenborough%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd279fe9c1716b5183f3dfb9ba101e9cbe40f9774%2F100_0_695_417%2F695.png>
 Photograph: BBC 
Finally we came across a big male. We followed him as he tracked the 
riverbank. He was clearly on the lookout for something, but we didn’t know 
what. Then he pounced, behind a fallen branch. When he came back into view he 
had in his mouth a caiman, almost as big as he was. I was astounded. Hunting 
caiman was the new behaviour we were after, but I never expected him to be able 
to tackle something with some of the biggest jaws in the animal kingdom.

Originally a biologist, Emma Napper joined the BBC over 10 years ago and has 
worked on a number of Attenborough series. ForPlanet Earth II 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/planet-earth-ii>, she also followed 
dolphins in the flooded forest – and scoured the night-time jungle for glowing 
mushrooms. She produced Jungles.

Fredi Devas: ‘Nothing would have stopped them if they had chosen me as a meal’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fplanet-earth-ii-hairiest-moments-david-attenborough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4acb79d99a28e0ff98662b56968ff9ea30019ac6%2F0_189_3940_2364%2F3940.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Hippos%20snapped%20my%20last%20boat%20in%20half'%3A%20Planet%20Earth%20II's%20hairiest%20moments&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fplanet-earth-ii-hairiest-moments-david-attenborough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Hippos%20snapped%20my%20last%20boat%20in%20half%27%3A%20Planet%20Earth%20II%27s%20hairiest%20moments&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fplanet-earth-ii-hairiest-moments-david-attenborough%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4acb79d99a28e0ff98662b56968ff9ea30019ac6%2F0_189_3940_2364%2F3940.jpg>
 Photograph: BBC NHU/Paul Thompson 
I’ve been circled by spotted hyenas in the bush before. It was a very 
frightening experience. So when I read that they were freely walking the 
streets of Harar in Ethiopia, it jumped out at me. Spotted hyenas are feared 
all over Africa (they are, after all, the second largest land predator in the 
continent after the lion). Perhaps the most vilified animal on our planet, they 
are often associated with witchcraft, but here things were different. Why?

Harar is an ancient city, considered by some to be the fourth holiest city of 
Islam. The old town has 99 mosques, and arriving there feels like going back in 
time. The warren of cobbled streets is too narrow for cars, so food is taken to 
the market by donkey. On my first night I found myself down a dark, narrow 
street at 3am. Eight hyenas turned the corner and headed straight for me. I 
held my breath as they walked past, two of them brushing my leg. Nothing would 
have stopped them if they had chosen me as an easy meal.

Locals told me the city walls were built over 400 years ago, and at the time a 
decision was made to incorporate “hyena gates”. On my second night I watched 
hyenas use these gates, heading to the meat market in search of bones left out 
by butchers. Over centuries these wild animals have developed a peaceful 
relationship with the humans, who believe that each time they cackle they’re 
gobbling up a bad spirit. But not far outside the city walls hyenas revert to 
being wild. I wanted to show how ferocious they could be.

Clans fight for access to Harar on a known battleground just outside it. This 
is a very rare event, so on the shoot we placed spotters on the edge of the 
city. I couldn’t believe it when I got the call. Ten minutes later we’d 
scrambled into position with our cameras. We were right in the middle of a 
battle between over 100 hyenas. Two clans running at each other, back and 
forth, for over three hours. It’s one of the most exhilarating scenes I have 
ever witnessed.

Dr Fredi Devas is a wildlife filmmaker who has filmed polar bears feasting on 
a whale carcass, camel racing with robotic jockeys, and been surrounded by 
nearly half a million King penguins. He produced Cities.



 