 I remembered pushing, breathing through a mouth like the Sahara. Then at 5am I 
regained consciousness in my small cubicle, staring confusedly at the dim red 
light they leave burning in the rooms of the sick, wondering what had happened. 
Needing a bedpan I groped stiffly for the bell, brain clearing, awareness 
dawning.
By the time the nurse came I knew - though my hand still felt my stomach to 
see if he was still there. "What happened?", I asked. She looked distressed: 
"Don't you know? You had your baby and it was a little boy, and he isn't alive."

For three hours until my husband came, I could not cry. They had taken me into 
hospital two weeks earlier to rest because of my lack of weight; they had 
induced the birth three weeks early in a (now I see) desperate attempt to 
prevent his inevitable death inside me: the night before the labour I rang a 
friend and said I was convinced my baby would die.

But such is the gap between what the heart hopes and the mind knows, that I 
could not take in the fate I had predicted. During 16 hours of awful pain made 
worse by the anxiety. I hoped he would live. I expected him to live. I laboured 
for his life. Now my husband and I were left to weep in each others' arms - 
like all parents of stillborn babies devastated by the extent of the love and 
loss we felt for someone we had never met.

The following days taught me more about the nature of motherhood as well as of 
suffering than did the birth of my first son, Daniel, now aged two. The gap 
ached - so much so that one sleepless, tormented night I tiptoed downstairs to 
get Daniel's teddy bear to take back to bed - the vacancy in the womb had been 
replaced by an emptiness in my arms and some small thing, anything, was 
necessary to fill it and they send women to prison for stealing babies.

On the fourth day after the birth-death I awoke to find my breasts full of 
milk - nature's cruellest irony - ready to feed the baby who was not there. 
Like a full cow past milking time I cried. And like an animal I could not 
understand: all the intellectual/feminist debate on the nature of motherhood 
and the needs of the family dissolved beside the awfulness of the physical loss 
and need. For nine months I had been prepared for a baby. Without that baby I 
was still a mother, ready, and cheated. When I cried bitterly three nights in 
succession that I hated being a woman, hated being married, hated being 
trapped, I was expressing an awareness more fundamental than that of my role, 
more an unwilling acceptance of my function.

He was born and died on the Wednesday. On Friday I was discharged from the 
hospital - the doctors and nurses, though kind and upset, unable (I sensed) to 
cope. Out of place, amidst waiting pregnant women, and the mewls of the 
newborn, and postnatally depressed girls staring helplessly into metal cots 
full of responsibility, had come death, and it was an intrusion.

Some mothers of stillborn babies want to see and hold their dead baby, though 
I did not. But signiflcantly, it was never suggested. Those who have escaped 
the experience cannot approach its meaning: that a stillborn child is a real 
person to the mother (and father, in this case) who bore him/her.

One day at home a friend rang, and I heard my mother say "Bel lost her baby." 
The euphemism outraged me. For I did not lose him like an umbrella or a lover. 
He was born and died. To be accurate he was born dead: the ultimate 
contradiction in terms, so mysterious it defies analysis. When I heard that 
acquaintances thought I had miscarried I was equally outraged - it seemed 
important that they should realise the gulf between that sad accident and what 
we had been through.

That gulf is symbolised most clearly by the requirements of bureaucracy: the 
fact that my husband had to go, one bleak rainy day, to get a piece of paper 
from the hospital then go to the Registrar's office and "give the particulars" 
- all written out in laborious longhand in the special book for the Stillbirths 
that are neither Birth nor Death, but both - then return to the hospital with 
another piece of paper to discuss funerals, prices, whether the ending would be 
Christian.

Though we did not attend the plain cremation the State requires and provides 
it was strangely consoling to think if him in his shroud and tiny, named doll's 
coffin. "Fitting" is the word: that a life which had begun should be ended with 
some rudimentary ceremony.

Afterwards, people rang. I wanted to tell the story: to talk about him gave 
his brief life a meaning, to share the experience with others gave it 
importance. Morbid it might (superficially) seem, but it was necessary: an 
exorcism of pain that was also a sharing of love.

Those who have experienced the death of a baby probably feel first (after the 
tears) the need to blame. In this case, first occurred the possibility that the 
hospital could have done something. But doctors are not gods, nor is science 
without its limitations. We assume that the process of pregnancy and birth is 
without its old perils - though still something like 20 in a thousand babies 
die. When your baby dies you look at loaded carry-cots with new wonder, the 
leap into the world seeming all the more perilous. All that ultra sound 
equipment, all, the knowledge of obstetrics . . . and the doctors, doing all 
they could, were blameless.

But needing to find as reason, you turn upon yourself. I knew that I had 
rested as much as I could, and eaten well - I had stopped work and cooked 
nourishng meals of liver and greens I did not went simply to make him grow. But 
blame lies deeper. The day after his birth-death I raved at my husband like a 
child: "I haven't been wicked. I've tried to he good to people. . . I've been a 
bit wicked but not that wicked."

The words assumed an area of responsibility far deeper than the physical, more 
primitive and necessary than sleep or food. I blamed myself in two ways. I felt 
that I had failed as a woman in that I had not managed to fulfill the sexual 
function I had assumed (either by conditioning or instinct) as my own. More 
important, I assumed I had failed as a person: somehow I had "gone wrong" and 
so I was being punished.

By whom? One day a woman who happens to be Cathollc visited me at home, and 
when I explained to her how real that baby seems, and how I am conscious of 
having borne two sons, she said: "You realise you are talking in a religious 
way?" Of course I did. Though an agnostic I was, for lack of anyone else, 
blaming God for my son's death.

He was born at midnight though they stopped (unknown to me) listening for his 
heart at 10 30pm. That was November 26, 1975, his birthday. On the 27th I heard 
myself asking my husband if our baby had a soul and where had he gone? A friend 
who had the same experience told me that it made her leave the Catholic Church 
- she was told that her baby, unbaptised, had gone to Limbo, that terrible 
empty place they reserve for children who have died without sin, but whose 
original sin, unredeemed by baptism, has denied them Heaven.

But I discovered, after initial grief and subsequent bitterness and rage, that 
I do not believe in original sin - just in original goodness. As we shared 
sorrow my husband consoled me by saying that his own comfort lay in the 
conviction that his baby died pure - he was conceived, and existed, and died. 
It was simply a speeding-up of the process we all experience, without the pain, 
without the regrets, without the hurting of other people, without the sickening 
consciousness of universal misery, without the disappointments of age. Also, of 
course, without the moments of joy - but then, he was wanted, cherished, loved, 
and so in that there is a joy he might have felt. How do we know what the 
unborn feel?

Without any joy to wipe out the memory I keep remembering the labour and see 
myself as through the wrong end of a telescope - a creature on a bed, writhing, 
vomiting, crying, almost unable to hear the physical suffering. Afterwards, 
longing for my baby to cuddle, I see myself railing at my husband, almost 
unable to bear the mental anguish. But it is in that "almost" that the majesty 
lies. Because we do bear it and we still want to live, all the love and hope 
and pain and loss, the resilience and acceptance, are all the more precious 
because of the darkness that surrounds them.

Five days after I came home I received a letter from a man called George 
Thatcher, a talented playwright, serving life murder in Gartree for a crime he 
steadfastly maintains he did not commit and who cannot obtain parole. He had 
been told about my baby by a mutual acquaintance.

His letter began: "I'm not going to make you cry because you have shed enough 
tears. But somewhere along the line there is a joy for you which will surpass 
all that pain - and only be possible because of it."

That sentiment - expressed (ironically enough) by someone who after 13 years 
is still deemed unfit to rejoin society - brought the most comfort, identifying 
the one thing that, for us, gave our baby's brief existence purpose. There is 
no divine right to happiness, simply a duty to cope, to understand, and to 
love. My duty to my first son seems clear and easy; but there is also a duty to 
that second baby.

I do not wish to "get over" his loss, nor do I wish to replace him with more 
children. I simply wish that his life and death should be absorbed into my own: 
enlarging, and deepening in perception.

Â· This article was republished as part of a special edition marking 50 Years 
of the Guardian women's page <https://www.theguardian.com/women/50years>.
 