
Sajita Tamang was 14 when she got married. She says love had nothing to do 
with it.

Now 17, Sajita recalls tearfully the pressure put on her by two women from her 
village to meet a man in the forest one day after school.

“They asked me to hang out with them. I said, ‘No, I have to make dinner and 
have work to do.’ But they said, ‘Come for a while.’ I didn’t want to but 
eventually went.”

In the forest near her home in the rural, hilly district of Makwanpur in 
centralNepal <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nepal>, Sajita was left alone 
with the 20-year-old man, whom she found out had paid the women to bring her 
there.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fwhy-do-women-still-die-in-childbirth-asks-emily-watson-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20do%20women%20still%20die%20in%20childbirth%2C%20asks%20Emily%20Watson%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fwhy-do-women-still-die-in-childbirth-asks-emily-watson-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20do%20women%20still%20die%20in%20childbirth%2C%20asks%20Emily%20Watson%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fwhy-do-women-still-die-in-childbirth-asks-emily-watson-video&media=>
Why do women still die in childbirth, asks Emily Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2016/may/16/why-do-women-still-die-in-childbirth-asks-emily-watson-video>
“He said, ‘I really like you – we should get married.’ I said I didn’t want to 
get married as I had a dream of opening a tailoring shop. He said, ‘I can’t 
wait for five years. I really like you.’ I don’t know what happened to me. I 
just got trapped.”

Being alone with a man is enough to ruin a girl’s reputation in the eyes of 
her community.

Thirteen days after they married, the verbal abuse started. “My husband [came] 
home drunk and [said] filthy, nasty things to me,” she remembers. “He said, 
‘Get out of my house.’”


Sajita’s story is not uncommon. An estimated 10% of girls in Nepal are married 
before their 15th birthday 
<http://www.unicef.org/publications/files/SOWC_2015_Summary_and_Tables.pdf> 
(pdf) and more than 40% before they turn 18. Nepal is among the countries with 
the highest rates of child marriage. Nationally, the average age a girl weds is 
17.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Ftrapped-child-marriage-nepal-attempts-to-expand-girls-horizons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3284e18b1d76967b350051d7a06af7bbf993ddeb%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20just%20got%20trapped'%3A%20Nepal%20tries%20to%20expand%20girls'%20horizons%20beyond%20marriage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Ftrapped-child-marriage-nepal-attempts-to-expand-girls-horizons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20just%20got%20trapped%27%3A%20Nepal%20tries%20to%20expand%20girls%27%20horizons%20beyond%20marriage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Ftrapped-child-marriage-nepal-attempts-to-expand-girls-horizons%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3284e18b1d76967b350051d7a06af7bbf993ddeb%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Sumina Pariyar, now aged 17, and her baby Unika, aged eight months, at their 
home in Jadibuti, Kathmandu district. Photograph: Jane Mingay/Girls Not Brides 
Sumina Pariyar says she fell in love when she was 15 and married seven months 
later.

“I used to carry and break stones at the quarry and he worked there too,” says 
Sumina, who lives in a one-room corrugated iron home on the outskirts of 
Nepal’s capital, Kathmandu.

When she turned 16, the couple eloped. “We were working together and fell in 
love and got married,” she says, as she comforts her eight-month-old daughter, 
Unika, who has a cough and diarrhoea. The family’s home is close to a busy 
flyover, and piles of rubbish sit beneath its arches.

“I was very young and didn’t know what was going to happen to me, so I just 
got married.”

After she’d given birth, doctors discovered Sumina, now 17, has a heart 
problem. This requires expensive medicine and the family has borrowed money to 
pay for it. They now have debts of more than 15,000 rupees (about £96). Her 
husband, Bhuwan, who is 18, can earn 200-300 rupees loading trucks with bricks. 
But the couple are two months behind on repayments.

Poverty, culture and a belief that a girl’s life goals should be marriage and 
motherhood are the main drivers of early marriage among girls in Nepal.

But the government is attempting to challenge the status quo with a new 
strategy <http://www.girlsnotbrides.org/news-nepal-girl-summit/>, announced in 
March. It comes at a time of renewed global action to end child marriage –
defined by the UN <http://www.unicef.org/protection/57929_58008.html> as any 
union before the age of 18.

Two years ago, the UN recognised child marriage as a human rights violation 
<http://www.girlsnotbrides.org/girls-brides-statement-un-general-assembly-resolution-child-early-forced-marriage/>
. Each year, early marriage strips an estimated 15 million girls under 18 of an 
education, while putting their health at risk, their lives in danger and 
robbing them of a childhood.

According to the World Health Organisation 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs364/en/>, pregnancy and 
complications from childbirth are theleading causes of death among 15- to 
19-year-olds 
<http://reliefweb.int/report/world/pregnancy-complications-child-birth-leading-cause-death-among-15-19-year-old-girls>
 in poorer locations. In September, the UN general assembly promised to end 
child marriage by 2030 under thesustainable development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
, the blueprint for the world’s development over the next 15 years.

Rates of child marriage in Nepal have been falling, but change is slow. The 
transition to democracy has enabled activists to lobby for action, however, and 
theGirl Summit <https://www.gov.uk/government/topical-events/girl-summit-2014>, 
held in the UK in 2014, proved pivotal. At the summit, the Nepalese government 
committed toend child marriage by 2020 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&ved=0ahUKEwjQ2_KwieHMAhWCL8AKHUHkADAQFggjMAE&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.girlsnotbrides.org%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2015%2F06%2FFact-sheet-Nepal-national-strategy-May-2015.pdf&usg=AFQjCNGEU-w0CWEDadU1D-fUnXa1NVgctA&sig2=K_e8UzmXYOEaoLxcT8wHWg&cad=rja>
.

Last year, the government raised the legal age for marriage to 20 and 
abolished the clause that allowed girls to marry younger if their parents 
consented. But in its national strategy, drafted with the support of the UN 
children’s agency, Unicef, andGirls Not Brides <http://www.girlsnotbrides.org/> 
Nepal, the government will take aim at the root causes: ensuring girls have 
access to quality education – including sex education, and skills training for 
girls who are married and out of school – increasing their economic 
opportunities.

It has the backing of the president and prime minister, and, crucially, the 
finance ministry, where officials were convinced by the argument that ending 
child marriage could increase gross domestic product by more than 3%.

How the strategy will be implemented is still to be fleshed out. But when the 
next fiscal year begins in July, district officials across the country will be 
expected to start finding ways to raise awareness among parents and communities 
of the legal, social and physical costs of child marriage, and to collect data 
on how often it occurs in their areas. A committee, which will include 
government officials, the national human rights commission and civil society 
groups, will be established to oversee progress.

Kiran Rupakhetee, undersecretary in Nepal’s ministry of women, children and 
social welfare, whose mother and father married at the age of 10 and 12 
respectively, says: “Child marriage is just a symptom of other things. We have 
to heed all the other problems.

“It’s an issue of poverty, injustice, child labour, human trafficking, it’s an 
issue of gender-based violence – so many issues that we have to deal with 
simultaneously. What’s very important is the empowerment of women. If a mother 
is empowered, the girl is empowered.

“The problem is nobody needs to get their marriage registered unless they need 
a certificate or documentation if they need a passport … otherwise society 
witness [to marriage] is enough. That’s where society is stronger than the law.”

Flowers and femidoms: Nepal wedding website offers contraception advice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/04/flowers-femidoms-nepal-wedding-website-contraception-advice-marie-stopes>
Rupakhetee acknowledges that funding will be a make or break issue. Unicef and 
the UN population fund, UNFPA, havelaunched a campaign to accelerate action 
<http://www.unicef.org/media/media_90394.html> on child marriage in 12 
countries, including Nepal, with £56m from the Netherlands and Canada and £25m
from the UK <http://iati.dfid.gov.uk/iati_documents/4808516.odt> over five 
years.

In Makwanpur, Sajita left her husband as he continued abusing her. By then 
they had a son, Dabil, born when she was 15. She is back living with her 
parents and taking a tailoring course set up by theChild Welfare Society 
<http://cwsmkngo.blogspot.co.uk/>. The organisation has set up centres to offer 
vocational training for girls, as well as advice on family planning. Her dream 
is still to open a shop.

In Kathmandu, Sumina says she won’t allow her daughter to marry young.

“I will be very strict. I won’t let her go out too much or meet her friends 
too much … In Nepal children are just left alone at an early age and free to do 
what they like. It’s only at school she can be better.”

 