
Alejandro Jodorowsky <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alejandro-jodorowsky>
, the one-time king of the midnight movie, can still be seen every night at the 
witching hour - but only on Spanish TV. This white-bearded 78-year-old has a 
new sideline presenting the "... and finally" items on the nightly news. He 
scours the papers and websites for these heartwarming little snippets and then 
records them in a block; 30 every month. They are his antidote to a litany of 
tragedy and disaster, a little balm for the soul as the clocks strike 12. "The 
planet is ill, everyone knows that," he says. "But I need to be optimistic, 
otherwise I would just be adding to the negativity. So every night I come on 
Madrid TV and read a piece of good news."

These days Jodorowsky has a snippet of his own to report. The director 
recently ended his notorious 30-year feud with Allen Klein, the hardball 
executive who once managed the Beatles. It was Klein who helped promote the US 
release of El Topo - America's original "midnight movie" - and it was Klein who 
stumped up the funds for its extravagant follow-up, The Holy Mountain. And, 
when the two men fell out, it was Klein who yanked both films out of 
circulation, turning them into cinema's equivalent of Bigfoot and the Mary 
Celeste. Now the world finally has the chance to judge them afresh.

I meet Jodorowsky at his Paris apartment, in a book-lined room patrolled by 
cats. "Are you afraid of cats?" he asks. "Some people are." He explains that he 
lives alone but has a woman - a new woman - moving in with him soon and that he 
is having the place repainted in readiness. "Five cats and a woman. That is all 
I need in life." His grin exposes a spectacular set of teeth. They can't be 
real, but maybe they are. With Jodorowsky it's sometimes hard to separate the 
fact from the fiction.

Jodorowsky's life reads like a picaresque, or the plot of a magic-realist 
novel. He was born in Chile, of Ukrainian Jewish descent, but abandoned his 
family at an early age "because my father was a monster, and my mother was as 
well." Alighting in Paris in the 1950s, he studied mime with Marcel Marceau and 
directed Maurice Chevalier in music hall. Relocating to Mexico, he founded an 
avant-garde theatre group and scandalised the Catholic priests, who believed he 
was holding black mass orgies in the cathedral. "In Mexico they want to kill 
me!" he exclaims. "A soldier held a gun to my chest!"

In 1970 he directed El Topo, a deranged peyote western that some have 
interpreted as a metaphor for the Old and New Testaments. It starred himself as 
a cold-blooded gunslinger in rabbinical black and his son Brontis, buck naked 
beneath a Stetson hat. El Topo eventually came to the attention of John Lennon 
who hailed it as a counter-culture masterpiece. Lennon introduced the film in 
New York, where it later played in special midnight screenings for almost a 
year. He also convinced Klein to stump up $1m for Jodorowsky's ambitious next 
production. And that's where the trouble began.

I watch El Topo and it stands up pretty well; a shotgun wedding of Sergio 
Leone and Federico Fellini: primal and pretentious in about equal measure. Then 
I watch The Holy Mountain and it's as though the world has gone widescreen. 
It's astonishing, outlandish; unlike anything made before or since. The plot in 
a nutshell concerns a thief who meets an alchemist (Jodorowsky again) and 
embarks on a quest for immortality. Yet the movie comes riddled, top to tail, 
with all manner of extraordinary setpieces. The most notable of these depicts 
the conquest of Mexico, re-enacted with chameleons dressed up as Aztecs and 
toads playing the Conquistadors. "Klein hated The Holy Mountain," says 
Jodorowsky ruefully. "He think I am crazy."

Matters reached a head when the director abruptly bailed out of Klein's next 
project, The Story of O. "I did not want to make a sexual film, because I am a 
feminist. So Klein says, 'OK, if you don't want to make this picture I will 
take your other pictures and no one will ever see them again'. And that's what 
he did. He took all the copies and he retired them." For three decades the 
films existed only as poor quality bootlegs. Jodorowsky would collect these 
bootlegs and circulate them among his nearest, dearest ... and anyone else who 
expressed an interest.

The front door bangs and a woman enters the room. "This is my ex-wife," he 
explains breezily. "We are very good friends." It turns out that the former Mrs 
Jodorowsky has dropped by with some magazine clippings. More good news for his 
TV broadcasts.

Two years ago Jodorowsky learned that the El Topo negative had been discovered 
in a laboratory in Mexico. His first thought was to call Klein's bluff and 
release it off his own back. Finally he decided to contact his old enemy and 
the pair agreed to meet in London. "For 30 years I hate him and he hate me," he 
recalls. "I thought I should take a weapon in case he wants to kill me. Then 
the hotel door opened and there was this little old man with white hair, just 
like mine. He said, 'You are not a monster. You are beautiful'. And the whole 
thing, all that hate, was finished in 10 seconds." Jodorowsky later supervised 
the re-mastering of both El Topo and The Holy Mountain; sharpening the colours, 
making the movement more fluid. Finally, he says, he has the films exactly as 
he wants them.

These days the director has found a fresh lease of life writing comic-books 
and studying the tarot. He presents me with gifts: a CD recorded by his 
youngest son, Adan, and a deck of cards he designed himself. He says the tarot 
has helped him make peace with his past and become a better father to his 
children. He says that he now returns to Chile to give readings for the 
president, Michelle Bachelet. He even has the photo to prove it. "That's her," 
he says. "Admiring me."

Jodorowsky refers to himself as "the world's last crazy artist". But as far as 
film-making is concerned he is now a king without a kingdom. He shot his last 
picture, The Rainbow Thief, as a hack-for-hire back in 1990 and has since 
disowned it. He still dreams of making a gangster picture starring Nick Nolte 
and Marilyn Manson. But he needs $5m and the cash keeps falling through.

In the wake of The Holy Mountain he embarked on an abortive attempt to adapt 
Frank Herbert's Dune (later made by David Lynch). When the backers pulled the 
plug, several members of Jodorowsky's core creative team jumped ship to work on 
Ridley Scott's Alien - reportedly taking many of the film's ideas with them. 
More recently his comic-book editor launched an unsuccessful lawsuit against 
Luc Besson. It was alleged that The Fifth Element was heavily indebted to 
Jodorowsky's comic-book series, The Incal. For his part Jodorowsky insists that 
he is not embittered by any of this. On the contrary, he is happy that other 
directors have picked up his ideas. "They like me and they copy me," he says. 
"That is very flattering."

Out of the blue he tells a tale from the past, from his bad old days in Mexico 
City. He explains that the winner of a cockfight is judged to be the last bird 
standing; the one that does not put its beak to the ground. But some cocks are 
so ferocious and so full of intensity that they literally die on their feet, 
with their beaks inclined towards the sky. Meanwhile the other bird survives a 
little longer, staggering drunkenly for a spell before expiring in the dirt. 
According to the rules, this bird "loses" and the other bird "wins".

Belatedly I realise that Jodorowsky is talking about himself. "I want to live 
to be 120," he says. "But of course I am getting old. And yet even if I get 
old, even if I die, the ideas live on. And that way I continue." He points his 
head to the ceiling and bares that terrific set of teeth. In that brief moment 
they look as real as real can be.

Â· El Topo is out on Friday, and a retrospective is at the NFT, London, April 
5-19. The Jodorowsky DVD collection is released on May 14
 