
“Does it just mean that I’m in a sticky situation?” Rachel Sherman, mother of 
four, asks, wondering if her household classifies as a just-about-managing 
family, or in thedispiriting new political acronym, a Jam. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/shortcuts/2016/nov/20/jam-the-new-government-acronym-just-about-managing-to-make-sense>

She is in a difficult situation financially, but questions whether the family 
should be described as just about managing, or more realistically, as one that 
is teetering on the edge of catastrophe, a Toteoc, or as one which is not OK by 
any stretch of the imagination, a Nobasoti (neither expression yet in political 
usage).

Autumn statement 2016: Philip Hammond to unveil Brexit impact on UK economy – 
live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/nov/23/autumn-statement-2016-philip-hammond-brexit-growth-deficit-housing-jams-universal-credit-minimum-wage-live>
She is due to start a new job this week in a furniture shop, but has only been 
given an eight-hour-a-week contract, which leaves her and her husband 
(struggling to find work after a heart attack) with a huge shortfall, since the 
lowering of the overall benefit cap earlier this month reduced her housing 
benefit payments from about £640 a month to 50p.


It is not yet clear how they will manage. She forced a smile when each of her 
children had to take in a £1 donation last Friday for Children in Need, eating 
into the small pot now set aside for food. “Our whole family as a unit is in 
need,” she says. “I agree with the idea of people getting off benefits and into 
work; I understand and that’s right, but this pressure is making it harder. My 
husband has applied for well over 100 jobs this month, and he can’t get an 
interview.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fi-worry-about-money-all-the-time-jam-reality-in-birmingham-just-about-managing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc92bfd019406ec2c63a650ba41a2baf5d5390d66%2F0_42_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20worry%20about%20money%20all%20the%20time'%3A%20the%20Jam%20reality%20in%20Birmingham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fi-worry-about-money-all-the-time-jam-reality-in-birmingham-just-about-managing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20worry%20about%20money%20all%20the%20time%27%3A%20the%20Jam%20reality%20in%20Birmingham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fi-worry-about-money-all-the-time-jam-reality-in-birmingham-just-about-managing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc92bfd019406ec2c63a650ba41a2baf5d5390d66%2F0_42_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
 Jim and Rachel Sherman and their family. Photograph: John Robertson for the 
Guardian 
From the bottom of the income scale to families with a reasonably good income 
who are still struggling, a wide spectrum of families in Birmingham are hoping 
that they might be the just-about-managing families that Theresa May andPhilip 
Hammond <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond> have in their 
sights for extra support in the autumn statement. Expectation is huge, and the 
disappointment is set to be palpable.


The constituency of Erdington voted strongly Brexit in the EU referendum and 
is one of the poorest in the country, with pockets of acute deprivation. 
Because of its location close to the Jaguar Land Rover Castle Bromwich site, it 
also has relatively well-paid workers, many of whom are finding that wage 
stagnation and rising living costs have also left them in difficulty.


Lauren Hampshire, 28, employed here as a family support worker, is capable, 
ambitious, professional and stuck. With a degree and postgraduate 
qualifications in early-years education, she works full-time, helping families 
who need advice with parenting and budgeting. Meanwhile, at home, she is 
worrying about her own budgeting issues as she tries to keep up mortgage 
payments and pay for nursery for her 18-month-old son.


“I did my education, I’ve bought a house, I’ve tried to do it all the right 
way, but there isn’t a lot of support when you’re left as a single parent. I’m 
just getting through each week, trying to manage,” she says. Planned local 
authority cuts for 2017 mean her job in the Castle Vale children’s centre is 
under threat, as the council decides which children’s services to shut down.


“I feel there is nowhere for me to go, there is no ladder for me to climb up. 
Nursery schools and children’s centres are at risk of closing and if they don’t 
actually close, they are at risk of massive budget reductions. Staff will be 
lost,” she says. “If I lost my job it would be devastating. I could apply for 
other jobs, but it is hard, because everyone is looking for budget cuts in this 
line of work so everyone is in the same boat, including management. If you 
think about it too much you can get quite down about it.”


What to look out for in the autumn statement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/autumn-statement-philip-hammond-economy-personal-finance-business>
For the moment she is just about managing by being careful not to buy new 
clothes for herself and by eating meals at her parents’ house whenever they are 
offered.


Clare Yates, 30, who has two daughters, one 14 months and the other three 
years old, is also hoping for more help with childcare costs. She lost her job 
with a catering company contracted to make breakfast for Jaguar workers when 
she was pregnant with her second child. “They said I wasn’t up to standard, 
that I was working too slowly, but I think they wanted me out because I was 
pregnant,” she says. Worries about her family’s financial situation have 
recently pushed her to ask her doctor for antidepressants, which she says are 
helping with the anxiety. “I worry about money all the time. It would help if 
there was more free childcare, so I could go back to work.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fi-worry-about-money-all-the-time-jam-reality-in-birmingham-just-about-managing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27e4da14cfdf08c109fcbc9ef8a304640be25772%2F0_112_5190_3114%2F5190.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20worry%20about%20money%20all%20the%20time'%3A%20the%20Jam%20reality%20in%20Birmingham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fi-worry-about-money-all-the-time-jam-reality-in-birmingham-just-about-managing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20worry%20about%20money%20all%20the%20time%27%3A%20the%20Jam%20reality%20in%20Birmingham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fi-worry-about-money-all-the-time-jam-reality-in-birmingham-just-about-managing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27e4da14cfdf08c109fcbc9ef8a304640be25772%2F0_112_5190_3114%2F5190.jpg>
 Lauren Hampshire. Photograph: John Robertson for the Guardian 
Fifty-year-old Anne (who asked for her real name not to be published, because 
she was uneasy about talking about her financial predicament), a senior 
teaching assistant in Erdington who has worked in the same nursery school for 
27 years, is also finding keeping up with her mortgage payments difficult. She 
extended the mortgage twice to meet household bills as she brought up three 
children, the youngest of whom is 16.


She recently received a letter from the bailiffs over costs related to late 
payment of council tax, and although she has decided to ignore it, the worrying 
memory of the letter keeps popping back into her mind. She has considered 
taking up a second job, but her hours at school are already quite long. She 
loves her job and is puzzled that, given how crucial the work is, her pay (more 
than £20,000) leaves her barely managing at all.


“I’m up at 6am and usually at work until five. At the end of the day you have 
to sleep,” she says. “I do struggle on what I get. I live in my overdraft, 
which is ridiculous. The wages come in, and the overdraft gets paid off and 
there’s nothing left. We haven’t been on holiday for five or six years because 
there hasn’t been extra money. We go to the market now to buy trainers, not to 
JD’s. I buy ‘smart price’, own-brand cornflakes, rather than Kellogg’s, and I 
still get to the checkout and think, ‘That’s come to a lot again.’”


Are you Daniel Blake? Here’s a guide to using our nightmarish benefits system 
| Matthew Ahluwalia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/18/daniel-blake-guide-benefits-system-welfare-claimants>
She says her salary hasn’t risen much in a decade – “You don’t notice your 
annual increment, it’s just pennies” – and she also worries that her job will 
be at risk next year with the next round of council cuts threatening nursery 
services.


In central Birmingham <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/birmingham>, at the 
National Express depot, senior skilled workers, whose wages used to put them 
automatically in a comfortable bracket, are also considering whether their 
current income makes them the kind of workers that the prime minister wants to 
offer extra support.

Peter (also not his real name, because he was worried about saying anything 
that might upset his employer) has been working for the company as an engineer 
for more than three decades since he was a teenage apprentice. He says his 
£12-an-hour rate no longer goes as far as it once did. He is grateful to bosses 
who this year allowed him to increase his overtime schedule so he now works 
Saturdays and Sundays to boost his take-home pay – he never previously had to 
work both days of the weekend. “I work hard, but the family struggles when you 
work weekends,” he says. A father of two whose wife works part-time in a shop, 
he has only been able to meet his mortgage payments because he puts in long 
hours and works antisocial shifts.


He voted leave in the referendum, concerned about the impact of immigration. 
“I haven’t got a problem with immigrants. I’m all for getting people into this 
country who will make a difference, but you shouldn’t go flooding the country, 
otherwise schools and hospitals won’t be able to cope,” he says. A Labour 
voter, he is not expecting much from the autumn statement, but he wishes the 
government would speed up the implementation of Brexit. “In a democracy, don’t 
you go with the majority?”

 