
“Jim was a guy you either loved or hated, there was no in-between,” says 
Amelia Davis <http://www.ameliadavisphotography.com/>, Jim Marshall 
<http://www.jimmarshallphotographyllc.com/>’s erstwhile assistant and now 
archivist. “If he loved you, he would lie down in front of a truck for you. If 
he hated you, he would happily drive the truck over you.”

Marshall, who died in 2010, is known as the father of modern music photography 
– Jimi Hendrix setting light to his guitar, a young Bob Dylan rolling a car 
tyre down a New York street,Johnny Cash “flipping the bird” on stage in San 
Quentin prison <http://www.nme.com/news/johnny-cash/55539>. While managers and 
minders may have bridled at his combative approach – he demanded total access 
before accepting an assignment – performers seemed to have sensed, in his 
upfront attitude and commitment to his craft, a kindred spirit. “They loved 
him. He was one of the guys,” says Davis. “But more importantly, they trusted 
him because he was so good.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fjazz-festival-rock-jim-marshall-photographer-monterey-newport%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3183da9acd2fd12b8ae92d8094a1f1697bf60352%2F52_0_2911_4472%2F2911.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Jazz%20was%20the%20catalyst%20for%20change'%3A%20Jim%20Marshall%E2%80%99s%20images%20of%2060s%20festivals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fjazz-festival-rock-jim-marshall-photographer-monterey-newport%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Jazz%20was%20the%20catalyst%20for%20change%27%3A%20Jim%20Marshall%E2%80%99s%20images%20of%2060s%20festivals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fjazz-festival-rock-jim-marshall-photographer-monterey-newport%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3183da9acd2fd12b8ae92d8094a1f1697bf60352%2F52_0_2911_4472%2F2911.jpg>
 Dizzy Gillespie at 1963 Monterey jazz festival. Photograph: © Jim Marshall 
Photography LLC 
Marshall’s first love, though, was jazz, and a new book testifies to his more 
quietly intimate approach to photographing musical titans such as John 
Coltrane, Duke Ellington, Miles Davis and Nina Simone. Simply titledJazz 
Festival <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/jazz-festival-jim-marshall.html>, it 
is not just a collection of great, mostly unseen fly-on-the-wall portraits, but 
a document of what the veteran jazz writerNat Hentoff 
<http://www.jazzwax.com/2009/05/interview-nat-hentoff-part-1.html>, describes 
as “one of the most important periods in the cultural history of the United 
States”. From 1960 to 1966, Marshall photographed the performers and the 
audiences at the Monterey and Newport jazz and folk festivals, the precursors 
of the huge hippy gatherings of the late 60s – Woodstock, Isle of Wight, 
Glastonbury. His images attest to the surprisingly intimate and formal nature 
of these early events: everyone is dressed smartly in the preppie-meets-boho 
style of the time and the audience sits attentive in rows of seats as if 
attending a classical recital.

His photographs often possess a sense of quiet power that only comes with 
proximity to your subject

More intriguingly, when Marshall’s democratic camera captured the young, 
relaxed, supremely stylish and racially mixed audiences that the jazz giants 
were attracting, at least on the east and west coasts, he was chronicling a 
brief utopian moment amid the gathering storm of protest and often violent 
reprisal that would define the civil rights era of the early-to-mid 1960s. 
“When Jim Marshall photographed integrated crowds peacefully digging each 
other’s company at jazz festivals,” writes Hentoff, “news photographs ofpolice 
dogs attacking black men, women and children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/mar/24/charles-moore-obituary-sean-ohagan>
 captured a very different reality in the south.”

The integrated audiences at Newport and Monterey were, as Davis puts it, “very 
much the exception in America at that time.Jazz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/jazz> music was the catalyst for change in a 
very real way. It was universal. People came for the music, whatever their age, 
beliefs or skin colour. The music united people.”

For Hentoff, the early jazz festivals were an augury of what was to come. In 
1963, he reported on theMarch on Washington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/aug/24/march-on-washington-anniversary-martin-luther-king>
 that culminated with a concert at the Lincoln Memorial, whereMahalia Jackson 
<http://www.history.com/this-day-in-history/mahalia-jackson-the-queen-of-gospel-puts-her-stamp-on-the-march-on-washington>
 sang and Rev Martin Luther King made his electrifying“I have a dream” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/09/martin-luther-king-dream-speech-history>
 speech. “Outside of the Newport and Monterey festivals, I had never seen such 
a large, integrated crowd coming together for a common purpose,” writes 
Hentoff. “As jazz reached deeply into more white Americans, America began to 
change.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fjazz-festival-rock-jim-marshall-photographer-monterey-newport%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3fef269caebd3854982d9049aef4ec0119e8868%2F60_47_4783_3146%2F4783.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Jazz%20was%20the%20catalyst%20for%20change'%3A%20Jim%20Marshall%E2%80%99s%20images%20of%2060s%20festivals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fjazz-festival-rock-jim-marshall-photographer-monterey-newport%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Jazz%20was%20the%20catalyst%20for%20change%27%3A%20Jim%20Marshall%E2%80%99s%20images%20of%2060s%20festivals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fjazz-festival-rock-jim-marshall-photographer-monterey-newport%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3fef269caebd3854982d9049aef4ec0119e8868%2F60_47_4783_3146%2F4783.jpg>
 The crowd at the Monterey jazz festival, 1960. Photograph: © Jim Marshall 
Photography LLC 
Though dispatched to Newport and Monterey to cover the performers, Marshall 
also turned his relentlessly curious eye on the audience, shooting beatniks and 
hipsters, Ivy League students and elegantly dressed young women, as well as 
celebrities such as folk icon Joan Baez, and the actor Steve McQueen, whom he 
caught deep in conversation with a young Miles Davis. His photographs often 
possess a sense of quiet power that only comes with proximity to your subject 
and, for all his attitude, Marshall seems to have been so ubiquitous as to be 
invisible to his. In his images of Coltrane, Davis andOrnette Coleman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/ornette-coleman>, you sense the rapt 
intensity of their playing, while a young Nina Simone seems almost meditative 
as she performs in semi-darkness.

In 1966, Marshall also trained his camera on Jefferson Airplane and the Paul 
Butterfield Blues Band, who were among the first wave of rock groups to play at 
the Monterey jazz festival. Change was in the air and the following year 
Marshall would capture Hendrix setting light to his guitar at the Monterey pop 
festival, a moment that, in retrospect, announced the start of the second wave 
of – bigger, brasher, louder – music festivals in the late 1960s. Marshall rode 
that wave too, chronicling the three-day Woodstock festival in 1969 – which he 
later described as “organised chaos” – and making his name as one of the great 
rock photographers of the time, despite gaining a reputation for excess that 
matched that of even his most dissolute subjects.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fjazz-festival-rock-jim-marshall-photographer-monterey-newport%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9a5c6d4d53b25785ac095b6c259d28fd46deebe%2F0_23_4541_2896%2F4541.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Jazz%20was%20the%20catalyst%20for%20change'%3A%20Jim%20Marshall%E2%80%99s%20images%20of%2060s%20festivals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fjazz-festival-rock-jim-marshall-photographer-monterey-newport%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Jazz%20was%20the%20catalyst%20for%20change%27%3A%20Jim%20Marshall%E2%80%99s%20images%20of%2060s%20festivals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fjazz-festival-rock-jim-marshall-photographer-monterey-newport%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9a5c6d4d53b25785ac095b6c259d28fd46deebe%2F0_23_4541_2896%2F4541.jpg>
 Nina Simone at the Newport Jazz Festival in 1963. Photograph: © Jim Marshall 
Photography LLC 
“He got pigeonholed as a rock photographer, but jazz was his first great 
subject,” says Davis. “For him it was very personal work and, though he was 
right there with great jazz photographers likeBill Claxton 
<http://www.williamclaxton.com/jazz--music.html>, he has never really got the 
respect for it he deserved.”

Jazz Festival should go some way to re-establishing Marshall’s reputation as a 
photographer who, despite his tough image, made some of the most tenderly 
observed, quietly powerful studies of a now long gone, but still resonant, 
cultural moment when jazz was both a unifying force for change and the 
soundtrack to a turbulent nation whose discontents reverberate to this day.

Jazz Festival is published by Reel Art Press (£45). Click here 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/413333/> to order it 
for £36.90
 