
The chief executive of press regulator Ipso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ipso> has defended its handling of Katie 
Hopkins’ controversial “cockroaches” Sun column about migrants, saying bad 
taste was not in its remit.

Matt Tee of the Independent Press Standards Organisation said migrants could 
not be viewed as victims of discrimination even when they were compared to 
cockroaches.

The regulator rejected complaints about the column 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/may/01/ipso-rejects-complaints-katie-hopkins-migrants-column-sun>
, which was published in April last year.


The Sun's Kelvin MacKenzie is trying to smear Muslims, says C4 News presenter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/19/the-sun-kelvin-mackenzie-muslims-c4-news-fatima-manji>
Ipso is currently considering more than 2,000 complaints 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/19/the-sun-kelvin-mackenzie-muslims-c4-news-fatima-manji>
 about another Sun column, by former editor Kelvin MacKenzie, about Channel 4 
News presenter Fatima Manji.

“Migrants as such are not a group that can be discriminated against,” Tee told 
the Media Masters podcast <http://www.mediafocus.org.uk/matt-tee>.

“And actually in our terms for it to be discrimination, the complainant would 
have had to show that an individual or a group of individuals were 
discriminated against by that phrase.

“I felt that the phrase was in very bad taste but bad taste is not something 
that is covered by the editors’ code.”

Ipso’s chair, Sir Alan Moses, has previously said that he was “frustrated” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mediamonkeyblog/2016/jun/05/euro-2016-radio-times-versailles>
 by the regulator’s failure to act over the column. Ipso rejected the 
complaints last May.

Tee told the Media Masters podcast: “My chairman is a lovely man who uses 
wonderful impactful language at times.

“I think it is important that columnists, particularly where it is very clear 
that this is a personal opinion, a column, inKatie Hopkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/katie-hopkins> terms or [Richard] Littlejohn 
or whoever, people who cause mass offence, it is very clear there is a picture 
at the top of the column, it is very clearly a column, which is their view, 
their opinion.”

More than 200,000 people signed a petition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/apr/20/katie-hopkins-sun-migrants-article-petition-nears-180000-mark>
 calling on the Sun to sack Hopkins following the column. A former The 
Apprentice contestant, Hopkins has since left the paper to join the Daily Mail.

Tee added: “There were suggestions with the Katie Hopkins piece that it was an 
incitement to racial hatred. That’s a legal matter. I don’t think the 
commissioner of the Metropolitan police has taken any action over that.

“In terms of the editors’ code, there wasn’t anything that could lead to a 
successful complaint against that column.”
 