
‘I felt really happy to be carried along by a song I don’t even like’

Fix You by Coldplay
Alexis Petridis
I couldn’t be more surprised to find myself writing about Coldplay playing Fix 
You at Glastonbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/26/coldplay-headline-sunday-at-glastonbury-2016-review>
 as my musical moment the year. I’m not one of those people who thinks Coldplay 
are the living embodiment of all that’s wrong about latterday rock music, but 
nor am I, by any stretch of the imagination, a big fan. Fix You is pretty much 
the apotheosis of what I don’t like about Coldplay: the vague, woolly 
sentiments, the feeling that it was written with the intention of getting vast 
crowds of people to pull out their lighters, a calculated exercise in 
button-pushing manipulation, rather than a genuine expression of emotion.

Furthermore, Glastonbury had a weird atmosphere this year. You couldn’t get 
away from current events that suggested the world was coming unglued: there was 
a lot oftalk about Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/britain-votes-for-brexit-eu-referendum-david-cameron>
 and tributes to the victims of the Orlando massacre andJo Cox, the MP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/16/labour-mp-jo-cox-shot-in-west-yorkshire>
 who was murdered in June.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Flife-goes-on-try-dancing-our-writers-favourite-music-moments-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb888357c02d9ec6869e28d46a0ace3a111309b2%2F0_0_4000_2650%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Life%20goes%20on%20%E2%80%93%20try%20dancing%E2%80%99%3A%20our%20writers%E2%80%99%20favourite%20music%20moments%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Flife-goes-on-try-dancing-our-writers-favourite-music-moments-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Life%20goes%20on%20%E2%80%93%20try%20dancing%E2%80%99%3A%20our%20writers%E2%80%99%20favourite%20music%20moments%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Flife-goes-on-try-dancing-our-writers-favourite-music-moments-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb888357c02d9ec6869e28d46a0ace3a111309b2%2F0_0_4000_2650%2F4000.jpg>
 Coldplay on stage at Glastonbury 2016. Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
I used to know Jo. I hadn’t seen her in years, but it was still deeply 
unsettling trying to square the girl I had once known with the woman whose 
image people were carrying around the festival like a religious icon, in whose 
honourPortishead had made a video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/22/exclusive-portishead-release-abba-sos-video-in-tribute-to-jo-cox>
. It kept jolting me, as it had when I had seen her face staring out of the 
front pages or read accounts of her murder: fucking hell, that’s Jo. I could 
remember dancing with her on Millennium Eve. I could remember us gabbing 
excitedly as we drove from JFK airport to Long Island at the start of a 
holiday. It didn’t seem plausible that she was the same person.

By Sunday evening, I had had enough. The weather made it feel more like 
November than June. My friends had all gone home, so I watched Coldplay on my 
own. I expected them to be objectively good, but not really for me: they had 
headlined Glastonbury three times before; they clearly know how to work a huge 
crowd. And then they played Fix You.The crowd started singing along 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6EG8fnbvLtQ> softly and I didn’t feel cynical 
or objective at all. The words – those trite lyrics, with whatever vague 
meaning they might have had in the first place worn away by umpteen appearances 
on TV show soundtracks – seemed incredibly soothing. For a moment, I stopped 
feeling weird, gloomy and uneasy and felt calm. More than that, I felt really 
happy to be carried along by a song I don’t even like, really happy to be part 
of that communal experience, really happy to be where I was at that exact 
moment.

I can’t really explain it. The closest I’ve got is thinking: well, maybe I 
just needed something familiar, the way you sometimes go to an upscale 
restaurant, look at the menu and think: God, I could murder some cheese on 
toast. Maybe it’s a better song than I thought, although I’ve not been gripped 
by the urge to reassess it: in fact, I’ve not listened to Fix You since. 
Perhaps it was just a moment when circumstance made the wrong song seem like 
the right song, proof that live music can work its magic in inexplicable ways.

‘Adulthood had not only arrived, but was about to get seriously real’

Teenage Spaceship by Smog
Tim Jonze
Inevitably, my musical moment of 2016 revolves around becoming a father. You 
only need to read this list, orany of the previous years’ lists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/dec/28/music-writers-favourite-musical-moments-of-2015>
, to see that the moments we cherish most are not simply about great tunes, but 
rather the way in which music weaves itself into our lives in order to magnify 
our emotions and offer us greater insight into them. I could list hundreds of 
ways music did that as my wife and I came to terms with having a new lady in 
the house, from the way it triggered unexpected tears in us (was that really me 
sobbing when Macklemore’sSame Love <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hlVBg7_08n0>
 came on the radio?) to the way it sparked unexpected smiles in her whenever I 
played the piano (general public, do not fear: I am fully aware that the only 
way to grow the rapt audience I’ve built for self-penned hits such as Wise Old 
Snufflepig and Big Girl Now is through further procreation).

A couple of weeks before Romy was born, I took a long walk around Hackney and 
decided, for some reason, to listen to Smog’s 1999 album Knock Knock. The song
Teenage Spaceship <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RT-kvaC-7ag> spoke to me 
deeply back then – a lonely, misunderstood wanderer of a small town dreaming of 
ways to light up the sky, determined not to get swept up in conformity when 
adulthood arrived. It felt funny hearing it again at a time when adulthood had 
not only arrived, but was about to get seriously real. It was extremely moving, 
in a way I couldn’t quite articulate.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRT-kvaC-7ag&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRT-kvaC-7ag>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRT-kvaC-7ag&media=>
Listen to Teenage Spaceship by Smog 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RT-kvaC-7ag&list=RDRT-kvaC-7ag> 
I didn’t join the dots until the day of Romy’s birth, when I sat cradling her 
in the maternity ward. I looked down and was struck by the realisation that 
she, too, was about to go through so many of those challenging moments of 
self-discovery on her journey towards adulthood. I knew I would have minimal 
control over the good times and the bad – as Joni Mitchell once accepted: 
“There’ll be icicles and birthday clothes … and sometimes there’ll be sorrow” – 
but I also knew Romy was blessed to have had this chance to experience life in 
all its tumultuous, see-sawing glory.

Music is unpredictable like this. It wasn’t a record about birth or even new 
beginnings that really hit home the enormity of what my little girl was about 
to go through, but one about being an oversensitive teenager. I played it 
again, cried uncontrollably and realised that I probably still was one.

‘In three and a half minutes, it articulated what I had spent 18 months trying 
to say’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Flife-goes-on-try-dancing-our-writers-favourite-music-moments-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c1341cc737ee71ddb047d9b55a931f69d87d302%2F517_506_2446_1468%2F2446.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Life%20goes%20on%20%E2%80%93%20try%20dancing%E2%80%99%3A%20our%20writers%E2%80%99%20favourite%20music%20moments%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Flife-goes-on-try-dancing-our-writers-favourite-music-moments-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Life%20goes%20on%20%E2%80%93%20try%20dancing%E2%80%99%3A%20our%20writers%E2%80%99%20favourite%20music%20moments%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Flife-goes-on-try-dancing-our-writers-favourite-music-moments-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c1341cc737ee71ddb047d9b55a931f69d87d302%2F517_506_2446_1468%2F2446.jpg>
 ‘It’s about the quiet pleasure of returning phone calls, holding friendships, 
going dancing at the local bar’ ... Courtney Marie Andrews. 
Put the Fire Out by Courtney Marie Andrews
Laura Barton
I ducked out of London on a midweek morning two summers ago, packed up my 
belongings and quietly left the city that had been my home for 15 years. I 
still remember how exhilarated I felt as I glimpsed my new town and the sea 
beyond, as if I had pulled off the most spectacular feat of escapology. But 
running away has long been my speciality – I like to feel weightless, 
anonymous, moving through land. The hardest thing for me has always been 
staying in one place and not thinking of another. Moving to a small town, then, 
felt like a challenge to my restlessness. The past year and a half has been an 
experiment in staying put.

It has been hard to explain. Friends and acquaintances have reacted with 
bafflement to the fact I have left the city, that I am not in London or Los 
Angeles or Louisiana or any of the places anyone might expect to find me. How 
to describe the need sometimes to belong, the wish for a counterweight to life 
in limbo?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dgl2mWYQyf3s&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dgl2mWYQyf3s>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dgl2mWYQyf3s&media=>
Listen to Put the Fire Out by Courtney Marie Andrews 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gl2mWYQyf3s> 
Then, this autumn, I heard Courtney Marie Andrews’s song Put the Fire Out 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gl2mWYQyf3s>. In its three and a half minutes, 
she seemed to articulate what I had spent 18 months trying to say. It’s a 
road-worn country song about finally heading home, about wanting certainty, a 
life lived in the present and tackled with both feet. It’s about the quiet 
pleasure of returning phone calls, holding friendships, relationships, going 
dancing at the local bar. “I’ve been lost,” she sings, “and I’m ready to be 
found.”

Putting out a fire sounds like admitted defeat, but for me it has been about 
doing something braver. My move was not an extinguishing of desire, but the 
recognition that, just as it’s necessary to have somewhere from which to run, 
it’s important to have a place to where you want to return. “There’s a place 
for everything,” as Andrews puts it, “and I think I know mine now.”

‘Feeling so vulnerable heightened my responses to otherwise unremarkable 
things’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Flife-goes-on-try-dancing-our-writers-favourite-music-moments-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4adaeebc797c459915d010dc7dd3bf63615f0f7%2F0_0_4930_3296%2F4930.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Life%20goes%20on%20%E2%80%93%20try%20dancing%E2%80%99%3A%20our%20writers%E2%80%99%20favourite%20music%20moments%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Flife-goes-on-try-dancing-our-writers-favourite-music-moments-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Life%20goes%20on%20%E2%80%93%20try%20dancing%E2%80%99%3A%20our%20writers%E2%80%99%20favourite%20music%20moments%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Flife-goes-on-try-dancing-our-writers-favourite-music-moments-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4adaeebc797c459915d010dc7dd3bf63615f0f7%2F0_0_4930_3296%2F4930.jpg>
 Squeeze on stage at Glastonbury 2016. Photograph: Smiejkowska/Rex/Shutterstock 
Labelled With Love by Squeeze
Michael Hann
This was my first Glastonbury. Every year since my early 20s, as scores of my 
friends and then colleagues traipsed down to Somerset, I spurned it. Not out of 
contempt for the festival, but because –as I wrote earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/15/anxiety-disorder-stresses-out-of-control-fears-sick>
 – the prospect of an event so big, so overwhelming, so far from home terrified 
me. I feared it would set me off on a spiral of anxiety, something I find very 
hard to escape from once I have entered it. This year, though, I had no choice. 
I had to go, with dread in my heart and that sensation in my stomach that you 
get when you’re terrified or very hungry.

As you will have guessed, I got from one end to the other – from Tuesday 
afternoon until Sunday – at which point I fled Somerset. I wouldn’t say I 
enjoyed it; I managed it. I hated the mud; I hated the crowds; I hated the 
scale of the site; I hated that the mud and the crowds and the scale combined 
meant it took an eternity to get anywhere. I was working most of each day, so I 
didn’t see much music, nor did I explore the dance areas, the healing fields – 
any of the other stuff for which Glastonbury is famous.

But I think that feeling so vulnerable – I realise this makes me sound 
pathetic, but that’s how it was – heightened my responses to otherwise 
unremarkable things. A friend later told me he had never been greeted so 
effusively as when I encountered him having a quiet pint on the Thursday 
afternoon, so pleased was I have to have bumped into him by chance.

The combination of tiredness and fear, when it combined with my letting down 
my guard, produced at least one moment that startled and haunted me. On the 
Saturday lunchtime, Alexis Petridis and I tooka short walk to the Pyramid stage 
to see Squeeze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/live/2016/jun/25/glastonbury-2016-saturday-live-daytime-adele?page=with:block-576e7a49e4b030d83eb4a591#block-576e7a49e4b030d83eb4a591>
. It wasn’t that I was desperate to see Squeeze – they’re on the long list of 
bands I like when I hear them, but don’t think about in between – more that it 
was close, Alexis was going and it was something to do.

As with most bands with back catalogues filled with songs that have been part 
of the cultural atmosphere for decades, Squeeze pretty much guarantee a decent 
time. I was enjoying the set; Alexis was enjoying it even more (I had never 
seen him sing along to anything until they played Goodbye Girl). And then they 
played Labelled With Love.

Labelled With Love is my favourite Squeeze song: I adore the simple 
circularity of its melody, the perfection of the metaphor that gives it its 
title. But it’s a song about the sadness of a life derailed and about alcohol – 
it’s not one that really touches my life (and, in any case, it is generally 
melody, rather than lyrics, that I love in pop music). Nevertheless, in a rare 
moment of sunshine, with my friend beside me and already feeling exhausted 
after four days on site, the lyrics of Labelled With Love hit me with 
bludgeoning effect. “Home is a love that I miss very much,” Glenn Tilbrook 
sang, and my defences crumbled. Suddenly, I was wishing that I was anywhere 
else but a field in Somerset and acutely aware that this music would not be 
having such a profound effect were I anywhere else. You would think I had been 
away for four months, not four days.

‘If there’s one time you can feel comfortable clearing a dancefloor for a good 
cry with your best friend, it’s your wedding’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Flife-goes-on-try-dancing-our-writers-favourite-music-moments-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce556e1509eb750fcea4cda8926b8c4d71dbef33%2F176_221_3202_1921%2F3202.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Life%20goes%20on%20%E2%80%93%20try%20dancing%E2%80%99%3A%20our%20writers%E2%80%99%20favourite%20music%20moments%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Flife-goes-on-try-dancing-our-writers-favourite-music-moments-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Life%20goes%20on%20%E2%80%93%20try%20dancing%E2%80%99%3A%20our%20writers%E2%80%99%20favourite%20music%20moments%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Flife-goes-on-try-dancing-our-writers-favourite-music-moments-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce556e1509eb750fcea4cda8926b8c4d71dbef33%2F176_221_3202_1921%2F3202.jpg>
 ‘Yellow was an important song during my coming-of-age era, when I wore a lot 
of corduroy’ ... Coldplay’s Chris Martin. Photograph: Stoyan Nenov/Reuters 
Yellow by Coldplay
Harriet Gibsone
I got married in August. Our first dance was Tender by Blur, but, with all due 
respect to my legally bound life partner and to Damon Albarn, I remember 
nothing about it. My brain had shut down because walking on to the dancefloor 
had signified the end of my bridal duties for the day. All that was left to do 
was dance, minesweep my relatives and avoid setting my dress on fire. A few 
hours later, I had relaxed. I had requested that the DJ play Coldplay’s Yellow, 
because it was an important song during my coming-of-age era (in other words, 
the years in which I experimented with fringes and wore a lot of corduroy). 
While it’s not exactly a climactic end-of-wedding banger – Lord knows, the 
people wanted Oops Upside Your Head – for me and a handful of school friends it 
was a glorious moment when the days before I could even comprehend having the 
capabilities to hire portable loos came flooding into a field in Essex. And, if 
there’s one time in your life when you can feel comfortable clearing a 
dancefloor for the sake of a cuddle with your best friend and a good cry, it’s 
your wedding.

‘That beautiful song of devotion made me think about Barbara’s decades of 
marriage’
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE0e-IhSX_7I&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE0e-IhSX_7I>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE0e-IhSX_7I&media=>
Nat King Cole performs When I Fall in Love 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E0e-IhSX_7I> 
When I Fall in Love by Nat King Cole
Dave Simpson
We buried my Auntie Barbara last month. She wasn’t my real aunt – she was Mrs 
Lister, who lived next door when I was a child – but after my father died when 
I was six and my mother became ill, Auntie Barbara took me in. Never mind that 
she already had a husband and four boys inside a modest semi. She gave me a 
home when it was needed, and hers became a second family.

Her second-eldest, Stephen, turned me on to Motown when I watched him doing 
northern soul glides in the living room to a Supremes soundtrack. Barbara’s 
husband, Harry, and their second-youngest, Kevin, took me to my first Leeds 
United matches; when I wrote about the league-winning 1991-92 team in my book
The Last Champions 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/blogs/lifestyle/2012/07/last-champions>, I 
dedicated it to the Listers. Over the years, as we all moved around, contact 
had reduced to greetings cards, but recently I had begun visiting Barbara and 
Kevin again.

Things came out at the funeral that I never knew: Barbara herself had been 
taken in by another family as a child during the war and had lost her first 
born in tragic circumstances, events that defined her life. It turned out that 
she had taken in several other children, too, and that she was still providing 
some with sanctuary – even when they had become adults – right up until her 
death at the age of 87.

Nat King Cole’s When I Fall in Love 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E0e-IhSX_7I#t=20s> was among the music played 
at Barbara’s funeral; it was also a favourite of my mum’s. That beautiful song 
of eternal devotion made me think about Barbara’s decades of marriage to Harry, 
and the unconditional love she had for so many children, and how we all owe it 
to her to make sure some of that survives.

‘Under the influence of Howard Donald’s appalling singing, I began to feel 
part of a community’
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyoO_1FFr56k&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyoO_1FFr56k>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyoO_1FFr56k&media=>
Take That perform Never Forget <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yoO_1FFr56k> 
Never Forget by Take That
Rachel Aroesti
In May, I was walking through a field in Lincolnshire when I got a call from 
one of my university housemates. He told me that another friend we had lived 
with, Aj, had died. Aj was training to be an RAF pilot and was on a routine 
practice flight when his plane crashed. He was 25.

After a summer spent letting this absurd, rattling loss sink in, I found 
myself back in my university halls. I deliberately hadn’t been back to Durham 
since I had graduated, sealing it off in my memory as dull and horribly 
claustrophobic, somewhere I had never really felt at home. But a small 
contingent had decided to return to our college for a ball. Originally, I had 
been unenthusiastic, but my attitude towards university nostalgia was changing 
– those memories I thought I could breezily discard were now the only 
connection I had to my friend.

Some colleges in Durham occupy 11th-century castles; others (such as mine) are 
1960s eyesores that force their students to sleep in outbuildings directly 
above basketball courts. Here are a couple of the things I never got on board 
with while there: “college spirit”, the coddled routine of college life; and 
Durham’s ironic pride in its crap nightlife (it is home to a club called Klute, 
once voted the worst in Europe, to everyone’s constant amusement; the idea of 
submitting yourself to terrible music and equally terrible ambience was a 
hallmark of university life that bled into most occasions).

College balls could be added to that list, and this post-grad version ended as 
they all did, with everyone doing the same school-disco-style dance routine to
Take That’s Never Forget <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yoO_1FFr56k>, during 
which about 80 people run into the centre of a big circle. In the misanthropy 
of my actual student days, I had never been interested enough to find out who 
the song was by, let alone paid attention to what would have been, under normal 
circumstances, risibly cliched lyrics. Now, “We’re still so young and we hope 
for more / But remember this / We’re not invincible,” was oddly, horribly apt.

Yet the experience of being there was far from horrible. Suddenly, under the 
influence of Howard Donald’s objectively appalling singing, I began to feel 
part of a community I had not when I really did belong to it. In the thick of 
this collective euphoria, tinged for some of us with a gnawing grief, I made a 
vow: from now on I would treasure my university memories – or, as Barlow and co 
would have put it, never forget.

‘I danced until my limbs felt light again’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Flife-goes-on-try-dancing-our-writers-favourite-music-moments-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffff76686d2355fc86e30e306ad57a3cee60acf27%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Life%20goes%20on%20%E2%80%93%20try%20dancing%E2%80%99%3A%20our%20writers%E2%80%99%20favourite%20music%20moments%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Flife-goes-on-try-dancing-our-writers-favourite-music-moments-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Life%20goes%20on%20%E2%80%93%20try%20dancing%E2%80%99%3A%20our%20writers%E2%80%99%20favourite%20music%20moments%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Flife-goes-on-try-dancing-our-writers-favourite-music-moments-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffff76686d2355fc86e30e306ad57a3cee60acf27%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 ‘I love hip-hop, but I’ve never been so deeply moved by it’ ... A Tribe Called 
Quest. Photograph: NBC/Getty Images 
Savages and A Tribe Called Quest
Dorian Lynskey
I have problems choosing music to help me when I’m feeling low. Something 
uplifting often feels false, while a sad song can make me feel like I’m 
performing sadness. It only works if I let fate press the shuffle button and 
find the soundtrack I need. This happened twice this year, when I most needed 
to be lifted out of myself, and left me dizzy with gratitude.

Friday 24 June was the bleakest Glastonbury day I’ve ever experienced. The 
festival woke up to mud and Brexit and you couldn’t avoid either. For most of 
the day, I trudged from act to act without being able to get politics out of my 
head, partly because it came hard on the heels of Jo Cox’s murder. As night 
fell, I went to the Park stage to seeSavages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/savages>, who have always gripped me, but 
never like this. They hit me like ice-water from a firehose. They were so 
fierce, strong and life-affirming that I could think of nothing beyond Jehnny 
Beth’s shamanic moves or the shrapnel clang of Ayse Hassan’s bass. I came away 
feeling like something poisonous inside me had been purged.

On 9 November, the day after the US election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-elections-2016>, I was in New York 
interviewing A Tribe Called Quest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/17/still-kicking-it-a-tribe-called-quest>
. I woke in the middle of the night after three hours’ sleep, my brain whirring 
nauseatingly with jetlag, shock and everything I had drunk to mute the shock. 
After the interview, there was an album launch party in Queens. This was a New 
York hip-hop crowd – definitely not Trump people – so they had every reason to 
be gloomy, but they didn’t let the election infect the celebrations. After a 
Q&A, Prince Paul and Questlove DJed 90s hip-hop classics and I danced until my 
limbs felt light again. I love hip-hop, but I’ve never been so deeply moved by 
it. It felt defiant, resilient, transcendent.

Like the Savages <https://www.theguardian.com/music/savages> show, the party 
reminded me what music can do that nothing else, certainly not tormenting 
yourself on the internet, can. It can say: Listen, no matter how bad you feel, 
there is still joy to be had and people to share it with. Life goes on. Try 
dancing.

‘Prince belonged to everybody, but it felt like he spoke just to me’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Flife-goes-on-try-dancing-our-writers-favourite-music-moments-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa139ed4b2f679564f715e06a171ca31b6f6bc40b%2F0_0_2658_1939%2F2658.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Life%20goes%20on%20%E2%80%93%20try%20dancing%E2%80%99%3A%20our%20writers%E2%80%99%20favourite%20music%20moments%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Flife-goes-on-try-dancing-our-writers-favourite-music-moments-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Life%20goes%20on%20%E2%80%93%20try%20dancing%E2%80%99%3A%20our%20writers%E2%80%99%20favourite%20music%20moments%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Flife-goes-on-try-dancing-our-writers-favourite-music-moments-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa139ed4b2f679564f715e06a171ca31b6f6bc40b%2F0_0_2658_1939%2F2658.jpg>
 Goodbye … Prince. Photograph: Chris O'Meara/AP 
Sometimes It Snows in April by Prince
Priya Elan
A few days after Prince <https://www.theguardian.com/music/prince> died, in 
April, the weather turned bitterly cold and slate grey. I was in the office 
staring out of the 10ft-high windows that overlook King’s Cross station when it 
happened. “Look, it’s snowing!” said my deskmate and fellow Paisley Park 
devotee, pointing at the sky. We stood in awe and wonderment, looking at the 
crouton-shaped flakes as they fell from the sky in disordered waves.

I can’t remember if there were tears in our eyes, but it felt eerie and 
momentous: in accordance withthe closing song on 1986’s Parade 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zlZONgpmw58>, it was snowing in April. The 
track, with its allusions to life, death and the afterlife (“All good things, 
they say, never last”) was almost impossible to listen to after he passed away. 
Even D’Angelo got so choked up when he performed the song on The Tonight Show 
with Jimmy Fallon that he stumbled through one of the lines. At the time of its 
release, the track, with its elemental feel and Joni Mitchell-esque delicacy 
(courtesy of Lisa Coleman’s piano and Wendy Melvoin’s acoustic guitar), served 
as a bittersweet end note to Prince’s collaboration with his band the 
Revolution. By April 2016, the song had become a devastatingly sad goodbye from 
a man whose superstar status meant he belonged to everybody, but it still felt 
like he spoke just to me.

As we stood there looking at the snow out of the window, we felt, in our 
secondhand celebrity grief, like this was Prince’s goodbye message to us.
 