
The union representing justice officers in Victoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria> says it is fed up with 
the “sustained pattern of orchestrated violence” which it says erupts between 
two youth justice centres on most Saturday nights.

A spokesman for the Victorian branch of the Community and Public Sector Union, 
Julian Kennelly, said he was extremely concerned about the safety of justice 
staff.

Melbourne riot: claims police going soft on African youths 'inaccurate and 
dangerous'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/15/melbourne-riot-claims-police-going-soft-on-african-youths-inaccurate-and-dangerous>
On Saturday night about 10 youths rioted at the Malmsbury youth justice 
centre, about 100km north-west ofMelbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne>. It took authorities 
just over two hours to bring the rioting under control, which left substantial 
damage to the Deakin unit of the facility. Victoria police are now 
investigating.

The riot was followed by another, less serious incident on Sunday afternoon, 
Kelly said, after an offender lashed out at a youth justice officer over the 
phone use policy.

“This is the second time in six weeks they’ve destroyed the Deakin unit,” 
Kennelly said.

“The violence can sometimes stem from recruiting exercises among offenders, 
with the older ones trying to recruit the younger ones to participate in gang 
activity. They often start to harm other inmates, then the staff step in, then 
they tend to start belting the staff. And it seems to be happening now every 
Saturday at Malmsbury or at the Melbourne youth justice centre in Parkville.

“It it’s not one centre, it’s the other.”

He said staff felt unsafe and there were high levels of absenteeism because of 
the stresses associated with the job. Contractors were often recruited from 
labour hire agencies in their place, he said, who may be ill-trained to cope 
with violent youth.

“They let the kids burn themselves out, was the expression used to me,” 
Kennelly told 3AW.


He wants the ringleaders to be separated into either another unit or 
transferred to other, higher security youth justice centres.

Young Indigenous imprisonment in NT: 'You wouldn’t believe it in a modern-day 
society'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/22/young-indigenous-imprisonment-in-nt-you-wouldnt-believe-it-in-a-modern-day-society>
Last month, staff at the Melbourne youth justice centre were forced to 
barricade themselves into a room after about a dozen inmates began to riot, 
prompting an internal review.

Victoria’s children’s minister, Jenny Mikakos, on Monday afternoon promised a 
crackdown on the youth responsible for the riots.

“It’s appalling and it’s totally unacceptable and police are now investigating 
the matter and charges may well be laid,” she told ABC radio.
 