
Our first expedition was in 1961. We fitted a Citroën 2CV with outsized tyres 
and arranged the interior so that we could sleep in it, then caught a cargo 
ship from Marseille to Djibouti. We stopped off for a few weeks on the coast of 
what was then French Somaliland and then travelled on to Yemen. At the time 
Taiz was one of the only cities in the world not to have a hotel, a cinema or a 
bank, and where the city gates were closed every evening from sundown to 
sunrise. People thought we were mad going there but we were intoxicated with 
this place where people wore feather lamé turbans and jambiyas, curved daggers 
with incised silver or gold blades. Our trip was supposed to last six months 
but went on for 17.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Froland-sabrina-michauds-photographers-asia-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ef5a72695ad083469d1ed89f64454e76436b89a%2F0_0_4961_3388%2F4961.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Photographer%20Roland%20Michaud%2C%20lifelong%20love%20affair%20with%20Asia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Froland-sabrina-michauds-photographers-asia-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Photographer%20Roland%20Michaud%2C%20lifelong%20love%20affair%20with%20Asia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Froland-sabrina-michauds-photographers-asia-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ef5a72695ad083469d1ed89f64454e76436b89a%2F0_0_4961_3388%2F4961.jpg>
 Kyrgyz caravan in the Wakhan corridor, north east Afghanistan, 1971 
When we returned to Paris, our friends couldn’t understand why it had taken so 
long. But the reason for our success as photographers over the years is that we 
always took our time. We tried to understand people. We went with the idea that 
other people may enrich you. For our next trip, we drove from Paris to 
Singapore and back. It took four and a half years and we returned with 34,000 
colour transparencies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Froland-sabrina-michauds-photographers-asia-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57731c6b0c98d39d311653780b7607506d808780%2F0_0_3416_5120%2F3416.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Photographer%20Roland%20Michaud%2C%20lifelong%20love%20affair%20with%20Asia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Froland-sabrina-michauds-photographers-asia-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Photographer%20Roland%20Michaud%2C%20lifelong%20love%20affair%20with%20Asia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Froland-sabrina-michauds-photographers-asia-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57731c6b0c98d39d311653780b7607506d808780%2F0_0_3416_5120%2F3416.jpg>
 Sabrina in the Citroën 2CV. 
Our greatest adventure was in 1970 when we were commissioned by National 
Geographic to photograph a camel caravan along frozen rivers in the Pamir 
mountains of Afghanistan. There were no books about Afghanistan then, no 
pictures, it was truly off the beaten track. For a photographer it was a huge 
opportunity. They didn’t take women on these caravans but we met the chief and 
he allowed Sabrina to join. We travelled across the roof of the world through 
snow and ice with these nomads and their 27 camels. It was very tough but the 
people were so kind. Beyond the problems of language, culture, habits and 
tradition, something very strong unites us; the suffering and great moments in 
life are the same wherever you are.

The first photograph I ever sold was of a snake charmer in Marrakech. It 
appeared on the front cover of the Swedish magazine Vi.

I met Sabrina in Rabat city library in 1956. I was so shy I didn’t know what 
to say, so I asked if she liked travelling and where she wanted to go. She said 
India. Seven years later, we fulfilled this dream and since then we’ve been 26 
times. We love it. In our apartment in Paris we used to read The Thousand and 
One Nights every evening and although the tales are set in Arabia, India is the 
best country to interpret them photographically. This is where we met 
Scheherazade, Ali Baba, Sinbad and Aladdin. You can find every type of person 
there. India has taught us humility and tolerance. I have probably spent seven 
years of my life there but I am still learning about it. Since 2001 we have 
been focusing on the monsoon season in a bid to understand the country better.

The one thing we have tried to do is put emotion in to our pictures. We became 
photographers to capture the magic of the places we visited – we chose not to 
show the uglier side of life but to show the beauty. We still use a Leica film 
camera and we have no internet, email or mobile phones. Now everyone can take a 
photo, it has become very ordinary. Where is the value or meaning in it? It is 
cheap.

We live in Paris, in the 17th arrondissement, near the Arc de Triomphe. I love 
the city – it has a certain beauty and charm – but not the people so much; they 
can be a bit arrogant. Paris is not rich in parks but we live near Parc Monceau 
and often spend time there, to be close to nature.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Froland-sabrina-michauds-photographers-asia-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50a827a702c099ec6f9288c34917132efeba1d87%2F0_0_5760_3773%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Photographer%20Roland%20Michaud%2C%20lifelong%20love%20affair%20with%20Asia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Froland-sabrina-michauds-photographers-asia-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Photographer%20Roland%20Michaud%2C%20lifelong%20love%20affair%20with%20Asia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Froland-sabrina-michauds-photographers-asia-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50a827a702c099ec6f9288c34917132efeba1d87%2F0_0_5760_3773%2F5760.jpg>
 Roland and Sabrina Michaud in Paris, 2015 
When you are old every day is a small miracle, but I hope we will travel a 
little more. We may go to Oman, which is still rather pure, not too developed. 
And, of course, back to India, to continue photographing the monsoon.

• Enchanted Lands by Roland & Sabrina is published by Prestel 
<http://prestelpublishing.randomhouse.de/book/Roland-&amp-Sabrina-Michaud/Roland-&amp-Sabrina-Michaud/Prestel-com/e497171.rhd>
, £45. To buy a copy for £36 including UK p&p visitbookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/370857/> or call 0330 
333 6846.
 