
Vicky Pryce, chief economic adviser, Centre for Economics and Business Research

The prime minister could not have given a clearer message. But a departure 
from the single market is a defeat for businesses that have been lobbying for 
as free and easy an access to the single market as possible.


SMEs have always complained about some of the regulations imposed from 
Brussels and the bureaucracy sometimes involved in selling to Europe. But much 
of this regulation is unlikely to disappear, especially if we want to continue 
to trade with Europe. It is often forgotten that despite our membership of the 
single market, the UK has managed to remain one of the least product regulated 
countries in the developed world, and has attracted one the highest levels of 
foreign direct investment. Countless small firms here have benefited from 
European grants and from easy access to much needed migrant skills from the EU.

Related: Key points from May's Brexit speech: what have we learned? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/key-points-from-mays-what-have-we-learned>

As Theresa May herself said in her speech, trade is essential for growth and 
less trade results in less growth. Smaller firms in general lack the capacity 
to explore markets which are far away. Replacing parts of an open market of 500 
million people with unknown future deals with other countries cannot be done 
without some cost. And that may fall on SMEs harder than on other parts of the 
economy.

So, what is there to compensate? Just the hope by some market participants 
that now that it has been conceded there will be a final vote on the new 
arrangements with the EU in both the House of Commons and the House of Lords. 
This might derail or at least weaken the “hardness” of the Brexit being 
contemplated by Theresa May.

Steve McCabe, economist, Birmingham City University’s Business School

For businesses, there are a number of complex discussions to come about how it 
will be possible for firms to maintain trade with the EU while trying to gain 
access to new markets. Every organisation, every business, no matter how big or 
small will need to embrace upheaval and change.

I’m afraid that the idea that there are a plethora of markets that will 
magically open up once we are free from the shackles of EU bureaucracy is not 
at all certain. The goods that are demanded by overseas buyers have cachet for 
being high quality and stylish; not because they are cheap. This is where 
investment is needed. Look at what Jaguar Land Rover has achieved under Indian 
ownership.

The prospect of a good deal is entirely possible if all sides see value in 
maintaining good relationships for the benefit of business. However, if May 
allows the process to be hijacked by the headbangers’ agenda of “out and bugger 
the consequences”, we can hardly expect to be given any goodwill by the EU. 
Besides, if the UK gets a good deal other countries may be emboldened and 
decide there is no disadvantage in also deciding to leave the EU.

The transitional arrangement is good news. Business needs time to adjust. 
Undoubtedly there will be continued uncertainty. However, I suspect many in 
business would prefer that either this hadn’t occurred or that we leave 
immediately. The reality is that this will be such a complicated and protracted 
process that no one really knows how it will end.

Angela McGowan, Northern Ireland regional director for the Confederation of 
British Industry (CBI)

The business community in Northern Ireland welcomes the greater clarity and 
the ambition to create a more prosperous, open and global United Kingdom, with 
the freest possible trade between the UK and the EU. However, ruling out 
membership of the single market has reduced options for maintaining 
barrier-free and tariff-free trading relationship between the UK and the EU.

Given the importance of the EU to Northern Irish exports, leaving the single 
market is a significant issue for the local economy. While local businesses 
want to make a success of Brexit, there are undoubtedly concerns about falling 
back on damaging World Trade Organisation rules.

However, the CBI notes and welcomes the prime minister’s commitment to 
maintaining the “family ties and bonds of affection between the UK and the 
Republic of Ireland” and maintaining the common travel area. Close cooperation 
and partnership between the two countries will be essential if the Northern 
Ireland economy is to succeed.

Russ Shaw, founder of Tech London Advocates

Theresa May’s decision to pursue a “clean and hard Brexit” that sacrifices 
access to the single market is putting our economic growth at stake to advance 
short-term political motives. The strategy of seeking deals for pet industries 
such as car making and pharmaceuticals shows an administration that is out of 
touch with the UK’s future growth prospects.

Technology is the country’s fastest growing sector, and industry leaders agree 
that we must continue to attract the best talent to the UK in order to compete 
with the US. Research from the Human Capital Leadership Institute showsthe UK 
remains attractive for these professionals 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/business/2017/01/16/post-brexit-vote-uk-leapfrogs-sweden-us-allure/>
, but we are jeopardising this opportunity due to our government’s vague and 
regressive immigration commitments along with its lack of investment in digital 
skills for home-grown talent.

A weaker pound, along with international commitment to protecting the City, 
can allow our export economy of services and software to prosper, but only if a 
hard Brexit does not compound our immigration problems.

Lesley Batchelor, director general of the Institute of Export

Being out of the single market brings a lot of uncertainty for all businesses. 
We’re starting negotiations for trade agreements on a completely blank piece of 
paper. It’s common knowledge that if someone else knows you’re on a deadline in 
negotiations, as we are with Brexit, it puts you on a distinct disadvantage.

The Department for International Trade is doing great job in putting together 
a register of companies that want to trade internationally. But I can’t say 
what trade is going to look like.

We need some scope on how export and import tariffs are going to work. This 
speech has addressed nothing on small business concerns. Trade post-Brexit is 
not going to be one simple cure all. It’s going to be lots of attempts at 
getting it right.

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 