
‘I start each day disinfecting the equipment in the gym and mopping floors,” 
says the handsome, slightly familiar prison inmate to the camera. Once the most 
dashing sportsman in the US,OJ Simpson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/simpson> is now reduced to menial duties 
at the Lovelock correctional centre in Nevada. There, he is serving a 33-year 
sentence – not for killing his wife, Nicole, in Los Angeles in 1994, but for a 
bizarre botched crime committed in a Las Vegas hotel room more than a decade 
later.


This is the opening of OJ: Made in America, a remarkable and revealing 
five-part documentary that explores the issue of race and policing in the US. 
Earlier this year, inthe People v OJ Simpson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/15/the-best-tv-of-2016-so-far-game-of-thrones-happy-valley-line-of-duty-the-night-manager-trapped>
, Cuba Gooding Jr played Simpson in a reconstruction of the “trial of the 
century”. An initial reaction to the idea of a documentary might be that we 
already know enough about the football star who shunned black politics, dumped 
his black wife for a blond teenager, made a fortune and then stood trial for 
the murder of his second wife and another man, Ron Goldman. But the 
documentary, written and directed by Ezra Edelman and already hailed as a 
likely Oscar contender, revisits many of the main players – the police who 
arrested him, the attorneys who prosecuted and defended him, the jurors who 
acquitted him, his former agent, friends and ex-friends – and uncovers fresh, 
telling details.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Foj-simpson-made-in-america-documentary-shocks-revelations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffda3e6db272fe229449d3799305d1447ab0eee4f%2F0_253_3628_2177%2F3628.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Please%20remember%20me%20as%20a%20good%20guy'%3A%20more%20OJ%20Simpson%20shocks%20and%20revelations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Foj-simpson-made-in-america-documentary-shocks-revelations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Please%20remember%20me%20as%20a%20good%20guy%27%3A%20more%20OJ%20Simpson%20shocks%20and%20revelations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Foj-simpson-made-in-america-documentary-shocks-revelations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffda3e6db272fe229449d3799305d1447ab0eee4f%2F0_253_3628_2177%2F3628.jpg>
 Before Nicole Brown Simpson’s murder, the police were called to the Simpson 
house eight times for domestic abuse. The punishment: arranging a celebrity 
golf tournament. Photograph: Getty 
We hear of the eight times the police were called out when Nicole was battered 
by Simpson. One LAPD officer begged her to press charges; another was convinced 
that any case against him would be mishandled because of his many friends in 
the police force (he was also convinced that “OJ was gonna kill her”). 
Simpson’s only punishment for all eight offences was a community service order 
that involved him organising a celebrity golf tournament. It is no surprise to 
hear from one of his chuckling buddies that he cheated at golf.

His agent, Michael Gilbert, who stuck with him at the time, reveals that a 
stoned Simpson effectively confessed to him, saying “if she [Nicole] hadn’t 
opened the door with a knife, she’d still be alive”. Gilbert adds: “The part 
that bothers me is that he left the kids upstairs – they could have walked out 
and seen their mom like that.” We are shown, in chilling close-up, exactly what 
“like that” means. Of his former client, Gilbert says: “If the Titanic sank, OJ 
was going to take a life vest for himself, but he was probably going to take 
yours, too, just in case.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Foj-simpson-made-in-america-documentary-shocks-revelations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F215211ca63cad02390e1b3f7080535d8333bdb27%2F0_273_5035_3022%2F5035.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Please%20remember%20me%20as%20a%20good%20guy'%3A%20more%20OJ%20Simpson%20shocks%20and%20revelations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Foj-simpson-made-in-america-documentary-shocks-revelations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Please%20remember%20me%20as%20a%20good%20guy%27%3A%20more%20OJ%20Simpson%20shocks%20and%20revelations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Foj-simpson-made-in-america-documentary-shocks-revelations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F215211ca63cad02390e1b3f7080535d8333bdb27%2F0_273_5035_3022%2F5035.jpg>
 His role model was Bill Cosby not Martin Luther King … Simpson partying hard. 
Photograph: Mickey Osterreicher/ESPN 
A few years before the murders, a black motorist, Rodney King, was savagely 
beaten by white LA police officers, a scene captured on film. The acquittal of 
the officers, despite the damning evidence, led to the 1992 LA riots in which 
55 people died. Bill Hodgman, one of the team who prosecuted Simpson, admits 
now what the OJ verdict truly meant: “I heard it over and over – ‘That was 
payback for Rodney King.’ For all the cases I tried, I never felt so white.”

“I’m not black, I’m OJ,” the defendant was fond of saying, especially when 
called on to protest racial inequality. As other black athletes such as 
Muhammad Ali took a stand in the 60s, Simpson was signing lucrative deals to be 
the face of Hertz car rentals and making nice with Bob Hope. His role model was 
Bill Cosby not Martin Luther King.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Foj-simpson-made-in-america-documentary-shocks-revelations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01c26511377415531ea1d98c81227bd22a72caa1%2F0_307_5035_3022%2F5035.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Please%20remember%20me%20as%20a%20good%20guy'%3A%20more%20OJ%20Simpson%20shocks%20and%20revelations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Foj-simpson-made-in-america-documentary-shocks-revelations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Please%20remember%20me%20as%20a%20good%20guy%27%3A%20more%20OJ%20Simpson%20shocks%20and%20revelations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Foj-simpson-made-in-america-documentary-shocks-revelations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01c26511377415531ea1d98c81227bd22a72caa1%2F0_307_5035_3022%2F5035.jpg>
 ‘I’m not black, I’m OJ’ … Simpson helps some nuns. Photograph: Mickey 
Osterreicher/ESPN 
While race is at the forefront of the story, so is celebrity. While awaiting 
trial, Simpson was busy signing autographs that netted him $3m – helpful in 
paying for the best justice that money could buy. His legal team cost him 
$50,000 a day. The late Johnnie Cochran was the star, but he was aided by Barry 
Scheck, Carl Douglas and F Lee Bailey, who lethally cross-examined the LAPD 
officer Mark Fuhrman, whose history of racist remarks played a major part in 
Simpson’s acquittal. In the programme, Fuhrman reflects on what the trial meant 
for him. “For you, it’s a documentary,” he says. “For me, it’s the end of my 
life.”


The famous scene where Simpson tries on the blood-stained glove from the 
murder scene – “If it doesn’t fit, you must acquit,” Cochran told the jury – is 
shown again. But now, we learn that OJ stopped taking his arthritis medicine 
for two weeks so his hands would swell up. Gilbert admits that “he couldn’t 
bend his hands”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Foj-simpson-made-in-america-documentary-shocks-revelations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20482601a1bcdee4183be12334b9495ad4501f44%2F0_9_971_583%2F971.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Please%20remember%20me%20as%20a%20good%20guy'%3A%20more%20OJ%20Simpson%20shocks%20and%20revelations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Foj-simpson-made-in-america-documentary-shocks-revelations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Please%20remember%20me%20as%20a%20good%20guy%27%3A%20more%20OJ%20Simpson%20shocks%20and%20revelations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Foj-simpson-made-in-america-documentary-shocks-revelations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20482601a1bcdee4183be12334b9495ad4501f44%2F0_9_971_583%2F971.jpg>
 ‘If the glove doesn’t fit’ … Simpson stopped taking his arthritis medicine for 
weeks before this moment so his hands would swell up. Photograph: Vince 
Bucci/AFP/Getty 
After 267 days of evidence, the jury took just three and half hours to acquit. 
Two jurors offer their views on the verdict today. “He’s a stupid ass to go out 
there and get into some more shit,” says one, Carrie Bess. Does she regret her 
decision? “Somewhat. But deep in my heart I done what I felt was right. Back 
then, we took care of our own.”

When I was the Guardian’s LA correspondent a dozen or so years ago, the street 
where the murders took place were a tourist attraction, I went to campaign 
meetings of the families of the – mainly black – young men who had been jailed 
for 25 years under the so-called “three strikes” law. Their sons and brothers 
received outlandish sentences for such minor offences as the theft of a video 
recorder or possession of $10 worth of cocaine. The families remarked that the 
only reporters who came to their meetings were Europeans. American journalists 
no longer saw it as a story: the routine excessive punishment of young black 
men was still seen as no big deal.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Foj-simpson-made-in-america-documentary-shocks-revelations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96e6763853138293c136534e344b43cfc673b606%2F0_203_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Please%20remember%20me%20as%20a%20good%20guy'%3A%20more%20OJ%20Simpson%20shocks%20and%20revelations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Foj-simpson-made-in-america-documentary-shocks-revelations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Please%20remember%20me%20as%20a%20good%20guy%27%3A%20more%20OJ%20Simpson%20shocks%20and%20revelations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Foj-simpson-made-in-america-documentary-shocks-revelations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96e6763853138293c136534e344b43cfc673b606%2F0_203_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
 Simpson at his sentencing for kidnap and armed robbery in 2008. He received a 
33-year sentence. Photograph: Getty Images 
OJ was arrested in 2007 for taking part in a ham-fisted, armed attempt to 
retrieve some of his own memorabilia from dealers in Las Vegas. Convicted of 
kidnap and armed robbery, he was jailed by a judge, who seemed to pause only to 
sip her milkshake through a straw before giving him a 33-year sentence. 
Coincidentally or not, Simpson had earlier lost a wrongful death civil suit 
brought against him by the victims’ families; they were awarded $33m. “That,” 
says OJ’s loyal schoolfriend, Joe Bell, of the jail term, “is white justice in 
America.”

Marcia Clark, the lead prosecutor in his murder trial, was there – as a 
reporter for Entertainment Tonight. “It was all so much bigger than we were,” 
she says, as she looks back on the case that has dominated her career. She got 
that right.

In one of the closing scenes, OJ speaks out from inside the jail. “I don’t 
know how I ended up here,” he says, his voice a whimper now. “I feel totally 
empty ... please remember me as a good guy. Please.”

OJ: Made in America is on BT Sport 1 at 9pm every night from tonight until 
Friday
 