
The chief executive of Apple has dismissed the EU’s tax ruling as “political 
crap” and saidIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> was being 
“picked on”, as he vowed to push ahead with expansion plans in Cork.

In an interview with the Irish Independent 
<http://www.independent.ie/business/irish/no-one-did-anything-wrong-here-and-ireland-is-being-picked-on-it-is-total-political-crap-35012145.html>
, Tim Cook suggested the European commission might be trying to use state aid 
rules to harmonise tax rates across the EU.

“There are other possibilities too, but I think it’s clear that there is a 
desire to harmonise tax rates across the EU. Doing it this way doesn’t seem 
like the right approach to me. There should be a public discussion about it.”

He rejected the assertion by European competition commissioner, Margrethe 
Vestager, who conducted a three-year investigation into the iPhone maker’s 
complex tax dealings, that Apple paid just 0.005% tax in Ireland in 2014. She 
said Apple’s sweetheart tax deal with Irelandconstituted illegal state aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/30/eu-apple-ireland-tax-ruling-q-and-a>
.

“It’s total political crap,” Cook said. “They just picked a number from I 
don’t know where. In the year that the commission says we paid that tax figure, 
we actually paid $400m. We believe that makes us the highest taxpayer in 
Ireland that year.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fwhy-apple-is-facing-13bn-tax-bill-in-ireland-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Apple%20is%20facing%20a%20%E2%82%AC13bn%20tax%20bill%20in%20Ireland%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fwhy-apple-is-facing-13bn-tax-bill-in-ireland-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Apple%20is%20facing%20a%20%E2%82%AC13bn%20tax%20bill%20in%20Ireland%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fwhy-apple-is-facing-13bn-tax-bill-in-ireland-video-explainer&media=>
Why Apple is facing a €13bn tax bill in Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/video/2016/aug/30/why-apple-is-facing-13bn-tax-bill-in-ireland-video-explainer>
The Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> boss said he would 
“love” to see the Irish government appeal against the commission’s ruling to 
pay €13bn (£11bn) in back tax to the Irish government.

“I think we’ll work very closely together, as we have the same motivation. No 
one did anything wrong here and we need to stand together. Ireland is being 
picked on and this is unacceptable.”

Ireland’s governing coalition government is split over whether it should 
immediately appeal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/31/ireland-government-split-apple-tax-bill-immediate-appeal>
 against the commission’s ruling. Further talks are planned before it will make 
a decision. The Irish finance minister, Michael Noonan, is one of the strong 
backers of an appeal, and has insisted that the country needs to preserve its 
status as alow-tax base for overseas companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/05/ireland-attracts-soaring-level-of-us-investment>
.

Vestager said Apple had improperly routed taxable income to a head office that 
only existed on paper and could not have generated such profits. However, Cook 
insisted that Apple and Ireland had “played by the rules” and would win the 
case on appeal. He warned this could escalate into a trade row between the EU 
and US.

“I think that Apple was targeted here,” he said. “And I think that [anti-US 
sentiment)] is one reason why we could have been targeted.”

Cook said Apple paid income tax of 26.1% globally. “Some people would say that 
that should be higher and some might say it should be lower. I’d be the first 
to say that the tax system needs to be reformed and that it should be made 
simple and straightforward. But it should be talked about going forward, not in 
a way that retrofits the law to what others wish it was.”

The tech firm is pressing ahead with plans for expansion in Cork. Cook said: 
“We have a 37-year-old marriage with Ireland and it means something to us … I 
feel like Ireland stuck with Apple when it wasn’t easy to stick with Apple, and 
now we’re sticking with Ireland.”
 