
This exchange of letters requires no comment from me, except to say - 
unsurprisingly - how much I agree with Lauren Lipton.

David Sze <http://www.huffingtonpost.com/david-sze/>, who works for Arianna 
Huffington, sent this note to veteran journalistLauren Lipton 
<http://www.laurenlipton.com/> last week:

Subject: Inquiry from Arianna Huffington’s office:

Hi Lauren,

I’m David, a Research Editor from Arianna Huffington’s office. Arianna is 
currently working on a book about the importance of sleep in our lives. In our 
research, we came acrossyour piece on hotel beds. 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/secrets-of-the-worlds-best-hotel-beds-1430506503> 

In that article, you mentioned that: “According to a 2014 Gallup survey, more 
than half of guests who stay in the highest-priced properties said they would 
pay more for an improved bed. Among all respondents, a comfortable bed was most 
often named as the most important feature of a hotel room”.


We were wondering if you have access to the Gallup research you mentioned in 
the article? We would like to cite it in Arianna’s book.

Thank you! Best, David

And here is Lipton’s wonderful response:

Hi David,

I know you’re just doing your job. So what I am about to say has nothing at 
all to do with you. It is solely for your boss, and I do hope you pass it along 
to her.

I have worked my entire career as a professional journalist. I have a masters 
degree in journalism from the USC Annenberg School and developed my skills as a 
staff writer for the Los Angeles Times, theWall Street Journal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wallstreetjournal> and other A-list 
newspapers and magazines.

These days you can find my byline in the New York Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/new-york-times>, the WSJ, Allure and Town & 
Country, as well as numerous additional print and online publications. I am 
very, very good at what I do.

Unfortunately, your boss’s predatory business practices have deeply undercut 
the ability of all reporters, writers and editors to make any kind of living 
wage. The rapacious Ms Huffington seems to believe that journalism skills are 
worth nothing, and that my beleaguered colleagues and I should be thrilled to 
help her make hundreds of millions of dollars in return for “exposure.”

If Ms Huffington would like to know how I uncovered that particular statistic, 
she is free to hire me and pay me for my time and expertise.

If she doesn’t wish to do so, she is welcome to track it down herself.

Best, Lauren

Source, and grateful hat tip: Jim Romenesko 
<http://jimromenesko.com/2015/08/25/journalist-to-arianna-huffington-youre-going-to-have-to-pay-me-if-you-want-my-help/>
 