
The Atlantic Ocean just got a little wider. The European Court of Justice’s 
latest ruling has determined that the US “does not afford an adequate level of 
protection of personal data”.

The case brought against Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> over the potential for US 
government snooping on European citizens’ data, throws the differences in 
internet culture into stark relief. But those differences have been growing for 
some time.

Until Tuesday, it had been US companies – principally Google and Facebook – 
that had been driving the wedge in. In 2012 Googleenraged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2012/oct/16/google-privacy-policies-eu-data-protection>
 European privacy regulators by declaring that it would unite data from its 
different services,mashing different privacy agreements into one 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2012/mar/01/google-privacy-policy-analysis>
. (The row is still going on.)

Then in 2014 the European Court of Justice declared that Google, as a “data 
processor” was covered by the data protection principles, and so must remove 
links about people from its search index that were “outdated, incorrect or 
irrelevant” (though with exceptions for public figures).Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> has implemented the so-called 
“right to be forgotten” more or less, but the ruling infuriated many in the US.

Facebook has set data protection authorities from around Europe on edge. An 
investigation followed the Dutch data protection authority asking Facebook to 
delay rollout of its new privacy policy, while the Belgian data protection 
authority recently took the social network to court over its use of cookies and 
tracking.

Now the ECJ has ruled again, and once more highlighted the gulf in attitudes 
either side of the pond. “Safe harbour” ostensibly means that a European 
citizen’s personal data being processed by a US company on US-based computers 
is under the same protections as if it were still in Europe on a European-owned 
system. But the ECJ says it doesn’t protect that data from US government 
snooping – and so cannot be allowed.

The problem with safe harbour is that the US government now treats any data on 
computers of US-owned companies anywhere in the world as fair game for 
examination. Microsoft, in fact, isvigorously appealing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/09/microsoft-court-case-hotmail-ireland-search-warrant>
 a court case won (in the US) by the US government, which asserts that it has 
the right to access data held in one of the company’s Irish data centres. Safe 
harbour applied, in theory, to US companies but not to the US government; now 
the edifice has come crashing down.


To privacy activists, the surprise is that it has taken so long: “Safe harbour 
was flawed in principle and flawed in practice,” said Joe McNamee, executive 
director of European Digital Rights, a pressure group for digital civil rights 
drawn from 19 European countries. “After last year’s data retention ruling, 
this is the second time in two years that the Court of Justice has struck down 
an instrument that the European Commission had spent years defending.” (The 
first was therejection of the Data Retention directive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jun/24/british-government-breaking-law-in-forcing-data-retention-by-companies>
, which had been favoured particularly by the UK government.)


The fallout could be dramatic. In August 2013, soon after Edward Snowden’s 
revelations about the NSA’s indiscriminate gathering of data from US companies, 
US technology businesses began fretting. If Europeans, and European businesses, 
thought that they couldn’t trust the US to look after their information, they 
could lose huge amounts of business –estimated then 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/08/nsa-revelations-fears-cloud-computing>
 at between $21.5bn and $35bn through to next year.

The US-based Cloud Security Alliance, which represented companies there 
offering file storage and internet-based computing, thought it could lose 
between 10% and 20% of its market to rivals. It was already seeing contracts 
being lost to European rivals who could promise Europe-based processing. Things 
are probably going to get worse for them.

Jim Killock, executive director of the Open Rights Group, commented: “In the 
face of the Snowden revelations, it is clear that safe harbour is not worth the 
paper its written on. We need a new agreement that will protect EU citizens 
from mass surveillance by the NSA.”

The ruling hasn’t been a surprise; it was foreshadowed last month by a summary 
ruling which was confirmed on Tuesday, but its progress to the ECJ has been 
slow, in theory giving any affected company time to adjust. Thus the larger 
companies – Google, Facebook, Apple, Microsoft, Twitter – are well-placed to 
deal with the fallout.

Those who will lose out are the smaller companies, and startups that had been 
planning to use something like Amazon’s AWS cloud services. The nature of cloud 
systems is that data is transferred promiscuously, both to create resilience 
and speed up access elsewhere. One possible solution is to encrypt the data 
using keys which remain on servers in Europe; that will carry performance 
penalties, but might satisfy the letter of the law.

In the longer term, the bigger problem will be the gap that is opening between 
the US and Europe. Privacy policies with teeth, the “right to be forgotten”, 
the desire to keep data inside Europe - all are at odds with the US’s treatment 
of data, which is more cavalier. That has helped the US to leap ahead in its 
development of systems, but also seen a swelling tide of resentment in the US 
at the burgeoning amount of individuals’ data collected and traded, and 
sometimes stolen. Will Europe act as the example for the US to follow? History 
suggests not – which means the cultural gap is going to get wider.
 