
The first time I cried was when Debbie McGee tweeted: “Just heard the sad news 
aboutCaroline Aherne <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/caroline-aherne> 
she was wonderful especially as Mrs Merton. My interview will be a treasured 
memory, RIP.” I cried on the W3 bus, and then laughed, because Debbie McGee had 
just made me cry, and what a weird, gorgeous legacy is that for one of your 
heroes to leave behind?

Great, funny people leave these landmines for us, so our grief gets thrown off 
whack, and we laugh-cry, that bitter-sweet spot rarely touched. Caroline Aherne 
has made me – us – laugh-cry more than any other writer. She was fearless, by 
which I mean she did not fear being vulnerable. She was intensely private, 
because so much of herself seeped through in her work.

Caroline's character disguises were flimsy to the point of nonexistent: she 
was millimetres from the surface

McGee had been a guest on the Mrs Merton chat show in 1995, when Mrs Merton – 
Aherne – asked her the famous question: “What was it that attracted you to 
millionaire Paul Daniels?” McGee must have heard that joke every day since 
then, and still loved it. It was impossible not to love Caroline Aherne.

I grew up in awe of her, starring in the early 90s as Sister Mary Immaculate 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=58_beEFk3Gs> (“Me and the sisters get a 
discount on Virgin airlines for some reason – subliminal advertising or 
something?”) on Channel 4’s thrillingly chaotic Remote Control. She was one of 
the few girls in that gang of gonzo comics, working with Frank Sidebottom and 
Vic and Bob before launching The Fast Show.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fsarah-morgan-caroline-aherne-tribute-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fead843f6b07017cda1ff6df56696fa2882e9b9f4%2F0_0_1321_1888%2F1321.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='She%20was%20fearless'%3A%20in%20praise%20of%20Caroline%20Aherne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fsarah-morgan-caroline-aherne-tribute-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27She%20was%20fearless%27%3A%20in%20praise%20of%20Caroline%20Aherne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fsarah-morgan-caroline-aherne-tribute-comedy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fead843f6b07017cda1ff6df56696fa2882e9b9f4%2F0_0_1321_1888%2F1321.jpg>
 Making the uncool hip … Aherne in The Mrs Merton Show. Photograph: 
ITV/Rex/Shutterstock 
Caroline’s most memorable Fast Show role was Poula Fisch, the 
“Scorchio”-yelping weathergirl from Chanel 9. But it was her other characters 
that got under your skin. Paul Whitehouse once said he considered calling it 
The Sad Show because, beneath the catchphrases, so many of the characters were 
tragic figures. None more so than Caroline’s Our Janine, the gum-cudding 
schoolgirl, dreaming big dreams under her pop posters despite teenage 
motherhood. (She wouldn’t name her baby’s father because “it’s not fair to 
grass on your headmaster”.)

Caroline was born in London but her parents moved to Manchester when she was 
two, and the city indelibly informed her voice, much like her peerVictoria Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/20/victoria-wood-her-shining-genius-never-stopped-unfurling>
. But Caroline’s was the modern Manchester – the Hacienda, Madchester, marrying
Peter Hook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/mar/19/peter-hook-if-my-son-joined-new-order-at-least-theyd-get-the-bass-played-properly>
 from New Order.

As Mrs Merton, she made the uncool hip. Celebrities who joined in the joke 
were elevated – with kindness and faux-naivety, she teased the truth out of her 
guests and invited them to play. Caroline understood the extraordinary power of 
female innocence, playing dumb.

Remember the 1997 Brit awards <https://youtu.be/Y8lA_UYS1-s?t=1m28s>, when Mrs 
Merton shuffled to the stage and asked if there was anyone in the audience 
called Charlie? “Charlie, love? Can you make yourself known? They’re all asking 
for you backstage ...”

Another thing about Caroline’s characters – their disguises were flimsy to the 
point of nonexistent. Mrs Merton was a wig and glasses – no ageing makeup. 
Janine was a school-tie and a scrunchie. She was always millimetres from the 
surface in everything. To me, her rawness was electrifying, seductive in a 
blokily 90s sea of safe surrealism and catchphrases.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fsarah-morgan-caroline-aherne-tribute-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee2b252ffef594a4f22ab68f005e941d77e7d775%2F0_0_652_483%2F652.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='She%20was%20fearless'%3A%20in%20praise%20of%20Caroline%20Aherne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fsarah-morgan-caroline-aherne-tribute-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27She%20was%20fearless%27%3A%20in%20praise%20of%20Caroline%20Aherne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fsarah-morgan-caroline-aherne-tribute-comedy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee2b252ffef594a4f22ab68f005e941d77e7d775%2F0_0_652_483%2F652.jpg>
 ‘I only had about nine’ … Craig Cash as Dave and Aherne as Denise, with baby 
David, in The Royle Family Photograph: Matt Squire/BBC1 
Like her masterpiece, Denise Royle. Most memorable female sitcom characters 
are spiky with a gooey centre, the old battleaxe with a heart of gold. Denise 
was the exact opposite, an inside-out hedgehog - a surface of ickle girl 
sweetness, all hair bobbles, peroxide andthat voice, a creaky toddler on the 
verge of tears – “Can you make us a bacon sandwich? And make the bacon dead, 
dead crispy?”

How we made The Royle Family
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/dec/23/how-we-made-the-royle-family>
Denise was nails. Always the victim, stroppy, outraged, certain and sexually 
terrifying. Craig Cash’s Dave worshipped her. Her frailty was her weapon, 
whimpering with a hangover: “I only had about nine.” (Every hangover I have 
ever had with my best friend, we whimper “I only had about nine …”) On 
motherhood: “I’m only not smoking in front of Baby David until he’s old enough 
to get up and walk out of the room, then it’s his choice.”

The Royle Family was instantly quotable because it was already saying what 
people were saying. We, soaked in telly, eating Club biscuits, remembering old 
adverts, arguing about thermostat fiddles. My friends and I grew up with the 
Royles; they reflecting us reflecting them – I don’t know a single parent who 
didn’t tenderly play their newborn Radiohead’s No Surprises, like Denise and 
Dave did with Baby David.

She was so outraged by the 'trad' Royle Family BBC pilot she buried the only 
copy in her mum's garden: what lady-balls!

It almost didn’t happen, of course. The Royle Family only exists because 
Caroline refused to make a fifth series of Mrs Merton until the BBC shot her 
pilot script, written with Craig Cash and Henry Normal. After a tepid response 
from execs, someone finally decided to make it – but their way, like “proper” 
telly. With a studio audience, multiple cameras, trad. Think: My Royle Family. 
According to series two producer Kenton Allen, Caroline was so outraged with 
the result that she took the only copy of the tape, and buried it in her mum’s 
back garden. What lady-balls! What self-assurance! What a woman!

Nothing is scarier than a woman with no fucks to give. She spent a whole 
lifetime battling cancer. She was born with retinoblastoma, cancer of the 
retina, which left her partially sighted. She fought bladder and lung cancer, 
but also inner demons. The well-publicised booze battles, the Priory.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fsarah-morgan-caroline-aherne-tribute-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c820bde0a367bcf96f67674e89cd96fec88ab28%2F0_448_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='She%20was%20fearless'%3A%20in%20praise%20of%20Caroline%20Aherne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fsarah-morgan-caroline-aherne-tribute-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27She%20was%20fearless%27%3A%20in%20praise%20of%20Caroline%20Aherne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fsarah-morgan-caroline-aherne-tribute-comedy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c820bde0a367bcf96f67674e89cd96fec88ab28%2F0_448_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 Aherne at the launch of a cancer campaign in 2014. Photograph: Vincent 
Cole/Manchester Evening News 
You need to have a life to write about life, and Aherne had strip-mined hers 
so thoroughly, a change was desperately needed. She moved to Australia and 
wrote about retirees for Dossa and Joe, working in the UK sporadically, 
carefully, on The World’s Fattest Man and some Royle Family specials. 

This year she came out of retirement to front a campaign for Manchester cancer 
care, and reveal the terrible truth that her cancer was back. But we were so 
happy to hear that voice –that voice – as the host of Channel 4’s Gogglebox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/sep/11/gogglebox-everyones-favourite-show>
. A divine tribute to her Royles, Googlebox is a “real-life” Royle Family (as 
though the Royles weren’t real people anyway). Hidden cameras spy on families 
and friends watching telly, accidentally leaking the truths of themselves as 
they snark at EastEnders <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/eastenders> 
and theBake Off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-great-british-bake-off>. 

Her joy in the honesty, the dirt and the exquisite awkwardness of the everyday 
will live on as a tingle in the fingertips of the writers she inspired. Write 
honest, write thin-skinned, write love. Bury your compromises in your mum’s 
back garden. We will miss you, Caroline.
 