
Here in Britain if we know Lizzie Borden at all it’s probably as the gruesome 
subject of an infuriatingly catchy children’s rhyme: “Lizzie Borden took an 
axe/And gave her mother forty whacks/When she saw what she had done/She gave 
her father forty one”. But that is all set to change as a host of new projects 
including a film,Lizzie Borden, starring Chloe Sevigny and Kristen Stewart, a 
highly anticipated debut novel,See What I Have Done, and a revival of a cult US 
rock musical,Lizzie <>, place America’s most famous probable parricide back in 
the spotlight again.

The new projects mark the culmination of a recent surge of interest in 
Borden’s story almost 125 years after she first hit the headlines. In 2014 US 
cable channel Lifetime showed a television film,Lizzie Borden Took An Ax, and 
followed that up with a 2015 seriesThe Lizzie Borden Chronicles, both of which 
received a mixed response. Earlier this year author Sarah Miller received 
considerably better reviews for her non-fiction workThe Borden Murders: Lizzie 
Borden and The Trial of the Century, while the crime scene itself has been 
rebranded as the Lizzie Borden Bed and Breakfast Museum since the mid 1990s and 
does a roaring trade enticing true crime fans, ghost hunters and even the odd 
would-be author through its doors.

“There’s definitely been a revival of interest in her story,” says Richard 
Behrens who runs the popularLizzie Borden podcast 
<http://lizziebordengirldetective.com/series/the-lizzie-borden-podcast/> in 
addition to writinga series of books 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/s/ref=dp_byline_sr_ebooks_1?ie=UTF8&text=Richard+Behrens&search-alias=digital-text&field-author=Richard+Behrens&sort=relevancerank>
 featuring a young pre-murders Lizzie as an eager beaver girl detective. “In 
part I think its that there’s a revival of interest in the Victorian era in 
general – look at something likePenny Dreadful 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/21/farewell-penny-dreadful-you-great-fertile-bitch-of-evil>
 – but it’s also the case that the Lizzie Borden story has always been part of 
American mythology, probably because her trial for murder happened at a time 
when mass media in the form of newspapers exploded so there was just that bit 
more coverage. Plus, of course, she got off.”

Leah Woodburn, the editor of Sarah Schmidt’s disturbing and visceral take on 
the murders,See What I Have Done, agrees that the Borden murders resonate 
because we will never really know how the tragic events played out. The basic 
facts are as follows: on 4 August 1892 Lizzie Borden alerted the family maid, 
Bridget Sullivan, to her father’s mutilated body. He had been hit 10 or 11 
times with “a hatchet-like weapon” while sleeping on the sofa. The body of Abby 
Borden, Lizzie’s stepmother, was found similarly mutilated in the family guest 
room. She had been struck 18 times. Lizzie’s sister, Emma, was out of town at 
the time of the murders and Bridget was apparently recovering from a bout of 
food poisoning. Another possible suspect, house guest John Morse, the brother 
of Lizzie’s deceased mother, produced a strong alibi placing him away from the 
scene. The police subsequently arrested 32-year-old Lizzie. Her trial the 
following year was a media sensation and ended in acquittal. Lizzie returned to 
Fall River to a new home, Maplecroft, where she would live for the rest of her 
life, dying in 1927 aged 67.

“It’s a classic whodunnit, locked-room story,” says Woodburn. “Lizzie might 
have been the main suspect but she was acquitted and because no one else was 
ever charged that leaves the door open for endless speculation and new ideas. 
In that sense it’s like Jack the Ripper – everyone has their own theories of 
who committed the crime.”

And the Borden case is not the only true-crime story attracting attention. 
There is a growing fascination with fictionalised takes on the genre from the 
BBC1 hitRillington Place, about the John Christie murders in London, to 
America’sThe People v OJ Simpson.

Novels too are increasing looking to put a fresh spin on past misdeeds. Anna 
Mazzola’sThe Unseeing, published this summer, covers the real-life tale of 
Sarah Gale, accused of helping the 1830s Edgware Road murderer James Greenacre 
cover up his crime. Jake Arnott’sThe Fatal Tree, out in February, delves deep 
into the life of the Georgian criminal Edgworth Bess denounced by her former 
lover Jack Sheppard with the damning words “a more wicked, deceitful and 
lascivious wretch is not known in England”. Emma Flint’sLittle Deaths, 
published in January, finds inspiration in the notorious case of Alice 
Crimmins, who was tried for the murder of her two children in New York in the 
1960s.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Flizzie-borden-40-whacks-lasting-fascination%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71de6d7ae43888b0dece1b9fac57a1c412a835ce%2F0_567_2144_1286%2F2144.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98She%20gave%20her%20mother%2040%20whacks%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20lasting%20fascination%20with%20Lizzie%20Borden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Flizzie-borden-40-whacks-lasting-fascination%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98She%20gave%20her%20mother%2040%20whacks%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20lasting%20fascination%20with%20Lizzie%20Borden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Flizzie-borden-40-whacks-lasting-fascination%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71de6d7ae43888b0dece1b9fac57a1c412a835ce%2F0_567_2144_1286%2F2144.jpg>
 Christina Ricci in The Lizzie Borden Chronicles. Photograph: Lifetime 
Televi/REX/Shutterstock 
So what is driving this sudden interest in long-buried crimes? “People have 
long been fascinated by fiction and drama with their roots in real crimes – 
many Victorian-era novelists were inspired by real murders,” says Mazzola. “But 
there’s definitely something of a resurgence, partly because we are drawn to 
what we believe to be genuine and partly because we are fascinated and 
horrified by the peculiarities of other people’s lives – in particular by what 
would lead someone to commit a terrible crime. And in novels we get the 
satisfying conclusion we don’t get with real-life crime. It constructs order 
from the chaos.”

Francesca Main, editorial director at Picador, agrees, adding that the 
phenomenon has been boosted by the continued success of the psychological or 
domestic thriller. “The boom in psychological thrillers means that readers have 
gone from characters we sympathise with or relate to complicated, difficult and 
not necessarily likeable heroines and this interest is now starting to merge 
with a continued enthusiasm for historical fiction,” she explains. It’s also 
the case that events such as the Borden murders resonate because we find their 
echo in our own recent past. “When I readLittle Deaths I didn’t know the story 
it was based on but reading about the lead character, Ruth Malone, reminded me 
of other recent cases where women were torn apart in the media,” Main says.

“It might be set in a very specific place and time but what it says about 
women and mothers and how they’re expected to behave rang true today.”

That’s certainly the case with the Borden murders: when Lizzie Borden went to 
trial much was made of her odd behaviour after her father’s death, her failure 
to grieve in “normal” or “acceptable” ways, her inability to grasp the 
situation she was in.

There are parallels with recent cases, such as that of Amanda Knox. “There’s a 
line that Amanda Knox says in the recent documentary about her that summed up 
the reaction about her: “Either I’m a psychopath or I’m you’,” says Sarah 
Weinman, editor ofWomen Crime <https://www.theguardian.com/film/crime> Writers: 
Eight Suspense Novels of the 1940s and 50s. “Women like her make people very 
uncomfortable because they don’t behave ‘normally’ even though there is no such 
thing as ‘normal’ after traumatic events. And because there is ambiguity, 
legal, morally, in the media, or otherwise, about what happened that discomfort 
increases.”

Flint, author of Little Deaths, agrees. “There’s definitely a sense with these 
cases of women being judged because they don’t behave in the ways in which 
women are supposed to behave,” she says. “We have no idea if they’re guilty or 
not guilty but we judge them on whether they look right or whether we think 
their behaviour is fundamentally wrong. In the case of Alice Crimmins it became 
all about not only how she wasn’t grieving in the way a mother should but also 
that, prior to that, she didn’t look how a mother should look. She didn’t dress 
or act the way she was supposed to and the police, her neighbours and the court 
judged her for that.”

It is also the case that each generation views these cases afresh, filtering 
them through a new set of feelings and fears. “It’s interesting that although 
the real Lizzie is fascinating enough people still project their own darkness 
or worst impulses on to the story,” says Behrens. “Or alternatively they try 
and make her more sympathetic. Each person who comes to her story views her 
through their eyes.”

And perhaps the most primal and immediate thrill from following these cases in 
today’s era is the fact that you can read the Lizzie Borden novel or watch the 
Lizzie Borden film and then head straight online to try to sift fact from 
fiction.

“I do think the true crime element brings an extra dimension to readers,” 
admits Woodburn. “If I’m honest my first reaction toSee What I Have Done was to 
read it and then Google the bejesus out of it. I had to find out more.”

See What I Have Done is published on 4 May. Lizzie The Musical is at the 
Greenwich Theatre, London, from 22 February. Little Deaths is published on 
1 January. The Unseeing is out now.

LIZZIE BORDEN’S LIFE

19 July 1860 Lizzie Borden is born

26 March 1863 Her mother dies

6 June 1865 Mr Borden marries Abby Durfee Gray

3 August 1892 John Morse, Lizzie’s uncle, arrives to stay at the family home

4 August 1892 Andrew and Abby Borden are murdered

11 August 1892 Lizzie is arrested and charged

5 June 1893 Lizzie is tried for the murder of her father and stepmother

20 June 1893 Lizzie is acquitted due to lack of evidence. She returns to home 
town of Fall River and buys a house, where she lives with her sister until the 
latter moves out in 1904

1 June 1927 Lizzie dies
 