
John Berger is the only writer to have accompanied me throughout the whole of 
my adult life, first as an east Yorkshire teenage reader, much later as a 
friend and close collaborator on various films for television, starting with
Ways of Seeing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/sep/07/ways-seeing-berger-tv-programme-british>
.


Somehow – I must have been 17 – I discovered his art column in The New 
Statesman at the very moment when I was becoming more interested in drawing, 
painting and literature than the science subjects I was formally studying for 
my A levels. There was something in the way John wrote that immediately touched 
me, and made the making of art matter. In simple and beautifully cadenced 
sentences, he connected what he was attentively seeing in a gallery to the much 
larger socio-political world beyond it, of which I was then far too ignorant. 
His writing opened up new worlds to me. I began to cut out his articles and put 
them in a file.

When I bought his first collection of essays Permanent Red, I remember being 
disappointed that I’d already read almost everything in it! I picked up his 
novel A Painter of Our Time in Charing Cross Road and read it straight through 
on a student bus and train journey from London to Barcelona. I gave a copy of A 
Fortunate Man to my GP father as a birthday present. Little did I realise that 
one day we would meet, become friends and find we could work well together. 
Such a situation must be rare. I feel very fortunate.

Ways of Seeing began with an invitation to John from the head of the BBC music 
and arts department to write and present a series of films on topics of his 
choice. Aware that John and I already knew each other, I was told I could 
develop the project, with the possibility of directing at least one of the 
films. But it soon became apparent that our collaboration was working and we 
were given the freedom, unthinkable today, to get on with it on our own, with 
little prying intervention from above. They trusted John and amazingly they 
trusted me, a junior member of the department, who’d never directed anything on 
this scale before.

John and I had met a couple of years earlier, with his then wife Anya. They’d 
just published a brilliant joint translation of Brecht poems for the theatre 
and we had dinner in Kentish Town to discuss their possible contribution to a 
show about Brecht. That programme never came to pass. But we got on well and 
kept in touch. Two years later, something happened …

I still have all the versions of the four scripts for Ways of Seeing. Looking 
at them now, after 45 years, I’m struck and moved by two things. The first is 
how much John wrote and rewrote – either at home in Geneva or in a back room of 
his parents’ flat in London – right up to the moment of filming, and then 
further modified during the edit, when something wasn’t quite right or we 
thought of a better idea. The second is John’s beautifully fluid and legible 
handwriting, which is very revealing about the way he thought – tentative and 
exploratory, never dogmatic, just trying to get something clear in his mind. He 
always used a fountain pen, with black ink, and the pages are full of crossings 
out, with single words added or sentences rephrased and stuck on with Sellotape.

On one script he wrote: “Dear Mike, here’s script No 2. Please remember all I 
said about it on the phone. Criticise, improvise, change, improve, cancel out, 
as much as you want or see how to. Or even we can begin again. All I would 
stand by is the essential idea …”

This exemplary approach to collaboration perfectly characterised our 
relationship on Ways of Seeing and on subsequent films together. That does not 
mean the process was always easy and free of tension – with John it was never 
like that – but the arguments when they arose were always open and equal (he 
never pulled rank), and ultimately resolved, not by theory, but by trying out 
an idea to see if it worked. And I often remember us laughing. John, I will 
miss you.
 