
Matteo Renzi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/matteo-renzi> has formally 
submitted his resignation, nearly three years after he became Italy’s youngest 
ever prime minister.

The resignation was delivered to Sergio Mattarella, Italy’s president, two 
days after he first attempted to quit after suffering a resounding defeat in 
Sunday’s referendum on constitutional reform.

On Monday, Mattarella asked the prime minister to stay in office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/matteo-renzis-resignation-frozen-by-italys-president>
 to oversee the final passage of the 2017 budget, which was passed on 
Wednesday, laying the groundwork for Renzi’s departure from office.

But even in the hours before his resignation, Renzi was seeking to pave a path 
– however uncertain – for his eventual return.

Italian bank rescue hopes build, as Renzi set to resign – business live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/dec/07/italian-banks-monte-de-paschi-renzi-markets-bonds-business-live>
In a note posted on his website, and in a highly anticipated speech before 
lawmakers in his Democratic party (PD), Renzi finally offered a plan for how he 
believed the party should move forward. He called on opposition parties to join 
the PD to form a new government that would tackle the country’s challenges and 
international obligations.

“Other parties have to share the burden,” he said, adding that it would be 
“difficult to sustain” a situation in which the PD was depicted in the media 
“every day and every night” as a government that had not legitimately been 
elected, a frequent criticism of Renzi’s government afterhe entered office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/14/italy-new-prime-minister-matteo-renzi-profile>
 following an intra-party coup.

If they failed to agree, Renzi said, new elections should be called as soon as 
the country’s constitutional court issued its verdict on an electoral law that 
is under review and may need to be changed. The verdict is due 24 January.

“The Democratic party is not afraid of democracy. The Democratic party is not 
afraid of votes,” he said.

It was unclear until Wednesday afternoon when Renzi would actually leave the 
prime minister’s office. But, an avid fan of social media, he confirmed his 
official resignation on Twitter after the budget passed, writing: “Formal 
resignation at 7pm. Thanks to all and long liveItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy>.”
Matteo Renzi (@matteorenzi) 
Legge di bilancio approvata. Alle 19 le dimissioni formali. Grazie a tutti e 
viva l'Italiahttps://t.co/PLsLxcrPGS <https://t.co/PLsLxcrPGS>
 <https://twitter.com/matteorenzi/status/806502084564619264> December 7, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/matteorenzi/status/806502084564619264> 
His departure was set in motion when it became clear that nearly 60% of 
Italians had voted to reject 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/matteo-renzis-future-in-the-balance-amid-high-turnout-in-italy-referendum>
 the sweeping changes to Italy’s constitution and parliamentary system that 
were backed by the outgoing prime minister. The resounding defeat was not only 
seen as a rejection of the reforms, but as a vote of no confidence in Renzi, 
who said he would step down if the vote went against him.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fmatteo-renzi-resignation-italian-prime-minister-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Matteo%20Renzi%20announces%20his%20resignation%20as%20Italian%20prime%20minister%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fmatteo-renzi-resignation-italian-prime-minister-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Matteo%20Renzi%20announces%20his%20resignation%20as%20Italian%20prime%20minister%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fmatteo-renzi-resignation-italian-prime-minister-video&media=>
Matteo Renzi announces his resignation as Italian prime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/05/matteo-renzi-resignation-italian-prime-minister-video>
The formal resignation will free Mattarella, who has the power to dissolve 
parliament and name prime ministers, to begin talks with the leaders of Italy’s 
biggest political parties – including the PD, conservative Forza Italia, the 
anti-establishmentFive Star Movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/m5s-calls-for-elections-after-matteo-renzi-loses-referendum-italy>
, and the anti-immigrant Northern League – who will have to agree on an interim 
government and prime minister.

Renzi also announced that he would not personally be involved in the 
negotiations.

He suggested one of his two deputies be sent to the talks with Mattarella: 
Lorenzo Guerini or Matteo Orfini, and two whips, Ettore Rosato and Luigi Zanda.

If no agreement can be reached, the new interim prime minister could probably 
be installed just with the backing of the PD, which controls a majority of 
seats in parliament. But as Renzi suggested, the party would then want 
elections to be called as soon possible.


One of the biggest questions is whether Renzi can still command the loyalty of 
a majority of his party after Sunday’s rout.

Meanwhile, the interim government, likely to be installed in the next few days 
if an agreement can be reached, is expected to deal with the primary task of 
amending an electoral law that needs to be changed following the referendum.

Giovanni Orsina, a professor of Italian politics at LUISS University in Rome, 
said the biggest question now was whether the developments of the next few days 
would go according to Renzi’s wishes and demands.

If Renzi got his way, Orsina said, the interim prime minister would be someone 
he trusts to stay in office until the electoral law is amended – someone who 
would then resign to open the door to elections.

Renzi’s preferred candidates for the job are widely believed to be Pier Carlo 
Padoan, his finance minister, Paolo Gentiloni, his foreign minister, or 
Graziano Delrio, the infrastructure minister.

Orsina added: “The real issue is, are we going to have a government that Renzi 
controls to the extent that he may ask the prime minister to resign in the 
right moment? Or will he have to accept a prime minister that is not under his 
full control?”
 