
So, Corrie's Todd has finally announced he's gay. The lad's out, but not 
particularly proud, because now the street despises him for being "a sick perv" 
and a "freak". Not the warmest coming-out reception; in fact people were more 
benevolent to Richard Hillman last year for killing four people with a shovel. 
Poor Todd. If ever there was an advert for keeping schtum, staying in the 
closet and living a life of bitter subterfuge, then this is it. He can't even 
pop to Roy's Rolls for a ham barm without staggering home with a black eye, one 
shoe missing and rotten veg down his back, only to discover "QUEE ... " 
graffiti across his front door. (Diddy David Platt evoking the spirit of Nazi 
Germany with a spray can, although his attention deficit disorder kicked in 
before he daubed the final "R").

"But what was I meant to do!? Live a lie?!" howled Todd at Gail, rather 
uselessly, as she phoned Weatherfield comp to see if their football pitch could 
be hired for a beheading. "I couldn't go on pretending!" he sobbed to his mam 
but, by now, no one was really listening as they were all intoxicated with 
venom. Eileen Grimshaw wrestled with Gail Platt, (northern rules: in 
Littlewoods dressing gowns, on the cobbles, the whole street cheering), David 
Platt punching Todd, Jase wading in and chinning Adam Rickitt (my possible 2004 
top soap moment), and rodenty Martin attacking Karl, the evil gay who started 
all this trouble by, well, being gay. Weirdly, no one slapped Norris, but as a 
confirmed bachelor with a great love of show tunes and Eccles cakes, his card's 
certainly marked.

If Todd's gay revelation wasn't antagonistic enough to the Platts, Sarah Lou 
giving birth prematurely just after, then losing her baby, was an especially 
black-hearted plot twist. Just when we thought Gail Platt couldn't be any more 
aggravating and destructive, she's upped the ante, dusting down her Reader's 
Digest Big Bumper Book Of Bereavement Skills, ignoring all the sections about 
being "positive, calm, strong and upbeat around the bereaved", preferring to 
channel energy into sticking her gopher face through the Venetian blinds 
squealing "Murrrrrderer!" at Todd, or grappling Sarah Lou in a desperate 
head-lock, splattering her with hysterical tears and snot.

This week, Todd's attempt to attend his child's funeral ended in another 
punch-up, Todd's bright blue teddy-bear flower arrangement wrestled off him and 
ripped to shreds by petulant 14-year-old David, soap's campest ABH assault 
ever. Thankfully, in the midst of violent homophobia and infant death, there's 
also mental illness to jolly things along. It's hard to remember that for the 
last 20 years Sally Webster was a timid, beige slip of a housewife whose life's 
ambition stretched to buttering cream crackers and finishing that 300-piece 
jigsaw of the Cotswolds, a stark contrast to the power-hungry vision of 
insanity who stalks Kevin Webster today. Sally's mid-life crisis, symptomised 
by her subtly escalating delusional madness, has turned into one of Corrie's 
most riveting plots, particularly as the other characters, Kevin, Rita, Tommy 
etc, have yet to join the dots and work out that she's actually rather ill.

After finally accepting that Rosie is actually talentless and dim (and not 
Madonna with a gift for quantum physics), Sally's latest fixation is Kevin's 
garage. OK, yes, we're all aware that for the last decade Sally's only 
involvement with Kev's business has been to push an egg sandwich glumly under 
the door at lunchtimes but then, suddenly, at about half-past seven last 
Wednesday, Sally appointed herself as Kevin's boss. Kevin didn't say much, but 
then he never does. He didn't even remark when someone swapped his youngest 
daughter Sophie's head last month. (A most perplexing mystery, she went 
upstairs to play with Stickle Bricks, emerging the next morning five inches 
taller, looking a bit like a mini-Maxine Carr, except with one of those 
geometric bobbed wigs, like Aneka who sang Japanese Boy). What happened to 
Sophie's old head is uncertain, but what's for sure, however, is that her mummy 
is a very unwell lady indeed who shouldn't be placed in charge of a busy, 
dangerous environment like a car yard. Or, for that matter, allowed out of her 
house without the benefit of a snug, backwards-fitting, buckled pyjama jacket.

Elsewhere, something for the ladies arrived this month on Corrie in the shape 
of Danny Baldwin, Mike's nephew, played by cheeky cockney Wheel Of Fortune 
presenter Bradley Walsh. Danny's character is exactly like Shane Richie's Alfie 
Moon (before they made Alfie a bloated, depressed simpleton). Danny's smooth, 
charming and clearly lives on his wits, just like proper cockneys do. Viewers 
adore Danny. In fact, at this precise moment, Brian Conley, the third face in 
the sinister cockney light-entertainment triumvirate, must be nagging his agent 
for an Emmerdale gig. Surely Brian could be a lovable, cheeky cockney who sets 
audience ratings soaring simply by placing a sock over one hand and chasing 
Patsy Kensit around Hotton shouting his well-loved catchphrase "It's a 
pupppppppet! It's a pupppppet!" six episodes a week until Britain's sides can 
take no more.

Emmerdale may seem at times to be plotted by people out of their mind on 
research chemicals, but it's rarely depressing like its rivals are. This month 
Sadie King (Kensit) and Charity Dingle's struggle for power shifted gears when 
snooty Sadie graciously conceded that plebby Charity could attend one of her 
classy dinner parties. (No feet on tables, no licking plates, no burping 
competitions, dead posh). With Baroness Fontague-Hubert and Lord 
Bumptious-Wotnot all seated, Charity clicked that she'd been royally set up: 
Sadie had briefed guests on Charity's dodgy family and jailbird past. Within 
the hour rampant snobbery turned to violent disorder, while Sadie watched in 
delight (pulling that angelic face she used, aged four, on the Birds Eye pea 
advert).

Over on EastEnders, Pauline Fowler has inflicted an entire fortnight of guilt, 
misery and boredom on Britain about Martin and Sonia's wedding. Pauline's such 
a detestable, selfish old crone, with a face like a freeze-dried apricot and an 
intrinsic hatred of humanity, it's mystifying why anyone gives a stuff what she 
thinks, and at first the bride and groom seemed to share this view by eloping 
to a country hotel, flicking Vs behind them, shunning Pauline's dream of a 
white do with a grand reception at the Vic.

Why always the Vic? It's a grotty, dank boozer, unchanged since the 1970s, 
full of gangsters, with only one temperamental loo, no kitchen for catering or 
anywhere for the wedded couple's first dance. Nana Moon's wedding there last 
week ended in disaster; so did Kat's at Christmas. In fact, any bride who's 
been near the place has ended up ditched or dead. With all that considered, 
Martin and Sonia acquiesced to apricot-head and chose the Vic. Oddly, Sonia's 
mother Carol couldn't afford the Â£4.40 travelcard from south London to Walford 
to see her daughter getting wed. Neither could Alan Jackson, who brought up 
Sonia.

Weirdly, Billy, Sonia's little brother, did make the long pilgrimage east this 
time, accompanied by a muffled explanation from Jim Branning that Billy lives 
"very far away". Billy wasted no time in getting sozzled at the bar, which is 
what you'd expect from a teenager forced to revisit the place from which he was 
violently kidnapped as a child (which no one mentioned). Pauline, having got 
her own way, adjourned to the "bench of sulks" and welcomed Sonia to the family 
by slagging her off for half an hour. Sonia took the abuse from her 
mother-in-law in stoic fashion, probably comforted by the fact that in 20 years 
she can sell Pauline's massive townhouse for a million quid, put the satanic 
cow in a home, then forget all about her.

In shock news, the entire Ferreira clan have all had their contracts renewed, 
meaning things are looking a bit perkier for Team Stupid. The clan is no longer 
homeless and Kareena's off to Ibiza for the summer with Kelly to become a club 
rep. With whacky Kareena's happy-go-lucky disposition and winning smile she's 
bound to have those Club 18-30 kids revved up to party. And as for Spencer's 
girlfriend Kelly, a dim-witted, bisexual ex-hooker who's anyone's after a 
Smirnoff Ice, I'm sure she'll be chaste and true during their summer apart. The 
lad's got nothing to worry about at all.

worldoflather@hotmail.com <mailto:worldoflather@hotmail.com>
 