
Eric McGraw founded Inside Time <http://insidetime.org/>, the first national 
newspaper for prisoners in England and Wales, a quarter of a century ago. He 
has edited the paper ever since. As he prepares to step down, we meet to 
discuss his editorship and his paper’s impact since 1990.

“Without doubt, the main thing we have achieved is to establish a place for 
the voice of the prisoner to be expressed and to be heard,” he says.

Inside Time: Britiain's only national jail newspaper
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2008/may/07/prisonsandprobation.insidetime>
Inside Time was born out of the 1990 riot at Strangeways prison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2010/mar/31/strangeways-riot-20-years-on> 
in Manchester. As director of the New Bridge Foundation, the charity co-founded 
by prison reformerLord Longford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/aug/06/guardianobituaries.prisonsandprobation>
 to provide supportive links between prisoners and the community, McGraw 
attended the subsequentWoolf inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/apr/01/lord-woolf-strangeways-prisons-still-crisis>
 into the riot almost every day. “I was just listening and learning and 
straight away it occurred to me that one of the reasons this had happened was 
that the prisoners had no voice,” he recalls.

After the inquiry, he contacted the Prison Service and asked if it would be 
interested in him setting up a newspaper for prisoners, to which the answer was 
yes. But its funding came from charitable grant-giving trusts, ensuring Inside 
Time remained independent from the Prison Service.

At first the paper was put together in a very rudimentary manner. Article 
ideas came from letters from prisoners in contact with New Bridge and selected 
items of interest from mainstream papers and magazines. McGraw added some 
puzzles and stuck the whole lot down with sticky tape on to several sheets of 
A3 paper. The print shop manager of Kingston prison in Portsmouth agreed to 
print the paper, initially simply called Time, and the first 12,000 copies 
rolled off the press and were distributed to prisons, young offender 
institutions and special hospitals around the country.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Foct%2F27%2Finside-time-newspaper-prisoners-independent-editor-eric-mcgraw%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2170e8e9ca32a15aac0ea1be6ac36f1417ef1cc%2F0_0_1181_1647%2F1181.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98The%20paper%20is%20a%20place%20where%20the%20voice%20of%20the%20prisoner%20can%20be%20expressed%20and%20heard%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Erwin%20james&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Foct%2F27%2Finside-time-newspaper-prisoners-independent-editor-eric-mcgraw%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98The%20paper%20is%20a%20place%20where%20the%20voice%20of%20the%20prisoner%20can%20be%20expressed%20and%20heard%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Erwin%20james&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Foct%2F27%2Finside-time-newspaper-prisoners-independent-editor-eric-mcgraw%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2170e8e9ca32a15aac0ea1be6ac36f1417ef1cc%2F0_0_1181_1647%2F1181.jpg>
 The first issue of the newspaper, with its photograph of the Strangeways riot 
Photograph: National Newspaper for Prisoners 
The first issue carried a cover photograph of the rioters on the roof of 
Strangeways, causing one prison governor to ban Inside Time from his prison, 
and urge other governors to do the same. But this was counterproductive. “When 
the POA (Prison Officers Association) banned the paper from one of their 
conferences – it did us a huge favour,” McGraw says. “Prisoners who had been 
sceptical of the paper at first [thinking it was a Prison Service contrivance], 
now eagerly welcomed it. The fact that prison officials were so against it gave 
it immediate acceptance and respect from the general prisoner population.”

More controversy followed when US weekly news magazine, Time, threatened to 
sue for breach of copyright on the title, so McGraw changed the name. “I 
thought they were joking at first,” he says. “Perhaps they thought we might 
steal a few of their readers.”

It occurred to me that one of the reasons the riot had happened was that the 
prisoners had no voice

Born in Blyth, in Northumberland, McGraw, 70, was placed into care aged one 
and adopted aged two. His childhood became even more precarious when his 
adoptive parents separated when he was 12 and he was sent to a children’s home 
in North Wales. Only many years later, when the law changed so he could apply 
for his birth certificate, McGraw discovered he was born Derek Campbell. He met 
his mother for the first time aged 30, and discovered he had eight sisters and 
brothers, one of whom, his mother told him, “dabbled in politics”. It was 
another 30 years before he came across the MP for Blyth, Ronnie Campbell, while 
listening to questions in parliament. He looked him up and, sure enough, the MP 
was his brother. A letter to him led at last to a full and happy family reunion.

Was it this uncertain early life that attracted him to work supporting 
prisoners, many of whom have also experienced difficult family circumstances? 
“Perhaps it was, although to be honest most of what I’ve done in my career was 
never planned,” he replies.

Inside Time’s first editorial assistant was a prisoner called John Bowers. 
“John was really impressive. He wrote for us and, probably more importantly, he 
had great proofreading skills.” He chuckles as he recalls a letter from a 
prisoner asking if he could be sent “the English language version, please”. 
“That’s how badly we needed a proofreader.” After his release, Bowers never 
returned to prison and still proofreads the paper today.

Lord Longford’s daughter, novelist Rachel Billington, was recruited early as a 
co-editor and contributor. “She did a terrific interview with Tony Blair for us 
early on. He promised all sorts of remarkable things for prisons in that 
interview, but never really delivered.” Billington now writes a monthly column 
for the paper and sits on the board of trustees, alongside former Sunday 
Telegraph editor Trevor Grove and publisher John Roberts.

Initially, Inside Time comprised just eight pages, printed four times a year 
in black and white. It was a bold concept. As a prisoner, just six years into a 
life sentence at the time, I remember the storm that surrounded its 
introduction. As McGraw discovered, giving prisoners a source of shared 
information and a voice was for many in the system a radical idea. One prison 
I’d been in earlier had as good as banned The Guardian because, an officer told 
me, there was “too much stuff in there about prisons”.

Eventually, Inside Time became a monthly and for the past 12 years it has 
contained more than 50 colour pages. Today, it boasts a print circulation of 
60,000 and several hundred thousand unique visitors to its website a month. One 
of the most popular sections is theMailbag 
<http://insidetime.org/category/mailbag/october-2015-mailbag/>, which can 
sometimes run to nine pages. For anyone interested, the letters pages provide a 
pretty accurate measure of the temperature of the prison system as a whole at 
any time. Issues raised, such as homophobia in the prison system, euthanasia 
for life prisoners, and most recently sex offenders making children’s toys in 
prison workshops are often picked up by the national press. One tabloid refers 
to the paper as the “Lags Mag 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/4471061/It-is-lard-labour-Lag-complains-about-fatty-food-in-prison.html>
.” Terry Waite, the former hostage and hostage negotiator, is a columnist. So 
is Jonathan King, the music impresario jailed for seven years in 2001 on sexual 
abuse charges.

Another section, Jailbreak, makes for a balanced read of information and 
entertainment, although when a cartoon appeared depicting a bearded sneezing 
pig wearing a turban next to a satirical article suggesting that swine flu was 
the result of a failed plot by Osama Bin Laden to “eradicate every pig in 
Christendom”, the whole month’s issue had to be pulped and reprinted without 
the cartoon after complaints from Prison Service diversity officers. “We have 
to be sensitive to everyone in our prisons, but we also owe it to our readers 
to be challenging and honest,” says McGraw. “Inside Time is an inclusive paper 
– everyone in our prisons deserves to have their voice heard.”

Eric McGraw is giving the Prisoners Education Trust 
<http://www.prisonerseducation.org.uk/> annual lecture on 2 November. Erwin 
James takes over as Editor of Inside Time in January 2016
 