
Gawker Media <https://www.theguardian.com/media/gawker-media> has agreed to 
pay former wrestler Hulk Hogan $31m (£25m) to settle a long-running legal 
battle that forced the company to file for bankruptcy and its eponymous gossip 
website to close down.


The news site, which filed for bankruptcy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/10/gawker-media-bankruptcy-auction-hulk-hogan-lawsuit>
 this summer after ajury ordered it to pay $140m in damages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/18/hulk-hogan-awarded-115m-in-damages-in-gawker-sex-tape-lawsuit>
 to Hogan for the website’s publication of a sex tape featuring the wrestler, 
agreed to forego an appeal and pay a cash settlement deal, according to legal 
filings on Wednesday. The lawsuit against Gawker wasfunded by Silicon Valley 
billionaire and Donald Trump donor Peter Thiel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/25/peter-thiel-gawker-hulk-hogan-sex-tape-lawsuit>
.

After four years of litigation funded by a billionaire with a grudge going 
back even further, a settlement has been reached, Gawker founder Nick Denton 
said ina blog post <https://nickdenton.org/a-hard-peace-e161e19bfaf#.sgkjney46>
. “The saga is over.”

Denton, a British journalist who founded Gawker in 2002 with an aim to report 
on the media and establishment elite, said he was confident that the appeals 
court would reduce or eliminate the $140m “runaway Florida judgment”.

“But all-out legal war with Thiel would have cost too much, and hurt too many 
people, and there was no end in sight. The Valley billionaire, famously 
relentless, had committed publicly to support Hulk Hogan beyond the appeal and 
‘until his final victory’. Gawker’s nemesis was not going away.”

As part of the settlement, three Gawker stories, including the Hogan one, will 
be deleted from the internet.

A spokesman for Hogan, whose real name is Terry Bollea, said: “As with any 
negotiation for resolution, all parties have agreed it is time to move on.”

Thiel, a co-founder of PayPal and an early investor in Facebook, has spent 
about $10m sponsoring the lawsuit against Gawker. He had also secretly funded a 
team of lawyers to track down “victims” of Gawker and help fund their lawsuits 
against the company.

He fell out with Gawker and Denton after the website outed him as gay in 2007 
with the headline:“Peter Thiel is totally gay, people.” 
<http://gawker.com/335894/peter-thiel-is-totally-gay-people> Denton is also gay.

“It’s less about revenge and more about specific deterrence,” Thiel has said 
of sponsoring Hogan’s legal action 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/26/business/dealbook/peter-thiel-tech-billionaire-reveals-secret-war-with-gawker.html>
. “I saw Gawker pioneer a unique and incredibly damaging way of getting 
attention by bullying people even when there was no connection with the public 
interest … I thought it was worth fighting back.” He said funding the lawsuit 
was one of the “greater philanthropic things that I’ve done”.

Gawker Media, which included several other websites including Jezebel, Gizmodo 
and Deadspin, was sold out of bankruptcy to US-based Spanish-language media 
company Univision for $135m. Gawker was permanently closed.

Gawker started life in Denton’s Manhattan apartment with a mission to expose 
celebrities and the media elite. It quickly became popular for its “snarky” 
tone and abhorrence of PR and media spin.
 