
Nicole Janz has lived in the UK since 2009. She completed a PhD at Cambridge, 
got married and had a daughter before settling in the city and becoming an 
assistant professor at Nottingham University. Janz and her husband are among 
the 300,000 Germans living in the UK, a fact they have become acutely aware of 
since 23 June.

Janz recalls an incident at a local pub after the Brexit vote that reminded 
her that her accent marks her out from the crowd.

After ordering a beer, the barmaid told her off for failing to acknowledge 
traditional English pleasantries. She was bluntly told: “We say please and 
thank you here in Great Britain.” For Janz it was indicative of a changed 
atmosphere after the referendum. “Maybe I didn’t order in the most friendly 
way, but things like this never ever happened to me before,” she recalls. “I am 
more often reminded of the fact that I am a foreigner.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fthey-feel-rejected-how-germans-in-britain-are-dealing-with-the-brexit-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f5fadcdd58cc6147a3861fac75da04f8af06bdf%2F0_51_768_960%2F768.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='They%20feel%20rejected'%3A%20how%20Germans%20in%20Britain%20are%20dealing%20with%20the%20Brexit%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fthey-feel-rejected-how-germans-in-britain-are-dealing-with-the-brexit-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27They%20feel%20rejected%27%3A%20how%20Germans%20in%20Britain%20are%20dealing%20with%20the%20Brexit%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fthey-feel-rejected-how-germans-in-britain-are-dealing-with-the-brexit-vote%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f5fadcdd58cc6147a3861fac75da04f8af06bdf%2F0_51_768_960%2F768.jpg>
 Nicole Janz and her family. ‘I’m more often reminded of the fact I’m a 
foreigner.’ Photograph: Family Handout 
Germans are one of the top 10 groups of migrants in the UK – behind the Irish 
and ahead of Americans. For many who settled in Britain long before the 
campaign to leave the EU gathered steam, the result of the vote feels like a 
personal slight against Europeans.

“They feel kind of insulted,” says Ulrich Storck, head of the Friedrich Ebert 
Stiftung in London, an institution linked to the Social Democratic party (SPD) 
in Germany. “Those people have strived to get closer to the British for decades 
and now feel rejected.”

Renate Dietrich-Karger, a German who has lived six months of the year at her 
Scottish home for the last three decades, agrees. “It felt as if a close 
relative had died,” she says. “Jewish relatives of mine fled to the UK to 
escape the Nazis. I came to the UK for the first time in 1965 and at that time 
it was to me the land of hope and glory. But a lot has changed since then and I 
am increasingly worried by the willingness to hate people from a different 
background and to express this openly.”

In Scotland, which voted overwhelmingly to remain, the SNP has attempted to 
reach out to EU leaders directly, circumventing Downing Street and reminding 
Europeans they have an ally north of the English border.

“German tourists are a very important group for the Scottish tourist sector,” 
Angus Robertson, deputy leader of the SNP says. The MP, whose mother is German, 
is friendly with German politicians such as David McAllister, a former state 
premier from Angela Merkel’s Christian Democratic party (CDU), and is 
determined to fight for Scotland to remain in the EU.

Labour’s Gisela Stuart, who is also German, was a leading campaigner for 
Brexit, arguing Britain needed to “take back control” of immigration, trade, 
taxation and justice.

The great Britain I love has fallen apart – it's an ex-parrot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/29/the-great-britain-i-love-is-falling-apart-its-an-ex-parrot>
Her own status as a European immigrant propelled her into the limelight in the 
run-up to the vote. But while it was used as an asset by Vote Leave before 23 
June, it has since made her a target.

Stuart claims she has been called a traitor by EU supporters in the UK and 
abroad. “I never received abuse in the United Kingdom for being German,” she 
says, “but I now receive it from Germany by people who tell me it’s in pursuit 
of being good Europeans.”

Meanwhile, neither remainers nor leavers have been able to offer assurances on 
howBrexit will affect Europeans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/22/will-europeans-be-free-to-stay-in-the-uk-after-brexit>
 already living in the UK, or those arriving after the estimated leave date in 
2019.

Many Germans who have come to Britain in the last 20 years are highly skilled 
and trained. More than 5,000 teach and research at British universities, making 
them the biggest group of overseas academics in the UK. An additional 3,000 
Germans work as doctors and medical staff in the NHS.

Oliver Cramer, deputy medical director at the Isle of Wight NHS trust, is one 
of them. Cramer came to the UK in 2003 with his Greek wife, who is also a 
doctor. The couple have been living and working on the island since and never 
felt like immigrants, until June.

Nearly 70% of Isle of Wight voters backed leave. “There are people who tell us 
it’s nothing personal as we were useful immigrants,” Cramer says before 
pausing. “Useful … And when we retire here in 20 years, are we no longer 
useful?”

Michaela Frye is similarly useful. A senior researcher at the department of 
genetics at the University of Cambridge, she has lived in the UK for 15 years 
and was dismayed by the outcome of the referendum.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fthey-feel-rejected-how-germans-in-britain-are-dealing-with-the-brexit-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcadbd128c9e4b0dd82fbf9a6e5edde1490a0fbea%2F0_337_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='They%20feel%20rejected'%3A%20how%20Germans%20in%20Britain%20are%20dealing%20with%20the%20Brexit%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fthey-feel-rejected-how-germans-in-britain-are-dealing-with-the-brexit-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27They%20feel%20rejected%27%3A%20how%20Germans%20in%20Britain%20are%20dealing%20with%20the%20Brexit%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fthey-feel-rejected-how-germans-in-britain-are-dealing-with-the-brexit-vote%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcadbd128c9e4b0dd82fbf9a6e5edde1490a0fbea%2F0_337_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Gisela Stuart touring the country for Vote Leave events before the referendum. 
Photograph: Christopher Furlong/Getty Images 
Although in Cambridge nearly three-quarters of citizens voted for remain, Frye 
says a subtle new hostility has arisen there as well. Her son attends an 
independent British school with a high percentage of international families. 
Many parents told her neighbours were asking them when they would leave.

But where is home after 15 years in the UK? She says: “I feel European. That’s 
what all my work is about. And now what? Get lost?”

She is worried that Brexit could seriously harm her research. The laboratory 
where she and the 10 members of her team work is 50% funded by the EU. If that 
money dried up, she would have to rely entirely on the National Research Fund, 
which wouldstruggle to match the value of EU programmes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/oct/06/brexit-not-good-news-for-british-science-warn-new-nobel-laureates>
. As a result, Frye is looking for positions in Germany. She is not the only 
one.

Janz’s husband was offered a position in Berlin recently and the couple are 
considering returning to Germany. Their British colleagues are concerned that 
an exodus of foreign talent could leave key institutions struggling to cope.

“Brexit hasn’t made it easier for us,” Cramer says, adding that his hospital 
could be hit if Europeans leave the UK. “Up to 30% of the doctors in his 
hospital are non-British. We have 89 nations working here and we’ve had people 
give notice and applicants who decided not to come.

“The main reason was the uncertainty. If you come here and bring your family 
you don’t want to move after two years.”

UK passport applications from EU nationals rose 14% before referendum
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/25/net-migration-to-uk-fell-to-327000-in-past-year-figures-show>
Like many other Germans, Cramer applied for permanent residency  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/01/home-office-prepares-for-rise-in-residency-applications-from-eu-migrants>
immediately after the referendum – as a precaution. Europeans living in Britain 
currently do not need the card, but applications are expected to surge amid 
ongoing uncertainty over EU citizens’ status in the UK.


Meanwhile, an increasing number of Britons with German ancestors are applying 
for German passports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/19/huge-increase-britons-seeking-citizenship-eu-states-brexit-looms>
. The German embassy in London says there has been a significant rise in 
requests since the vote, mostly for passports, citizenship and social insurance.

Abraham, a British citizen with a German surname, applied for a German 
passport a couple of weeks ago. The PhD student works in Cyprus, where he grew 
up. “A German passport allows me to keep my bureaucratic European identity, as 
I identify withEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>,” he says.

 Stuart is convinced that Britain’s borders won’t change. “I came here 40 
years ago. I live in Birmingham where you have second and third generations. 
You can hardly find a more open country.”

Whether 300,000 Germans will agree with her by 2019 remains to be seen. 

• Anna Lehmann is a political correspondent at the Berlin-based daily 
newspaper taz.die tageszeitung, and currently works in the Guardian’s offices 
on the George Weidenfeld bursary, an international journalists’ exchange 
programme
 