
The Exorcist (1973) 

It began when William Peter Blatty read about a case of possession in the 
paper. He wrote a novel that director William Friedkin couldn’t put down. 
Friedkin could not explain the things that he experienced while researching the 
paranormal for his adaptation ofThe Exorcist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-exorcist> (oh, and the set was supposedly 
cursed), and upon seeing it for the first time, audiences screamed, fainted and 
fled from the theater. The film’s tragic hero, Father Karras (Jason Miller), 
enlists Max von Sydow’s Father Merrin to exorcise a troubled girl who has done 
unspeakable things with a crucifix. In doing so, these priests face down 
gallons of pea soup and incomprehensible darkness.

Poltergeist (1982)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fpop-culture-exorcisms-poltergeist-buffy-exorcist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe70288b2e7ddff31ec30f104115ea09cf333e424%2F0_80_2048_1228%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='The%20power%20of%20Christ%20compels%20you'%3A%20a%20pop%20culture%20guide%20to%20the%20perfect%20exorcism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fpop-culture-exorcisms-poltergeist-buffy-exorcist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27The%20power%20of%20Christ%20compels%20you%27%3A%20a%20pop%20culture%20guide%20to%20the%20perfect%20exorcism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fpop-culture-exorcisms-poltergeist-buffy-exorcist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe70288b2e7ddff31ec30f104115ea09cf333e424%2F0_80_2048_1228%2F2048.jpg>
 Tangina Dream: Zelda Rubinstein in Poltergeist. Photograph: Allstar/MGM 
Horror director Tobe Hooper’s and Steven Spielberg’s film deals with dread in 
American idyllic suburbia, where an unlucky family learns the hard way that 
their perfect home is built on a cemetery. This isn’t a Pet Sematary deal, 
though – here be restless ghosts and the beast himself who holds their daughter 
Carol Anne captive. The paranormal investigators trying to make sense of the 
house’s strange phenomena are out of their depth, but tiny clairvoyant and 
“house cleaner” Tangina Barrons (Zelda Rubinstein) knows what to do. All she 
needs to save Carol Anne are tennis balls, red ribbon, handkerchiefs, rope, a 
bathtub and some help from Carol Anne’s mom.

Buffy the Vampire Slayer (1997) 

What happened to exorcists in the late 80s and 90s? The Poltergeist and 
Exorcist franchises continued, alongside possession comedies: Ghostbusters, 
Repossession, Beetlejuice. But Buffy’s first season premiered the same year as 
Peter Jackson’s The Frighteners and presaged supernatural superheroes such as 
Blade as well as signaling the triumphant return of the real deal in 2005 with 
Constantine and The Exorcism of Emily Rose. Buffy’s expertise was slaying, but 
when your school sits on top of a Hellmouth, all kinds of spirit-destroying 
happens, including an exorcism where Buffy rids Sunnydale High of a former 
student’s ghost who keeps reenacting the bloody end of his ill-fated affair 
with his teacher by possessing current students, teachers and even the janitor.

Constantine (2005)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fpop-culture-exorcisms-poltergeist-buffy-exorcist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcfc6724981bcb19dd47234764bfc77ec6771ba00%2F0_130_3072_1844%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='The%20power%20of%20Christ%20compels%20you'%3A%20a%20pop%20culture%20guide%20to%20the%20perfect%20exorcism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fpop-culture-exorcisms-poltergeist-buffy-exorcist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27The%20power%20of%20Christ%20compels%20you%27%3A%20a%20pop%20culture%20guide%20to%20the%20perfect%20exorcism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fpop-culture-exorcisms-poltergeist-buffy-exorcist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcfc6724981bcb19dd47234764bfc77ec6771ba00%2F0_130_3072_1844%2F3072.jpg>
 Where the hell is that cat? Shia LaBeouf, Rachel Weisz and Keanu Reeves in 
Constantine. Photograph: Allstar/WARNER BROS. 
Some people may try to tell you that Francis Lawrence’s Constantine is not a 
faithful Hellblazer adaptation, but it doesn’t matter: it’s a great, underrated 
film where Keanu Reeves plays a lonely occult detective with the ability to see 
a world behind the world, and the half-demons and half-angels that populate it. 
God and Lucifer exist, but they’ve made a wager for the souls of mankind. 
Constantine’s own soul is in play, and he deports demons back to hell in an 
attempt to avoid his own seemingly inevitable journey there. His help includes 
a man who deals in magical objects like a supernatural Q, a witch doctor who 
owns a nightclub, an alcoholic priest, a psychic cop, Shia LaBeouf, and a cat.

The Conjuring (2013) 

This is James Wan’s first film based on Ed and Lorraine Warren, a real-life 
ghost-hunting power couple who investigated countless hauntings together, 
including Amityville, Enfield and a spooky doll. This particular case concerns 
the ghost of an accused witch who murdered her child at a farmhouse in Rhode 
Island. Lorraine (Vera Farmiga) is a powerful clairvoyant still exhausted from 
her last exorcism, and Ed (Patrick Wilson) is the only non-ordained 
demonologist recognized by the Catholic church. They confirm the presence of a 
dark entity, but the church delays their exorcism approval, and the Warrens are 
on their own. Talk about red tape.

Deliver Us From Evil (2014)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fpop-culture-exorcisms-poltergeist-buffy-exorcist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5fde0ff89abde24dca2860d3a3cb43f86a252ffa%2F0_232_1996_2494%2F1996.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='The%20power%20of%20Christ%20compels%20you'%3A%20a%20pop%20culture%20guide%20to%20the%20perfect%20exorcism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fpop-culture-exorcisms-poltergeist-buffy-exorcist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27The%20power%20of%20Christ%20compels%20you%27%3A%20a%20pop%20culture%20guide%20to%20the%20perfect%20exorcism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fpop-culture-exorcisms-poltergeist-buffy-exorcist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5fde0ff89abde24dca2860d3a3cb43f86a252ffa%2F0_232_1996_2494%2F1996.jpg>
 Bad buddy: Edgar Ramirez in Deliver Us From Evil. Photograph: Allstar/SONY 
PICTURES 
Scott Derrickson’s Deliver Us From Evil is the most nightmarish buddy cop 
movie ever made, where evil works like a contagion in New York City and demons 
love to quote The Doors. Édgar Ramírez plays Mendoza, a Jesuit priest and 
exorcism “specialist” who was nearly defrocked once for sex, drugs and, judging 
from his leather jacket, rock’n’roll. Police officer Ralph Sarchie (Eric Bana) 
becomes Mendoza’s reluctant partner when he begins to investigate bizarre 
interconnected crimes that he can’t explain. When a possessed suspect abducts 
Sarchie’s wife and child, Mendoza joins Sarchie and the afflicted man in an 
interrogation room for an impromptu-but-successful exorcism that they perform 
together.

The Exorcist (2016) 

Five episodes in, the show has only just revealed it’s more than just an 
atmospheric sequel to Friedkin’s film, but it’s been faithful to the formula of 
two priests teaming up since the pilot: one a guilt-ridden old hand at 
exorcism, the other an inexperienced young man grappling with his faith, both 
called upon to help a possessed woman when no one else can. So far we’ve seen a 
sexual harasser eviscerated on the train, spontaneous combustion, a series of 
murders in preparation for a demon-summoning ritual, and an old gang of 
exorcising nuns. The city of Chicago itself seems possessed as it suffers a 
surge in violence, supporting one character’s belief that “evil is a moveable 
feast”. Yum.
 