
A judge has chastised individual lawyers for charging up to £400,000 in their 
successful defence of a billionaire sheikh accused of being involved in the 
torture of a British citizen, saying the high court was a “court of justice not 
a casino”.

Judge Blake ruled last month that Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin Jaber al-Thani, 
a former Qatari prime minister worth an estimated £8bn, could not be sued in 
London over claims that agents acting on his behalf falsely imprisoned and 
tortured Fawaz al-Attiya, a former official spokesman for the emirate.

The high court said that since the sheikh had been appointed to a role at 
Qatar’s London embassy in November 2013, he was shielded by diplomatic immunity.

Hamad bin Jassim, known as HBJ, had hired David Pannick, Britain’s most 
prominent human rights Queen’s counsel, to head his defence team. Lord Pannick 
shot to fame in the 1980s when he appeared for the Sunday Times in the 
Spycatcher case and has since acted for the Queen, and defended the kingdom of 
Saudi Arabia and the rights of gay soldiers.

Court documents show Pannick charged £407,250 for a defence involving a 
two-day trial, which he did not attend. His colleague Monica Carss-Frisk QC, 
who did appear, put in a fee for £228,150.

At these rates of pay, Pannick would appear to be more expensive to hire than 
Jonathan Sumption, who was paid almost £8m – the highest fee in British legal 
history – for defending the Chelsea football club owner, Roman Abramovich. Lord 
Sumption, now a supreme court judge, charged that sum for work over a period of 
10 months – about £40,000 a day in court.

The former Qatari prime minister had employed a City law firm – Macfarlanes – 
and four pre-eminent QCs, as well as two junior counsels. His legal bills 
amount to more than £1.1m. This sum is being claimed from Attiya, who will also 
have to cover his own costs, which amount to less than £200,000, with brief’s 
fees of £30,000.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fcourt-of-justice-not-casino-judge-tells-lawyers-over-huge-fees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9985638c45926ee5cdb1f7ffb38b16ee41ae108%2F0_0_1727_2240%2F1727.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='This%20is%20a%20court%20of%20justice%20not%20a%20casino%2C'%20judge%20tells%20lawyers%20over%20%C2%A31.1m%20fees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fcourt-of-justice-not-casino-judge-tells-lawyers-over-huge-fees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27This%20is%20a%20court%20of%20justice%20not%20a%20casino%2C%27%20judge%20tells%20lawyers%20over%20%C2%A31.1m%20fees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fcourt-of-justice-not-casino-judge-tells-lawyers-over-huge-fees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9985638c45926ee5cdb1f7ffb38b16ee41ae108%2F0_0_1727_2240%2F1727.jpg>
 Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin Jaber al-Thani. Photograph: Karim Jaafar/AFP/Getty 
Images 
However, last week the judge intervened to halt the payments, saying that his 
“initial response to sums allegedly claimed is that this is [a] court of 
justice not a casino and costs must be reasonable and proportionate to the 
issue in hand, and the sums identified by the claimant as those claimed by the 
defendant would not be.”

Blake, who refused to hear Attiya’s appeal in the high court, said he would 
make “no award for payment” because there was “no basis for forming an estimate 
of the defendant’s reasonable cost”. Instead, both sides will have to negotiate 
an agreed settlement. Attiya is believed to be seeking permission to have the 
court of appeal hear his case.

The issue of rising legal fees has been a source of much debate since the 
government first tried to reduce costs by initiating cuts to legal aid in 2013 
– a move that provoked a backlash at the Bar. The current justice secretary has 
since put further cuts, to criminal legal aid, on hold.

Last month, in a case involving a privacy action against the publicist Max 
Clifford by Princess Diana’s former butler Paul Burrell, the deputy judge 
Richard Spearman said he had concerns about “disproportionality between the 
value of the claim and the costs involved”.

When contacted, Pannick, who also write a column for the Times, said he had no 
comment to make on the judge’s words or his costs. The peer is a regular 
contributor to debates, and recognised as a “leader of the crossbenchers” with 
an “incredible influence” in parliament.

According to his website, Pannick has “appeared in 100 cases in the appellate 
committee of the House of Lords (before the opening of the new supreme court), 
and has argued more than 25 cases in the European court of justice in 
Luxembourg and over 30 cases in the European court of human rights in 
Strasbourg”.
 