
Towards the end of the new film Suffragette 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/suffragette>, the main characters briefly 
note that the tactics of their leader, Emmeline Pankhurst (regally portrayed by 
Meryl Streep) have spurred dissent, not only inside the suffrage movement but 
also within the Pankhurst family itself.

That’s the movie’s only gesture towards Emmeline’s rebel daughter Adela, who, 
when she relocated to Australia, launched a career every bit as colourful as 
the action portrayed in the film.

The Pankhurst daughters – Christabel, Sylvia and Adela – grew in a family 
dominated by ideas and causes. Their father, the campaigning lawyer and 
socialist Dr Richard Pankhurst, Emmeline’s husband, once declared “Life is 
nothing without enthusiasms”, and visitors to the household included most of 
the era’s great rebels and iconoclasts: William Morris, Keir Hardie, Tom Mann, 
Eleanor Marx, the anarchists Peter Kropotkin and Errico Malatesta, the 
abolitionists William Lloyd Garrison and Elizabeth Cady Stanton, and others.

Suffragette: tough questions disenfranchised despite earnest attempt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/22/suffragette-film-carey-mulligan-maud-watts-working-class-womens-suffrage-movement-violence>
Not surprisingly, the children followed their parents into agitation around 
the Independent Labour party and then, after Richard’s death, the Women’s 
Social Political union.

But the unwavering dedication to public life created intense personal stress.

Adela always thought that, as a late-arriving child, she was resented by her 
mother. Certainly, Emmeline made no secret of her preference for Christabel, 
who would become her closest political ally. But Adela was also deeply jealous 
of Sylvia. “We lived too much together within ourselves,” she wrote later, “to 
be healthy minded, and brooded over troubles that children in more healthy 
surroundings would have forgotten in five minutes”.

At a young age, Adela threw herself into the suffragette cause. In 1906, she 
heckled Churchill and Lloyd George; when she slapped the policeman trying to 
eject her, she was sent to Strangeways prison in Manchester for assault. She 
did more jail time after a violently suppressed suffragette protest at 
parliament, and then worked as an organiser for the WSPU until she collapsed 
from exhaustion.

By late 1913, personal and political tensions had come to the boil. 
Tactically, Emmeline and Christabel had embraced aggressive tactics such as 
window breaking, hunger strikes and even bombings. Politically, they were 
moving to the right – and they were aghast at Sylvia’s relationship with the 
working class organisations of East London.

Adela, too, made no secret of her socialist views, and so, when Sylvia was 
ejected from the movement, Emmeline and Christabel decided the youngest 
Pankhurst daughter should also go.

“I would not care if you were multiplied by a hundred,” said Christabel to 
Sylvia, “but one of Adela is too many.”

Adela was given £20, some warm clothes, a letter of introduction to Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> feminist Vida Goldstein, 
and a boat ticket to Australia. She never saw her mother or sisters again.

Arriving in Melbourne in April 1914, she received a hero’s welcome: the famous 
daughter of a famous mother.

“You have heard a great deal about broken windows,” she told a crowd at the 
Melbourne Auditorium. “I can tell you about the broken lives that caused the 
broken windows.”

“She’s not the least like one’s idea of the ‘shrieking sisterhood’,” said one 
conservative paper with approval.

But the appreciation for Adela from respectable Melbourne did not last long. 
Free from her mother’s restrictions, she joined the Victorian Socialist party 
and the Women’s Peace Army, and threw herself into agitation against the first 
world war. She wrote antiwar plays and pamphlets; during the two 
anti-conscription referendums, she campaigned almost every day, often alongside 
future prime minister John Curtin.

“I have seldom heard a speaker who held such sway over her audience,” said one 
of the undercover police recording her.

In August 1917, police arrested Adela during a Melbourne march against wartime 
price increases. “Roused to fury by this development,” reported the Age, 
“several women acted in a most disgraceful manner and umbrellas and fists were 
used against police.”

A few weeks later, she and “half a dozen shrill-voiced girls” led a group of 
red flag-carrying men and women into the city “singing songs of revolt” (as the 
Argus said) “and smashing windows out of pure wantonness”.

The original suffragette: the extraordinary Mary Wollstonecraft
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/womens-blog/2015/oct/05/original-suffragette-mary-wollstonecraft>
In September, Adela married Tom Walsh, a union leader who signed his articles 
as “Sinbad the Sailor”; in October, the magistrate Notley Moore sentenced her 
to prison. The socialist poet RH Long asked:

Adela Pankhurst, what have you done?
Meddled with poison, handled a gun?
Nine months gaol from Notley Moore,
For openly pleading the cause of the poor.

In 1920, Adela Pankhurst Walsh and her husband Tom were two of the most 
prominent figures at the foundation of the Communist party of Australia, a 
meeting she attended with a crying baby on her knee.

Adela’s political convictions spurred Emmeline – a passionate supporter of the 
war – to telegram the prime minister, Billy Hughes, denouncing her daughter. 
But these convictions also drew her closer to Sylvia, a central figure in early 
British communism. Lenin’s pamphlet Left Wing Communism is partly addressed to 
Sylvia.

“This is the life, isn’t it,” wrote Adela to her sister, “and I am very happy.”

Christabel, meanwhile, had moved to America to become an evangelical Seventh 
Day Adventist.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F24%2Fwayward-suffragette-adela-pankhurst-and-her-remarkable-australian-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f4a6313cd8d8181c2c8078222b5a22df5fbe74a%2F15_30_991_718%2F991.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Wayward%20suffragette'%20Adela%20Pankhurst%20and%20her%20remarkable%20Australian%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F24%2Fwayward-suffragette-adela-pankhurst-and-her-remarkable-australian-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Wayward%20suffragette%27%20Adela%20Pankhurst%20and%20her%20remarkable%20Australian%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F24%2Fwayward-suffragette-adela-pankhurst-and-her-remarkable-australian-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f4a6313cd8d8181c2c8078222b5a22df5fbe74a%2F15_30_991_718%2F991.jpg>
 Suffragettes Adela Pankhurst and Annie Kenney in 1910. They are standing 
beside a tree planted by Emmeline Pankhurst. Photograph: Col Linley 
Blathwayt/Bath In Time – Bath Central Library 
Adela’s passion for communism faded remarkably quickly. In articles such as 
“Communism and Social Purity” she expressed a tacit enthusiasm for conventional 
domesticity quite foreign to the new doctrines coming out of Moscow and, by 
1923, both she and Walsh had left the party.

The next year, Walsh was sent to jail – and nearly deported – for his role in 
the seamen’s strike, an experience that, alongside his quarrels with his former 
comrades, seems to have shattered the couple’s faith in union militancy.

In 1927, Adela launched the Australian Women’s Guild of Empire, an 
organisation dedicated to fighting communism, upholding Christian ideals and 
safeguarding the family. She wrote to her mother, now a member of the 
Conservative party, explaining that she and Tom had changed their minds about 
socialism. Just before her death, Emmeline replied to say she was “full of 
regret for the long rift”.

Over the next decade, Adela devoted her considerable skills to an 
employer-backed campaign against strikes. She would arrive at a discontented 
workplace, set up her stump outside and then harangue the employees about the 
advantages of industrial peace. In her writing, she denounced contraception, 
abortion and even nursery schools as detrimental to the maternal values she 
identified as the key legacy of suffragism.

Though Sylvia had also broken with the Communist party, she remained 
determinedly on the left, supporting sexual freedom and raising support for 
Ethiopia’s struggle against fascist Italy (she eventually moved to Addis 
Ababa). Perhaps for that reason, Adela was enraged by her sister’s 1931 account 
of the suffragette movement, and the two were once again estranged.

After Suffragette, which feminist biopics should we see next?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/29/suffragette-feminist-biopics-next>
Throughout the 1930s Adela drifted further rightward, occasionally embracing 
anti-Semitism and writing favourably about Nazi Germany. In 1940, in the midst 
of the second world war, she became an organiser for Australia First, the 
peculiar pro-Japanese fascist outfit established by the writer PR “Inky” 
Stephensen. Interned (without trial) as a traitor in 1942, the old suffragette 
embarked on a hunger strike until she obtained her release.

Thereafter, she remained out of public life. There was, however, one last 
ideological reinvention: just before her death in 1961 she converted to 
Catholicism.

In 1978, feminist historian Anne Summers asked why, after such a remarkable 
career, Adela Pankhurst remained so obscure. Despite Vera Coleman’s 1996 
biography of “the wayward suffragette”, the question remains moot.

Where Summers partly attributed the neglect of Pankhurst to her break from 
traditional feminist preoccupations, other historians (such as Joy Damousi and 
Jacqueline Dickenson) have focused on the continuities behind her apparent 
zigzags (such as a longstanding preoccupation with the domestic sphere and an 
understanding of femininity as a eugenic safeguard for British “racial” purity).

Indeed, it might be argued that Adela provides the most extreme illustration 
of the problem that Martin Pugh identifies in his collective biography of her 
family: the difficulty of explaining “exactly where the Pankhursts stand in 
relation to the modern women’s movement”. If, in some respects, Adela seems a 
very contemporary figure, in other ways, she reminds us of the foreignness of 
the past.
 