
More than 10 years ago, a friend from Brixton came to stay in my Amsterdam 
apartment and brought me a tape of the sessions that would become the bulk of 
the Alabama 3's incendiary debut album, Exile on Coldharbour Lane. Its fusion 
of techno with country and western was astonishingly bold, combining the most 
radical and reactionary genres of popular music. I started to check out the 
band's gigs and found that Jake Black (aka D Wayne Love), one of the band's 
founding members, and I had many mutual friends from our raving days in 
Glasgow, stretching back to the punk era. So I became one of the band's 
aficionados, known collectively as the "bammies": we're the punters who help 
make A3 gigs the best party in town.

I can't understand why the Alabama 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/alabama-3> aren't one of the biggest bands 
on the planet. Woke Up This Morning, which plays over the opening credits of 
The Sopranos, remains their best-known song, but you would expect at least one 
of their albums to have gone platinum on the leg-up from that alone. Over the 
course of seven albums - from Exile, through Power in the Blood (2002) and last 
year's MOR, to their latest retrospective, Hits and Exit Wounds - the A3 have 
turned a crazed mirror on the UK's mainstream cultural influences, parodying 
derivative and genre-based music through the lens of what the band call their 
"sweet muthafuckin' acid house country music", with a leavening of dirty 
rock'n'roll.

I'm wondering how they'd cope if it all suddenly went mega. I settle down with 
D Wayne and Rob Spragg (aka Larry Love), the other founding member, in a dark 
corner of Dublin's Clarence Hotel, the smart, corporate, U2-owned enterprise, 
in front of a tray of our favourite blended margaritas. Does it concern them 
that lesser lights are fawned over, while they remain on the margins, albeit 
the exciting, interesting ones? "As long as we do good work," Larry says, "we 
know there will be a payback time."

Larry is as cadaverous as ever, a man who still looks as if a ray of sunlight 
will combust him. D Wayne, though, is a more substantial figure than the 
skeletal, spectral one I've seen grace stages, couches and floors over the 
years. But these boys are proper rock'n'roll stars. If they wear shades 
indoors, it's because they're covering up strung-out eyes and brawlers' 
bruises. Glancing at the tape recorder I've slipped on to the table, Larry asks 
me: "Do you feel guilty that you haven't had a rock'n'roll death yet, and are 
still bounding down the highways and byways of self-destruction?"

Death is such a cheerful presence in the A3 canon, it's easy to think of the 
Grim Reaper as a band member. "We've got a lottery in the band about who's 
going to die first," Larry says. "We're amazed we're all still alive."

D Wayne comes from the Possil area of Glasgow and I'm from Muirhouse, in 
Edinburgh, so when we get together we talk about art and politics, with all the 
pomposity, pretentiousness and guilt of true Scottish schemies. Playing back 
the tape of us rapping is like listening to two 80s Marxist polytechnic 
sociology lecturers vying to seduce an impressionable fresher. He tells me, 
touchingly, about my debut novel's influence on the band. "Trainspotting was 
iconoclastic for us. It introduced a whole disenfranchised generation to 
literature - a generation that had been informed literature was the possession 
of an elite. It delineated the complex inner lives of the housing estates and 
communities people lived in. We've been trying to do the same with our music, 
trying to show young people that they can make music based on their own lives, 
using genres like country and blues that they probably considered the territory 
of their dads and grannies."

But writing novels is a lonely business, and release is often difficult. 
That's what I envy about these boys: they can hit that stage and perform 
together; the communication and catharsis is instant, and there's an immediate 
connection with their audience. "That's the end of the process - the 
performance," Larry says. "But we're constantly looking for new experiences, 
new people to bounce off, new shades of reality to reflect our twisted US 
accent-based view of life. We're always collecting experiences to use as 
songwriters. But you can write everywhere," he suddenly accuses me. "You used 
to sit on the Circle line in London with your laptop and knock them out."

I ask them what music kicked off their warped but exhilarating vision of the 
world. "House affected us deeply," says D Wayne. "But punk rock liberated 
people like me and those I knocked around with in Glasgow. For the first time, 
we were able to come out of the scheme, dress up and hit the city centre, talk 
about Rimbaud and Baudelaire, mix with Jim Kerr and Charlie Burchill [of Simple 
Minds] and get shagged. It opened up a brand new lifestyle for us."

In practical terms, the band grew organically out of its members' acid house 
DJing activities. Larry explains: "We were doing a gig in Italy, me and D Wayne 
in the early days, with two turntables and a load of acid house records and 
some obscure blues LPs. It was run by the Italian Communist Party. There were 
lots of punk bands. We played our house, the room was full, it was kickin'. 
Then this guy from the CP came in and said we had to prepare and read out our 
manifesto. Someone tore a page from an Italian comic book and we read it out. 
It started, 'The techno warriors will save the Martians.' It made me think 
about the veracity of political manifestos. The crowd loved it. I often wonder 
if there are still a few addled Italian CP members trying to live by the code 
we outlined that night."

Things seem a lot blander now, in the age of Simon Cowell. "Alabama 3 live in 
this world," Larry says. "We reflect and comment on it. But we're trying to cut 
through the distortions of people who peddle popular culture as a series of Pop 
Idol-type creations."

So are they speaking to the old punks and house heads, those of us who should 
know better but just can't quite stay indoors and behave?

"Yes," Larry says, "But not exclusively. The last album was called MOR. Some 
say it stands for Middle of the Road, but it's based on those gorgeous 
California west coast sounds like the Eagles, and it maybe widened our 
audience. With the new collection, we just thought we'd offer up a reminder of 
how we got there."

One of the Eagles' most famous tracks is Take It to the Limits. Rest assured, 
the A3 will continue to do just that. It would be nice if the mainstream caught 
on and this retrospective brought them their just rewards. Yet for selfish 
reasons, I enjoy being part of a cult who can access the best party around.

Â· Hits and Exit Wounds is out today on One Little Indian. The Alabama 3 play 
53 Degrees, Preston (01772 893000), tonight, then tour. Details:alabama3.co.uk 
<http://www.alabama3.co.uk>
 