
When the mayor of Rome and star of the Five Star movement, Virginia Raggi, 
recently suggested that the large number of refrigerators and furniture being 
dumped on the city’s streets was potentially a plot by her political enemies to 
undermine her, it was met with ridicule and anger.

It did not take long for observers – already unhappy with Raggi’s performance 
since her sweeping electoral victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/20/rome-mayoral-crisis-could-hurt-five-stars-national-chances-italy-virginia-raggi>
 in June – to point out that Rome’s contract withrubbish collectors  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/02/romes-reform-minded-mayor-under-pressure-to-bin-rubbish-tsar>
 to pick up fridges and other large items had expired shortly before the 
election.

#Frigogate 
<http://www.repubblica.it/politica/2016/10/25/foto/virginia_raggi_e_il_frigo-gate_l_ironia_corre_sui_social-150562032/1/#1>
, or #fridgegate, created an easy political opportunity for Italy’s centre-left 
prime minister, Matteo Renzi, who is fighting atough battle before a critical 
referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/06/could-italys-renzi-be-next-victim-of-an-unwanted-referendum>
 on 4 December onconstitutional reform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/20/italian-pm-renzi-electoral-reform-m5s>
 that could end his political career. He never misses an opportunity to paint 
his toughest political rivals – the populist Movimento 5 Stelle (M5S) – as 
incompetent conspiracy theorists.

How Rome's mayoral crisis could hurt Five Star's national chances
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/20/rome-mayoral-crisis-could-hurt-five-stars-national-chances-italy-virginia-raggi>
“Honesty in politics is about being capable, and not playing around with 
demagoguery and indifference,” Renzi said. “If you’ve forgotten to renew the 
contract for large refuse removal, it’s not a conspiracy.”

Since its founding in 2009, M5S has been seen as a “post-ideological” protest 
party givingvoice to disaffected Italians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/06/italians-beppe-grillo-five-star-movement>
 who were attracted to its vehement positions against corruption and crony 
capitalism. Its founder, Beppe Grillo, a comedian, had a loud megaphone, but 
was not seen a contender to run the country.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fitaly-m5s-became-a-real-contender-five-star-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7082ab90d6a4ed35afda38eb92bedfab6dc7f9c5%2F0_102_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%20are%20for%20what%20is%20logical'%3A%20how%20Italy's%20M5S%20became%20a%20real%20contender&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fitaly-m5s-became-a-real-contender-five-star-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%20are%20for%20what%20is%20logical%27%3A%20how%20Italy%27s%20M5S%20became%20a%20real%20contender&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fitaly-m5s-became-a-real-contender-five-star-politics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7082ab90d6a4ed35afda38eb92bedfab6dc7f9c5%2F0_102_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
 Beppe Grillo speaks during a rally three years ago. Photograph: Stefano 
Lancia/EPA 
But today M5S is no longer on the sidelines of Italian politics. Instead, it 
is the second most popular party in the country and leading the campaign 
against Renzi’s referendum, which it says poses a threat to the country’s 
constitution. If Renzi loses, it could hasten the call for general elections 
before 2018, putting M5S within striking distance of the prime minister’s seat 
in Palazzo Chigi.

“The chances of the Five Star winning the next election are quite high, 
whether the referendum passes or not,” said Federico Santi, an analyst at 
Eurasia Group.

While it is clear that M5S is a force to be reckoned with, just what the party 
stands for – beyond its championing of “transparency” and “direct democracy” – 
is a much murkier question. Just as it lacks a clear leader in the conventional 
sense – it is not clear, for instance, who would be in the prime minister’s 
seat if it did one day enter Chigi – it presents voters with a hotchpotch of 
policies from across the ideological spectrum.

Unlike other populist movements in Europe that are clearly associated either 
with rightwing politics, such as Ukip in Britain, or with leftwing politics, 
such asPodemos in Spain <https://www.theguardian.com/world/podemos>, M5S has 
been able to attract votes across the political spectrum.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fitaly-m5s-became-a-real-contender-five-star-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4eafd1728d922a4c1044bfed2e7bf7d1645a2722%2F0_34_2592_1556%2F2592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%20are%20for%20what%20is%20logical'%3A%20how%20Italy's%20M5S%20became%20a%20real%20contender&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fitaly-m5s-became-a-real-contender-five-star-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%20are%20for%20what%20is%20logical%27%3A%20how%20Italy%27s%20M5S%20became%20a%20real%20contender&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fitaly-m5s-became-a-real-contender-five-star-politics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4eafd1728d922a4c1044bfed2e7bf7d1645a2722%2F0_34_2592_1556%2F2592.jpg>
 The leader of Podemos, Pablo Iglesias, celebrates in Madrid after the results 
of the Spanish general election in June. Photograph: Kiko Huesca/EPA 
Leftwing voters are attracted to its pro-environment stance and its criticism 
of big business. Rightwing voters support its call for controls on migration 
and its attacks on the EU and the euro. Grillo has long been an admirer of the 
former Ukip leader Nigel Farage, and M5S has said it would seek to call a 
referendum on the euro if it came into power.

Alessia Morani, an MP in Renzi’s Democratic party and the chief attack dog 
against M5S, points to a paradox: that though M5S is associated with leftwing 
heroes in Italy, such as thelate playwright Dario Fo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/13/dario-fo-nobel-winning-playwright-dies-aged-90>
, it has alsostalled legislation in support of same-sex civil unions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/19/italian-same-sex-couples-face-setbacks-in-fight-for-equal-marriage-rights>
, regularly attacked the press for being biased, and enjoyed a close 
relationship withthe WikiLeaks founder, Julian Assange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/news-blog/2016/oct/22/wikileaks-clinton-leaks-julian-assange-sean-hannity-david-duke>
, whose leaks of Hillary Clinton’s campaign emails have recently made him a 
hero of the right in the US.

Will Italy be Europe’s next casualty as Renzi risks all on referendum?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/06/matteo-renzi-italy-referendum-banks-brexit>
“The right in Italy is imploding, it does not exist. [Silvio] Berlusconi is 
gone and the rest is a diaspora, and they are trying to win these voters. For 
us, they are in the same category as [rightwing politicians]Giorgia Meloni 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/15/silvio-berlusconi-rome-mayor-mother-giorgia-meloni-sexism>
 andMatteo Salvini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/01/northern-league-gains-italian-elections-matteo-salvini>
,” said Morani.

Jacopo Iacoboni, a political journalist at La Stampa who covers M5S, said the 
party’s ties to the right have become more evident following Raggi’s election 
as mayor of Rome, when she decided to fill top posts with officials associated 
with a previous rightwing administration.


“I don’t want to say they are like a cult, but they repeat a kind of mantra 
when they talk about direct democracy and how you should only believe what you 
see on the internet, and not the newspapers,” he said, pointing out a similar
distrust of traditional media outlets expressed by Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/24/donald-trump-attacks-media-pollsters-florida>
, the Republican US presidential nominee.

“I think there is a sort of cultural tie that connects the things that are 
happening abroad, in the USA and the UK andItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> and Russia,” Iacoboni said. 


At the heart of it lies not only anger at the status quo, but distrust of 
elites and a tendency to “see plots everywhere and in everything”, he added.

Among some of the theories that have been expressed by M5S officials is that 
the forthcoming referendum on the constitution is part ofa capitalist plot 
hatched by the US bank JP Morgan 
<http://www.ilfoglio.it/politica/2016/09/19/referendum-banche-report-jp-morgan-di-battista___1-v-147681-rubriche_c318.htm>
, thatvaccines are linked to autism 
<http://www.lombardia5stelle.it/2013/10/18/vaccinazioni-pediatriche-incontro-a-senago/>
, thatthe moon landing never happened 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.it/2014/07/20/carlo-sibilia-sbarco-luna-farsa_n_5603390.html>
, and thatRenzi’s party may have lost the Rome mayoral contest 
<http://www.ilfattoquotidiano.it/2016/05/19/elezioni-roma-2016-se-vince-la-raggi-il-piu-contento-e-renzi/2746407/>
 on purpose in order to set Raggi up to fail.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fitaly-m5s-became-a-real-contender-five-star-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95bf04c21e43c59391efffd34d5a679efe145786%2F0_95_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%20are%20for%20what%20is%20logical'%3A%20how%20Italy's%20M5S%20became%20a%20real%20contender&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fitaly-m5s-became-a-real-contender-five-star-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%20are%20for%20what%20is%20logical%27%3A%20how%20Italy%27s%20M5S%20became%20a%20real%20contender&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fitaly-m5s-became-a-real-contender-five-star-politics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95bf04c21e43c59391efffd34d5a679efe145786%2F0_95_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Rome’s new mayor, Virginia Raggi. Photograph: Remo Casilli/Reuters 
Laura Ferrara, an MEP for M5S, where the movement is part of the Europe of 
Freedom and Direct Democracy Group 
<http://www.efddgroup.eu/about-us/our-presidents> along with Farage and Ukip, 
insists her party has been misunderstood and given unfair treatment in the 
Italian media.


“We are not on the leftwing or the rightwing. We are for what is logical and 
better for citizens. For instance, on the management of migrant flows, it is 
absolutely wrong that we are close to the rightwing,” she said, pointing to 
calls by Italy’s rightwing parties for all migrants and refugees to be expelled.

Ferrara said the M5S position was that more needed to be done to determine the 
differences between economic migrants and refugees fleeing war and to “protect 
the fundamental rights of citizens” who were unemployed. She said one solution 
favoured by M5S would be for refugees to obtain “humanitarian visas” from EU 
and other embassies in their countries of origin so they could avoid the 
dangerous passage across the Mediterranean. Creating “hotspots” to relocate 
refugees in other countries, she said, would “protect Italian citizens”.

Italy’s Five Star Movement now has to translate protest into problem-solving | 
Francesco Grillo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/21/italy-five-star-movement-protest-problem-solving-elections>
Asked about some of the less mainstream theories the party has supported, 
Ferrara denied M5S opposed vaccinations, but said it wanted to urge parents to 
be more vigilant about which vaccines they gave their children, saying that 
both the flu vaccine andvaricella <http://www.who.int/wer/2014/wer8925.pdf?ua=1>
 – or chickenpox – vaccine were portrayed by doctors as obligatory even though 
they were not mandatory by law. Both vaccines are recommended by the World 
Health Organisation.

“Well, it depends on the situation of each individual and we need to be aware 
of that,” she said, referring to the flu vaccine.

For political history professor Giovanni Orsina at LUISS University in Rome, 
the M5S phenomenon, much like the rise of Trump and Brexit, points to a general 
failure of mainstream politics.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fitaly-m5s-became-a-real-contender-five-star-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb836f4aa6a918dd17cd7ced679e8e2d0a140b98a%2F0_238_4208_2525%2F4208.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%20are%20for%20what%20is%20logical'%3A%20how%20Italy's%20M5S%20became%20a%20real%20contender&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fitaly-m5s-became-a-real-contender-five-star-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%20are%20for%20what%20is%20logical%27%3A%20how%20Italy%27s%20M5S%20became%20a%20real%20contender&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fitaly-m5s-became-a-real-contender-five-star-politics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb836f4aa6a918dd17cd7ced679e8e2d0a140b98a%2F0_238_4208_2525%2F4208.jpg>
 Matteo Renzi speaks during the constitutional referendum campaign, on 29 
October. Photograph: Pacific Pres/Rex/Shutterstock 
“I think 20% of their supports believe in them, and 80% despise all the 
others,” he said. “Italian voters should start getting a greater sense of 
responsibility and reality. M5S is contributing to a sense of catastrophe, this 
is the first problem. The second is that the quality of their administrative 
elite is very low. So they are both miseducating the electorate and not 
governing well, and that causes real damage.”

Santi at Eurasia, which follows Italian politics, said the big question facing 
Italy now was not whether M5S could put the country on a Brexit-like track to 
abandon the euro, because that was likely to be too difficult procedurally and 
politically.


“The real problem is that they are highly inexperienced,” he said. Santi said 
he would worry about M5S’s response to economic challenges if they came into 
power, particularly since they seem to oppose any public intervention when it 
comes to saving troubled banks, and that their anti-austerity policies would 
put Italy on a collision course with the European commission.

“I think the Five Star movement didn’t come out of nowhere. They have a huge 
following in part because the traditional political class is completely 
inadequate for the job and people have real grievances,” Santi said. “So while 
I sympathise with those ideas, I think so far they have struggled to articulate 
a convincing response.”

 