
The EU referendum has had at least one useful side-effect. Brexit has got 
people engaged in politics, including those who don’t have a British passport.

A week ago, the Library of Birmingham hosted a public discussion to debate the 
question “What Brexit do you want?” The room was full of people wanting answers 
from the two MEPs present, Labour’s Neena Gill and Ukip’s James Carver. “Two, 
three months before the referendum, just a couple of people would have shown up 
to an event like this, but now they are always fully booked,” said the BBC 
journalist who presented the discussion.

One of the people who spoke was Adam Fejfer, a young Polish man. He has been 
in the UK for more than a decade, and said he wanted Britain to stay as diverse 
as it was now. “We belong to this country,” he says of the well over 800,000 
Poles living in the UK. “We contribute unique skills and talents. We don’t want 
to be alienated. We don’t want to live in ghettos but be a part of this 
community.”

EU citizens living in UK lobby for post-Brexit residency law
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/10/eu-citizens-living-in-uk-lobby-for-post-brexit-residency-law>
Fejfer is not eligible to vote in major elections, but he became a member of 
the Liberal Democrats two years ago. “I try to convince as many people as 
possible to join a party and to do something,” he says.

The Brexit vote has boosted the memberships of many political parties, 
including Labour and the SNP. The Lib Dems, who stood firmly for remaining in 
the EU, have become particularly attractive to non-British citizens. The fact 
that they werenot able to vote in the referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/05/how-do-i-vote-in-the-eu-referendum>
 on an issue that was going to affect their lives fundamentally has not 
prevented them from wanting to shape the future of Brexit Britain. Instead of 
mourning, they have become increasingly active.

Bele Weiss, a German who came to the UK in 1993 and lives with her husband in 
London, joined the Tories immediately after the referendum, before Theresa May 
became party leader. She wanted to prevent Boris Johnson being prime minister, 
she says. When Johnson quit the race, she switched to the Liberal Democrats. 
“They are the only party standing firm against Brexit.”

Weiss runs two Bavarian restaurants in Kingston and Richmond, where imported 
Nürnberger Würstchen and Münchener pretzel with Obatzer, a cheese dip, are 
served at huge wooden tables.

I’m one of 3 million EU citizens in the UK. This uncertainty is unbearable | 
Anne-Laure Donskoy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/17/3-million-citizens-uk-brexit-vote-theresa-may>
Despite being unable to vote herself, she is campaigning for the Lib Dem Sarah 
Olney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/30/lib-dems-sarah-olney-to-fight-zac-goldsmith-richmond-park-byelection>
 in next week’s Richmond Park byelection. “I have never been politically 
active, either in Germany or in Great Britain,” she says. “But now I feel 
obliged to do something in my own backyard against Brexit. I got so angry about 
the Brexit vote.”

Zac Goldsmith, who quit as a Tory MP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/25/zac-goldsmith-quits-as-mp-over-doomed-heathrow-expansion-decision>
 and is standing as an independent, is a stout supporter of Brexit, so the Lib 
Dems are trying to make the byelection a vote about the issue. Weiss has been 
into every shop on Richmond high street in an effort to persuade other 
businesspeople and shop owners to vote for Olney. “Every shop employs immigrant 
workers. The owners tell me they couldn’t run their business without immigrant 
employees,” she says. “Maybe the byelection will be the beginning of the end of 
Brexit.”

Rosalie Schweiker, a German artist who has lived in London for 10 years, 
believes Brexit is inevitable but wants to use her work to challenge some of 
the narratives that dominated the campaign, the idea that the EU is strangling 
the UK, and that immigrants live here at the expense of British citizens. She 
helped run theEU-UK campaign <http://eu-uk.info/> against Brexit and has 
recently joined the Labour party.

'How do I protect my family?': EU citizens in Britain contemplate their futures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/10/how-do-i-protect-my-family-eu-citizens-in-britain-contemplate-their-futures>
Schweiker did not despair after the referendum result. “I am not going to 
leave,” she smiles. “That’s what people like Nigel Farage want.”


Instead she uses Facebook to call for action and has launched the Unite 
Against Dividers campaign with four other women. The group, three of whom have 
EU passports and two of whom British, are organising an “activation weekend” in 
January to bring artists and politicians together and gather fresh ideas for 
strategies.

“Brexit has changed my life,” Schweiker says. “Politics had never had such an 
impact on my life. I have stopped doing my usual kind of work for the moment 
and just concentrate on the new campaign.” She and her group want to spread 
their initiative to other British cities.

In Birmingham, Gavin Wade works as an art curator for the Eastside Projects 
<https://eastsideprojects.org/>, a former manufacturing hall that is both 
gallery and community centre. He has worked with Schweiker and is inclined to 
support her campaign. During the referendum campaign a billboard with an EU 
flag dominated the front of his studio. The day after the referendum they 
destroyed it. It hasn’t been replaced. “We feel the pressure to do something, 
but I have no answer yet,” he says.

The voice of art has been surprisingly quiet since the referendum, Schweiker 
and her fellow campaigners believe. They want it to be loud again. “I don’t 
want to sit by and let everything happen. The issues that caused Brexit have 
not gone away. They are still there.”
 