Ann Clwyd (Cynon Valley): In 1991, I stood at the Opposition dispatch box and 
described what I had seen on the mountains of Iran and Iraq when the Kurds fled 
from the bombardment of Saddam Hussein. I am afraid that people have very short 
memories. The scenes were appalling and typical of the attacks made by the 
Iraqi regime on its own people. The victims include Arabs as well as Kurds. 
They also include Assyrians, Turkomans and the Shi'as in the south of the 
country who were forced to flee from the marshes into Iran.
I have spent the past two days travelling and I have come back for this debate 
so that I can tell the house what I have seen and heard. As the house knows, I 
have continually argued the case over the years for indicting the regime for 
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. I am grateful to 201 of my 
colleagues on both sides of the house who supported my proposal. I believe that 
the regime should be removed and that it could have been removed by using 
international law and indictment. It is a great regret to me that this country, 
which could have led the way, did not do so.

After two years of our making the case and providing evidence from the victims 
of the regime, the attorney general felt that there was not sufficient 
evidence. I do not know how much evidence one needs, because it abounds. Human 
Rights Watch and Amnesty International have the evidence, and the Kurds 
captured documents from the torture centre that they eventually liberated. 
Thousands of their citizens died there.

On my latest visit, I opened the first genocide museum in Iraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>. It was snowing and quite dark on that 
day and people had come from all over the area. Their relatives had died in 
that torture chamber. Inside the museum were photographs that the Kurds had 
taken. The images were of skulls and shreds of clothing, and of the type of 
thing that one sees in genocide museums elsewhere in the world. I have been to 
similar museums in Rwanda and Cambodia, and I have seen the holocaust 
exhibition in London, but I am afraid that, on this occasion, I just cried. I 
do not think that I have ever cried in public before, but I did so because the 
regime's victims were all around me. One old woman came up to me with a piece 
of plastic and pushed it into my hand. I unwrapped it and saw three 
photographs. They were of her husband and two sons who had died in that torture 
centre.

People had written things on the cell walls. Sometimes the writing was in 
blood and sometimes it was just marks to cross off the days of the week. Inside 
one cell is a statue of a Peshmerga, whose face looks upward towards a grill 
through which the light comes. I was told that that Peshmerga had died in that 
cell and that he was always looking towards the light, because he hoped that, 
one day, he would be out in the daylight again.

The victims were all around me, and I have been involved for 25 
years-including before I became a politician-with the Iraqi opposition. For 
those 25 years, I have heard the tales of Saddam Hussein's regime and its 
repression of the Kurds and other minorities. People seem to think that that 
all came to an end in 1991, but that is a big mistake. Repression, torture and 
ethnic cleansing have continued throughout the time since then.

On my latest visit, I met some of the victims of torture who had, in the past 
few months, come out of the Abu Ghraib prison in Baghdad under the so-called 
amnesty. One man told me stories that I hardly like to repeat, but we at Indict 
have taken victims' statements over the past seven years. This victim was a 
youngish man who said that he had been in prison for eight years. He said that 
almost every day, people were executed at that prison - not one person, but 
hundreds. When there was an attack on Uday Hussein's life some time ago, 2,000 
prisoners in the prison were executed on the same day. That is the reality of 
Saddam's Iraq. When I hear people calling for more time, I say "Who will speak 
up for those victims?"

I shall recount only two stories told by the same man. He told me that a 
university professor gave birth at the Abu Ghraib prison while he was there. 
Apparently, because of the very poor diet of thin soup and bread, she did not 
have enough milk to feed the baby when it was born. She begged the guards for 
milk, but they refused to give it and the baby died. She held that baby in her 
arms for three days and would not give up the body. At the end of the three 
days, because the temperature in the prison was very hot-some 60Â° C-the body 
began to smell. They took the woman and her dead baby away. I asked the former 
prisoner what happened to her and he said that she was killed.

The man then talked about a young boy aged 15 who had done something or other 
and was in the prison, and fainted during one of the torture sessions-he was 
beaten so hard that he fainted. The guards pinned him up to the frame of a 
window and crucified him on the window frame while he was still alive. When he 
came to, he was crying out for water, but nobody would give him water. One of 
the other prisoners threw water in his face, but that prisoner was himself 
taken away and beaten.

Ethnic cleansing goes on all the time. I visited a UN camp where there were 
hundreds of recent victims of ethnic cleansing who had been kicked out of 
Kirkuk. The men, women and little children in the camp had been told that they 
had 24 hours to get out of Kirkuk because they would not agree that they were 
not Kurds, but Arabs, as part of Arabisation. In other countries, we have taken 
action against people responsible for ethnic cleansing, so I say to my 
colleagues, please, who is to help the victims of Saddam Hussein's regime 
unless we do?

I believe in regime change. I say that without hesitation, and I will support 
the government tonight because I think that they are doing a brave thing.
 