
Maybe you haven’t heard. Maybe you’ve been combing the Mariana Trench 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mariana_Trench> for a dropped contact lens, or 
been employed to brush the dust off theMars Rover 
<http://mars.nasa.gov/mer/home/>, so have been out of the loop for a while. For 
everyone else, it’s common knowledge that they’ve madea Ghostbusters reboot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/03/ghostbusters-first-trailer-all-female-reboot-kristen-wiig-melissa-mccarthy>
, thatit has LADIES in it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/03/ghostbusters-first-trailer-all-female-reboot-kristen-wiig-melissa-mccarthy>
, and large chunks of the internet areseriously 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/09/paul-feig-hits-back-at-twitter-haters-trolling-ghostbusters-leslie-jones>
unhappy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/02/ghostbusters-trailer-most-disliked-in-youtube-history>
 about it.

There are a few explanations for this, from a general disgruntlement with 
excessive Hollywood reboots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/10/ghostbusters-reboot-hollywood-paul-feig-bill-murray>
 to the whole Ghostbusters aspect being a feeble cover for what is basically an 
enraged anti-feminism backlash, something which is a depressing inevitability 
when women attempt to do anything, in any context, ever. But some people just 
seem outraged that they dare to “tamper” with their beloved childhood 
favourite, in this case Ghostbusters.

Admittedly, such complaints are often legitimate; to have something that you 
feel very fondly towards, and to see it be manipulated or changed in 
often-cynically-motivated ways is very irksome. If they painted “I LOVE TRUMP” 
on the Mona Lisa’s forehead to attract a new demographic, nobody would see that 
as an improvement. But often, the attempted remake/reboot fades from public 
consciousness without incident. Barely anyone can rememberthe Total Recall 
remake <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1386703/> (ironically). 

However, there’s often a genuine anger over well-known children’s 
entertainments being adapted, expanded or altered in ways that don’t meet the 
approval of the existing fans. I don’t deny I’m susceptible to this too, I’ve 
basedan entire article on one particular grievance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/brain-flapping/2014/feb/07/fireman-sam-the-worst-childrens-programme-ever>
. But why do some feel so strongly that they accuse something of “ruining their 
childhood 
<http://bibliodaze.com/2016/05/you-ruined-my-childhood-the-fetishizing-of-nostalgia/>
”?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fyour-film-has-ruined-my-childhood-why-nostalgia-trumps-logic-on-remakes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce82aea25d480a3563598eed66080a8172df8446%2F129_0_1454_873%2F1454.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Your%20film%20has%20ruined%20my%20childhood!'%20Why%20nostalgia%20trumps%20logic%20on%20remakes%20%7C%20Dean%20Burnett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fyour-film-has-ruined-my-childhood-why-nostalgia-trumps-logic-on-remakes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Your%20film%20has%20ruined%20my%20childhood%21%27%20Why%20nostalgia%20trumps%20logic%20on%20remakes%20%7C%20Dean%20Burnett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fyour-film-has-ruined-my-childhood-why-nostalgia-trumps-logic-on-remakes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce82aea25d480a3563598eed66080a8172df8446%2F129_0_1454_873%2F1454.jpg>
 Attempts to make childhood favourites more modern and realistic can be quite 
disturbing, in fairness Photograph: Lula Carvalho/AP 
Obviously, this is an exaggeration. A modern film, no matter how bad, cannot 
retroactively ruin a childhood, not unless it somehow travels back in time and 
gets your parents hooked on class-A narcotics (althoughsome would argue 
<https://twitter.com/quinnnorton/status/735747941919395841> that The Phantom 
Menace <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0120915/> did exactly that). Nonetheless, 
there are several psychological quirks that would mean people get 
disproportionately angry and defensive about their childhood entertainments and 
are quick to use hyperbole.

For one, there’s a thing called the “reminiscence bump 
<https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/cusp/201210/the-reminiscence-bump>”, 
where memories obtained during childhood and early adulthood are actually more 
vivid and easier to recall than others. It makes sense; our brains have 
developed enough toactually form memories effectively 
<http://learnmem.cshlp.org/content/19/9/423.full>, but everything is still 
mostly new and vivid to us as we’ve not much prior experience, and we are still 
developing so the things we encounter will have more impact. The things we were 
drawn towards and enjoyed as children would therefore have a lasting impact, 
more so than many other things we encounter.

This ties into general nostalgia. Nostalgia is a seemingly universal 
psychological phenomenon which is actuallyvery powerful, for numerous reasons 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/09/science/what-is-nostalgia-good-for-quite-a-bit-research-shows.html?pagewanted=all>
. But it can actually betoo powerful in many ways, leading a majority of people 
to thinkthings are worse now than they were in the past 
<http://www.wbs.ac.uk/news/why-we-think-life-was-better-in-the-good-old-days/>, 
despite there being ample evidence to the contrary (e.g. invoking the “spirit 
of the Blitz <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-11213968>” to reference 
community togetherness and positivity, while overlooking the whole “constant 
risk of bombing and death” aspect).

This declinism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/head-quarters/2015/jan/16/declinism-is-the-world-actually-getting-worse>
 is nothing new, and studies have shown that the older you get, the more likely 
you are to remember positive elements than negative ones, the aptly-named
“positivity effect” <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23060825>. For older 
people, it’s memories of the war and times of strife. The younger generations, 
raised in more peaceful periods, it seems to be films and TV of our youth. A 
Twitter follower of mine Robert Ramsey pointed out that themodern generations 
are the first ones to be able to record or download their favourite 
entertainments <https://twitter.com/MothTwiceborn/status/735754211611152384> 
and watch them at will, thus keeping them fresh in the memory rather than 
fading over time.

This doesn’t quite explain the ridiculous zeal with which people (mostly men, 
if we’re honest) often react to any attempt to meddle with their treasured 
childhood viewing material. However, there are a few potential causes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fyour-film-has-ruined-my-childhood-why-nostalgia-trumps-logic-on-remakes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbb5e93d762a281189385642142feb73c0ed8649%2F0_33_2923_1754%2F2923.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Your%20film%20has%20ruined%20my%20childhood!'%20Why%20nostalgia%20trumps%20logic%20on%20remakes%20%7C%20Dean%20Burnett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fyour-film-has-ruined-my-childhood-why-nostalgia-trumps-logic-on-remakes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Your%20film%20has%20ruined%20my%20childhood%21%27%20Why%20nostalgia%20trumps%20logic%20on%20remakes%20%7C%20Dean%20Burnett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fyour-film-has-ruined-my-childhood-why-nostalgia-trumps-logic-on-remakes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbb5e93d762a281189385642142feb73c0ed8649%2F0_33_2923_1754%2F2923.jpg>
 Why is the CGI Jar Jar Binks clearly defined and Liam Neeson somewhat blurry 
in this picture? It’s as if even a still image of an actor wants to distance 
itself from this character. Photograph: Allstar/LUCASFILM 
The shows and films we liked as kids are, typically, self-contained. Nobody is 
making them anymore, so we can know “all” about them. Seeing every episode and 
iteration, having all the merchandise, that is a relatively simple way of 
achieving a goal. It can give usa sense of control 
<https://www.verywell.com/what-is-locus-of-control-2795434>, especially if we 
lack the ability to determine events in most other areas of our lives. Then 
someone who you don’t know, who didn’t consult you, comes along and adds new 
stuff, or reboots the whole thing? It may seem churlish or utterly 
inconsequential, but if you’re invested in your Ghostbusters fandom, then 
someone coming along and making new stuff can effectively lower yourstatus 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?hl=en&lr=&id=OC84AAAAIAAJ&oi=fnd&pg=PA17&dq=social+status+awareness&ots=GY8SkhU3X3&sig=-55Why7k-Ohe7DN2gWRz0jQ9oIE#v=onepage&q=social%20status%20awareness&f=false>
, reduce your sense of control, add uncertainty that you can’t address, all of 
which are things our brainsdon’t deal with 
<http://ir.lib.uwo.ca/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1014&context=hucjlm> very well
 
<https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/adventure-in-everything/201505/be-very-afraid-uncertainty-fear-and-achievement>
.

On top of this, the prominence in our memories of our childhood entertainment 
may mean they are a disproportionately large aspect of our identity. So, any 
attempt at updating or change could, in a weird way, be perceived as an attack 
on our identity. And people tendto react very negatively to such things 
<http://epubs.surrey.ac.uk/715101/3/2012%20Self%20identity%20threat_and_resistance_final.pdf>
.

Appeals to logic often don’t work. Surely the fans, many argue, will be happy 
that the thing they love is getting a new lease of life and the opportunity to 
gain a whole new audience of admirers? This makes logical sense, but overlooks 
some of the more dubious elements of the human psyche. Namely,scarcity and 
exclusivity is attractive 
<https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/automatic-you/201307/how-boost-desire-using-the-psychology-scarcity>
, so any attempt to make your favourite thing more accessible to the masses 
effectively devalues it, and therefore the fans will be upset. For examples, 
see the reaction from current Twitter users toany attempt by Twitter to attract 
new ones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/brain-flapping/2015/nov/04/hearts-attack-is-twitter-trying-to-kill-its-users>
.

It may be that only a minority group of die-hard fans have these extreme 
reactions to attempts to reboot or expand an existing property or franchise, 
but we’re all online now, so that’s all it takesbefore others will join in with 
the outrage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/brain-flapping/2015/apr/29/outrage-public-widespread-anger-is-so-common-psychology>
.

In summary, there are many underlying psychological processes that conspire to 
make people overreact in weird ways to something that should be innocuous. Or, 
to put it another way, there’s something strange, and it don’t look good.

Dean Burnett <https://twitter.com/garwboy> will be talking about his book The 
Idiot Brain 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Idiot-Brain-Neuroscientist-Explains-Really/dp/1783350814/ref=sr_1_1_twi_pap_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1464078803&sr=1-1>
with Robin Ince at the Guardian Live event in London on June 2nd 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/the-idiot-brain-with-dean-burnett-and-robin-ince-24403692100>
.

The Idiot Brain 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Idiot-Brain-Neuroscientist-Explains-Really/dp/1783350814/ref=tmm_pap_swatch_0?_encoding=UTF8&qid=1455958710&sr=1-1>
by Dean Burnett (Guardian Faber, £12.99). To order a copy for £7.99, go to 
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/370462/s/idiot-brain/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min. p&p of £1.99.
 