
I've been watching this show <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p01gkhtx>, 
about four girls at a south London comprehensive, since the first episode. It's
so funny and very true to life 
<http://www.radiotimes.com/episode/cpjpfw/some-girls--series-2---episode-4>. My 
school in east London is a bit tamer: we definitely wouldn't get away with 
being so rude to the teachers. But the writers do a great job of putting across 
what school life is like.

You get a very accurate sense of the pressures we're under as teenage girls. 
In one episode,Holli <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p00y78kd/profiles/holli> 
is pushed out of her friendship group, and starts being friends with another 
girl, Charlie, and her mates. She has to change to fit in: she dyes her hair 
and starts acting really differently. I've seen that happen: a girl not being 
sure of herself and feeling she has to change.

We get a lot about the girls' relationships with boys. I can't say any couples 
I know have ever had sex in a school cupboard – at least, as far as I know – 
but the show does look at the real issues around dating. We seeViva 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p00y78kd/profiles/viva>, the main character, 
at a party getting off with the head boy,Tyler 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p00y78kd/profiles/tyler>. He pressures her to 
go upstairs with him – he says he has condoms – but she doesn't want to. That 
kind of thing happens a lot. I really like the fact the programme shows the 
girls as strong and in control.

It's good that the show goes behind all the usual stereotypes about teenage 
life and looks at the things we really want to achieve. Viva is really 
ambitious: she wants to go to university and have a career. I sing and I'd like 
to have a career as a musician. It's also good that we see one of the girls, 
Saz, questioning her sexuality, and seeing that all her friends are OK with it. 
The same thing happened with someone I know, and that's how we all were.

Some other TV programmes about teenagers – like, say, Skins 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/skins> – feel so over the top: you can tell 
the writers are adults pretending to know what it's like to be young. Some 
Girls comes much closer to how life actually is. Not that there aren't some 
silly moments – like when Viva finds a dead teacher in a cupboard. That's 
certainly never happened to me.

• Some Girls is on BBC3 on Mondays.
 