
Just now the Hulme Town Hall is filled with the twittering of many canaries. 
It is the show of theManchester <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester> and 
Northern Counties Ornithological Society, the most important exhibition of cage 
birds in the kingdom. To the amateur it is astonishing to find to what an 
extent the breeding of canaries is carried. There are some dozens of distinct 
varieties, not to speak of the “mules” or cross-breeds between canaries and 
other kinds of birds.

One walks down long lanes lined on either side by little cages, each 
containing a small cheery yellow, green, or cinnamon coloured bird. There are 
more than 1,500 birds, whose niceties of tint and form are giving pleasure to 
the fanciers. The Norwich canaries are perhaps the most excellent as they are 
certainly the most numerous exhibits. The Norwich canary is known by his rich 
reddish-yellow breast. The aim of the fancier is to get as “warm” a colour as 
possible. Then there is the Lancashire canary, the “Lancashire coppy,” much 
affected in Rochdale and Oldham and thereabouts. This is the bird of a 
beautiful pure yellow, with a little round crest like a cap. The spangled 
lizard canary is a pretty fellow, too, with his neat, trim body and 
gold-coloured patch on the top of his head. Some lovers of canaries prefer the 
cinnamon breed, and they are certainly delightful creatures in their deep 
mellow coat.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fthe-northerner%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fbirds-ornithology-canaries-exhibition-canary-manchester%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0588915db6c10538320e9f5605ca658e5f42707%2F140_446_2967_1779%2F2967.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20big%20day%20in%20Manchester%20for%20bird%20fanciers%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%2027%20October%201906&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fthe-northerner%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fbirds-ornithology-canaries-exhibition-canary-manchester%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20big%20day%20in%20Manchester%20for%20bird%20fanciers%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%2027%20October%201906&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fthe-northerner%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fbirds-ornithology-canaries-exhibition-canary-manchester%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0588915db6c10538320e9f5605ca658e5f42707%2F140_446_2967_1779%2F2967.jpg>
 As well as being kept as pets, canaries were used also by UK miners to alert 
them to the presence of dangerous gases. Photograph: Laister/Getty Images 
The hue of some canaries is produced by special feeding – “colour-feeding,” as 
it is called. The natural colour of a canary is pale yellow. The Yorkshire bird 
has a very distinctive shape; he is long and slim, and like a narrow wedge of 
vivid yellow. His popularity is greatest in the Yorkshire towns, notably in 
Bradford and the district. There is also a green Yorkshire canary, specially 
favoured by the Liverpool fanciers, notable for his fine dark colour. A curious 
result of artificial selection is the Belgian canary. He has a kind of 
humped-back, the aim of the breeders being to produce a bird shaped like a 
half-moon, one curve from tail to beak. In this they are successful, but the 
result is not so much beautiful as interesting.

The part of the show devoted to “mules,” or cross-breeds, is well filled. 
Canaries are often crossed with goldfinches, and the product varies in a most 
surprising way. The fancier strives after a uniformity of colour in the “mule,” 
but it is rarely that he gets it. The same parents will produce strangely 
diverse offspring, and one member of the family may be coloured entirely 
differently to another. The pure goldfinches on show are a charming set – 
lively fellows, with a circle of deep red round the beak. This circle, or 
“blaze,” is what the breeder strives to attain in perfection. The goldfinch, 
one learns, is very popular in the homes of Lancashire working men. He is cheap 
and lives well in captivity, and, above all, he is a good singer. Among 
canaries, the Norwich variety sings the best.

Beside the canaries, there is an exhibition of British and foreign birds, 
including some lovely bullfinches from Warwickshire, and a kind of dark green 
linnet. The tropical birds are a delightful study, especially the tiny 
Australian finches – one a mere dot of bright crimson, another most delicately 
marked with yellow spots on red. A toucan, with a big rainbow-hued beak, and a 
gorgeous macaw give an exotic touch to the exhibition. A big archbishop 
tanager, coloured a sort of faint violet, is one of the beauties. Another 
tanager, from Cuba, is a great rarity, such a bird, it is said, has not been 
seen in this country for the last twenty years.
 