
Like most young boxers, I loved Rocky and Raging Bull. In fact, I've been a 
fan ofSylvester Stallone <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sylvester-stallone> 
and Robert de Niro since I was a kid. So I enjoyed this film, in which they 
play two retired boxers who come back to fight each other one last time. It's 
nothing like Rocky and Raging Bull, though. It's a comedy, very 
tongue-in-cheek: as long as you don't go along expecting a serious film, it's 
actually pretty funny.

The concept of a "grudge match" between two former rivals is certainly 
feasible. Chris Eubank and Nigel Benn are a good example.Boxing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> does get personal, especially if 
there's a major title at stake. Two older fighters would still tend to be 
evenly matched, too: what you don't see is an old fighter trying to make a 
comeback and taking on younger boxers. That would end horribly.

Razor, Stallone's character, has lost all his money and his fame. That is 
one of the downsides of boxing. But Razor has been duped out of his by a dodgy 
manager. This rings true, too: there's a lot of hangers-on in boxing, 
especially around the great heavyweights. You get guys like Larry Holmes, who 
haven't got a lot of money now; and others like George Foreman, who've invested 
wisely, put their names to certain brands, and done very well for themselves.

The training scenes are good, similar to stuff you'd see in a gym: chin-ups, 
padwork, speedball. Actors like the speedball: you can get decent at it in a 
couple of weeks, and it always looks impressive on screen. I've got to lean 
towards Stallone here. I'm sure he's had a lot of practice. In fact, for me he 
has the edge overall: he's in much better shape and seems to still have all his 
strength. But De Niro still manages some pretty nifty moves.
 