
I was blown up in Afghanistan in 2009 <https://www.army.mod.uk/news/24227.aspx>
. I had to have a leg amputated – and had the operation done while wearing a 
musical cockerel posing pouch. Black humour is what gets squaddies through 
dodgy times, so I loved seeing one of the characters in thiscomedy about a bomb 
disposal unit in Afghanistan <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b03n3bsz> being 
awarded the "jockstrap of destiny". I've never heard of that, nor a "filthiest 
bastard" award. But I have heard of "regimental showers". That's when a grotbag 
– a guy who never washes – gets given a shower with a firehose and a huge 
brush. As for racing pubic lice, I've never seen that either. But I have seen 
squaddies race spiders, scorpions and even poisonous snakes.

So even though it's a comedy, I found this show true to life – and I did two 
tours in Afghanistan, in a unit just like this one. I was a number two, in 
charge of making sure the commander had all the equipment he needed, just like
the character Towerblock 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b03n3bsz/profiles/towerblock>. People who 
aren't in the military might think comedy isn't the best way to show what war 
is like. I disagree, and most soldiers I know think Bluestone 42 is spot-on, 
too.

This isn't a serious exploration of bomb disposal, though, like The Hurt 
Locker. That's a good thing: I'd take Bluestone 42 overThe Hurt Locker 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0887912/> any day. And the action is pretty 
accurate. There's a scene where one of the guys tries to save an Afghan man 
from driving over a mine, but he can't get the car's handbrake to work. You do 
get things going wrong like that. I remember one guy accidentally let off a 
flare, a massive smoke-rocket, while my boss was defusing a device.

I've never seen an attractive female priest 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p014vls5/profiles/mary>, like the one they 
have in the show, but she does remind me of the average "tour princess". That's 
a woman who's maybe a six or seven back in the UK – but when she's out on tour, 
where there are so few other women around, she becomes an eight or nine. As I 
say, squaddie humour is pretty dark: you can find yourself in the middle of a 
firefight and end up laughing your head off.

• Daniel Whittingham works with the bomb disposal charity The Felix Fund 
<http://www.felixfund.org.uk> Bluestone 42 is on BBC3 on Thursdays.
 