
I first read Roald Dahl's book when I was five, and it took over my dreams. 
I'd go to sleep thinking about Willy Wonka's factory, imagining picking sweets 
off trees or eating mint-flavoured chocolate grass. When I founded my own 
company,Rococo <http://www.rococochocolates.com>, in 1983, I was thinking of 
Wonka, and of how to put fantasy and theatre into chocolate.

This new musical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jun/25/charlie-and-the-chocolate-factory-review>
, based onDahl's book <http://www.roalddahlfans.com/books/char.php>, manages to 
convey all that magic. It starts with an explanation of the chocolate-making 
process, with drawings by Quentin Blake. I enjoyed this – especially the part 
where the chocolatier steps in and starts turning the raw ingredients into 
something magical – but there were steps missing: the fermentation process, for 
instance, which takes place between the harvesting of cocoa beans and drying 
them out in the sun.

The design is incredible, especially Wonka's chocolate room, with its 
mint-flavoured grass and the river of chocolate. Rococo's factory in south 
London doesn't quite look like that, but we could certainly build a chocolate 
garden if we wanted to: among other things, we already make chocolate fish, 
lobsters, asparagus and mushrooms.

I wouldn't lay any claim to being like Willy Wonka myself – but my late 
colleague Mott Green, founder ofthe Grenada Chocolate Company 
<http://www.grenadachocolate.com/about.html>, certainly was. He was always 
inventing things, like a bicycle-powered winnowing machine, for removing cocoa 
beans' shells and cracking them into nibs. In the show, Charlie Bucket's dad 
powers their TV with a bicycle: I saw that and smiled, thinking of Mott.

It's a shame they haven't recreated the sweet shop that so enchants Charlie in 
the book. In the show, the chocolate is sold from a stall, which isn't the 
same. I remember how exciting it was going into a sweet shop as a child. We try 
to recreate that same excitement in our shops, especially at Easter, when we 
have big window displays. Children come in and their mouths hang open. 
Afterwards, we often have to clean the drool off the counters.
 