
One of the main differences between humans and animals is that we compulsively 
tell stories – to ourselves and to others. The question of why this should 
be remains a mystery. Did our need to create narratives simply arise out of our 
facility for language? Is it nothing more than a form of rarefied 
entertainment? And do all the global and historical stories, in their multitude 
of forms, have anything in common – some fundamental strand of shared DNA that 
endures to this day?

Many thinkers, writers and critics have tried to identify the underlying 
meaning, origin and structure of stories, from Kipling, Goethe andJoseph 
Campbell <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joseph_Campbell> right back to the 
original dramatic theorist, Aristotle, who inPoetics 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Poetics_(Aristotle)> came up with the still 
extant three-act structure, along with catharsis, denouement, reversal (
peripeteia) and much more besides.

The closest we have in the contemporary world to Poetics may be the classic 
textStory by Robert McKee <http://mckeestory.com/>. The so-called “God of 
Story” (as Vice magazine dubbed him 
<http://www.vice.com/en_uk/read/the-god-of-story-0000339-v21n6>) has been 
explaining his theory of how and why dramatic narratives emerge for 35 years, 
to the fascination of playwrights and screenwriters – his alumni have so far 
mustered 60 Oscar wins, including, among many others, William Goldman (Butch 
Cassidy and the Sundance Kid) Paul Haggis 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0353673/?ref_=fn_al_nm_1>, Peter Jackson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/peterjackson>, John Cleese  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/john-cleese>(who has attended the story 
seminar three times) and the entire writing staff ofPixar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/pixar>. However, McKee receives a more 
sceptical response from most novelists, at least, most non-genre novelists like 
myself.

Jonathan Coe <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jonathancoe>, for instance, 
straightforwardly rejects McKee’s approach to storytelling: “For me, the 
essence of creative writing – whether it’s in the form of a novel, a play or 
a screenplay – is absolute freedom. So I have an instinctive horror of all 
systems which try to reduce writing to a series of rules to do with three-act 
structures and narrative arcs. It’s a sure recipe for formulaic writing.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fcreative-writing-lesson-god-of-story-robert-mckee-tim-lott%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7c2decabe3f4f2c410956948b840858a5b822e3%2F0_328_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20creative%20writing%20lesson%20from%20the%20%E2%80%98God%20of%20Story%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fcreative-writing-lesson-god-of-story-robert-mckee-tim-lott%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20creative%20writing%20lesson%20from%20the%20%E2%80%98God%20of%20Story%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fcreative-writing-lesson-god-of-story-robert-mckee-tim-lott%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7c2decabe3f4f2c410956948b840858a5b822e3%2F0_328_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 ‘He has struck terror into my heart’: Esther Freud. Photograph: Murdo Macleod 
for the Guardian 
Esther Freud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/aug/16/esther-freud-houses-ghosts-inspired-new-book>
 agrees. “McKee has always struck terror into my heart with the idea that 
something important and gripping has to happen on page 27,” she says. “Actors 
and writers I knew were always going to his courses, but my reality is that 
there are no real rules with writing – you just have to get on with it, and 
trust your instincts.”

Sadie Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/books/sadie-jones>, who attempted for 
several years to make it as a screenwriter before she turned to novels, was the 
only writer I talked to who showed some sympathy for McKee. “When I was younger 
I entirely rejected the notion of being taught to write, and McKee’s name made 
me run in horror,” she says. “I later realised we can reject or accept the 
teachings of others as we choose. It’s a question of confidence. Insecurity 
doesn’t want to be lectured, but if we want to break the rules we can do it 
more thoroughly if we master them first.”

It is instructive that all three writers use the words “horror” or “terror” 
when talking about the “rules” of storytelling. It seems to indicate that 
novelists don’t merely dislike McKee, they fear him.

***

An intensive inquiry into the nature and structure of narrative, McKee’s 
“Story seminar” has been running in one form or another since he first gave the 
lecture at the University of Southern California in 1983.

McKee credits himself as inventing the language of Hollywood – it is not an 
empty boast

McKee credits himself with inventing the language of Hollywood – with its talk 
of the “mid-point climax”, the “inciting incident” and the “negation of the 
negation”, a phrase that originated with Hegel, but in movies means something 
like “the ultimate negative”: a fallen hero who is not merely defeated but 
wants to die, or a character who doesn’t simply lose faith in God but begins to 
hate God.

His claim is not an empty boast. So prominent is McKee in film-making circles 
that he had the rare honour, for a writing teacher, to be depicted at some 
length – satirically, but not without tenderness –by Brian Cox in the Charlie 
Kaufman-written filmAdaptation <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JHVqxD8PNq8>. 
Kaufman, not incidentally, also distrusts “craft”. At a 2011 lecture at the 
BFI, he said: “I think craft is a dangerous thing,” suggesting that, at heart, 
it was “very hard to separate … from marketing”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fcreative-writing-lesson-god-of-story-robert-mckee-tim-lott%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F261f233578f3182689e362f3b75424cd5826134b%2F0_0_2496_1676%2F2496.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20creative%20writing%20lesson%20from%20the%20%E2%80%98God%20of%20Story%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fcreative-writing-lesson-god-of-story-robert-mckee-tim-lott%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20creative%20writing%20lesson%20from%20the%20%E2%80%98God%20of%20Story%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fcreative-writing-lesson-god-of-story-robert-mckee-tim-lott%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F261f233578f3182689e362f3b75424cd5826134b%2F0_0_2496_1676%2F2496.jpg>
 Nicolas Cage in Adaptation from 2002 Photograph: Rex Shutterstock 
Sitting among something like 200 would-be writers, directors, producers and 
editors in the audience of a three-day story seminar at Regent’s College in 
London, I intend to find out if this scepticism is justified. A teacher of 
story myself, formerly with theFaber Academy <https://www.faberacademy.co.uk/> 
and now for theGuardian Masterclasses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-masterclasses>, I do not have the same 
deep aversion to “craft” as some of my peers. But McKee is the most pure – 
perhaps even puritanical – of all modern story theorists, and I don’t expect to 
find his fundamentalism to my taste.

The audience has come from all over the world – from Australia, Thailand, 
Italy, Barcelona, even Siberia. They are mostly in their 20s and 30s. McKee, 
75, shambles about the stage cradling a cup of coffee. A heavy brow embroidered 
with impressive eyebrows and a full head of hair give him a prophetic aspect. 
He reminds me of Charlton Heston playing Moses 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Charlton+Heston+playing+Moses&espv=2&biw=1898&bih=712&tbm=isch&tbo=u&source=univ&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwj7r4nz1frOAhXHJsAKHc5YB0kQsAQIMg>
 – a similarity underlined by his course literature offering his “Ten 
Commandments of Storytelling”, which include “Thou shalt not make life easy for 
thine protagonist” and “Thou shalt take thine story into the depth and breadth 
of human experience”.

McKee is a tartar about maintaining order and timekeeping. He makes it clear 
that if you turn up late, you will not be admitted. If you use a mobile phone, 
you will be fined. If you use it more than once you will be excluded. There’s a 
£10 fine for talking.

He reiterates these amiable threats sitting on a high stool, legs dangling 
in front of him like late-period Sinatra or the Irish comicDave Allen 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ezUZqPSjd-4>. He does, in fact, consider 
himself a comic – “a comic says the world is shit. And you have to destroy it.”

He begins by making some fairly grandiose statements: “What we do as 
storytellers is crucial to the success of our species on the planet”… “All 
stories say how and why life changes. They equip us to live.” He poses crucial 
questions at the start of his lectures: “What is a story? What do all the story 
cultures and genres have in common?”, and spends the next three days trying to 
answer them, beginning with this suggestion: “All stories have same universal 
form. Not formula. There is no formula. But it’s like saying the form of music 
is remarkably simple – just 12 notes on a scale.”

Having started exactly on time the lecture continues from 9am in the morning 
to 8pm, with only three short breaks per day, two of which McKee works through, 
taking questions from individuals. His fundamental insight concerns the 
relationship between storytelling and the human psyche – how a story is 
structured basically reflects how a human mind, and a human life, is structured.

Every lived moment is an event taking place at a number of levels – 
interpersonal, internal, societal, institutional

Drama, for him, arises when we make “value-laden choices under pressure”. It 
is through these choices that we find out who we are – since all of us live 
under the cover of masks, which hide our selves from others, and even 
ourselves. Every lived moment of human life is a multilayered event taking 
place at a number of different levels – interpersonal, internal, societal, 
institutional. Story, then, is the sea in which all of us swim, and dramatists, 
screenwriters and novelists create “story” with the boring bits of life cut 
out. In story nothing moves forward except through conflict, and stories are 
metaphors for life – because to be alive is to be in perpetual conflict.

To grasp how McKee actually talks it is necessary to use italics extensively, 
as he constantly emphasises – in his slightly abrasive Detroit drawl – the key 
words in any passage of speech.

“Story design means choices – boiling down from life, far more material [than] 
you could ever use. A story is a series ofevents that have been chosen then 
composed. Like composing music.

“An event is a meaningful choice; that is, a choice with a value at stake. 
Values are at the heart of storytelling. A binary of human experience, 
positive or negative, truth and lies, love and hate, war and peace – all are
binaries. They shift charge constantly. An event – in story terms – equals 
meaningful change in the value-charged condition of a character’s life, 
achieved through conflict.”

McKee doesn’t confine himself to talking about writing: he wanders off-piste 
frequently. The course literature warns the audience to be aware that “Mr McKee 
has strong opinions on religion, politics and society and uses strong 
language.” This is not an understatement. What follows is a selection of quotes 
from the lecture, all of which are extracts from larger anecdotal reflections.

“People are not equal. If you’re a liberal at 30 you have no brain.”

“If you show your woman your inner crybaby she’s out the door. Never say what 
you deeply feel and think to your woman.”

“A lot of women’s films just say, ‘All men are shit’ – can you imagine a man 
writing something the same?”

If McKee’s tongue is in his cheek – and it may well be – he conceals it well. 
But his predilection for winding up his audience does little to dilute what I 
am beginning to realise is the strength and clarity of his teaching.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fcreative-writing-lesson-god-of-story-robert-mckee-tim-lott%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8034e1ffb778d46ccac2c43979364571fb02200d%2F0_249_2961_2203%2F2961.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20creative%20writing%20lesson%20from%20the%20%E2%80%98God%20of%20Story%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fcreative-writing-lesson-god-of-story-robert-mckee-tim-lott%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20creative%20writing%20lesson%20from%20the%20%E2%80%98God%20of%20Story%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fcreative-writing-lesson-god-of-story-robert-mckee-tim-lott%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8034e1ffb778d46ccac2c43979364571fb02200d%2F0_249_2961_2203%2F2961.jpg>
 Humphrey Bogart and Ingrid Bergman in Casablanca Photograph: Ronald Grant 
Archive 
At the conclusion of the third day, when he has finished his scene-by-scene 
deconstruction ofCasablanca, he sings, in a slightly quavery voice, the theme 
tune of the movie,“As Time Goes By” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d22CiKMPpaY>. This song, he believes, points 
to the underlying message of the film, the tension between Being and Becoming – 
that is, the idea of holding on to what is permanent within you while you are 
forced into incessant change by circumstance.

“You can have both – if you learn to love. And that is what I wish you all.”

With these words, the three-day seminar is concluded. He promptly receives a 
standing ovation from the entire audience.

***

When we meet, after the course, in McKee’s sparsely furnished rented flat in 
Chelsea, I ask first about the element of his lecture I found particularly 
fascinating – the relationship of life as it is lived to the scene-by-scene 
dramatic structure of a story.

“In film, there’s this constant irony of expectation not meeting result. Out 
of this turning point comes the opposite – a turning point for the better. Then 
the positive shifts to the negative almost automatically. No wonder primitives 
believed in the unseen hand, because this dynamic is so relentless,” McKee 
says. “We focus in story on moments when life is interesting … when the world 
reacts in a way which, in retrospect, you think you should have seen coming. 
Human beings have imagination and that makes the shit really hit the fan. 
Because you also have animal instincts. Therefore you have inner conflicts. 
It’s not only the world that doesn’t react the way you expect: you don’t react 
the way you expect.”

Story, for McKee, is a consolatory refraction of reality. By witnessing our 
own true inner dilemmas realistically on screen or page we receive a form of 
relief. But it is also, at some level, an exercise in denial. “Denial makes the 
world go round,” he says. “If you live in unvarnished reality for one minute 
you have to fantasise … it’s just too awful. You have to deny it. Story 
mediates the contradictions that make life unlivable. It is an evolutionary 
adaptation to consciousness.”

Is this element of denial – in many Hollywood films in particular – the reason 
so many fiction writers are nervous about the dynamics, or even existence, of 
story structure? McKee looks scornful – an expression that comes easily to him. 
“That’s because they think ‘art is instinctive’. Which is fucking nonsense. You 
don’t want constipation from analysis, you don’t want to get in your own way; 
but you have to learn your craft. ‘It won’t stop you being a genius’ asDelacroix
 <https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/artists/eugene-delacroix> said.”

Is that also true for literary, non-genre novelists?

“Every writer is a genre writer. If you don’t know the genre, the audience 
does. There’s no such thing as non-generic story; if you think that, your head 
is up your ass.”

When I suggest there are elements of his lecture with which many people might 
not agree, feminists in particular, his voice rises several decibels.

“Really? You think I’m not a feminist? I say just as many critical things 
about male behaviour, but it goes unnoticed. I treat people in a universal way. 
Women are just as fucked up as men, but you’re not allowed to say that. Once 
you say it you’re perceived as an anti-feminist. Women cannot be criticised. 
Well, guess what …”

He leaves the sentence unfinished.

Does he really believe that if you’re liberal at 30 you have no brain?

Anything that puts meaning and beauty into the world in the form of story 
helps people live with more peace and purpose

“My attitude is, they’re both wrong. If liberalism becomes extreme and 
sentimental and unthinking it’s a dead end – same with the right wing. I hate 
them all. I hate institutions.

He has spent so much of his life doing these lectures, rather than actually 
writing screenplays. What’s his motivation?

“Life is absurd. But there is one meaningful thing, one inarguable thing, and 
that is that there is suffering. Fine writing helps alleviate that suffering – 
and anything that puts meaning and beauty into the world in the form of story, 
helps people to live with more peace and purpose and balance, is deeply 
worthwhile.”

McKee’s political opinions may certainly appear overripe to most contemporary 
readers, but he doesn’t give a damn, which is perhaps one of the things that 
makes him a good teacher. At the end of his seminar I was handed a piece of 
paper on which I was asked to write the most important thing I learned on his 
course. A great number of possibilities crossed my mind – particularly how a 
narrative only progresses through conflict and meaningful change (with a value 
at stake), or how to show deep character (“choice of action in pursuit of a 
desire under the pressure of life”); but in the end I decided very quickly. 
“Everything is subtext,” I wrote. This is really what McKee teaches above all 
else – that the best drama always happens below the surface.

As I hack away at my eighth novel, his voice is now in my head much of the 
time. If McKee is the God of Story, then I am no longer an agnostic – I am 
a convert.

• Tim Lott offers mentoring for writers at theguardian.com/masterclasses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-masterclasses/2015/oct/28/one-to-one-mentoring-for-authors-with-tim-lott>
. Robert McKee’s new book,Dialogue, is published by Twelve.
 