
When it comes to lumberjacks, Monty Python has a lot to answer for. I've lost 
count of the number of times people have responded to a question about what I 
do for a living (I usually say I manage trees) with: "Ah, you're a lumberjack – 
and you're OK!"

I hope this show <http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whatson/timber-74074>, by 
Canadian circus troupe Cirque Alfonse, will help people see there's more to 
lumberjacks thanthat song <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xToPCaNxaow> – 
because it's abrilliant, energetic celebration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jul/15/timber-review> of North 
America's lumberjack heritage. Unlike forestry in Britain, which was usually 
conducted as part of the management of country estates, lumberjacking over 
there goes back to the first settlers, who began cutting trees that had been 
growing untouched for thousands of years. These were redwoods, firs and 
conifers – and they were seriously big, possibly as big as the California 
redwood that's considered the world's tallest tree today.

Early lumberjacks would climb using spiked boots and a rope, then cut off tops 
using axes and saws. So they had to be fit, strong and athletic, with a good 
head for heights – just like the acrobats in this show. In fact, Timber! made 
me see the parallels between acrobats and lumberjacks. We work with a good deal 
more attention to safety, though. I would never try juggling axes, naturally, 
but we all still need to be able to balance and climb.

Several of the stunts echo old lumberjacking ways. One involves balancing on 
two rotating logs – lumberjacks would do exactly that to transport logs 
downriver. And a wholetimber sports 
<http://www.stihlusa.com/stihl-timbersports/> culture has developed out of the 
job – things likepole-climbing <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nJam33t3_1E>, 
which involves climbing an 80-100ft trunk as fast as you can. Back in 1995, I 
was the world champion over 80ft.

I can't say all lumberjacks and foresters have beards, like these guys, but 
the show does capture something of the joy of working with trees, and the 
relationship between man and forest. They've also tapped cleverly into today's 
nostalgia for lumberjacking. In these days of big logging companies and 
mechanisation, some skills have been lost. This is a very entertaining way of 
keeping them alive.

• Jeremy Barrell runs Barrell Tree Consultancy <http://barrelltreecare.co.uk> 
 