
No film by Andrei Tarkovsky <https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrei-tarkovsky>
 is anything other than a daunting prospect. He yields up his secrets slowly, 
massively and with the utter conviction of a filmmaker who knows he is out of 
step with his times and does not regret it. You have to draw a deep breath and 
plunge into his world with as much concentration as he has fashioned it.

The Sacrifice, which looks more and more like his testament, is no exception. 
Filmed in Sweden and using mostly Swedes both behind and in front of the 
cameras, it will inevitably seem like an incursion into Bergman territory. But, 
in fact, it is so Russian that it almost hurts, in its warning thunder, its 
call for sacrifice, and in its final intimation that there could just be hope.

This is a world we all secretly dread, on the very edge of nuclear disaster. 
It is part of our corporate nightmare. And, as in a nightmare, where you are 
falling and falling, there is the half-waking feeling that something can stop 
the descent if only we could will it strongly enough. That something, in 
Tarkovsky's terms, is faith, which can only be obtained by blasting through the 
dream into reality and then having the courage to change everything. Faith 
heals only with the most intense effort. Spirituality triumphs over materialism 
only after a bloody battle.

In The Sacrifice, a middle-aged intellectual, celebrating his birthday with 
family and friends at his isolated home by the sea, faces the prospect of the 
holocaust with them and strikes a bargain with the Almighty. He will give up 
everything, including his cherished son, in return for the chance to start 
again. After burning the house down, he is regarded as mad and taken away, but 
his son, a deaf mute, finds his voice and survives to water the tree his father 
had planted.

The film is full of those lengthy, intricate and virtuoso takes that, with 
symbolism as well as heightened realism, seek to post a stage in the argument. 
Erland Josephson plays the writer with utterly dogged concentration. Susan 
Fleetwood as his wife and Allan Edwall as the local postman provide the fire 
with which to melt some of Josephson's ice, but there is little real warmth in 
the film, because that is not what Tarkovsky is after. Needless to say, it is 
supremely well-fashioned.

Exceptional works of art like this are seldom flawless but equipped with so 
defiant a sense of their necessity that, even when you are bored, you feel it 
is a fault of concentration and not of what is actually up there on the screen. 
They trample you half to death with their superior strength of will and 
single-mindedness of purpose.

If you can even begin to cope with it, the dividends are immense and lasting. 
And even if you can't, there are whole sequences which will hold you like a 
vice. But for his death last week, I would have said that no one in the cinema 
at present can begin to compete with Tarkovsky at this level. And now there is 
a huge void. We have lost a hard master, but a master he was.

Â· This article is drawn from the archive at the Newsroom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/newsroom>
 