
I have no idea why Ben Elton chose to set this TV comedy 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b01s5l2y> in the health and safety department 
of a council called "Basilricky", clearly a play on Basildon and Billericay. 
Well, I've been the health and safety manager atBasildon borough council 
<http://www.basildon.gov.uk/index.aspx?articleid=1> for 10 years, and I can 
safely say it's nothing like this. It definitely wasn't filmed round here, and 
I'm nothing like the main character, Gerald Wright. I'm much better looking, 
for a start.

Neither am I anything like as pernickety. In the first episode, Gerald has a 
go at his daughter about the way she's stacked the dishwasher. I don't even 
have a dishwasher, and if I did, I wouldn't make a fuss about something so 
unimportant. I can't say I haven't come across people in health and safety who 
do take their interest in regulation a bit too far – but for most of us, it's 
all about making balanced judgments about significant risks. If someone came 
over to me and asked for a risk assessment for a tube of Tippex, I'd probably 
screw it up and throw it out.

I must admit, though, that I am guilty of using acronyms. I certainly don't 
use one called "BALLS UP", but the titles of most health and safety legislation 
and industry norms do tend to get shortened. TheProvision And Use of Work 
Equipment Regulations 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/1998/2306/contents/made>, for example, get 
called "PUWER". I'm quite often stopped in a meeting by somebody saying, "What 
does that mean?"

In the first episode, Gerald and his team set out to reduce the height of a 
sleeping policeman. That's a major inaccuracy: the highways department looks 
after roads, not health and safety. And we haven't seen anything in the show so 
far about the occupational health side of the job, which is a large part of 
what we do.

I did find the programme funny, but unfortunately it reflects a lot of the 
myths about health and safety. Every month, it seems like there's a new 
"elf'n'safety" story – fromkids being made to wear eye protection during conker 
fights <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/england/cumbria/3712764.stm>; to banning 
Pancake Day races 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/1577530/Health-and-safety-flattens-pancake-race.html>
. The fact is that health and safety professionals do not usually make these 
decisions. I never stop anything going ahead if I can possibly help it. The way 
I see it, we run nuclear power plants – surely we can run a safe event?

• The Wright Way is on BBC1 on Tuesdays.
 