
 In the two decades I've worked as a hypnotherapist, the biggest myth I've 
encountered is that we mess with people's minds. It's completely unfounded. 
Hypnosis isn't about disappearing into another realm and handing control to 
someone else. It's simply a deep state of relaxation, through which you can 
free yourself from certain behaviour patterns, negative thought processes or 
phobias.

Unfortunately, this film directed by Danny Boyle 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/mar/28/trance-review> – in which a Harley 
Street hypnotherapist, Dr Elizabeth Lamb (Rosario Dawson 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/video/2012/sep/25/rosario-dawson-1bn-rising-video>
), works with an art expert, Simon (James McAvoy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/jamesmcavoy>), to find out where he put a 
stolen painting – will do nothing to dispel this stereotype. It feels 20 years 
out of date: we're right back to the cliche of the swinging watch.

Trance initially shows that hypnosis can free a person from a raft of 
psychological challenges. We see Dr Lamb working with a client who struggles 
with obesity, a fear of flying, and panic attacks – all of which can be helped 
by hypnosis. I wasn't impressed with the upright chair she had her patients 
sitting in, though. A good hypnotherapist chair will cradle you, so you feel 
like you're floating.

Some patients do come looking to recover a memory. Usually it's related to 
trauma: an embarrassing situation that has given them the habit of blushing, 
for instance. But I did once help a woman find her engagement ring; and the 
police often use hypnotherapists to help witnesses recover key information like 
car numberplates. I've never heard of a hypnotherapist helping find a stolen 
painting, though.

Dr Lamb proves a malign influence on Simon – and the film seems to suggest 
anybody working as a hypnotherapist is intrinsically sinister. This is unfair; 
we're here to help, to heal. Hypnotherapy is ripe for demystification and 
respectability. And as for a romantic involvement with a patient – that's 
completely unacceptable. Anyone who crossed that boundary would be immediately 
struck off.

• Deborah Marshall-Warren <http://www.youtube.com/user/Experthypnotherapy> is 
deputy chair of theNational Hypnotherapy Society 
<http://www.nationalhypnotherapysociety.org>. Trance is out now.
 