
Gentleman’s agreement?

 There are times when you are reminded of how young the A-League is. On 
Saturday, in a situation that can only be seen as complete amateur hour, new 
Central Coast Mariners recruit Fabio Ferreira was left out of the squadagainst 
his old side Adelaide United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/07/central-coast-mariners-get-off-canvas>
. It was the so-called “gentleman’s agreement” between Mariners coach Phil Moss 
and Reds boss Josep Gombau that Ferreira could move to Gosford on the condition 
that he wouldn’t play against Adelaide unless they faced each other in the 
finals. Widely criticised – Fox Sports pundit Ned Zeliclabelled it “pathetic” 
<https://twitter.com/NedZelic/status/563609099363835904> – one wonders why the 
Mariners let it happen at all. In Ferreira’sown words 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/sport/football/central-coast-mariners-recruit-fabio-ferreira-frustrated-by-agreement-that-could-stop-him-facing-adelaide/story-fnk6rl6i-1227210750411?nk=642d0a01a293251b0e92397bdb0849fa>
 in the lead up to the match: “I don’t agree with it but both coaches came to 
this agreement. I cannot do anything about it. Believe me I want to play and 
what difference will it make? But there’s nothing I can do about it. It’s not 
going to change anything...just play me, that’s what I want...far out.”

Victory shine in comfortable win over City in Melbourne derby
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/07/victory-shine-in-comfortable-3-0-win-in-the-melbourne-derby>
Ange back home for a romper Melbourne derby

It might have been the biggest game of the round, but it was slightly odd to 
see Ange Postecoglou and the Asian Cup presented to the crowd in Melbourne and 
nowhere else. Ange, of course, is on a well-deserved break in his hometown, and 
so perhaps it was simply a matter of logistics. In any event it was a fitting 
spectacle for the VIPs as Victory totally outclassed City in their 3-0 win. 
Besart Berisha, Kosta Barbarouses, Fahid Ben Khalfallah and Gui Finkler shared 
the goals and assists, illustrating the immense value of Victory’s foreign 
imports. Perth Glory, of course, must be considered the team to beat after 
their tremendous start to the season, but Victory’s attacking stocks are surely 
the best in the league. Thirty-four goals in the opening 16 rounds is arecord 
<https://twitter.com/foxsportsstats/status/564558423186886656> for any team in 
A-League history.

Asian players in the A-League

Last Monday, Football Federation Australia announced that it had scrapped its 
plans to reduce the number of foreign players from five to four. In what was 
widely seen as a victory for the clubs, any change to the number of visa 
players will be shelved until 2017. Just days after the Asian Cup final, many 
have asked what role an Asia-specific visa player might have played as a major 
legacy item. In my experience of speaking to fans in the Korean, Iranian and 
Iraqi communities, for example, a targeted Asian visa player could go a long 
way in engaging Asian communities still yet to pick up an A-League club. But 
the attitude from FFA has been consistent – it is up to the clubs, not the 
governing body, to scout and recruit Asian players. With many of the other AFC 
nations creating opportunities for Australian players via their “3+1” policy (
including Mitch Duke who leaves for Japan on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/09/mitchell-duke-leaves-central-coast-mariners>
), this approach is short-sighted at best, and pig-headed at worst, but at 
least there seems to be some movement by the clubs. Western Sydney Wanderers, 
Melbourne City and Newcastle Jets all had new Asian recruits in their squads 
over the weekend – one from Japan, one from Singapore and one from South Korea. 
Let’s hope, in the face of FFA indecision, the new imports perform and 
encourage more clubs to look at players in our own region.

Nine-man Sydney FC upset Perth as Glory lose ground at top of A-League
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/08/a-league-perth-sydney-match-report>
A strange slip in the west

No team has been more consistently hard to beat at home this season than Perth 
Glory <https://www.theguardian.com/football/perthglory>, and so it was peculiar 
to see Sydney FC secure a 3-1 win at NIB Stadium on Saturday night. Glory’s new 
recruit Denis Kramer had a mixed debut, giving away a penalty and scoring a 
late goal, and the match ended in bizarre fashion with two Sydney players and 
one Perth player sent off. The double red card for Jacques Faty and Dino 
Djulbic late in the first half was perhaps the most peculiar incident 
considering it seemed to be simply a heated exchange of views. A stern talking 
to from the referee, perhaps, possibly worthy of a yellow card, but a red? At 
least both were sent from the field and so neither team could cry foul. Unable 
to come back in the last 20 minutes despite having a man advantage, it’s 
certainly no time to panic for Perth, but as they face their bogey side 
Adelaide next week, another loss might be cause for slight concern.

Some uncertainty in an otherwise predictable season

In a season where top and bottom of the ladder have been quickly separated, 
like the liquid and the sediment in an organic orange juice, this was a round 
to keep the league interesting. Fifth-placed Sydney FC defeated top of the 
table Perth Glory away from home,eighth placed Central Coast Mariners eked out 
a win over second-placed Adelaide United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/07/central-coast-mariners-get-off-canvas>
, whileninth-placed Western Sydney Wanderers claimed their first win of the 
season against high-flyers Wellington Phoenix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/08/western-sydney-wanderers-end-winless-run-with-victory-over-wellington>
. Without a system of promotion and relegation, and thus no penalty for 
mediocrity, these are the kind of results that are necessary for fans to remain 
interested in the back end of the A-League season.
 