
On Friday morning, the bookies assume, there will be a new Conservative MP for 
Witney, the constituency suddenly vacated by David Cameron when he resigned 
last month. While few doubt that the Tory candidate,Robert Courts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/22/robert-courts-chosen-tory-candidate-david-cameron-constituency>
, will win, it is likely he will have no more than 40% of the vote, where his 
predecessor won 60%.

Courts faces a strong Liberal Democrat challenge and an equally strong Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> one. These two candidates will 
split the not-Conservative vote and allow Courts to become another name in the 
long succession of Tory MPs for west Oxfordshire. His victory will be taken as 
an endorsement of Theresa May’s divisive and sometimes dangerous rhetoric about 
Brexit. Those who oppose both the style and substance of what she says will be 
weakened. This is not an attempt to rerun the referendum or overturn the 
popular will, it is about making sure that leaving Europe inflicts as little 
collateral damage as possible.

Bernie Sanders endorses his brother in race to replace David Cameron
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/11/bernie-sanders-endorses-his-brother-larry-in-race-to-replace-david-cameron>
Now just imagine what a message could have been sent if Labour and the Lib 
Dems – and perhaps the Greens too – had run a single candidate to campaign just 
on a pro-single market, pro-migrant, pro-refugee ticket. These are issues that 
many voters in Witney, a constituency that voted to remain in the EU by 54% to 
46%, care about deeply. These are people who trek into Oxford to joinRefugees 
Welcome 
<https://en-gb.fievent.com/e/let-the-children-in-refugees-welcome/4534089> 
marches like the one last week, and who support the local council’sAsylum 
Welcome <http://www.westoxon.gov.uk/residents/communities/help-for-refugees/> 
work.

But instead, even though the two main challengers are actually working 
together on the council to set up a community transport company to replace 
newly axed bus services, for the past three weeks they have been fighting each 
other over the sterile territory of who’s to blame for the cuts. What an 
indictment this byelection will be of British politics’ destructive preference 
for the narcissism of small differences.

Over the next two years, Britain will be remade by a government with a working 
majority of 12. This new country that is being born will be out of Europe, its 
territorial integrity under threat from nationalism and its outlook narrow and 
sometimes xenophobic. It is a place where millions of people will find 
themselves ill at ease. Proof of identity will become part of everyday life, 
not just an inconvenience for under-25s at a party. And the first serious 
opportunity to challenge its direction is taken as the opportunity to debate 
local buses.

It is typical of the reductionist style of politics that has undermined the 
capacity of Westminster to represent the whole country. It may be why people 
who ran street stalls during the referendum campaign report that time after 
time they found bewilderment about what was at stake. This is the lesson: if 
you treat voters as if they are nothing but a compound of self-interested 
behaviours, then that’s what you get.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fleft-united-witney-theresa-mays-britain-byelection-lib-dems-labour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb3c238261e79ba3a31bdbeff3a0abaf0391c07a%2F0_0_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20left%20united%20in%20Witney%20could%20have%20changed%20Theresa%20May%E2%80%99s%20Britain%20%20%7C%20Anne%20Perkins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fleft-united-witney-theresa-mays-britain-byelection-lib-dems-labour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20left%20united%20in%20Witney%20could%20have%20changed%20Theresa%20May%E2%80%99s%20Britain%20%20%7C%20Anne%20Perkins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fleft-united-witney-theresa-mays-britain-byelection-lib-dems-labour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb3c238261e79ba3a31bdbeff3a0abaf0391c07a%2F0_0_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 David Cameron with his wife, Samantha, just before he resigned. Photograph: 
Geoff Caddick/AFP/Getty Images 
The EU referendum should have left voters in no doubt about the power of their 
vote.Byelections <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/byelections>, held at 
critical moments such as this one, can do something more subtle but just as 
powerful. Cameron is far too tactical a politician not to have been aware of 
the hold that a few thousand voters can exert over a government, not least one 
embarking on the fraught and uncertain route to Brexit. A campaign that 
challenged May’s determination to remake Britain by executive fiat, and 
demanded instead that parliament be allowed its central role in shaping the 
country’s future could have helped to influence wider public opinion and the 
political context.

In the 1930s, perhaps the last period when the national mood was so uncertain, 
byelections became a way of demonstrating opposition to government policy. 
Depression, economic collapse and the rise of fascism had split the Labour 
party, destroyed the Liberals and left the country in the control of a single 
party.

In 1933, after the Fulham East byelection was won by John Wilmot, a pacifist 
Labour candidate, Stanley Baldwin was persuaded not to campaign for rearmament. 
Five years later, after the “peace in our time” Munich agreement in 1938, a 
series of byelections – most famously in Oxford and Bridgwater – became in 
effect plebiscites on Neville Chamberlain’s policy of appeasement.

The main opposition parties were as reluctant to stand a single candidate then 
as now. A Labour MP who came to support the anti-appeasement candidate in 
Bridgwatersummed up the attitude 
<http://vernonbartlett.co.uk/which-side-are-you-on/the-result/>: “I have not 
departed one iota from my Labour principles. When the campaign is over I shall 
go back again to the party to which I belong. Until then I feel there is much 
work to be done in making a protest against this government.” Victory for the 
Liberal Vernon Bartlett did not change government policy. But it did challenge 
the orthodoxy.

West Oxfordshire has already had one moment in history: in 1990, at the height 
of the political row over the poll tax, 18 Conservative councillors in Witney
resigned 
<http://www.heraldscotland.com/news/11951319.England_apos_s_poll_tax_rebels_view_future_with_resignation/>
 in protest at a tax that fell hardest on the least able to pay. Douglas Hurd, 
the foreign secretary, told Margaret Thatcher it was serious. Their action 
didn’t quite defeat the policy, but it was a revolt that significantly loosened 
Thatcher’s grip on power.

This week there will be no unambivalent message for May, no irrefutable 
clarion call to end the anti-migrant rhetoric and work for as soft a Brexit as 
possible. Witney 2016 could have been another byelection that changed Britain. 
Instead it will be business as usual.
 