
I found the first episode of this BBC drama set during the Wars of the Roses 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p018sxqp> useful and informative. As with 
Philippa Gregory's source novels 
<http://www.philippagregory.com/books/the-white-queen>, they've done their 
research: a great deal of backstory – from the marriage of Elizabeth 
Woodville's parents, to the suspicions of bastardy that circled Edward IV – is 
cleverly is woven in from the start. It's not how a historian might have 
written it, but it's all there.

There are anachronisms: clothes in late medieval England didn't have zips; but 
to make the middle ages look fully convincing today is an impossible task. I 
can see why they shot it in Belgium: there's a lot of woodland, and buildings 
that have remained unchanged – like the hunting lodge where Edward shacks up 
with Elizabeth. Still, it is pretty obvious that we're not in England.

As Elizabeth, Rebecca Ferguson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/jun/02/why-were-watching-rebecca-ferguson>
 certainly looks the part: we can't know for sure how beautifulElizabeth 
Woodville 
<http://womenshistory.about.com/od/medbritishqueens/ig/Elizabeth-Woodville> 
was, but we know Edward was fixated with her. It's true, too, that he seems to 
have had a succession of widows who came and petitioned him, and got what they 
wanted in return for going to bed with him. It's quite likely he promised them 
marriage, as in the show. But Elizabeth was the only one for whom his promise 
held true: she became the first English lady – commoner, in short – to marry a 
crowned king.

It's easy to see why the Wars of the Roses have inspired so many writers. It's 
a complex, kaleidoscopic period, with many changes of fortune: there were seven 
monarchs in 30 years, several of whom reigned twice. There are connections to 
today: the collapse of the economy, wars abroad, popular uprisings. But I'm 
unsure how they will stretch Elizabeth's story to 10 episodes.

They've fiddled with the chronology: I found the second episode confusing. 
I can see why they decided to restrict the cast of characters, and play up the 
rivalry between Elizabeth and the Earl of Warwick. But Warwick wasn't always 
her enemy – he presided at her coronation, and thechurching 
<http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/03761a.htm> (or blessing) after the birth of 
her eldest daughter. But portraying their relationship as a titanic struggle 
makes for better drama.

• Professor Michael Hicks 
<http://www.winchester.ac.uk/academic-departments/history/people-profiles/professor-michael-hicks>
 is head of history at the University of Winchester. The White Queen is on BBC1 
on Sundays.
 