
Somewhere around the 500th headline I read in praise of Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/02/how-did-hamilton-become-broadway-breakout-hit>
, the universally acclaimed Broadway musicaldue in Europe next year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/06/broadway-hit-hamilton-to-tour-england-europe-and-australia>
, I was struck by a deflating thought: I’ll probably never see it. Not just 
because it’s virtually impossible to get a ticket, but because so many people – 
people whose tastes I trust – have raved about it that I now regard the 
prospect with annoyance. Two years ago, it was the Richard Linklater movie
Boyhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/10/boyhood-review-richard-linklater-film>
, which I still haven’t seen; thenElena Ferrante’s Neapolitan novels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/elena-ferrante>, which I still haven’t read. 
Straw polls of friends suggest I’m not alone in this reaction – call it 
“cultural cantankerousness” – which seems to affect books, films, plays, 
holiday destinations and restaurants equally. Increasingly, my first thought on 
seeing something described as a “must-read” is‚“Oh really? Try and make me.”

It would be easy to dismiss this as simple contrarianism. After all, we live 
in an era that champions ostentatious dissent from the mainstream, whether 
you’re a journalist trolling for clicks by explainingwhat “Donald Trump gets 
right” 
<http://www.marketwatch.com/story/what-donald-trump-gets-right-and-wrong-about-trade-2016-03-11>
, or a hipster embracing fashions because others disdain them. And 
contrarianism has its merits: “Whenever you find you are on the side of the 
majority,” Mark Twain said, “it is time to pause and reflect.” But unlike 
contrarianism, cultural cantankerousness isn’t solely about appearing different 
from others: even alone in a room, I’d be disinclined to pick up Ferrante’s 
books if others were available. Nor is it because I suspect these works of art 
are no good; they’re probably all sensational. When it comes to, say, TV shows 
about competitive baking, I resist the pull of the crowd because I’m confident 
I’m not missing much. In the case of Hamilton or Boyhood, I’m sure my 
perversity is costing me real enjoyment.

So what’s going on? One explanation is what psychologists call “optimal 
distinctiveness theory” 
<https://www.researchgate.net/publication/222696537_Chapter_2_-_Optimal_Distinctiveness_Theory_A_Framework_for_Social_Identity_Social_Cognition_and_Intergroup_Relations>
 – the way we’re constantly jockeying to feel exactly the right degree of 
similarity to and difference from those around us. Nobody wants to be exiled 
from the in-group to the fringes of society; but nobody wants to be swallowed 
up by it, either. In toddlerhood and teenagerhood, this manifests as a 
bloody-minded refusal to do what we’re told, precisely to show we can disobey 
our parents. Perhaps it never entirely goes away.

Can’t always get what you want? Don’t worry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/10/get-what-want-not-happy-oliver-burkeman>
But I have a different hunch about cultural cantankerousness: I think it’s a 
defence against the“fear of missing out” 
<https://caterina.net/2011/03/15/fomo-and-social-media/>. These days, thanks 
largely to technology, we’re more aware than ever of all the exciting things 
other people are up to, in other places. The result is an edgy, distracted 
state of worry that undermines the pleasure of whatever we’re doing: what if we 
could be doing something better? My irritation at the plaudits heaped on any 
given book, film or play is a way of reasserting control. Instead of worrying 
about whether I should be reading Ferrante, I’m defiantly resolving that I 
won’t. That’s one less thing to worry about missing, leaving me free to focus 
instead on haranguing other people to watchBetter Call Saul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/19/better-call-saul-its-not-breaking-bad-but-it-might-be-even-better>
. No, really – if you haven’t seen it, youmust.

 * oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com>
 