
He must be disappointed by that typo in the first line of the email. That was 
my first thought when the following landed in my inbox:

“Dear Olivia,

What’s you preference: 

To be sodomized and left to anally bleed until you die or to get raped 
conventionally before getting your throat cut?”

It might sound shocking and threatening, but I didn’t feel shocked or 
threatened. This was just another day on the internet, where people – 
disproportionately women, people of color and queer people – are harassed, 
abused, bullied, intimidated and threatened. It’s what writer Umair Haque 
describes as aceaseless flickering hum of low-level emotional violence 
<https://hbr.org/2016/02/the-reason-twitters-losing-active-users>.

The women abandoned to their online abusers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/11/women-online-abuse-threat-racist>
At around the same time someone, I assume the same person, signed me up to a 
mailbot service, which meant I received thousands of unsolicited email 
newsletter sign-ups within a few hours. Thankfully Gmail’s spam filters learn 
quickly, but it took a 20 minutes of flagging messages to clean up my inbox – a 
mild irritation. Meanwhile onTwitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter>, someone else was sending me 
pornographic GIFs and asking whether penis size “really matters for a lady”; I 
blocked him, as I’m sure I will have to block many others in the future in a 
tedious game of whack-a-troll.

I would love to say that this is atypical, but it’s not. In fact, I’d go as 
far as to say that this feels entirely pedestrian, just your regular 
run-of-the-mill rape threats and dreary dick pics. For one of my colleagues, 
“normal” is dealing with racial slurs or having her profile photo edited to 
have “jew horns”. For a male colleague, it’s people telling him to commit 
suicide or saying they want his kids to die.

If we complain about these microaggressions, we’re either overreacting or 
feeding the trolls. But if we don’t speak up, we’re letting them get away with 
it. Paralysed by this dilemma, we fall back on swatting the antagonists away 
like flies and, perhaps as a coping strategy, telling ourselves that it’s 
normal.

Most of the time, the flies are few and far between. But you only have to look 
at the relentless campaigns of hate against public figures likeGhostbusters 
actor and comedian Leslie Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/19/leslie-jones-twitter-abuse-deliberate-campaign-hate>
,Olympic diver Tom Daley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/jul/31/london-2012-tom-daley-twitter-troll>
 orgames developer Zoe Quinn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/dec/03/zoe-quinn-gamergate-interview>
 to see what happens when the flies form a swarm. It becomes overwhelming, 
exhausting and incredibly difficult for the individual – or the police – to 
make case-by-case judgements on what constitutes a credible threat.

“If you’re in the media you are familiar with how things work online, but for 
an average person these types of interactions could be terrifying,” said 
Whitney Phillips, author ofThis Is Why We Can’t Have Nice Things 
<https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/why-we-cant-have-nice-things>.

So how did we get here? And what should we do about it?

Many cyberbullies are aggrieved middle-aged white men who feel like they 
weren’t given the fantasy life they were owed
Bailey Poland, author of Haters 
Determined bullies have always found ways to antagonize others, but digital 
tools have given them new powers. Fifty years ago if you wanted to wind up a 
co-worker you could write anonymous messages and leave them on his or her desk.

“You could tease that person, but there would be no archive and it couldn’t be 
amplified. It could potentially be upsetting but it wouldn’t be indexed in 
Google Search,” said Phillips. It’s the ability of Google search to index abuse 
or what she calls “ambivalent play” that changes the ethical stakes. Your 
online history follows you around, meaning those targeted struggle to move on 
and have a fresh start.

Trolling and cyberbullying have been part of the internet since its inception 
– a side effect of anonymity and unfettered free expression, both critical 
pillars of the web. Once restricted to niche forums and chatrooms with their 
own codes of conduct, ubiquitous social media has brought it into the 
mainstream.

“There used to be so few people occupying those [digital] spaces and the 
people who were were a lot more homogenous than what you see now,” said 
Phillips. “More homogenous” means more white, and more male.

“It isn’t just teenagers in their parents’ basements. A lot of them are 
otherwise very well adjusted normal adult men with wives and children and 
full-time jobs,” said Bailey Poland, author ofHaters 
<http://www.nebraskapress.unl.edu/product/Haters,677280.aspx>.

“Many of them fall into the camp of very aggrieved middle aged white men who 
feel like they weren’t given the fantasy life they were owed. They tend to take 
it out on people who are happy, successful or present in a way that makes them 
feel uncomfortable.”

 That’s not to say that white men don’t get harassed online, but that 
harassment is more frequently directed at members of historically 
underrepresented populations whose voices have not always been privileged. “The 
people who have always had their voices taken seriously tend to be the 
antagonists,” said Phillips, arguing that it comes from a sense of 
disenfranchisement.

The Trump effect

It’s that same sense of disenfranchisement that propelled Donald Trump to the 
White House with a campaign that normalized identity-based antagonism.

“He says absurdly offensive degrading things about women and people of color 
and specific groups whether that’s Mexicans, Muslims, whatever. He says these 
terrible things and that normalizes hate speech in mainstream discourse. It’s 
so normal to open up CNN or any news app and see bigotry,” says Phillips.

“The tenor of discourse that Trump and his associates have been engaging in 
has emboldened some people to say ‘we are in charge now and we can say whatever 
we want’,” addsKate Miltner <http://katemiltner.com/>, a PhD student at USC 
Annenberg School of Communication and Journalism.

Trump’s “locker room” comments about sexually harassing women are a reflection 
of the normalization of violence against women.

“Sexual threats and rape threats are a form of domination that has been used 
against women for all of time. It ties into seeing women as not fully human and 
having their value contingent on whether or not they are worthy of raping,” 
said Poland.

The media, in an effort to draw attention to the bigotry, ends up amplifying 
it. “Some publications might be trying to troll readers, but some are just 
calling attention to it. But inadvertently or not it ends up incentivizing more 
problematic behavior,” said Phillips.

This opens up the vexing question of whether or not to feed the trolls. “I’m 
wary of that framing as it comes with a victim-blaming undercurrent. The 
message is ‘if you don’t give them attention you won’t get harassed’,” said 
Phillips.

Poland suggests keeping a record of posts in case a situation escalates and 
then reporting the perpetrator where possible. Individuals should make up their 
minds about whether they respond, mute or ignore,following online safety guides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/13/online-abuse-how-women-are-fighting-back>
 likethis one 
<http://datasociety.net/output/best-practices-for-conducting-risky-research/> or
this one <https://onlinesafety.feministfrequency.com/en/>.

Counter-meme

Phillips offers an alternative way to handle such trolls: by creating a 
countermeme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/04/save-pepe-cartoon-frog-meme-matt-furie-trump>
. “Contribute to an active, explicit pushback against these behaviors as 
opposed to repeating them,” she said. “It’s about taking more control of that 
narrative, so that the antagonist is no longer the center of the universe.”

Miltner suggests the rest of the online community can help here. “Showing 
solidarity is important, asking how you can help is important. Basically trying 
to take a stand and say ‘this is not acceptable’.”

Phillips agrees: “The same behaviors that can marginalize and denigrate and 
traumatize can really bring a group together, making them feel good and 
pro-social.”

My paltry effort was to take a screengrab of the email and share it on Twitter 
with a pithy comment mocking the sender. It was not an act of fear or a cry for 
help, but an act of defiance: I am not intimidated by you and I am not alone. 
The post triggered messages of support and wonderful jokes from friends and 
acquaintances that reminded me of all of the lovely people on the internet.
Olivia Solon (@oliviasolon) 
It's like Sophie's Choice pic.twitter.com/4AfTcrRQjk <https://t.co/4AfTcrRQjk>
 <https://twitter.com/oliviasolon/status/781881930111340544> September 30, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/oliviasolon/status/781881930111340544> 
If we’re very generous, we might say that we’re still in the early stages of 
internet settlement and that we will all start to become more civilized. 
Google, Facebook, Twitter, Snapchat and others might rally to create better 
tools for tackling the low-level abuse and funnelling real threats towards law 
enforcement.

It’s a start, but not a fix. The disproportionate harassment of women, people 
of color and queer people reflects underlying social, culturally embodied 
issues. These are problems that exist offline being brought to attention in new 
and imaginative ways.

“These problems have nothing to do with the internet, so the idea that we 
could have an internet solution is erroneous,” said Phillips. “We need to deal 
with and mitigate systemic racism and sexism. How do you get rid of rape 
culture? The fact that women tell themselves stories to justify the horrible 
treatment they receive speaks to the depth of the cultural issues that underpin 
the behavior.”

The free speech myth

The US and Silicon Valley in particular has a very specific libertarian view 
of free speech, typified byJohn Perry Barlow’s 20-year-old Declaration of 
Independence of Cyberspace <https://www.eff.org/cyberspace-independence>, which 
said: “We cannot separate the air that chokes from the air upon which wings 
beat.”

Attempts to clamp down on online harassment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/13/online-abuse-how-women-are-fighting-back>
 are frequently described as infringing on free speech, especially in the US. 
It’s just people expressing their opinions no matter how racist, sexist or 
unpalatable. And so society appeals to the constitutionally-enshrined right to 
protect the words of antagonists.

It’s certainly true that censorship is damaging to democracy, but the damage 
is taking place in the opposite direction. “When you cede the floor to the most 
violent, bigoted contributors that tends to marginalize and silence members of 
the group they are targeting,” said Phillips.

That leads to a reduction in the number of voices contributing to discourse, 
all in the name of free speech. A more robust understanding of free speech is 
about trying to cultivate and protect the greatest amount of speech from the 
most diverse groups of people. It’s about having more people talking, not fewer 
people shouting.

Or, as Phillips eloquently puts it: “Antagonism silences and that infringes 
people’s free speech far more significantly than telling some asshole to shut 
his mouth.”
 