
Whenever I tell someone I work for BBC Radio Norfolk 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/radionorfolk>, I know it's only a matter of time before 
they mention Alan Partridge. It doesn't bother me, though: I've been a fan of 
his for years. I've never really felt the character was poking fun at local 
radio or at Norfolk. In fact, round here Alan's seen as a bit of a mascot. We 
even had the first showing of Alpha Papa in Norwich. Hundreds of people turned 
out for it, myself included.

Much as I love Alan, though, I had my doubts about whether he could sustain a 
feature film <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/08/alpha-papa-review> – 
especially one in which he becomes an unlikely hero. So I was pleasantly 
surprised. The film is really funny, and they've done their research: they 
filmed quite a bit of it in Norfolk and namecheck a lot of local places, from a 
Norwich police station to Cromer pier. I can't imagine all those references 
would mean much to viewers elsewhere, but they got laughs here. If anything, 
rather than making fun of Norwich, Alan's put the city on the map – there's 
even anew walking tour 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/travel/article-2380740/Alan-Partridge-walking-tour-launches-Norwich-celebrate-Alpha-Papa-release.html>
 of the city centre, picking out some of the landmarks from the film.

If the film makes any serious point at all about radio, it's about local 
independent stations losing their identity – a growing trend. Alan's station, 
North Norfolk Digital, is being taken over by a conglomerate. For years, big 
companies have been buying up local commercial stations and syndicating 
content, so you get much less truly local programming. Thankfully, the BBC has 
been fiercely protective of its local radio – for the majority of the day, we 
broadcast only to Norfolk.

Aspects of Alan 
<http://whatculture.com/tv/15-greatest-alan-partridge-moments.php> do ring 
true: I'm sure we can all think of media personalities with similarly large 
egos, and some of his cliched catchphrases (like "the pedestrianisation of 
Norwich city centre") sound scarily familiar. But a lot of what Alan says on 
air is pretty extreme. He's a kind of cautionary tale: I can't be the only 
local radio presenter to watch him and think: "There but for the grace of God 
go I."

• Chris Goreham at Breakfast is on BBC Radio Norfolk 
<http://bbc.co.uk/radionorfolk> from 6.30-9am, Monday to Friday. Alan 
Partridge: Alpha Papa is out now.

More on Alan Partridge: Alpha Papa

• Steve Coogan on playing Alan Partridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2013/aug/07/steve-coogan-alan-partridge-video-interview>
• A set visit report from the film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/01/steve-coogan-alan-partridge-alpha-papa>
• Full content on Alpha Papa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/151441/alan-partridge>
 