
One of the many pleasures of A Pacifist’s Guide to the War on Cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/23/a-pacifists-guide-to-the-war-on-cancer-review-vital-confrontation>
, at the National Theatre, is its acute awareness that you can’t make a musical 
about cancer – even though it is exactly that. It makes a virtue of its 
absurdities. This show boasts dancing tumours. They were one of my favourite 
bits.Bryony Kimmings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/11/musical-about-cancer-bryony-kimmings-judith-dimant-national-theatre>
’ work has always trodden the finest of lines between the apparently innocent 
and the entirely knowing, and this one is no exception.

A Pacifist’s Guide to the War on Cancer review – a vital confrontation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/23/a-pacifists-guide-to-the-war-on-cancer-review-vital-confrontation>
It has flaws aplenty – songs that don’t quite convince, characters that are 
underdeveloped – but Kimmings and her co-creators, Brian Lobel and Tom 
Parkinson, know how to turn manipulation into the finest of arts. I mean that 
as a really sincere compliment.

In the final moments of the show, something remarkable happens as audience 
members are invited to name their loved ones who have suffered from cancer. It 
probably isn’t for theatregoers who like the action to take place a long way 
behind the fourth wall, but it is genuinely moving. But if Kimmings and her 
collaborators can get an audience to unselfconsciously participate to such a 
degree on a press night, when I saw it, then who is to say what might happen 
with a less famously uptight audience? A friend, one of the world’s greatest 
cynics, went the other night and reported that sobs were audible from 
throughout the auditorium and that she herself had become teary.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Finside-the-musical-a-pacifists-guide-to-the-war-on-cancer-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20the%20musical%3A%20A%20Pacifist's%20Guide%20to%20the%20War%20on%20Cancer%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Finside-the-musical-a-pacifists-guide-to-the-war-on-cancer-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20the%20musical%3A%20A%20Pacifist%27s%20Guide%20to%20the%20War%20on%20Cancer%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Finside-the-musical-a-pacifists-guide-to-the-war-on-cancer-video&media=>
Inside the musical: A Pacifist’s Guide to the War on Cancer – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/video/2016/oct/27/inside-the-musical-a-pacifists-guide-to-the-war-on-cancer-video>
Even as you know that you are being manipulated, you succumb to it. This is 
extraordinarily disarming, and it’s clear that the climactic moment works 
because it has been so carefully set up. Everybody involved in the show knows 
what they are doing, and even if the audience feel stage-managed, we also feel 
completely safe, so we do join in and shout out.

Kimmings earns the right to hold us in the palm of her hand because she shouts 
out her own life on stage, warts and all

A Pacifist’s Guide may look rough and ready, but it is as cunningly 
constructed asKimmings’ Sex Idiot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/aug/22/sex-idiot-edinburgh-review> 
(where the audience were invited to snip their pubic hair during the show) and
Fake It ’Til You Make It 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/08/fake-it-til-you-make-it-edinburgh-festival-review-traverse-bryony-kimmings-tim-grayburn-depression>
 (which tackled another taboo, male depression). Even if it’s not to your 
taste, you have to admire it. The device in which Kimmings’ disembodied voice 
is used throughout the show is particularly fascinating. Initially, it sets her 
up as an almost godlike voice or guide, which is slightly irritating. Then her 
authority is undercut when her primary motives for making the musical are 
questioned, particularly by a mother who takes Kimmings to task for having “no 
brains” in wanting to turn her son’s cancer into a play and expecting him to 
buy a ticket to see it so he can relive the experience. But just when you start 
bristling in agreement with the mum, you realise thatKimmings’ experience with 
her own seriously ill baby 
<http://thebryonykimmings.tumblr.com/post/152462036927/overshare-catch-up> 
means that she also has a stake in “the kingdom of the sick”, asSusan Sontag 
described it <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/jan/19/politics>. Kimmings 
has earned the right to hold us in the palm of her hand, just as she did in her 
previous shows, because she dares to shout out her own life on stage, warts and 
all.

This theatrical sharing is so neatly done that when the moment comes to ask 
the audience to be emotionally open and generous, we succumb to it, almost with 
thanks. The fact that how we get to that moment is carefully orchestrated 
suggests not an artist who is dishonest, but one who is genuinely taking care 
of us and who knows there is quid pro quo when comes to audience participation 
in the theatre, a kind of performativeyou show me yours and I’ll show you mine 
<http://thebryonykimmings.tumblr.com/post/67660917680/you-show-me-yours>. It 
joins us together – and what else is theatre but a way to bring people together 
in the same room, sharing an experience and making connections?

 * Bryony Kimmings on making a musical about cancer. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/11/musical-about-cancer-bryony-kimmings-judith-dimant-national-theatre>
 