
Translating PG Wodehouse <https://www.theguardian.com/books/pgwodehouse> to 
the stage isn't easy. He's the Master – with a capital M – of language: there's 
at least one original metaphor on every page. So I wasn't sure how well thisnew 
play <http://www.jeevesandwoosterplay.com/tickets/>, based on Wodehouse's 
stories, would work. But I enjoyed it enormously.

As far as I could tell, the play is derived from The Code of the Woosters 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/9858081-the-code-of-the-woosters>. To talk 
like a Friends fan, that's "the one with the cow creamer": the plot centres on 
an antique silver cream jug shaped like a cow. That jug has passed into 
Wodehouse folklore. If you meet anotherWodehouse fan 
<http://www.pgwodehousesociety.org.uk> and say "the cow creamer", they will 
snigger. Actually, this makes us sound like real anoraks. We're not really 
that bad.

The play opens with Bertie Wooster, played by Stephen Mangan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/stephen-mangan>, sitting in an armchair. He 
starts telling the audience a story and invites in Jeeves, played byMatthew 
Macfadyen <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0532193/>, to help him. Then Macfadyen 
and another actor play all the other parts between them. This is a very clever 
way of staying true to the tone of the books: they're narrated by Bertie in the 
first person, and now here's Bertie telling the story to the audience.

It would be very easy for cross-dressing, costume-changing actors to turn the 
whole thing into a farce. That they don't is one of the most impressive things 
about the play, which still manages to be burst-out-laughing funny. Wodehouse's 
style, too, is more about humour than comedy. And the play includes enough of 
the recognisable one-liners, like the joke about not fearing people we despise, 
but not so many that it feels like an exercise in Wodehouse-mania.

This has been Wodehouse's year: we've had the TV series Blandings 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p00yzmt1> – though I didn't enjoy that half as 
much as this – and Sebastian Faulks's novelJeeves and the Wedding Bells 
<http://www.sebastianfaulks.com/index.php/jeeves/>. Is this resurgence of 
interest an effect of the recession? Perhaps. There are no baddies in his work.
Evelyn Waugh said <http://www.drones.com/waugh.html> he "made a world for us to 
live in and delight in". There is something about Wodehouse that makes you 
suspend your disbelief and just revel in the happy world he creates.
 