
Dr William Masters and Virginia Johnson were pioneers 
<http://www.npr.org/2013/10/04/228906644/pioneering-masters-of-sex-brought-science-to-the-bedroom>
: without their groundbreaking research into sex, orgasm and sexual 
dysfunction, we would probably never have reached the level of understanding 
that we have now. They were the first researchers to scientifically track the 
stages of sexual arousal and to analyse the female orgasm in detail. Most 
psychosexual therapists, including me, have at least one of their books. So I 
was very interested to see how thisbiographical drama series 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/masters-of-sex> tackled their lives and 
work.

All through the first episode, we got a great sense of how difficult it was 
for them to start their research in the 1950s, when it just wasn't acceptable 
to talk about sex. The provost of Washington University in St Louis, where 
Masters worked, is concerned that his research into orgasm (he and Johnson 
monitor the physical responses of female volunteers as they pleasure 
themselves, and even ask a couple to have sex in the lab) will be construed as 
smut rather than science.

Their methods were certainly unorthodox – I'm not aware of any research today 
that still involves observing sexual behaviour firsthand; usually, it's 
conducted through surveys. And I definitely didn't agree with Masters's 
suggestion that the best way to deal with the problem of erotic transference 
might be for he and Johnson to sleep together. Erotic transference can be a 
problem for any psychosexual therapist or researcher, but we have very strict 
guidelines about how to deal with it.

I liked the fact that we saw Masters having problems with his own sex life. 
When you work in this field, people definitely make assumptions: women, 
especially, tend to say I must be great at sex. That's because they 
misunderstand what we psychosexual therapists do: they think we're here to tell 
people how to have great sex rather than explore emotional and psychological 
issues around it.

I'd like to say that this misunderstanding has changed since the 1950s, but it 
hasn't - and neither have the wider social taboos.Sex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/sex> is all around us in the media, 
but most TV programmes about it just peddle the same old stereotypes. At least 
this show is making an effort to examine serious research. I'll definitely keep 
watching.

• Krystal Woodbridge <http://www.woodbridgetherapy.co.uk/about.html> is a 
trustee of theCollege of Sexual and Relationship Therapists 
<http://www.cosrt.org.uk/>.

Masters of Sex is on Channel 4 on Tuesdays.
 