
Religion is curiously absent in both this film 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/may/09/reluctant-fundamentalist-review?INTCMP=ILCNETTXT3487>
 and in the novel by Mohsin Hamid it's based on. I readthe book 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2007/mar/03/featuresreviews.guardianreview20> 
when it first came out in 2007, and skim-read it again before seeing the film. 
When you've dedicated much of your life to studying radicalisation, 
particularly that of western Muslims, it's difficult to set aside that 
knowledge and approach a book like this for what it is: a piece of fiction 
written for the general reader. But it does strike me as odd that there should 
be so little mention of Islam – I don't think the word even comes up.

My key question, for both Hamid and the director Mira Nair, is what they mean 
by "fundamentalist". In the film, we learn howChangez Khan 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2013/apr/27/riz-ahmed-actor-rapper-ranter>, 
a Pakistani pro-jihad intellectual, spent years working as an economic analyst 
in America. Disillusioned with western capitalism after 9/11, he starts to 
identify more with his fellow Muslims – but we don't get a clear sense that 
he's become a fundamentalist in a religious sense, or that he's directly 
involved in terrorism.

It's true that some western jihadists feel they've been subjected to 
persecution since 9/11 – and I'm sure many Muslims have had experience of it. 
But I can't imagine this really being such a major factor in a well-educated 
Pakistani man's decision to become a professor and tell his students how much 
they should hate America. In fact, there really aren't that manyhate crimes 
against Muslims in the US 
<http://www.fbi.gov/news/stories/2012/december/annual-hate-crimes-report-released/annual-hate-crimes-report-released>
 – according to FBI statistics, there is far more antisemitic and homophobic 
violence.

I have also heard jihadists describe particular life events – like the loss of 
a loved one – as being the catalyst for reassessing what's important to them, 
and choosing a fundamentalist path. Starting to identify with a wider community 
of Muslims, rather than your local neighbours, is definitely a step on the way: 
it's about feeling more for the plight of Ethiopian Muslims than for homeless 
people sleeping rough in your local park.

The film and the book do, then, identify some realistic factors in one man's 
path to radicalisation – but of course every path is different. And I find 
their wider point about there being a parallel between Islamist fundamentalism 
and western capitalism far too simplistic.

• Alexander Meleagrou-Hitchens works at the International Centre for the Study 
of Radicalisation 
<http://icsr.info/about-us-2/staff/alexander-meleagrou-hitchens-research-fellow/>
, London.
 