
At the beginning of this year it was announced that Muhammad Ali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/muhammad-ali> planned to visit the UK for 
the first time in three years, to attend the I Am the Greatest exhibition in 
his honour at the O2 centre in London. Davis Miller, the co-curator of the 
exhibition, said at the time that Ali wouldn’t consider making the trip to 
anywhere else in the world. “He connects with the people in the UK,” said 
Miller. “He connects with the Brits.”

For once it wasn’t mere hype. Ali did indeed enjoy a special relationship with 
Britain. Of course the appeal of “the greatest sportsman of the 20th century” 
was universal. He was a global star before globalisation. But there was a 
particular ease and mutual appreciation he found in British audiences that 
stemmed from a shared language but, crucially, a different history.

In America, Ali – or Cassius Clay, as he was before he became a Muslim and 
changed his “slave” name – was a divisive figure. In the 1960s the nation was 
beset by racial strife, the civil rights struggle and the war in Vietnam, all 
social and political tensions with which Ali would come to be deeply 
associated. To many white Americans, particularly in the south, Ali was seen as 
brash, uppity and disloyal. And even many black Americans felt he was too 
confrontational.

Although the country was not without its own post-colonial growing pains, Ali 
represented something much less problematic in Britain. He was admired in an 
uncomplicated way for his astonishing boxing skills – although not at first. As 
Clay he beat Britain’s Henry Cooper in 1963, having first been knocked down by 
Cooper and saved by the bell.

He called Cooper a “bum” and a “tramp”, and the British boxer was unlucky to 
be stopped with a cut. Ali was booed by the crowd and roundly loathed by the 
nation. That could have been the end of the affair before it had even started. 
He then went on to upstage the Beatles when he met them just before he beat 
Sonny Liston in 1964 to become world heavyweight champion. “He made a fool of 
us,” said John Lennon, who was nobody’s fool.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Fhow-the-british-took-muhammad-ali-to-their-hearts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8dbc8b73054669c00fc9294525637058ccc79233%2F0_1150_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20special%20relationship%3A%20how%20the%20British%20took%20Ali%20to%20their%20hearts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Fhow-the-british-took-muhammad-ali-to-their-hearts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20special%20relationship%3A%20how%20the%20British%20took%20Ali%20to%20their%20hearts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Fhow-the-british-took-muhammad-ali-to-their-hearts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8dbc8b73054669c00fc9294525637058ccc79233%2F0_1150_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Relaxing in a London park the day after his 1966 defeat of Henry Cooper. 
Photograph: PA 
But instead he beat Cooper again three years later, and that proved to be the 
beginning of an extraordinary romance. He went on television after that fight, 
alongside Noël Coward and Dudley Moore, and launched a charm offensive every 
bit as effective as one of his lightning combinations.

Ali was a joker, a teaser, capable of pantomime antics that spoke to an 
irreverent, tongue-in-cheek British sense of humour. And he was that rare 
paradox: the bigger he got, the more easily he interacted with smaller people. 
There’s a photograph of him visiting a children’s home in Notting Hill, west 
London, in 1966. He’s surrounded by young kids, a huge man in a black leather 
jacket and shirt and tie, completely comfortable and unthreatening.

In Glasgow, Newcastle and elsewhere it was the same story. In some strange 
transnational way, Ali becameour fighter. This was perhaps never more the case 
than when he refused the draft to fight in Vietnam and as a consequence was 
banned from boxing for more than three years at the peak of his career. There 
was a sense that if the American establishment didn’t want him, then the 
British people did.

Thereafter, it didn’t matter whom he boxed against – even British fighters 
like Joe Bugner and Richard Dunn – we wanted Ali to win. There was his silky 
style, his daunting courage and his principled stance – but what made them 
tangible was his transporting charisma, the gift of being able to touch people, 
amuse them, make them feel just a little bit more alive.

The way Britain got Ali, and Ali returned the compliment, was most obviously 
exemplified in the series of remarkable television interviews conducted by
Michael Parkinson <https://www.theguardian.com/media/michael-parkinson> over 
more than a decade. There’s a marked progression from a sharp-talking, 
provocative young man to a warmer and perhaps truer personality. The shows also 
captured a quality for which Ali is not often celebrated: that of quiet 
forbearance. But how else to describe the restraint he displayed in sharing a 
guest spot with Freddie Starr, who was dressed in a white Elvis jumpsuit?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Fhow-the-british-took-muhammad-ali-to-their-hearts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ebf354843032aba5d01c5e3aea144e3f0593ece%2F0_394_5005_3003%2F5005.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20special%20relationship%3A%20how%20the%20British%20took%20Ali%20to%20their%20hearts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Fhow-the-british-took-muhammad-ali-to-their-hearts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20special%20relationship%3A%20how%20the%20British%20took%20Ali%20to%20their%20hearts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Fhow-the-british-took-muhammad-ali-to-their-hearts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ebf354843032aba5d01c5e3aea144e3f0593ece%2F0_394_5005_3003%2F5005.jpg>
 Arriving at Glasgow airport for a series of exhibition matches, August 1965. 
Photograph: Daily Express/Getty Images 
In a later interview, Parkinson told an already obviously impaired Ali 
that British viewers were worried about his health. “It’s the affection they 
have for you,” explained Parkinson. “They’ve never felt about another boxer the 
way they felt about you.”

The Parkinson interviews are justly celebrated, but what’s not so well 
remembered is that Ali regularly appeared on British TV. Joanna Lumley 
interviewed him, and he was even the subject ofThis Is Your Life, presented by 
Eamonn Andrews. His parents and his arch ring enemy Joe Frazier turned up for 
that. This was 1978, Ali’s unprecedented third stint as world heavyweight 
champion. He was, as Andrews said, probably the most famous man in the world – 
and there he was doingThis Is Your Life in London.

There was talk a few months ago of Ali being awarded an honorary knighthood. 
It seemed like a well-intentioned but misplaced idea. In the best sense of the 
expression, Ali was a man of the people. That didn’t mean he spent his time in 
the UK travelling on public transport and popping into strangers’ houses for a 
cup of tea. But he reached out to the people, never the establishment, and the 
honours he received he fought for.

In the end, he was too ill to travel to Britain one last time. He complained 
on his first visit that the cars were too small and the streets too narrow and 
that he hadn’t seen as many pretty girls as he did at home. Within a few years, 
his attitude, and ours, had changed.

“Britain can be ranked as number one as far as supporting me is concerned,” he 
told Dickie Davies in the early 1970s. “And the little hassles I had in the 
States, they didn’t pay no attention. They recognised me as their champion.”

So he was. And for those of us who saw him in his prime, he always will be.
 