
Hills and Holes. A name like that 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barnack_Hills_%26_Holes_National_Nature_Reserve>
, it had to be a manufactured place for kids and dog walkers, I thought. On 
hearing what locals called it – Hills and Hollows – I decided to look closer at 
thefunny space on the edge of this village <http://fbhh.org.uk/> near Stamford.

Turns out it was manufactured, but not by anyone we knew. The place with the 
playground name once built cathedrals. A Jurassic seabed turned medieval 
quarry, its limestone was used in the extravagant churches of Ely and 
Peterborough. Now it’s a meadow, and important again.

The quarrying has left a strange, toy landscape of ridges and valleys not a 
kilometre square. Rare plants –fragrant orchid 
<http://www.wildlifetrusts.org/species/common-fragrant-orchid>, pasque flower 
<http://www.wildlifetrusts.org/species/pasqueflower> – grow here. Nature has 
taken it back, but only to a point: a sign tells me the sheep are in for autumn 
to graze. Invisible sheep, it seems.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fstorybook-world-medieval-quarry-cambridgeshire-country-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe10a0325f992f3bd086d7e65b8919321e2102f6%2F0_0_4416_3312%2Fmaster%2F4416.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20storybook%20world%20growing%20from%20a%20medieval%20quarry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fstorybook-world-medieval-quarry-cambridgeshire-country-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20storybook%20world%20growing%20from%20a%20medieval%20quarry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fstorybook-world-medieval-quarry-cambridgeshire-country-diary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe10a0325f992f3bd086d7e65b8919321e2102f6%2F0_0_4416_3312%2Fmaster%2F4416.jpg>
 A part-eaten pear among the autumnal litter. Photograph: Simon Ingram 
It’s raining, so I duck into one of the hollows, a little tuck beneath a 
birch. Sudden childhood feelings of sunken dens beneath low-slung trees; maybe 
this place is for kids after all, or big kids. It’s intricately beautiful. The 
arched roof of the den is a wriggle-braid of branches, the floor autumnal 
litter. There’s a pear with one coarse-toothed chunk out of it. The rain 
crackles on the canopy, and there’s a quiet whine. I take it for a saw 
somewhere, but then realise it’s closer than the rain noise; insects, 
sheltering too.

Afterwards, I climb on to the ridgelines. Even in miniature, hills and valleys 
follow form: bare up top, with rich valleys drawing the eye down. There’s a red 
thicket down in one, like a miniature autumn forest in a bigger landscape. It’s
rosebay willowherb <http://www.wildlifetrusts.org/species/rosebay-willowherb>, 
a hairy wire of seed bursting from a vivid fern-bed of russet. In America they 
call this fireweed because it likes burnt ground: here that colour makes it 
look as if this English meadow is itself burning.

It’s the trees that break the illusion of scale. They tower. Thorns, a 
statuesque silver birch, one gorgeous oak crouched over another of those 
storybook shade-pockets.

More rain. I could make it to the car but instead I go to the little den 
again. I’m glad I looked closer at this place. Quarry, toy-landscape, now a 
quiet little world full of quiet little worlds.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>
 