
This Disney animation is strictly for kids. It's a David and Goliath story, in 
which a humble cropduster named Dusty goes up against the world's fastest 
racing planes in a round-the-world race. There's no such competition in 
reality: the logistics would be impossible, and racing planes aren't designed 
to fly long distances. Plus there's no way a cropduster could compete against 
more advanced aircraft. But it's hardly worth quibbling. This film's about 
firing up children's imaginations, rather than reflecting reality. And anything 
showing that aviation is about more than taking a passenger plane to Malaga 
once a year is fine by me.

The film does draw on some real-life competitions. Early on, Dusty takes part 
in a training race around a series of pylons – very much like theRed Bull Air 
Race <http://www.redbullairrace.com>, an international competition in which 
pilots navigate obstacles at speed. Some of the aeroplanes bump into the pylons 
– yes, it has happened – and Dusty later crashes into the sea but is rescued. I 
wouldn't like anyone to think they could really get away with crashing into 
water, though. Planes that do so rarely come up again.

There's a culture of pylon racing in the US, with a major air show at Reno in 
Nevada <http://www.airrace.org/at_the_races>. Unfortunately, they had a 
dreadful incident in 2011 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2011_Reno_Air_Races_crash>, where a pilot crashed 
into the audience, killing himself and 10 others, and injuring many more. Of 
course, we don't see any incidents like that in the film: it would be pretty 
disturbing for the children watching.

All the planes are based on real aircraft. I don't know of any painted with 
long eyelashes, like thelady planes <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xLCRTNisVW4>
 in the film, but there are certainly planes with that distinctively feminine, 
curved shape; and I do know of some pilots who call their aircraft "she". 
There's also a major interest in souping up second world war planes – like 
Ripslinger, the champion plane in the film.

The fact that Dusty is afraid of heights isn't as absurd as it sounds. Some 
amateur pilots also prefer to fly low - but once they climb higher, they 
realise, like Dusty, that it's well worth it. There's nothing quite like flying 
above the clouds, just you and your aeroplane.

Several scenes made me smile: I liked the fact that what from the air seemed 
to be a herd of sacred Indian cows turned out to be a herd of tractors; and 
there's a lovely sense throughout of the joy of piloting a light aircraft. You 
get some wonderful moments up there – like the time I met a flock of geese at 
14,000ft.

Alan Cassidy <http://freestyleaviation.co.uk/Freestyle/Alan.htm> is chairman 
of theBritish Aerobatic Association <http://www.aerobatics.org.uk>.
 