
At first, I didn't like this new BBC comedy 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/mediapacks/bigschool/>, set in an urban 
secondary school. I'm usually a fan ofDavid Walliams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2012/sep/07/david-walliams-ratburger-quickfire-interview>
, who plays nerdy science teacher Mr Church, but the humour just fell flat. 
There is a scene, early on, where PE teacher Mr Gunn, played byPhilip Glenister 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0322562>, gets an erection while giving Catherine 
Tate <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/sep/22/comedy.catherinetate>, 
playing French teacher Miss Postern, a very closeup massage. That's not just 
sexual harassment, it's abuse – and I certainly didn't find it funny.

Things did get a little warmer as the show progressed, but I still think it's 
more about laughing at teachers than with them. I suppose some people might 
find that funny, but I don't think we teachers need any more sticks to be 
beaten with. And actually, funny things happen at school every day: we work 
with bright, quirky, fascinating young people, who say and do hilarious things. 
It's a shame none of that really comes out in the show.

A few things do ring true about Greybridge School, though. That 60s concrete 
building, hung with pupils' displays, could be any urban comprehensive – and I 
recognise some of the teachers. Miss Postern tells Mr Church she always gives 
"110%": there are teachers like that, always letting you know they live only 
for the kids. And it's true that PE teachers wear tracksuits all the time, 
though the ones I work with are a lot more hardcore than Mr Gunn – he can 
hardly run one mile, while my colleagues are off swimming the Channel.

It was horrible when Mr Church told the whole school about the graffiti he'd 
seen in the boys' toilets, poking fun at the Welsh geography teacher. Teachers 
can be badly bullied by their pupils – I've never seen it myself, but my old 
English teacher had a terrible time. Pupils would hide under their desks, 
making siren noises and pretending there was an air raid. If I ever discovered 
that was happening in my school, I certainly wouldn't make fun of the poor 
teacher myself. Good teachers always support each other.

• Sarah Jones is a pseudonym. Big School is on BBC1 on Fridays.
 