
The overnight low in West Kirby on the Wirrall was around 5C last night. Yet 
in Colin Usher’s home the temperature is a comfy 20c-21C – despite the fact he 
has not turned on the heating once this autumn. Even in the depths of winter, 
the house uses a fraction of the energy that most British homes consume trying 
to keep warm. On average, the Ushers’ home energy bills since 2014 have been 
£530 a year, and that for a house that is nearly twice the size of a standard 
British semi. It means the family is saving at least £1,000 a year, and 
possibly much more. Throw in the fact that their rooftop solar panels generate 
an income of £500 a year and their net energy bills are actually close to zero.

Colin and his wife Jenny insist they are not shivering in their four-bed 
house, or wrapped in multiple fleeces and blankets to keep the cold away. 
Rarely does the temperature in the house go above 22c, rarely does it fall 
below 20c. Yet they have achieved this without spending ludicrous amounts of 
money buying the fanciest new technology. Usher, an architect, built the 179 sq 
metre (1,926 sq ft) house for just £240,000 and says the key to saving on 
heating bills is being airtight.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fthree-bed-house-500-energy-bills-how-you-can-slash-costs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2dd0856d3ef4673a7a57bead275793620add815%2F0_38_670_837%2F670.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20three-bed%20house%20with%20%C2%A3500%20energy%20bills%3F%20How%20you%20too%20can%20slash%20your%20costs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fthree-bed-house-500-energy-bills-how-you-can-slash-costs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20three-bed%20house%20with%20%C2%A3500%20energy%20bills%3F%20How%20you%20too%20can%20slash%20your%20costs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fthree-bed-house-500-energy-bills-how-you-can-slash-costs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2dd0856d3ef4673a7a57bead275793620add815%2F0_38_670_837%2F670.jpg>
 A warm welcome: it may be chilly outside, but inside Colin and Jenny Usher’s 
home it’s a steady 20C – without having to turn on the heating. 
“We have lots of insulation, of course. The house is almost completely 
airtight. But because it is hermetically sealed we also need to carefully 
ventilate it. Above all, we spent money on good quality construction – it is a 
heavyweight construction using lots of concrete, a material that helps to iron 
out hot and cold weather. It heats up from the sun, and holds the heat for 
days.”

Usher did not even bother to install any heating upstairs in the house and, 
after three winters in their home, they haven’t needed it. “The way it works is 
that the whole building holds heat – it’s like a night storage heater. The 
ventilation system then distributes the temperature around the house.”

One innovation of Usher’s is to have an over-large water cyclinder, which 
holds lots of warm to hot water, rather than very hot water. “You don’t have to 
overheat water. We never add cold water to the shower or when running a bath. 
It is very wasteful to overheat water.”

But while Usher is a fan of “Passivhaus 
<http://www.passivhaus.org.uk/standard.jsp?id=122>” eco-standards for building, 
he is critical of some in the insulation industry. “I have a jaundiced view of 
installing insulation without warning about the condensation risks. People go 
to great efforts to put in insulation, then get condensation and mildew in the 
corner of their rooms. It’s almost bound to happen.” He recommends that anyone 
making their home airtight should also consider systems such as theNuaire 
Drimaster <http://www.nuaire.co.uk/our-products/Residential/products?pt=1685>, 
which costs around £250 and gently forces moist air out of the house.

Some will say that new-builds with lots of energy-saving measures are great, 
but ask what is realistic for an existing house, especially the Victorian or 
Edwardian terraces common in UK cities?

Luigi and Jane Caccavale took a 120-year-old, three-floor, rundown property in 
Wandsworth, south London, and brought it up to “EnerPHit 
<http://www.passivhaus.org.uk/page.jsp?id=20>” standards that aim to match the 
energy efficiency of a new-build eco-home. Today their energy bills are around 
£80 a month, although keeping the home comfortable was as important as saving 
money. Like the Ushers, airtightness has been key to saving energy, as has 
triple-glazing the house.

People go to great efforts to put in insulation, then get condensation and 
mildew. It’s almost bound to happen
Colin Usher 
“It’s all about keeping the heat in,” says Luigi, a software engineer who 
managed much of the project himself. It involved stripping the house back to 
its brickwork, and then leaving enough of a gap between the bricks and the 
insulation to let air circulate. “In effect, condensation forms outside the 
envelope of the house rather than inside it,” he says. But he warns owners of 
older houses that making it airtight was something of a slog. “When you try to 
make an old house airtight, you have to go through every crack and seam. It’s 
very labour-intensive.”

Meanwhile, in Fulham, south-west London, Pablo Ettinger says his electricity 
bills are already down 40% since he carried out a full energy survey on his 
house earlier this year and had works completed in July. He’s hoping that his 
heating bills will be down by a similar amount. “They insulated my roof and 
some walls, and a very large number of windows and doors were replaced with 
triple-glazed windows. In addition they converted all my bulbs to LEDs.”

He admits the cost was high – but it’s a big house in an expensive area – and 
that the work was done to make the house quieter and more comfortable as much 
as to save money. “It’s a classic large Victorian house, four beds, a cellar, 
very badly built around 1895 with almost zero insulation. Our heating bills 
were around £2,000 a year.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fthree-bed-house-500-energy-bills-how-you-can-slash-costs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa3b864da8a53acbdb0bde771457276b6fc40db3%2F7_0_1213_942%2F1213.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20three-bed%20house%20with%20%C2%A3500%20energy%20bills%3F%20How%20you%20too%20can%20slash%20your%20costs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fthree-bed-house-500-energy-bills-how-you-can-slash-costs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20three-bed%20house%20with%20%C2%A3500%20energy%20bills%3F%20How%20you%20too%20can%20slash%20your%20costs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fthree-bed-house-500-energy-bills-how-you-can-slash-costs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa3b864da8a53acbdb0bde771457276b6fc40db3%2F7_0_1213_942%2F1213.jpg>
 For Luigi and Jane Caccavale it’s all about keeping the heat in. Photograph: 
Joana Saramago 
He’s now a huge convert to triple-glazing. “We’d had double-glazing done, but 
it was a complete waste of money. Triple-glazing is twice the price of 
double-glazing but makes a huge difference. The house now feels totally, 
totally sealed. We’re about five yards away from the District Line at the back 
of the house but now you can hardly hear it.

“The thing with us was that it wasn’t really about saving money, but about 
making the house comfortable. The top of the house used to feel cold even at 
the height of summer. It just feels so much more comfortable now.”

Ettinger looked into turning his home into a zero-energy house, but after 
visiting various projects he decided against it. “I’m a musician, and standing 
in a zero-energy room feels like standing in a dead space – you really can 
almost feel it. So we decided not to go the whole hog.”

Akta Raja, founder of Enhabit UK <http://www.enhabit.uk.com/>, which designs 
and delivers low-energy improvements to buildings, and who helped the 
Caccavales to retro-fit their home, says her drive is about protecting the 
environment as much as saving money. Around a fifth of carbon emissions in 
Britain come from buildings, which could be cut dramatically if we moved to low 
energy standards. She also reckons that we could drive home energy bills down 
to as little as £350 a year with careful planning and building. “There are also 
the other benefits: homes that are quieter and more comfortable, warmer in 
winter and cooler in summer.”

When you try to make an old house airtight, you have to go through every crack 
and seam
Luigi Caccavale 
Raja acknowledges that some energy-saving measures can be expensive, only 
delivering a financial return over the long term. But she adds that there are 
quick wins: chimney balloons, which cost as little as £20, “make a massive 
difference to comfort and to bills,” she says. Manufacturers estimate that a 
chimney balloon can save half a tonne of CO2 a year per chimney and pay for 
themselves within three months.

So should we tackle the major housebuilding firms for failing to ensure our 
homes are not more airtight and energy saving? Enhabit UK’s board includes a 
former chief executive of Barratt. “Current building regulations in the UK are 
actually quite good, and newly built houses should be relatively cheap to run 
and be comfortable. But above this it needs attention to detail – so we see 
some houses where airtightness levels are lower than they should be.”

At the Building Research Establishment (BRE) in Watford, meanwhile, a “zero 
bills” home aims to make home energy bills obsolete. The rooftop solar panels 
generate electricity, while a small air source heat pump recycles heat 
recovered from stale air. The house is an off-the-shelf kit made of a steel 
frame with timber wall panels that its makers,ZEDfactory 
<http://www.zedfactory.com/>, say costs £1,350 per square meter, or around 
£129,600 to build a standard three-bed home. It has already been commissioned 
for use on a development in Newport, Essex.

The public can visit the BRE Innovation Park at Watford and view the 
zero-energy home. Go toipark.bre.co.uk <http://ipark.bre.co.uk/index.jsp?id=223>
 or call 0333 321 8811 to book a tour.

Five easy steps

• Switch off standby You can save around £30 a year just by remembering to 
turn your appliances off standby mode. TheEnergy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> Saving Trusts suggests getting 
a “standby saver” which allows you to turn all your appliances off standby in 
one go.

• Save £50 a year in the kitchen Use a bowl to wash up rather than a running 
tap and cut energy bills by £30 a year. Only fill the kettle with the amount of 
water you need and save around £7 a year. Cutback your washing machine use by 
just one cycle per week and save £5 a year on energy, and a further £8 a year 
on metered water bills.

• Spend less time in the shower One minute less in the shower each day will 
save around £10 each year per person. With a water meter this could save a 
further £10 off annual water and sewage bills. If everyone in a four person 
family did this it would lead to a total saving of £80 a year.

• Install an energy saving monitor Nothing shows you how much power you are 
using more than a domestic monitor – you will get one for free when you install 
a smart meter, or you can buy them for around £25. You soon find out exactly 
where your cash is going on energy costs.

• Low energy LED lightbulbs New LED spotlights are bright enough to replace 
halogens, as well as regular energy saving bulbs. If the average household 
replaced old-fashioned bulbs with compact fluorescent lamps, and all of their 
halogens with LEDs, it would cost about £100 and save about £35 a year.
 