
I saw this film <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156901/railway-man> 
with a colleague who knewEric Lomax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/dec/28/railway-mans-forgotten-family>
, whose memoir it is based on. He had been a victim of torture, too. We both 
found it strikingly realistic: the torture scenes are terrifying without being 
remotely sensationalist, as can sometimes be the case with film and TV.

Both Lomax's experience of torture in a Japanese prisoner of war camp and his 
ultimate reconciliation with his torturer are put across excellently. The
waterboarding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/oct/01/hugh-muir-diary-michael-gove> 
is particularly horrific: the victim, as we see here, has a cloth placed over 
their mouth, and water poured on to their face so they can't breathe. There has 
been a lot of talk recently about waterboarding somehow being a lesser form of 
torture –Dick Cheney famously described it as a "dunk in water" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/oct/27/usa.guantanamo>. The film leaves 
us in no doubt as to the suffering it inflicts.

Reconciliation is a remarkable thing, but I can't say it's typical of the 
experience of many of my patients: if you've been tortured in Iran or 
Afghanistan, you're hardly going to try to go back there to seek 
reconciliation. Most patients are angry with those who tortured them: they want 
revenge, or they're simply terrified of ever seeing their torturer again. 
Dealing with these feelings of revenge and anger can be a vital step in moving 
on. This might not involve actually making contact with the person who tortured 
you, but it does mean coming to terms with what happened to you.

We see a lot about Lomax's experience of post-traumatic stress disorder. This, 
too, is very true to the experience of many torture victims I work with. Like 
Lomax, they often prefer not to talk about what happened to them, even with 
fellow victims: they fear cheapening their experience somehow, or finding that 
others don't understand. Intimacy and social interaction become difficult, and 
some find it particularly hard to admit to sexual torture. They may wake 
sweating in the night, experience flashbacks – and even believe they can see 
the face of their torturer in a crowd or on a bus.

• Dr William Hopkins is a consultant psychiatrist for medical charity Freedom 
from Torture <http://www.freedomfromtorture.org/> (freedomfromtorture.org). The 
Railway Man is out now.
 