
I've been a fan of James Corden for years. I used to live in Wales and Gavin 
and Stacey <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/gavin-and-stacey> was a 
huge hit there. So I was intrigued to see he'd come up withthis new comedy 
about a town planner 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p0185pyh/profiles/characters> for Berkshire 
County Council, who gets caught up in a criminal plot after answering a mobile 
phone that's ringing at the site of a car crash.

Berkshire County Council doesn't actually exist; it was dissolved in 1998. I 
work forWest Berkshire <http://www.westberks.gov.uk/>, one of the councils set 
up since. There are two kinds of town planner: those who deal with long-term 
policy, such as redeveloping town centres; and those who handle day-to-day 
applications. I do the latter. The town planner in the show (Sam Pinkett, 
played by Mathew Baynton) seems to be working on policy â€“ but we don't see a 
lot of planning going on.

Although Sam's slogans for the rebranding of Bracknell are hilariously bad, 
the idea of "rebranding" a town is real: about every 10 years, we come up with 
a "vision" for our county town, Newbury. I guess Corden and Baynton are having 
a joke at Bracknell's expense: it's a new town, built in the 1950s and 60s, and 
it looks pretty dated now.

Corden's character, mailroom worker Phil Bourne, reminds me of certain 
larger-than-life people in our office. It's a shame no one wants to join him on 
nights out. Here in planning, we've always had an active social life. Once a 
year, loads of the planners in councils around southern England get together 
for a games session calledPlanning Sans Frontieres 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gwUMTzZE5CM>: we pitch tents, play games, have 
a few drinks. As with Sam and his boss Lizzie, there are a few intra-office 
romances, too. One colleague recently moved to highways to be closer to her 
boyfriend.

I enjoyed the programme, but I would like to defend the job. Sam hates it, but 
I've always seen it as a great chance to serve the community. The show is 
certainly a cautionary tale about sticking your nose in other people's 
business, though. If I ever see a mobile lying in the street, I don't think 
I'll pick it up.

The Wrong Mans is on BBC2, Tuesdays.
 