
G is for Gesamtkunstwerk <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gesamtkunstwerk>. 
Wagner couldn't spell it – he wrote "Gesammtkunstwerk" – but he knew what he 
meant by it, and the word could be said to sum up his entire aesthetic 
philosophy once he had decided to cast off what he came to see as the shackles 
of Italianate opera. It means "total work of art", and Wagner introduced the 
term in 1849 in a series of essays in which he decried the fragmentation of the 
arts and argued it had been downhill all the way since the Greeks.

He was especially critical of the way opera had become a vehicle for showy 
effects rather than a deep, unified statement of cultural truths. "In opera, 
hitherto, the musician has not so much as attempted to devise a unitarian form 
for the whole artwork," he wrote inThe Artwork of the Future 
<http://users.skynet.be/johndeere/wlpdf/wlpr0062.pdf>. "Each vocal piece is a 
form filled out for itself, and merely hung together with the other tone pieces 
of the opera through a similarity of outward structure. The disconnected is 
peculiarly the character of operatic music."

The working out of Wagner's vision in these essays led directly to the Ring 
cycle – he was sketching Siegfried as he wrote them – in which he gave up 
writing operatic "numbers" and sought to integrate music and drama. "Wagner 
claimed that in traditional opera, music, which should be the means, had become 
the end, while drama, which should be the end, was merely the means," explains 
Michael Tanner in hispithy, provocative book on the composer 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Wagner-Michael-Tanner/dp/0691102902>. "His revolution 
in opera, as opposed to all the other revolutions which he hoped to effect, was 
to be the placing of music and drama in the right order."

It was this integration of music and drama that George Bernard Shaw, one of 
Wagner's most influential early proselytisers, most admired. "There is not a 
single bar of 'classical music' in the Ring … that has any other point than the 
single direct point of giving musical expression to the drama," he wrote inThe 
Perfect Wagnerite 
<http://www.online-literature.com/george_bernard_shaw/perfect-wagnerite/>. Shaw 
said Wagner was not striving for musical effect "any more than Shakespeare in 
his plays is driving at such ingenuities of verse-making as sonnets, triolets 
and the like." There could be no higher praise.

Previous articles in the series

A is for Alberich 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2013/jan/16/a-z-wagner-alberich-antisemitism>
B is for Bayreuth 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/musicblog/2013/jan/30/a-z-wagner-bayreuth-brunnhilde>
C is for Cosima 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/musicblog/2013/feb/13/a-z-wagner-c-cosimo>
D is for Death 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/musicblog/2013/mar/12/a-z-wagner-d-death>
E is for Eva, Elsa and Elisabeth 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/musicblog/2013/mar/26/a-z-wagner-e-heroines>
F is for Die Feen 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/musicblog/2013/apr/04/a-z-wagner-f-die-feen>
 