
When I first met Ed Guiton, who died last week aged 71, I was struck by the 
force of life in his eyes. His happy round face belied the internal agony he 
must have suffered daily from the frustrations of being paralysed. This was in 
the old Guardian building in Farringdon Road; he was in his motorised 
wheelchair and had negotiated with some skill the clutter of review books, page 
proofs and other journalism detritus that clogged the narrow gaps between the 
various desks. As he propelled himself towards me, I smiled a little 
uncomfortably. How do you shake the hand of someone who has no movement or 
feeling below the shoulders? I reached over and squeezed his right hand with 
both of mine. There was nothing uncomfortable about his smile. "Hello, 
colleague," he said. I liked him instantly.

We were both unlikely Guardian columnists â€“ me a lifer on day release: him 
quadriplegic. I wroteA Life Inside 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2004/aug/12/prisonsandprobation.erwinjames>
, he wroteLife Goes On 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2004/mar/04/health.lifeandhealth1>. 
Through our alternating fortnightly G2 columns we had each been able to open 
small windows of light on to areas of society that existed mostly in the 
shadows: prison and disability.

Guiton broke his neck in a freak accident when he was on a walking holiday in 
the Andes in 2000. In his Bolivian hotel a combination of high altitude and low 
blood pressure caused him to faint and hit his head on the bedpost. He recalled 
how, five years before, he had heard the news that Superman actor Christopher 
Reeves had been paralysed in a riding accident. Among his first thoughts had 
been: "If that happened to me, I'd rather die." When it did, with the love and 
support of his family, he learned to live and cope.

Guiton lived a full and active life before his injury. Husband, father, keen 
walker, rock climber and potholer, he had also had careers in teaching, 
dentistry and IT, , and for a while ran his own small software company. His 
column kickstarted another career as a writer and disability rights champion. 
We kept in touch via infrequent email exchanges. My last one to him was in 
April this year. "Hi Ed, are you still around." He was. "Still alive and 
kicking," he wrote back. I said we must meet up again soon. "When are you 
coming to Sheffield?" he asked. Sadly, I never made it.
 