
I've been the singer and guitarist of my Eagles tribute band, the Alter Eagles 
<http://www.altereagles.co.uk/index.html>, for 10 years now – so I was 
interested to take a look atthis ITV show 
<http://www.itv.com/yourfacesoundsfamiliar/>, in which celebrities impersonate 
pop stars. It is, I guess, just light-hearted Saturday-night entertainment. But 
I kept thinking this was an hour of my life I would never get back.

Only one of the celebrities, Natalie Anderson from Emmerdale, can actually 
sing, so it's no surprise she's won for two weeks running. She lookedpretty 
good as Kate Bush <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ApRM0of1PcY>: the show is 
strong on costumes and makeup. Getting the look is important for any tribute 
act: we spent ages poring over old photographs of the Eagles. When we do their 
classics, we're all flowery shirts and denim.

I thought it was absurd, though, to have Cheryl Fergison from EastEnders as 
Meat Loaf 
<http://www.itv.com/yourfacesoundsfamiliar/news/cheryl-fergison-as-meatloaf-preview-pictures/>
: tribute acts don't usually attempt cross-dressing, mainly because audiences 
paying to see a tribute to the band they love would be annoyed if they got 
there and found out the singer was of the opposite sex. And Cheryl, like most 
of the other celebrities, is so bad that you can clearly hear the Auto-Tune. 
That's a no-no for any tribute act worth their salt: we're all professional 
musicians who've spent hours in the studio perfecting our sound. For us, it's 
all about the music, not this X Factor-style fascination with looks over 
substance.

It's hard to see why ITV has bothered with this programme: it's really just a 
rerun of their old talent show,Stars in Their Eyes 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0200379/>. I suppose programmes like this do say 
something about the perpetual popularity of tribute acts – we're certainly busy 
with bookings – but they don't come close to showing what it's really like to 
watch a good tribute in action. People come to see us because they love the 
Eagles, but can't afford to pay £150 a ticket on the rare occasions the band 
plays the UK. It's up to us to give them as close an experience to that as we 
can.

• Your Face Sounds Familiar is on ITV1 on Saturdays.
 