
It's very difficult to make an actor look as if they can really play a string 
instrument. I once helped out on a photoshoot, posing a group of models to look 
like a string quartet. It was an impossible task.

Yaron Zilberman <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm1597629/>, the director of this 
film about a New York string quartet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/apr/04/late-quartet-review>, has clearly 
made great efforts to get things right: each actor apparently spent hours 
working with music coaches. Sadly, their efforts haven't really been successful 
– the actors just seem to be moving their bows across the strings. Every time I 
saw them miming to the soundtrack, the film lost credibility.

This wasn't helped by the fact that the excerpts from the piece they spend a 
good deal of time playing (Beethoven's String Quartet No 14, Opus 131 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pSD0gXHSlKI>) were poorly selected and put 
together.

The quartet in the film are meant to have been playing together for 25 years. 
My quartet,the Endellion <http://www.endellionquartet.com>, has been together 
rather longer, at 34 years. But I did relate to the difficulties the players 
face when they discover that their cellist, Peter (Christopher Walken 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/mar/21/christopher-walken-im-a-regular-guy>
), has Parkinson's. He's very much the emotional lynchpin of the group. The 
same could be said of our cellist, David Waterman. Oddly, I think the cellist 
quite frequently takes this role – perhaps because they are so often playing 
the bass line that holds the music together.

Robert (Philip Seymour Hoffman) and the viola player, Juliette (Catherine 
Keener), are a married couple. This is less common among quartets than you 
might think. The ideal situation is for four individuals to come together, 
leave all their outside influences at the door and focus on the music. That 
becomes rather more difficult when two of the players are married.

Like Daniel, the first violinist in the film, I'm something of a 
perfectionist. In fact, I'm self-critical to the point of destructiveness. But 
he extends his perfectionism to the other players, too, which I try never to 
do. It also struck me as absurd that the second violinist, Robert, would 
suddenly try to usurp Daniel's position. I'm sure there are quartets where the 
second violinist harbours simmering resentment – though really, our positions 
are equally important. But surely a musician who was unhappy with his lot 
wouldn't wait 25 years to mention it?

• Andrew Watkinson plays first violin with the Endellion.
 