
It is less than 18 months since Ed Balls was one of the big beasts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/28/ed-balls-labour-minister-memoir>
 of British politics. Yet how long ago that era seems when one reads his 
agonised account ofthe May 2015 election  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/08/election-2015-panel>in 
his memoir, Speaking Out. As a Financial Times reviewerpungently put it 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/3241b5a4-800b-11e6-8e50-8ec15fb462f4.html#axzz4LexXidV3>
, the Balls generation already “reeks of yesterday.”

Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> lost last year, Balls 
writes, because it was not sufficiently trusted on the economy, and because Ed 
Miliband was not credible enough as a potential prime minister. This is what 
most politicians, as well as most political scientists, election analysts and 
commentators, myself included, believed at the time and believe now.

Yet Jeremy Corbyn spoke to the Labour party conference this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/sep/28/jeremy-corbyn-speech-labour-conference-jeremy-corbyns-today-interview>
 as if such things simply did not matter to Labour any more. Buoyed by his
emphatic re-election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/24/labour-leadership-jeremy-corbyn-wins-landslide-victory-party>
 and by the surge of activism in his party, he produced a 21st-century 
socialist wishlist of policies that flew in the face of the collective common 
sense of modern politics. Credible economic management? That’s old thinking 
now. People want hope of change. Competent leadership? It’s the message not the 
messenger that matters.

Although Corbyn talked about the importance of elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/sep/28/jeremy-corbyns-labour-conference-speech-video-highlights>
, it is abundantly clear that he wants nothing to do with winning on the centre 
ground in ways that earlier generations on left and right regarded as 
inescapable. Economic management and competent leadership were always the 
lodestars of that approach, though not the only tests of centre ground appeal. 
By these yardsticks, Labour lost in 2015 because the Tories were preferred as 
best party for the economy by an 18-point margin and because David Cameron was 
preferred to Miliband as prime minister by 17 points.

It is hardly surprising that Corbyn does not want to be judged in the same 
way. How could he, when his ratings are so poor? The Tories remain 17 points 
ahead of Labour on the economy. Meanwhile Corbyn trails Theresa May by an 
eye-watering 58 points 
<https://www.ipsos-mori.com/researchpublications/researcharchive/88/Political-Monitor-Satisfaction-Ratings-1997Present.aspx>
 on net satisfaction. Labour may not be living in la-la land, as the Daily Mail 
claimed this week, but it is certainly engaged in an attempt to substitute a 
new political reality for the old one.

The problem for Labour is that the centre ground hasn’t gone away. When 
offered a choice of left, centre-left, centre, centre-right or right, 45% of 
all British voters inan Opinium survey 
<http://opinium.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/Dead-Centre-British-politics4_lr.pdf>
 still regard themselves as being in the very centre of the political spectrum. 
A huge 77% of the British public see themselves either as centrists or 
centre-left or centre-right. Only 19% see Corbyn as being in the same 
territory, compared with 46% for Balls and 49% for Tony Blair.

By contrast, May is seen as on or close to the centre ground by 44% of all 
voters. This is one reason why it might be unwise to fall into the fashionable 
trap of claiming that the centre-focused politics that stretched from the John 
Major era to that of Cameron is either phoney or finished.

Labour has undoubtedly moved on. But those who think that May represents 
something equivalent on the Tory side of the aisle misread what is happening. 
The change in the Tory party since the summer is not a retreat from centrism. 
It may be better understood simply as a recasting, a less metropolitan liberal 
and more hard-edged version of centrism.

May exhibits no sign whatever of being willing to leave the centre untended, 
as Corbyn does. Just because she has put some very rightwing peoplein her 
cabinet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/13/who-theresa-may-cabinet-boris-hammond-rudd>
, or because she hasreopened the question of selection in schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/09/the-guardian-view-on-theresa-mays-schools-speech-a-divisive-blueprint>
, or because she is tasked with implementing Brexit, it does not follow that 
May is the mirror image of Corbyn.

Next week’s Conservative conference will be a test for her. She is adamant she 
is not abandoning the centre ground. But she does think that she is fashioning 
a more modern, more post-liberal, more Brexit-aware version of it.

The centre is always mobile. Today we live in more economically fragile times 
than in the Blair years. Those who are “just managing”, and who May has pledged 
to support, have a tougher time and fewer expectations than their equivalents a 
generation ago. Politics is viewed with more mistrust, seen as having failed to 
control widening inequality and unfairness. And immigration, real and imagined,
has hardened attitudes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/26/immigration-england-ons-migration-london-eu-referendum>
.

In any case, centrist politics was never as technocratic as its enemies 
pretend. In the 1960s, Harold Wilson did not just promote economic stewardship 
and effective leadership. He invoked flag and family, and cultivated an image 
of domestic, pipe-smoking ordinariness that was at odds with his well-hidden 
taste for cigars and brandy. In the present day, what is the SNP in Scotland 
but centrist government wrapped in a mastery of the symbolic and the rhetorical?

Jeremy Corbyn’s critics must decide: unity or terminal decline | Owen Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/29/jeremy-corbyn-critics-must-decide-unity-or-terminal-decline>
The Blair-Balls-Cameron generations were much less good at this. Blair in 
particular had a blind spot, which became a hostility, to the public’s 
attachments and in particular to the public’s fear of change. Though the public 
admired his competence as a domestic leader, they never bought into his embrace 
of change for change’s sake, his love of the new and disruptive, his 
indifference to tradition.

Though much has changed in the world, good management of the economy and 
competent leadership remain the essentials of any election-winning strategy. 
But a really smart centrist has to master the cultural as well as the 
technocratic, especially in tough economic times. Corbyn has some grasp of the 
former but possesses little or none of the latter. May, in her centre-right 
way, seems to have a much firmer sense of both – which is probably why she is 
winning.
 