
It had me from the first five minutes; Dinah’s late-night chase through 
Manchester, cab and heels ditched, suspect shortly to meet a sticky end under a 
bus. And it’s still got me, 355 minutes later – only now I’m officially in love 
with DI Vivienne Deering and about half her station to boot.No Offence 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/no-offence> has proved to be that doubly 
rare thing: a comedy drama that is both gripping and funny, and a police 
procedural that really does bring something new to the genre.


No Offence: why female coppers are the making of Paul Abbott's drama
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/jun/01/no-offence-strong-female-characters-paul-abbott-drama>
That something new is Abbott’s understanding of people, place and the way they 
speak. No Offence uses a team of writers, but has an unmistakable streak of 
Abbott running through every conversation. Every line is carefully measured, 
beautifully balanced, the good stuff sprinkled through every exchange, rather 
than saved up for the zingers. “Calm, methodical, Sunday fucking best,” briefs 
Deering as her team close in on the killer. “Don’t give me the face,” she tuts 
as Dinah tries to resist her orders. It all feels real.


I would probably still watch if Deering was the only good thing about No 
Offence. She’s a brilliant concoction: in some ways, completely unlike the 
traditional TV police boss (a plump, sexual, mid-40s woman with a taste for 
leather and a bleach-blond blow-dry); in others, absolutely recognisable 
(massive ego, fiercely protective of her troops, plagued by the decisions of 
chiefs above her).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fa-witty-love-letter-to-manchester-have-you-been-watching-no-offence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434450872604%2Fd5f0c0bb-9245-4054-b24b-29e1d3108a2c-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20witty%20love%20letter%20to%20Manchester%3A%20have%20you%20been%20watching%20No%20Offence%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fa-witty-love-letter-to-manchester-have-you-been-watching-no-offence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20witty%20love%20letter%20to%20Manchester%3A%20have%20you%20been%20watching%20No%20Offence%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fa-witty-love-letter-to-manchester-have-you-been-watching-no-offence%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434450872604%2Fd5f0c0bb-9245-4054-b24b-29e1d3108a2c-1020x612.jpeg>
 ‘I do like a man who isn’t bothered about promotion.’ Joanna Scanlan as DI 
Vivienne Deering. Photograph: Rory Mulvey, Ryan McNamara/Channel 4 
No Offence: meet the stars of Paul Abbott's gobby police drama
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/may/05/paul-abbott-no-offence> 
What makes Deering utterly compelling is the seam of tenderness that breaks 
free at surprising moments, and her absolute commitment to nailing the bad 
guys. “I’m here, I’ll see you through, it’s all right. You can go off now,” she 
tells Patrick Llewellyn, taking his hand as he lies dying. “Fucker’s dead,” she 
declares, seconds later to her assembled troops. Neither feel out of character.

It takes some skill to carry that off – and Joanna Scanlan has basically given 
a seven-week lesson in why directors should be less predictable and altogether 
bolder when it comes to casting. As deft with the office banter – “I do like a 
man who isn’t bothered about promotion,” she deadpans as an officer gives her a 
seven out of 10 when she asks how she looks – as with moments of fury or pure 
frustration. In other hands, Viv would have been a monster: between Abbott and 
Scanlan, she’s human; the cliched northern matriarch re-imagined as a modern 
police boss.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fa-witty-love-letter-to-manchester-have-you-been-watching-no-offence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434453838705%2F9158ad7e-d117-4bb8-8266-a6219dee37d6-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20witty%20love%20letter%20to%20Manchester%3A%20have%20you%20been%20watching%20No%20Offence%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fa-witty-love-letter-to-manchester-have-you-been-watching-no-offence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20witty%20love%20letter%20to%20Manchester%3A%20have%20you%20been%20watching%20No%20Offence%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fa-witty-love-letter-to-manchester-have-you-been-watching-no-offence%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434453838705%2F9158ad7e-d117-4bb8-8266-a6219dee37d6-1020x612.jpeg>
 The No Offence gang. Photograph: Ryan Mcnamara/Channel 4 
But No Offence is not just Scanlan’s show. When almost every actor on screen 
has proved a revelation – from Elaine Cassidy as Dinah, toAlexandra Roach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/nov/06/alexandra-roach-margaret-thatcher-role>
 as Joy,Will Mellor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2011/dec/16/will-mellor-greatest-mistake> as 
Spike and Paul Ritter as eccentric forensics expert Randolph – then you can be 
sure they’re appearing in a pretty remarkable piece of television.

Joanna Scanlan: 'Depression was like turning around a liner across the ocean'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/27/joanna-scanlan-depression-the-thick-of-it-getting-on-the-invisible-woman-nervous-breakdown-career>
Of course, No Offence has its flaws. While I have enjoyed the show’s main 
focus on one mystery across the series, and particularly admired the way it has 
been careful not to reduce its disabled actors to merely victims, I have 
wondered whether there was enough happening to really merit the long-running 
case. And I question, too, whether the final twist of last week’s episode, 
(spoilers!) that somebody within the team has been working with Patrick, is 
really necessary.

But perhaps that’s partly because, among the long list of things to admire, 
the thing I have most relished about No Offence is the show’s underscore of 
constable-level banter. I don’t want any of the team to be proved a murder and 
rapist in next week’s final episode, because I have spent seven weeks seeing 
them all develop as characters, and enjoying their interactions that capture 
completely the warmth and wit of the north west. (For this Mancunian in exile, 
each episode feels like a love-letter to the city and its people.)

Abbott has not exactly been idling away his time since those early glory days 
ofShameless <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/shameless>. But I’ll 
admit, I had forgotten how astonishing his best work could be. You can’t watch 
No Offence and not be reminded of his talent – let’s hope Channel 4 also 
recognises it with a second series. Because to decide not to renew the 
adventures of Viv and her team? Well, I wouldn’t fancy telling her, would you?

No Offence, 9pm, Channel 4 <http://www.channel4.com/programmes/no-offence>
 