
Constant coverage by a high profile media organisation is what most NGOs dream 
of: an unrivalled opportunity to communicate the issues you are working on to 
millions of readers over a sustained period.

Katine is a unique project that has given Guardian readers the chance to get 
under the skin of development. The project has shown that development takes 
time, can be complicated and doesn't always go to plan. For example, providing 
clean water is not straightforward. Contractors may delay implementation and 
flooding could make potholed roads impassable, which in turn stops building 
materials for a new water supply from arriving on time. Equally, readers have 
also seen how flowing water can make a huge, positive difference to women and 
girls' workload, health and school attendance.

This "behind the scenes" scrutiny meant we had to learn a lot, and quickly. 
The pace of development and the pace of the media do not always run in 
parallel. But the result was greater transparency between us, our beneficiaries 
and our donors.

The process was as complex as it was innovative. Working with such a variety 
of partners, with different insights, resources, skills and ways of doing 
things, was both beneficial and challenging, but showed how much more can be 
accomplished together than alone. With the continued overwhelming generosity of 
Guardian readers and funding from Barclays, we were able to achieve what we set 
out to do.

As a Ugandan woman, I know how poverty can make one powerless and hopeless. I 
know that change in a community such as Katine takes time and isn't easy. I'm 
proud of the people of Katine and Soroti district council, who have embraced 
this partnership so warmly. The project reinforced Amref's belief in engaging 
communities and local governments as partners from the start in order for a 
project to be relevant and sustainable. At the beginning, Katine's communities 
were ill-equipped to engage with local government or hold it accountable for 
the delivery of services. People are now becoming truly empowered.

Three years on, we are seeing real change. Increased access to clean and safe 
water. Improved school infrastructure and quality of education, along with more 
girls enrolled in school. Better food production, increased incomes and 
improved healthcare. We will continue our efforts to make progress in 2011. We 
are humbled by the achievements to date, and by the passion and commitment of 
our partners, the Guardian and Barclays, to Katine.

The project is helping us understand how we can better work with communities, 
put across better what we do, and work with different partners in other parts of
Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>. It might "start with a 
village", but it certainly doesn't end there. And Katine will never be the same 
again.
 