
The Living our Values sustainability report was created a decade ago when the 
web was still in its infancy and reader involvement in the newspapers was 
largely restricted to the letters page.

At that time, giving our readers an insight into the way we created our 
newspapers and the reasons behind our editorial decisions felt crucial if we 
were going to be open and transparent and hold ourselves to account.
However, the digital revolution has transformed the relationship with our 
readers to the point where they are now key partners in helping us to generate 
news, analysis and debate.

Given that so much of what we do is instantly accessible on the web, it feels 
appropriate for the sustainability report to highlight key editorial activities 
over the past year and to provide web links to more detailed coverage, rather 
than to create new content that replicates what is already on theguardian.com.

Clearly, the reverberations from the Guardian's investigation into phone 
hacking <https://www.theguardian.com/media/phone-hacking> at the News of the 
World is continuing to have a profound effect on the media industry as well as 
politics.

Apart from uncovering the scandal, the Guardian has been playing a prominent 
role in theLeveson inquiry <https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry>, 
including thinking through what would constitute effective industry 
self-regulation, given the failures of the existingPress Complaints Commission 
<http://www.pcc.org.uk/>.

To ensure the continuing trust of our audience, we brought our own 
journalists' code of conduct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/guardian-editorial-code> up to date and also 
strengthened the guidelines that ensure there is clarity around content that 
has involved some form of commercial sponsorship.

Our coverage of social justice continues to be an important thread across our 
national and international coverage.

The Guardian's Breadline Britain Project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/series/breadline-britain>, for example, 
has been tracking the impact and consequences of recession on families and 
individuals across the UK. As the cost of living rises, incomes shrink, and 
public spending cuts start to bite, we've been looking at how people are coping 
(or failing to cope) with austerity in areas such as food, housing, work, debt 
and money.

Internationally, our Global Development website 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development> takes an in-depth look at key 
issues around the Millennium Development Goals. A professional network is also 
being developed to provide specific support for development workers in the 
field.

The Guardian also continues to support the community of Katine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/katine>, in north east Uganda, which it has 
reported on for the past four years. The integrated development project, in 
partnership with African NGOAmref <http://www.amref.org/> and Barclays, has 
been extended until the end of 2013 with Â£160,000 of new funding to ensure that 
new community structures have the support necessary to remain viable in the 
longer term.

Sustainability plays a central role in the coverage through our environment 
website as well asGuardian Sustainable Business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/sustainable-business>, which encourages 
companies to embed social, ethical and environmental considerations into the 
heart of their strategy.

A central pillar of corporate responsibility is based around stakeholder 
engagement and the Guardian is going to enormous lengths to work in partnership 
with our millions of newspaper readers and web users, who can add a richness of 
perspective to our content. With the number of journalists shrinking as a 
result of financial pressures, it also makes sense not to rely on the expertise 
only of our writers.

Guardian editor-in-chief Alan Rusbridger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/alanrusbridger> is clear that the openness 
of the web 
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/insideguardian/2012/feb/29/open-journalism-at-the-guardian>
 is also a critical factor in bringing a higher degree of transparency to world 
affairs, and makes individuals, companies, institutions and politicians 
accountable for their actions.

He contrasts this with media organisations that are putting their content 
behind paywalls, such as the Times, which creates an impenetrable barrier to 
the free flow of information and ideas.

"We are developing an idea of a newspaper that is very different," says 
Rusbridger. "Our approach recognises the importance of putting a newspaper at 
the heart of the open eco-structure of information so that you can then harness 
different voices and link to an array of other sources.

"We are reaping the rewards for breaking out of the old mindset of journalism 
and understanding that we can harness, aggregate, curate and report, which is a 
distributive model of journalism that has a richness and diversity of content."

The Guardian extended the idea of openness during the last year to include 
publishing each day'snewslist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/insideguardian/2011/oct/10/guardian-newslist> 
kept by editors. Not only has it provided a glimpse into the scheduled 
announcements, events and speeches that make up the news day, but also allows 
readers to view what our editors think about the stories by reading their 
updates on Twitter.

Readers are given the opportunity to give their views on individual stories 
and suggest lines of inquiry using Twitter by tweeting to #opennews.

The Guardian further extended the idea of openness by inviting thousands of 
our readers to visit our offices to take part in a huge array of activities 
spread over two days in March 2012.

The Open Weekend not only allowed our readers to engage with some of the big 
issues facing society, but also to better understand how we create and curate 
our editorial coverage. Sessions included joining the Guardian's leader writers 
and political reporters to help shape the leader line and a discussion with 
Rusbridger as well the chief executive ofGuardian Media Group 
<http://www.gmgplc.co.uk/> and the head of Guardian US 
<http://www.guardiannews.com/> on where the digital revolution may take news 
organisations.

Being open is also at the heart of our multimedia offering with about a third 
of video views now on ourGuardian Facebook app 
<http://apps.facebook.com/theguardian/>, which helps us access a large and 
often new audience.

During the UK riots, we showcased user-generated videos to give a very real 
sense of the atmosphere on the streets.John Domokos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/johndomokos> went into the heart of riots, 
gathering locals' views and showing our audience the looting and unrest 
first-hand.

To highlight the impact of proposed changes to the Disability Living Allowance 
(DLA), we asked our users receiving DLA to send us videos of themselves, 
explaining the importance of this allowance. We received submissions from 
people suffering from a wide range of conditions, from ME to depression, each 
explaining how DLA is their lifeline. This set of videos gave a very personal, 
and powerful, insight into the impact of the proposed changes.

This example demonstrates our commitment to using multimedia to combat social 
injustice. Over 2011-12 we have endeavoured to give a voice to the voiceless, 
make a difference and engender change in attitudes and policy. We have covered 
issues in the UK and abroad, ranging from travellers' rights to the death 
penalty for minors.

One film we are particularly proud of is "I will never be cut" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2011/apr/18/female-genital-mutilation-video>
. This film gave a voice to two teenage girls living with the threat of female 
genital mutilation. Fighting against tradition and their parents, they were 
supported by a local grassroots organisation and narrowly avoided being cut. 
The film was winner of the best individual documentary at the Webby Awards 2012 
and a finalist at the Rory Peck Awards 2011.

Another key aspect of the Guardian's development is the expansion of its 
editorial and commercial presence in the United States. A readership of many 
millions of unique users per month has been built up in the US with virtually 
no marketing and this is being extended through the launch of New York-based 
guardiannews.com.

Not only is this expansion a key plank in Guardian News & Media's commercial 
strategy but also ensures our unique brand of liberal journalism reaches a 
broader audience.
 