
Last August Lliana Bird <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lliana_Bird> and Josie 
Naughton 
<http://www.helprefugees.org.uk/2016/01/21/co-founder-josie-sets-the-record-straight-in-victoria-derbyshire-interview/>
 were just two friends with interesting jobs in London, vibrant social lives 
and a good set of contacts. Bird, who is 34, is a writer and radio presenter, 
and 31-year-old Naughton had spent 10 years making her way up in music 
management to work for Coldplay. They had beliefs and ideals, and had gone on 
the odd march, but they weren’t activists. Political engagement did not go much 
beyond putting up an opinionated Facebook post. Then the refugee crisis began 
to encroach on the holiday headlines and, like a lot of people, they both 
wondered how they might help.

Bird noticed that her old acting teacher, a Zen monk named Tom Radcliffe, had 
posted on Facebook saying he was going to raise £1,000, get in his car and 
drive to the refugee camp in Calais. She and Naughton offered to help. At a 
lunch with their mutual friend, the TV presenter and author Dawn O’Porter, the 
three women decided to start a hashtag#HelpCalais 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/oct/01/helpcalais-how-a-hashtag-grew-into-a-social-movement-to-support-refugees>
, with the aim of getting enough money and clothes together via Twitter to take 
a van to France.

If people hadn’t helped my dad, I kind of wouldn’t be here, so I had to help 
in some way

With their Twitter followers, social media savvy and background in promotion, 
it wasn’t difficult to reach out to a few thousand people. Still, they weren’t 
prepared for just how quickly things would escalate. Naughton would soon quit 
her job and both women would be scrambling to exploit their celebrity contacts. 
But most surprising of all, they would find themselves ahead of all the 
established charities and agencies, at the forefront of the momentous task of 
feeding, housing and looking after tens of thousands of refugees across Europe.

In the first few days of their appeal, so many donations arrived that they had 
to find storage space, which the company Big Yellow donated for free. Then Dani 
Lawrence turned up, also wanting to help. A 43-year-old mother of three who 
runs an import company with her husband, she told me she had personal reasons 
for coming on board. As she, Naughton and Bird made one of their regular 
Eurostar trips toCalais <https://www.theguardian.com/world/calais> last week, 
Lawrence explained her motivation: “My father’s Moroccan, and he left when he 
was 17 in a boat to a refugee camp in Gibraltar, and then a bigger one in 
Marseille.”

Eyes watery with emotion, she continues: “He left without family, papers or 
passport. So the images of refugees in the summer resonated with me. If people 
hadn’t helped my dad, I kind of wouldn’t be here, so I had to help in some way.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fhelp-refugees-calais-accidental-activists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f270ba59d968f9b06828683d4cf330ea685f3f1%2F0_0_937_562%2F937.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Accidental%20activists%3A%20the%20British%20women%20on%20the%20front%20line%20of%20the%20refugee%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fhelp-refugees-calais-accidental-activists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Accidental%20activists%3A%20the%20British%20women%20on%20the%20front%20line%20of%20the%20refugee%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fhelp-refugees-calais-accidental-activists%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f270ba59d968f9b06828683d4cf330ea685f3f1%2F0_0_937_562%2F937.jpg>
 The first Help Refugees aid lorry leaves the UK last September. 
Bird’s sister, who lives in Tel Aviv, became supply manager, setting up an 
Amazon wish list so that anyone who wanted to donate could order a tent, 
sleeping bag or any other essential for the homeless and dispossessed.

A week after they started, the image of three-year-old Syrian Alan Kurdi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/04/alan-kurdi-turkish-court-jails-pair-syrian-toddler-death-trafficking>
 flashed around the world, showing his body washed up on a Turkish beach after 
his family’s dinghy capsized en route for Greece. The three women were deeply 
affected by the photograph. They were not alone. Bird’s sister in Israel called 
her to say that there was a glitch with the Amazon wish list. “She said, ‘I 
keep putting on 100 pairs of boots, 200 sleeping bags, 300 tents, and they keep 
disappearing’,” recalls Bird. “I had a go, and suddenly we realised that they 
were disappearing because people were buying them.” They got a call from Big 
Yellow asking how many volunteers they had. The answer was six. They were told 
they were going to need many more: 7,000 packages had arrived in a day, and 
would continue to come at a similar rate for the next five weeks. Again the 
women used social media to drum up support, and hundreds of volunteers turned 
up, from out-of-work actors to concerned grandmothers. They needed to be fed, 
so the women used their persuasive powers, and Domino’s Pizza and Nando’s did 
the rest.

They now had 15 storage rooms. What had started out as a goodwill gesture had 
turned into an industrial process. They had to learn about transportation, 
distribution, palletising. Enter a prison logistics officer named Ash, eager to 
help. “We had all this stuff and no way of shifting it,” says Lawrence. “So we 
went to Calais for the night, all four of us in my car.”

“We didn’t know what to expect,” says Naughton. “We actually thought we might 
get there and there would be a large, you know, UNHCR or Red Cross camp, and 
there would be a warehouse.”

“But there was nothing,” says Lawrence. “No warehouse. No big organisations. 
No structure. Just a load of amazing people, working there on the ground.”

At this stage, most people would have congratulated themselves for their good 
deed and beat a hasty retreat home. But two encounters made them want to 
redouble their efforts. The first was with a remarkable woman calledLiz Clegg 
<http://www.helprefugees.org.uk/2016/02/24/watch-liz-from-the-calais-women-and-childrens-centre-read-her-letter-to-jamil/>
, a former firefighter from Glastonbury who was organising food and aid at the 
camp. She had seen well-intentioned people come and go without really improving 
the situation. She was sceptical about the group, who were calling themselves 
Help Calais at the time. They had to prove they were committed if she was going 
to work with them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fhelp-refugees-calais-accidental-activists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6b23a77979e8a8817c961152dc2bc0c958b6199%2F95_321_5316_3190%2F5316.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Accidental%20activists%3A%20the%20British%20women%20on%20the%20front%20line%20of%20the%20refugee%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fhelp-refugees-calais-accidental-activists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Accidental%20activists%3A%20the%20British%20women%20on%20the%20front%20line%20of%20the%20refugee%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fhelp-refugees-calais-accidental-activists%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6b23a77979e8a8817c961152dc2bc0c958b6199%2F95_321_5316_3190%2F5316.jpg>
 Dani Lawrence, Lliana Bird and Josie Naughton photographed in the refugee camp 
at Calais last week. Photograph: Antonio Olmos for the Observer 
The other meeting was with a 15-year-old Syrian boy. “He had the most 
beautiful eyes,” says Lawrence. “I asked him his story. He said, ‘My parents 
smuggled me out, and I went from Turkey to Lesbos on a boat that started 
sinking.’ The people smugglers attempted to keep the boat afloat by throwing 
off all the unaccompanied boys to drown. And the boy said: ‘I realised what was 
happening so I linked my arm with the boy next to me, who was also without 
family, and I said: We’re brothers, we’re brothers, they won’t throw us off.’”

Lawrence pauses, welling up again. Having survived the journey, the boy was 
now alone in Calais. “I said, ‘What do you mean you’re on your own?’ He said, 
‘I’m on my own.’ I was thinking, how can he be living on his own? I have a 
14-year-old. ‘What can I bring you?’ I asked. And he looked me in the eyes, 
full of tears, and said ‘I don’t want anything. Just bring me my mum.’ I broke 
down. We all broke down. That was the moment we realised we couldn’t stop.”

Ten months on, and Help Refugees <http://www.helprefugees.org.uk/about/>, as 
they’re now called, has 26 projects going on across Europe. It has raised £2m 
and another £1m worth of goods and services, with close to zero overheads. At 
times it has been feeding 20,000 people a day. It has recruited the support of 
well-known figures including Benedict Cumberbatch, Lena Dunham, Elizabeth 
Gilbert, Jude Law, Tom Stoppard and Juliet Stevenson. It has built 1,500 solid 
structure shelters at the camp in Calais, going where other major charities 
fear to tread, and in the process saving countless lives.

We worked around my kitchen table. I’d take the children to school then work 
with the team

How these three women – with no real charitable experience – turned themselves 
within a few months into one of the most effective humanitarian response 
organisations anywhere on the continent is a story not only of exceptional 
dedication and determination but also of a new kind of rapid mobilisation based 
on social media and grassroots action. As good as their word to Clegg, they 
returned to Calais on 15 September to open a warehouse. The speed of these 
amateurs put many professional charities to shame. For various reasons, 
political and structural, the major NGOs were not set up to react to a 
migration crisis in Europe. As the camp outside Calais, nicknamed the “Jungle”, 
was not legally recognised, it presented bureaucratic problems for longstanding 
agencies.

But the women had their own problems. How do you run an empty warehouse? 
Lawrence found herself in a DIY superstore on the outskirts of Calais, looking 
for shelving materials for storage. A stranger asked what she was doing. She 
told him, and he said he’d pay for the shelves, which came to £900. He’d raised 
£5,000 in Ireland, and didn’t know what to do with the cash. The women are full 
of anecdotes like this, featuring moments of crisis when ordinary people proved 
to be extraordinary.

They needed someone to stay in Calais for a week to look after the warehouse. 
Their friend,Philli Boyle, 
<http://www.helprefugees.org.uk/2016/01/17/philli-quoted-in-bbc-piece-on-the-relocation-in-the-calais-refugee-camp/>
 offered to do it. She ended up staying nine months. Another friend,Nico Stevens
 
<http://www.helprefugees.org.uk/2016/01/20/the-guardian-talks-to-help-refugees-volunteer-nico-about-the-calais-camp-relocations/>
, who was just 24, moved out to France to deal with volunteers and arrange 
shelter allocation. What the women quickly recognised was that the volunteers 
needed to be supported, empowered and organised. Back in London, they were 
putting in 18-hour days around their jobs. “We didn’t have an office,” says 
Lawrence. “We worked around my kitchen table. I’d take the children to school 
then work with the team, leave them working, then get the kids, and then they’d 
eat with my kids. The kids understood, and my husband has been incredibly 
supportive.” They were, Lawrence says, “the accidental charity”. She says 
she’ll always put her children first, but has effectively given up working on 
her business.

By January, Naughton realised she had to give up her job, too. “It was a huge 
decision, but I was obsessed with doing this.” She acknowledges that, being 
single and living alone, she finds it hard to know when to stop work. “I 
struggle with that. Basically, I don’t see my friends or family any more. This 
is completely my calling. There will have to be a time when balance comes back. 
I hesitate to say this, because the situation is so awful, but I’m more 
fulfilled now than I’ve ever been.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fhelp-refugees-calais-accidental-activists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a1bca503adb6d0daa5a84ef6fcbb997df25849d%2F0_294_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Accidental%20activists%3A%20the%20British%20women%20on%20the%20front%20line%20of%20the%20refugee%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fhelp-refugees-calais-accidental-activists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Accidental%20activists%3A%20the%20British%20women%20on%20the%20front%20line%20of%20the%20refugee%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fhelp-refugees-calais-accidental-activists%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a1bca503adb6d0daa5a84ef6fcbb997df25849d%2F0_294_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Help Refugees volunteers sorting donated tents at the warehouse in Calais. 
Photograph: Antonio Olmos for the Observer 
All the women have at times felt overwhelmed by the workload and 
responsibility but have drawn encouragement from each other and inspiration 
from the volunteers, and the refugees themselves. Bird not only works as a DJ 
and writes for theHuffington Post, she is also writing a book on weird science. 
“The way to deal with it is to work seven days a week, sometimes up until 3am. 
There have been moments when we’ve all felt like walking away but we’ve pulled 
each other through it. Working with your best friends makes it easier. I 
couldn’t have done it without them, and the support of my partner.”

She lives with Noel Fielding, the comedian best known for The Mighty Boosh. He 
jokes that since she started HelpRefugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/refugees>, she’s taken to dressing like Bob 
Geldof. But, like the other two, she’s keen to crush the idea that she’s a 
saint. She speaks for them all: “Every time I feel exhausted I remember how 
hard the incredible teams on the ground work, how much they’ve sacrificed to be 
there, and I remember the refugees themselves, how they’ve lost everything, how 
resilient and strong they are, how my life is a bed of roses compared to 
theirs, and that being able to work is actually a privilege.”

Dignity also counts. People are deserving of our help but also our respect. 
That’s at our core

In Calais, on the forecourt of two large warehouses, 24-year-old Hettie 
Colquhoun 
<http://www.helprefugees.org.uk/2016/02/10/evening-standard-piece-on-the-creative-london-volunteers-working-in-the-calais-camp/>
 is giving the morning briefing to 50 volunteers, nearly all in their 20s. 
First the group does limbering up exercises, then they hear the day’s plans – 
and the news that many migrants have been arriving in recent days. People are 
selected to do particular tasks, and Colquhoun finishes with an inspirational 
speech, telling the crowd that they represent the best of the human spirit.

She’s not wrong. From a distance, it all looks a bit Glastonbury, a colourful 
scene of festival chic, but there’s no empty posing about Colquhoun or the 
people she’s addressing. They’re motivated, hardworking and fiercely 
conscientious. On an earlier visit, the playwright Tom Stoppard was so 
impressed by Colquhoun, he said she should become prime minister.

Another young woman – Help Refugees cannot be accused of being male-dominated 
– 22-year old Melissa Colak reminds the group that it’s the start of Ramadan, 
and extra sensitivity should be displayed: they shouldn’t eat publicly or play 
music, and Colak also tells them the most appropriate greeting to use.

Bird tells me that Help Refugees has two abiding principles. “Always find out 
from the volunteers on the ground and the refugees themselves. Don’t think you 
know best. And the second thing is that although providing the essentials of 
humanitarian aid is so important, dignity also really counts, and that can be 
overlooked. People are deserving of our help but also our respect. That’s at 
our core.”

Colak and 25-year-old Cecile Burton 
<http://morzinesourcemagazine.com/the-jungle-jam/> show me around the 
warehouses. They are stacked with tents, backpacks, shoes and mountains of 
clothes. There’s a shortage of men’s shoes, says Burton, because donors tend to 
think only of women and children and assume that men can fend for themselves. 
“But they still need shoes,” she says.

Most of the volunteers come and go under their own steam, but some stick 
around, and there is a core, of which Burton and Colquhoun are part, whose 
accommodation and living expenses are paid by Help Refugees.

Seventy per cent of the donations come from Britain. After a while, Help 
Refugees realised that Amazon wish lists were not ideal. There was difficulty 
getting the supplies palletised and over to France, so Bird tasked her sister 
with finding an alternative. “She finally found this guy called Paul, who’s 
been absolutely amazing,” says Bird. “He runs this small campsite equipment 
company called Leisure Fayre and they put us on thehome page of their website 
<https://www.leisurefayre.com/section.php/86100/1/help_refugees>. It says Buy a 
Gift for a Refugee. It has all the goods we need.” Each week Leisure Fayre 
fills up a big van of goods that the public has donated through its website and 
sends it all, free of charge, over to Calais.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fhelp-refugees-calais-accidental-activists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6932564576fb81a5788048876299ab550d77410%2F0_321_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Accidental%20activists%3A%20the%20British%20women%20on%20the%20front%20line%20of%20the%20refugee%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fhelp-refugees-calais-accidental-activists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Accidental%20activists%3A%20the%20British%20women%20on%20the%20front%20line%20of%20the%20refugee%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fhelp-refugees-calais-accidental-activists%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6932564576fb81a5788048876299ab550d77410%2F0_321_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Volunteers prepare meals for 2,000 in the Help Refugees kitchen. Photograph: 
Antonio Olmos for the Observer 
As we walk into the kitchens, at the front of the warehouse, where hot meals 
for 2,000 are produced, the Rolling Stones’ Gimme Shelter is playing. Never has 
a song title seemed more appropriate. But for all its sprawling collections of 
goods and hectic activity, the warehouse is a refuge of calm, a place where 
like-minded souls can get on with some of the essential logistics of 
humanitarian aid. The real action, of course, takes place in the Jungle.

There have been several camps around Calais since the French government closed 
down the Sangatte migrant reception facility in 2002 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/2533415.stm>. The authorities have 
raided and dismantled them over the years, only for another to spring up almost 
immediately. The current main encampment lies on charmless wasteland to the 
east of the town, just beyond the perimeter road. You enter beneath a 
graffiti-covered flyover with aBanksy artwork depicting Steve Jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/dec/11/banksy-uses-steve-jobs-artwork-to-highlight-refugee-crisis>
, the son of a Syrian migrant, carrying an Apple computer and a bin bag of 
possessions. Around it, someone has sprayed “London Calling” and next to that 
“Nobody deserves to live this way”. Standing guard are several police kitted 
out in Robocop-style riot gear.

Tuesday is shoes day, Wednesday is jackets, Fridays trousers

There’s a clearing with a football pitch, a row of jerry-built shops, 
makeshift mosques, a couple of churches, a school, washing facilities, portable 
toilets, and 1,500 tightly packed wooden shelters, all built by volunteers 
working under the Help Refugees umbrella, where 5,188 refugees and migrants 
from Sudan, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Afghanistan, Syria and elsewhere live while they 
attempt to reach the UK.

That precise figure comes from the meticulous censuses that Help Refugees 
conduct each month to track the camp’s makeup and population, and to counter 
the French authorities’ tendency to underestimate numbers.

There is also within the camp a fenced-off area of large white residential 
containers run by the French, to which Help Refugees has no access. Movement is 
restricted within this area and there is a strict curfew, but in many respects 
it’s a safer and cleaner environment than the surrounding shanty town.

Each day Help Refugees, which provides welcome packs of sleeping bags and 
other essentials to new arrivals, distributes specific goods to three sites on 
the camp. Tuesday is shoes day, Wednesday is jackets, Fridays trousers.

But now, after a recent fire, they’re trying to work out how to replace the 
shelters that were destroyed. A 23-year-old graduate in French and philosophy 
with the wonderful name Liv Long is overseeing the rebuilding. I suggest that 
her degree subjects, while not necessarily the ideal preparation for working 
out how to house refugees, must have come in handy in Calais. “Well,” she says, 
surveying the scorched land where the shelters were destroyed, “I haven’t had 
much use for the French.”

The French authorities won’t allow any more building so it can be difficult to 
get the constructions into the camp. For the moment, Help Refugees have 
deployed tents, which are not ideal, especially when it rains.

And here you reach the central paradox of the camp. No one wants it to exist, 
not Help Refugees, not the British or French authorities, not even the people 
that live there. They would like to see it disappear – but for different 
reasons.

It’s the human suffering that concerns the women behind Help Refugees. And to 
alleviate it neither Bird nor Naughton have been shy in using their 
connections. When Liz Clegg announced that she needed a double-decker bus for a 
women and children’s centre, the actor Juliet Stevenson, brought to the camp by 
Help Refugees, made sure that one arrived within 12 days.

Clegg and her daughter, Inca Sorrell 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/entry/calais-refugee-camp-liz-clegg_uk_571a0a81e4b0727e4fe76c78>
, look out for the Jungle’s 420 unaccompanied children. One of Clegg’s 
initiatives that Help Refugees financed was to give every child a mobile phone 
with credit. Just how vital that step proved to be was witnessed by Naughton 
when she accompanied Clegg and Sorrell in March to the Women in the World 
Conference in New York. Naughton recalls: “Inca got atext message from Ahmed 
<http://www.helprefugees.org.uk/2016/04/08/media-coverage-of-ahmed-afghan-boy-saved-after-he-texted-no-oxygen-to-volunteer/>
, who was seven years old.”

The message read: “I ned halp darivar no stap car no oksijan in the car no 
signal iam in the cantenar. Iam no jokan valla.”

Sorrell instantly worked out that this meant: “I need help. The driver won’t 
stop the car. No oxygen in the car. No signal. I’m in a container. I am not 
joking. I swear to God.”

She called the Afghan boy and spoke to him, while Naughton contacted the Help 
Refugees office in London. They called the police, who traced the phone to a 
motorway service station in Leicestershire. In a sealed lorry, they found Ahmed 
and 14 adults hidden in the airless container.

That’s 15 lives saved by Help Refugees money, and there have been plenty more. 
Last October the Moira refugee camp in Lesbos was overrun by new arrivals, with 
some 5,000 people under the care of half a dozen volunteers. The situation was 
dire, with disease breaking out, soHelp Refugees put out a message 
<http://www.helprefugees.org.uk/2015/11/07/help-refugees-feed-3000-hungry-refugees-in-moira-lesbos/>
 for doctors and medics, offering to pay for flights and accommodation if they 
could commit to more than a week. They managed to fund 30 doctors, one of whom, 
Dr Linda, called Naughton and, shocked by the conditions she found, told her 
that she had a month before children started dying.

“That day Josie rang me,” says Bird, “and told me what Dr Linda had said. She 
was crying a lot. We thought, it’s not right that we’re the ones dealing with 
this. We didn’t know what to do, so I wrote anarticle for the Huffington Post 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/lliana-bird/refugee-crisis-lesbos_b_8388988.html>
 and they put it on the front page in the UK and the US. The title was “The 
Children’s Feet Are Rotting You Guys Have One Month and Then All These People 
Will Be Dead.”

The response was immediate. “We got £80,000 in one week,” says Bird.

It also opened the way to an ongoing relationship between Lawrence and an 
American woman calledAmy Olrick <https://mobile.twitter.com/aolrick>, who is 
part of a group called theCompassion Collective 
<http://thecompassioncollective.org>, which features writers like Elizabeth 
Gilbert ofEat Pray Love fame and Cheryl Strayed, who wrote Wild. During a 
48-hour fundraising drive, which involved Lena Dunham and Reese Witherspoon, 
they raised $1m for Help Refugees.

The money has been put to active use, feeding and clothing refugees across the 
islands of Chios, Samos, Kos, Lesbos and on the Greek mainland too. At one 
point they were serving 20,000 meals a day in all the camps they worked in. 
They’re supplying mosquito repellant and baby milk to mothers in the Greek 
camps, which are run by the Greek military, and they have employed an 
organisation called the Green Helmets to build floors for the military tents, 
which are on gravel and open to snakes and scorpions.

“We shouldn’t be doing that,” says Naughton. “A larger organisation should be 
doing it. If they came along and said we want to floor all the tents in the 
camps, that would be brilliant.”

We eat lunch in an Afghan restaurant in the Jungle and make our way back to 
Britain. Our trip home is effortless, but for the people we leave behind it is 
an impossible journey that they dream every night of making. On the train the 
women tell me more about their plans, while constantly reminding me that they 
are simply facilitators, and it’s the volunteers on the ground who really make 
the difference – and the refugees who really matter.

That’s true, of course, but the fact remains that they have stepped into a 
massive void where few governments or established NGOs are prepared to go. 
They’ve fed the hungry and housed the homeless, and there are people living now 
thanks to them who would otherwise be dead.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fhelp-refugees-calais-accidental-activists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd87c1e1e582862d73e3da12fec1d8cbbe7b149d1%2F0_246_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Accidental%20activists%3A%20the%20British%20women%20on%20the%20front%20line%20of%20the%20refugee%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fhelp-refugees-calais-accidental-activists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Accidental%20activists%3A%20the%20British%20women%20on%20the%20front%20line%20of%20the%20refugee%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fhelp-refugees-calais-accidental-activists%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd87c1e1e582862d73e3da12fec1d8cbbe7b149d1%2F0_246_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Jack Steadman, taking a camp census, jokes with (left to right) Dani Lawrence, 
Lliana Bird and Josie Naughton. Photograph: Antonio Olmos for the Observer 
They knew very little about charity, fundraising or organising humanitarian 
aid when they started, but they never let that stop them. Instead of waiting 
for someone else better qualified and more experienced to do the job, they got 
on with it. And when doors were closed, they just pushed harder.

I ask them as the train pulls into St Pancras, London, what they would say if 
Oxfam came along and said they’d take over the operation.

“Great,” says Lawrence.

“We’d say ‘fantastic!’” says Naughton.

Bird looks more pensive. She says that she’s heard from that charity that they 
would indeed like to partner with Help Refugees.

“But I don’t agree that we’d let them take over everything. Not being a 
charity that’s been around for 75 years, not having the name that they have – 
it comes with great knowledge but they have a lot to lose, so they have to do 
things a certain way. If we can work together with them, and they can help us 
with their knowledge and support network, that would be best.”

Whatever agreements the European Union reaches with Turkey, and whatever 
unfolds in Syria, Libya and beyond, the refugee and migration crisis is not 
going away anytime soon. That’s something we all have to think about. The good 
news is that the inspiring women from Help Refugees look like they’re going to 
be sticking around for a while too.

Moved to action: other grassroots responses

Migrant Offshore Aid Station (Moas) <https://www.moas.eu>
Appalled by the lack of response to the hundreds of refugees who drowned at 
sea near the Italian island of Lampedusa in 2013, American millionaire 
entrepreneur Christopher Catrambone and his Italian wife, Regina, founded the 
Malta-based Moas in 2014 after converting a 40-foot Canadian fishing boat into 
the Mediterranean’s first private search-and-rescue vessel. The couple have 
ploughed millions of their own money – made through providing insurance in 
conflict zones – into the charity, which has in its first two years rescued 
nearly 12,000 people at sea.

Project Amal ou Salam <http://projectamalousalam.org>
Translated as ‘Project Hope and Peace’, this organisation aims to instil in 
Syria’s schoolchildren the same happiness and hope that its founder, 
Syrian-born Canadian Nousha Kabawat, felt growing up in peacetime Syria. 
Through workshops, summer camps and a permanent school in Jordan, since 2013 
the project has affected the lives of more than 5,000 children in Turkey, 
Lebanon, Jordan and Syria.

Lighthouse Relief <http://www.lighthouserelief.org/>
Founded in Lesbos in 2015 by a small group of multinational volunteers 
concerned by the lack of aid on offer to the increasing number of refugees 
arriving on the island, the organisation now operates in camps across Greece 
and is registered in Sweden.

International Network for Aid, Relief and Assistance (Inara) 
<http://www.inara.org/>
Arab-American Arwa Damon, a CNN reporter, co-founded Inara in Lebanon in 2015 
to provide medical treatment to children from conflict areas suffering from 
burns, bomb injuries and malnutrition-related afflictions such as cataracts, 
and who wouldn’t otherwise be treated.Daisy Dunne

How you can help

• With more than a million refugees in Europe, the need is still great. You 
can donate to help provide hot food, clothes, baby milk and essential medical 
care athelprefugees.org.uk <http://helprefugees.org.uk/>

You can also buy a sleeping bag, blanket or tent for a refugee, which will be 
delivered to them by visiting:helprefugees.leisurefayre.com 
<http://helprefugees.leisurefayre.com>

To volunteer in Calais, email volunteerincalais@gmail.com
 