
Jeremy Hunt's policy adviser, Adam Smith, was a regular political contact for 
News Corporation executives on policy issues from filesharing to James 
Murdoch's views on intellectual property legislation, according toevidence 
submitted 
<http://www.levesoninquiry.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2012/04/Exhibit-KRM-34.pdf>
to the Leveson inquiry by Rupert Murdoch on Thursday.

The special adviser who worked closely with the embattled culture secretary 
was named five times in a list of political contacts engaged by the media 
conglomerate since 2009, more than any other Whitehall official.

Smith resigned on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/apr/25/jeremy-hunt-special-adviser-bskyb?INTCMP=SRCH>
 after News Corporation revealed he acted as a conduit to Hunt for James 
Murdoch during the company's Â£7.8bn takeover bid for BSkyB. Smith admitted he 
had allowed the perception to develop that News Corp had "too close a 
relationship with the culture department" and that his "activities at times 
went too far".

Hunt claimed he had been unaware of "the volume and tone" of Smith's contacts 
with News Corp.

But the latest submissions from the Murdoch family show Smith was a key figure 
in News Corp's political strategy in the UK. The Department for Culture, Media 
and Sport on Thursday declined to say what form the discussions had taken, but 
Smith is listed as a News Corp contact on proposed legislation in the digital 
economy act which aimed to stop peer-to-peer filesharing, which News Corp told 
theLeveson inquiry <https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry> "impacts 
heavily on [its] commercial operations".

In late 2010 he was a contact on the issue of "net neutrality", which relates 
to whether internet service providers can block certain content, a major 
concern to News Corp.

Last year, Smith was contacted by the media giant about a government review of 
the UK's copyright framework which News Corporation submission said was 
"profoundly important" across all its businesses.

In May 2011, News Corporation involved him in a discussion of James Murdoch's 
ideas about intellectual property law, and the following month he was a point 
of contact for News Corp's response to plans for a new communications bill 
which it deemed of "central importance to the broad regulatory environment in 
which News Corporation will be operating over the coming years".

The culture department declined to comment on whether it was right for Smith 
to have such frequent contact with News Corporation over such a wide range of 
policy issues, on behalf of the culture secretary.

"The secretary of state has made clear that he will respond fully to all 
allegations about his conduct and that of the department when he gives evidence 
to the Leveson inquiry," a spokesman for the department said.

Hunt is facing calls for his resignation amid accusations that he has used 
Smith as "a human shield".

The evidence shows News Corp also had three meetings with a senior adviser to 
David Cameron, Rohan Silva, and two meetings with Ed Vaizey, the culture 
minister.
 