
Early this morning, the news came in that Adnan Syed – the “subject” of the 
firstSerial <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/serial> (nobody can call 
him the hero, though plainly that is how he is seen) – had been granted a 
retrial. Legally, this has more significance than it first seems. As his lawyer 
explained: “The conviction is erased. It’s gone. As of this day, he’s not 
convicted any more.”

Adnan Syed, subject of Serial podcast, granted a new trial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/30/adnan-syed-judge-grants-new-trial-serial-podcast-baltimore-murder-case>
This doesn’t mean the state won’t fight the case that Syed murdered his former 
girlfriend, Hae Min Lee. But Judge Martin Welch has, by the exigencies of the 
law, said something larger than “What the – what the fuck?” (to use the 
memorable analysis of series creatorSarah Koenig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/05/serial-sarah-koenig-natalie-harnes-my-highlight>
 in one episode).

The Baltimore judge has said categorically that the original guilty verdict, 
handed down 16 years ago, lacked foundation. Devotees of the first series of 
Serial will, whatever their reservations, unite in celebration. We will not – 
all 80 million of us – have the same interpretations of the characters in 
Serial, nor even all think that Adnan was innocent.

But the consensus must surely be unanimous that the evidence used to convict 
him wasn’t enough. The only way to accept the guilty verdict would be if you 
were of an authoritarian bent, inclined to believe that police and other 
professionals had instincts, knowledge, insights, evidence, that they wouldn’t 
necessarily make public. If you were of that view, the podcast would hold no 
interest for you: its magnetism came from the fact that it described a 
miscarriage of justice.

Yet it was profoundly atypical of miscarriage-of-justice reporting, which 
usually takes its energy from the trenchant, pioneering conviction that the 
subject is innocent. This is what made Serial so groundbreaking and Koenig 
herself so human, and I think it was its originality and everywoman 
universalism that initially lifted it heads above its true crime genre (though 
other things kept it there).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fadnan-syed-retrial-serial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7910899efcfaf39dbd09201517e24ccdbf48442%2F0_75_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adnan%20Syed%20retrial%3A%20Serial%20finally%20gets%20the%20ending%20it%20deserves&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fadnan-syed-retrial-serial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adnan%20Syed%20retrial%3A%20Serial%20finally%20gets%20the%20ending%20it%20deserves&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fadnan-syed-retrial-serial%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7910899efcfaf39dbd09201517e24ccdbf48442%2F0_75_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
 ‘What the?’ … Sarah Koenig Photograph: Boston Globe/Boston Globe via Getty 
Images 
You never get the sense that Koenig is playing you, drawing out the 
uncertainty for a punchline or a cliffhanger. She genuinely doesn’t know. This 
gives her the deep credibility of the open mind, and invites you into a puzzle 
that is more subtle, more delicate and ultimately more engrossing than the 
usual true crime fare – did Adnan Syed murder Hae Min Lee?

Instead, the question is: “Can we, based on what we know, say for certain that 
Adnan Syed is a murderer?” This makes it more listenable, in many ways, even 
though ultimately it means that our desire for resolution cannot be met: the 
bald and brutal act of killing is an alienating thing, while the question of 
whether or not we can know what we think we know demands the attention and even 
participation of the citizen detective.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fadnan-syed-retrial-serial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F004c2d1117bfbf450209f1bea34f879b06d1b340%2F0_0_1758_2539%2F1758.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adnan%20Syed%20retrial%3A%20Serial%20finally%20gets%20the%20ending%20it%20deserves&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fadnan-syed-retrial-serial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adnan%20Syed%20retrial%3A%20Serial%20finally%20gets%20the%20ending%20it%20deserves&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fadnan-syed-retrial-serial%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F004c2d1117bfbf450209f1bea34f879b06d1b340%2F0_0_1758_2539%2F1758.jpg>
 Adnan Syed when he was 16 years old and playing varsity football. Photograph: 
Jonathan Hanson/Syed family 
It came as no surprise that the podcast spawned many hours of further 
investigation by listeners. There is, beneath all of that (spoiler alert, 
though arguably you can’t spoil a thing with no answers) a whodunnit: if Syed 
is telling the truth, then Jay Wilds, a key witness, is lying. The programme 
never went hard after Wilds, for the very good reason that just flying the kite 
of Syed’s innocence implicates Wilds in something larger than perjury, and even 
that is a large charge for a journalist to make.

The testimony of lawyer Deirdre Enright 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kLVFbI8HyPY>, from the Innocence Project, was 
compelling: it introduced a formality into what was otherwise a series of 
interviews in which a group of almost-witnesses nearly-but-didn’t-quite 
remember things. Enright described the weakness of the case from a legal point 
of view: Syed’s palm print on a map in a friend’s car that couldn’t be 
time-stamped; records of a cell-phone tower which the phone company explicitly 
warned were not reliable. All these circumstantial nuggets might function as a 
garnish to the meat of a prosecution, but when they were the meat, it was 
pretty thin pickings.

True-crime stories: a centuries-old craze from Ben Franklin to Making a 
Murderer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jan/07/making-a-murderer-serial-true-crime-genre>
However, the distinctive and memorable elements of Serial were the details 
that a court wouldn’t accept, and wouldn’t even go looking for. Syed was 
charming, believable – indeed, more than believable, impossible to credit as a 
cold-blooded murderer. When he says he wished he had committed the crime, 
because it would be easier for his parents to cope with having lost him for a 
reason, the pathos is unbearable.

The track record of his lawyer, Cristina Gutierrez, long-deceased, was 
chilling: she also, apparently through carelessness, lost the defence of a 
15-year-old who had shot his own brother, leaving the parents bankrupt and 
functionally childless. That texture was part of what made a retrial for Syed 
seem unlikely: Serial was an emotional more than factual experience, and it 
always seemed far-fetched that emotions, even millions of them, would ever lead 
a court to reconsider its decision.

The true chemistry of Syed’s story remains a mystery even to the 
programme-makers, since they didn’t manage to recreate anything like it for 
Serial 2 (even though that was accomplished enough). But if the announcement of 
the retrial was initially surprising, it swiftly seemed inevitable. Koenig took 
her insistent splashes of doubt and turned them into an ocean.
 