
Adnan Syed, whose murder case received international attention through the 
viral podcastSerial <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/serial>, has been 
granted a new trial, marking a major victory for the Maryland prisoner.

Serial, Adnan Syed and the revival of the obsessive world of online supporters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/11/adnan-syed-case-serial-revival-online-world-supporters>
Baltimore judge Martin Welch on Thursday granted Syed’s request for a new trial
 
<http://www.baltimorecitycourt.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/syedvstateofmdpetitionforpostconvictionrelieforder063016.pdf>
 after the record-setting podcast sent thousands of internet sleuths digging 
through the details of the murder of Hae Min Lee 17 years ago.

Syed, now 35, had argued in Baltimore court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/10/adnan-syed-serial-case-judge-defers-ruling-retrial>
 that Cristina Gutierrez, his lawyer in the original trial, had provided 
ineffective counsel and failed to investigate a crucial alibi.

In Welch’s order, he disagreed that Gutierrez erred when she failed to contact 
Asia McClain Chapman, the key alibi featured on the podcast. The judge also 
disagreed with Syed’s claims that prosecutors breached their duty by 
withholding exculpatory evidence.

But Welch did agree that Syed’s attorney should have cross-examined a state’s 
expert witness about the reliability of cell tower data that placed him near 
the burial site.

Syed has been serving a life sentence since his conviction in 2000 for the 
murder of Lee, his ex-girlfriend from high school.

C Justin Brown, Syed’s current lawyer, said at a press conference on Thursday 
that the judge’s order means “the conviction is erased, it’s gone. As of this 
day, he’s not convicted any more.”

Brown quoted Serial host Sarah Koenig, saying there was a time when this 
outcome seemed impossible.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fadnan-syed-judge-grants-new-trial-serial-podcast-baltimore-murder-case%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F360b3819af09d3b955e30559a96ecbe35255b515%2F0_139_1559_1559%2F1559.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adnan%20Syed%2C%20subject%20of%20Serial%20podcast%2C%20granted%20a%20new%20trial&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fadnan-syed-judge-grants-new-trial-serial-podcast-baltimore-murder-case%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adnan%20Syed%2C%20subject%20of%20Serial%20podcast%2C%20granted%20a%20new%20trial&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fadnan-syed-judge-grants-new-trial-serial-podcast-baltimore-murder-case%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F360b3819af09d3b955e30559a96ecbe35255b515%2F0_139_1559_1559%2F1559.jpg>
 An undated photo provided by Yusuf Syed shows an earlier photo of his brother, 
Adnan. Photograph: AP 
“She said this case is just hanging by a string. Statistically it was over. We 
have come back from that and we have incrementally won and won and won and 
gained more and more traction. This is us getting over the hill.”

Brown said he expected the state to appeal the decision. “We’re prepared to 
fight. Our heels are dug in … We know the state’s not going to give up and 
we’ll be ready.”

In February, Syed’s mother, Shamim Syed, told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/10/adnan-syed-serial-case-judge-defers-ruling-retrial>
 that she believed racism played a role in her son’s arrest.

“For me it was discrimination,” she said. “He was a 17-year-old Muslim. If his 
name was something else they wouldn’t touch him but his name was Adnan Syed and 
his parents were from Pakistan and they forgot he was born and raised in 
America.”

After the huge success of Serial, Rabia Chaudry, a family friend of Syed who 
brought the case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/11/adnan-syed-case-serial-revival-online-world-supporters>
 to the radio producers, launched her ownpodcast called Undisclosed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/shortcuts/2015/sep/06/serial-podcast-what-happened-adnan-syeds-case>
, which reported further crucial details.

Chaudry’s podcast uncovered 
<http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/crime/bs-md-ci-adnan-syed-new-trial-20160630-story.html>
 documents that raised questions about the evidence from cellphone towers.

Syed’s current lawyers argued in court that the data linking his phone to the 
burial site on the day of Lee’s murder was misleading, because it lacked a 
cover sheet warning that incoming call data was not reliable.

Chaudry celebrated the news of the new trial on Twitter, writing 
<https://twitter.com/rabiasquared/status/748615254947532800>: “I am shaking 
with joy, shaking!”

Brown said he has been unable to reach Syed in prison, but expects he has 
received the news. The legal team will now be pushing for Syed to be released.

“I’m feeling pretty confident right now. This was the biggest hurdle. It’s 
really hard to get a new trial,” he said.

In 2014, Serial became the fastest podcast to reach 5m downloads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/nov/18/serial-podcast-itunes-apple-downloads-streams>
 and streams in iTunes’ history with a huge following in the US, Canada, the UK 
and Australia, and eventually reaching the top 10 in Germany, South Africa and 
India.

After the podcast ended, communities on Reddit, Facebook and other online 
forums 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/11/serial-one-year-later-adnan-syed-investigation>
 continued to investigate the murder.

Lee’s family has maintained that Syed is guilty, releasing a statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/07/serial-case-hae-min-lee-statement-adnan-syed-hearing-baltimore>
 in February saying the proceedings had “reopened wounds few can imagine”.

“It remains hard to see so many run to defend someone who committed a horrible 
crime, who destroyed our family, who refuses to accept responsibility, when so 
few are willing to speak up for Hae,” they wrote. “She stood up for what was 
right, regardless of popular opinion.”

The state attorney general’s office suggested it intended to appeal against 
the decision in a statement on Thursday night. It said: “There does appear to 
be at least one ground that will need to be resolved by the appellate courts. 
The state’s responsibility remains to pursue justice, and to defend what it 
believes is a valid conviction.”







Associated Press contributed to this report
 