 Following a private meeting earlier this summer, a number of organisations 
have pledged to rebuild the 1,800-year-old Bamiyan buddhas in Afghanistan, 
blown up by the Taliban in 2001. Those leading the effort presented a virtual 
3D reconstruction of the larger of the statues to members of the Afghan 
government, including President Hamid Karzai, in August.
The project will be led by Paul Bucherer-Dietschi, director of the Afghan 
Museum in Exile, along with Professor Armin Gr√ºn of the Swiss Institute of 
Photogrammetry in Zurich. Bucherer-Dietschi says the statues represent an 
irreplaceable link between European art and eastern culture: "The Buddhist 
grandsons and great-grandsons of Macedonian and Greek settlers built the 
statues in the Hellenistic style. They are of profound importance." He added 
that the restoration funds would not come from humanitarian aid. "The money to 
rebuild the buddhas is there, but I can't say yet where it came from."

Carved into the limestone mountainside 144km west of Kabul, the buddhas were 
originally painted gold. Though they were almost completely destroyed, their 
outlines and some features still remain.

Habiba Sarabi, governor of Bamiyan province, told me: "When the work of 
stabilising the cliffs is finished, we will try to rebuild at least one statue. 
But nothing could be achieved until at least 2009." She added: "The people are 
poor, and many of the poorest live in caves in the cliffside - their first 
priority is to eat. But a lot of them want to see the statues reconstructed. 
The only thing we can do to bring change here is to develop tourism."

Dr Sarabi is also considering a proposal by 58-year-old Californian artist 
Hiro Yamagata to "re-create" the Buddhas using laser systems to project images 
of them on to the cliff where they once stood. The project is currently pending 
Unesco approval.

"The irony is that the destruction of the buddhas has aided archaeologists, 
says Unesco's Christian Manhart. "When they were destroyed, people could see 
how they were built and were able to explore the caves behind them, many of 
which revealed ancient murals."

There will be another meeting this week at which further recommendations will 
be made. Junko Okahashi of Unesco's Central and South Asia Unit said 
reconstruction was being considered, but added: "If we find that the memory of 
the buddhas could be transmitted better as empty niches, we might endorse 
leaving them as a better solution."
 