
It is hard to think of a legal ruling with bigger political consequences than 
the one the lord chief justice and his colleagueshanded down in the high court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/parliament-must-trigger-brexit-high-court-rules>
 on Thursday. As a result, the May government’s secretive Brexit strategywill 
have to be rethought 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/brexit-ruling-will-not-derail-article-50-timetable-says-no-10>
 to comply, parliament will have to stop cowering in the corner about the 
referendum as it has done too often, while the welcome likelihood of MPs using 
their influence to ensure some form of “soft Brexit” has dramatically increased 
– as the immediate response to the news in the markets showed.

Will the article 50 ruling stop Brexit? | The panel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/03/will-article-50-ruling-stop-brexit-high-court-parliament>
Indeed, the political possibilities may go a lot further. The next general 
election is now much more likely to be a verdict on Theresa May’s Brexit 
stance, a prospect that ought to focus opposition party minds as well as the 
prime minister’s. That election could now take place earlier than May had 
originally intended. A second vote on the eventual Brexit terms, either in 
parliament or even another referendum, is also more likely. It’s even possible 
that Brexit itself just got a bit less inevitable. That’s still a distant 
prospect, but maybe it’s worth a little flutter.

The judges have done something else. By asserting that the UK parliament has 
sovereignty over a treaty issue with domestic implications, the court was in 
fact merely restating a fundamental principle. The precedent on which the court 
drew went back to Sir Edward Coke in the early 17th century and to the bill of 
rights of 1688-89. This is why the ruling is unlikely to be overturned in the 
government’s appeal to the supreme court. It may even be strengthened.

That Thursday’s ruling was needed at all is a reminder of how much in the 
British political and democratic system still needs fixing. On the one hand the 
judgment reopens the issue of the medieval prerogative powers that ministers 
continue to claim for themselves over Britain’s place in an increasingly 
interconnected world. These powers have no place in an open 21st-century 
democracy.

After Iraq, no prime minister can in practice take Britain to war without the 
authority of parliament. After this ruling,no prime minister can secretly 
renegotiate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/high-court-brexit-ruling-what-does-it-all-mean>
 one of the most all-embracing treaties, the 1972 European Communities Act, 
ever made by the UK either. This is progress.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fnicola-sturgeon-uk-government-lacks-coherent-position-on-brexit-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicola%20Sturgeon%3A%20UK%20government%20lacks%20%E2%80%98coherent%20position'%20on%20Brexit%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fnicola-sturgeon-uk-government-lacks-coherent-position-on-brexit-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicola%20Sturgeon%3A%20UK%20government%20lacks%20%E2%80%98coherent%20position%27%20on%20Brexit%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fnicola-sturgeon-uk-government-lacks-coherent-position-on-brexit-video&media=>
Nicola Sturgeon: UK government lacks ‘coherent position’ on Brexit – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/nov/03/nicola-sturgeon-uk-government-lacks-coherent-position-on-brexit-video>
On the other hand, the ruling dramatically underscores the uneasy evolving 
relationship between referendums and parliamentary democracy in Britain. If 
ever there were an example of the way referendums create at least as many 
problems and cause at least as much instability as they resolve, here it was.

Parliament is far from perfect, but it is a lot better at making good, 
stabilising decisions than referendums, which give too much power to a biased 
and bad media of the kind we have here. The case for the kind ofroot-and-branch 
constitutional rethink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/uk-needs-further-devolution-to-prevent-brexit-anger-says-gordon-brown>
 that Gordon Brown made on Thursday continues to be overwhelming.

Nevertheless, parliament needs to rise to the occasion. Parliamentary 
sovereignty is a phrase that is more used than understood, let alone exercised. 
If you need proof, look at the Brexiters’ response to the court ruling. If 
there is one thing that united all wings of the leave campaign this year it was 
the belief that Britain should make its own decisions and “take back control”. 
Unless it means rule by the Daily Mail, that means parliament is the sovereign 
lawmaker and judges decide what the law means – which is exactly what the 
courts have just upheld.

Who are the judges who ruled that MPs should vote on Brexit?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/-three-judges-mps-vote-brexit-article-50-high-court>
But you would never think that from the Brexiter reactions, which would be 
laughable if they were not so disturbing and arrogant.Ukip funder Arron Banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/15/panama-papers-reveal-offshore-secrets-arron-banks-brexit-backer>
 complained about unelected judges and sabotage. Nigel Farage said it was a 
betrayal that would lead to a half-Brexit.Leadership contender Suzanne Evans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/29/suzanne-evans-gaping-hole-in-british-politics-for-ukip>
 said the judges should all be sacked. The supposed libertarian Conservative MP 
Dominic Raab condemned the claimants for going to law at all. Iain Duncan Smith 
said the courts should not tell parliament how to do its job – they didn’t, 
Iain. Doubtless tomorrow morning the bullying and triumphalist anti-European 
press will be in primal outrage mode too.

In many respects it is to parliament’s discredit that it has done so little to 
force the issue and protect its rights. Instead, it has taken Gina Miller and 
Deir dos Santos to stand up against those who believe the June referendum is 
the be-all and end-all of all discussion about the future of this country in 
Europe. Thursday was a noble restatement of the importance of parliamentary 
sovereignty, but parliament itself has done pathetically little to deserve the 
outcome.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fliam-fox-government-disappointed-article-50-ruling-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Liam%20Fox%3A%20government%20%E2%80%98disappointed%E2%80%99%20with%20article%2050%20ruling%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fliam-fox-government-disappointed-article-50-ruling-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Liam%20Fox%3A%20government%20%E2%80%98disappointed%E2%80%99%20with%20article%2050%20ruling%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fliam-fox-government-disappointed-article-50-ruling-video&media=>
Liam Fox: government ‘disappointed’ with article 50 ruling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/nov/03/liam-fox-government-disappointed-article-50-ruling-video>
That needs to change. With the exception of the Scottish Nationalists, who 
march to a different drum, most English and Welsh MPs have been browbeaten into 
feeling they can’t say much about the detail of Brexit for fear of being 
labelled anti-democratic. Now’s their chance.

They need to start by asking for information; demand a green paper about 
Brexit plans and options. Labour, in particular, has to focus on the issue far 
better than it has yet done. Every time shadow Brexit secretary Keir Starmer 
opens his mouth on the subject, though, there is a glimpse of the possibilities.

Brexit has caused havoc already. Now parliament must save us | Polly Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/03/brexit-parliament-article-50-mps>
May will not be able to duck this ruling. It is a big humiliation for her 
approach. She may be tempted to go for a quick one-off vote in order to 
minimise the problem. But the supreme court appeal, where judgment is likely to 
come in January, gets in the way of that strategy. If the opposition wins the 
Richmond Park byelection at the start of December, a leader who thrives on 
being in control will not want to look as if she is on the run. Meanwhile, keep 
an eye on George Osborne.

Until now, May has combined secretiveness with hinting that a tough 
negotiation stance on migration would make single market access difficult. That 
approach will not withstand the impact of the need to consult parliament. She 
must face the likelihood that both the Commons and the Lords will focus on 
securing single market access in ways that could split the cabinet and provoke 
resignations.

These things are real possibilities now, not daydreams. The courts have left 
May little alternative but to change course on the most important issue of her 
premiership.
 