
It was, in many ways, an inauspicious beginning.

Forty years ago the radio station now broadcasting as 3RRR launched with an 
opening address from the president of the RMIT council – followed by 25 minutes 
of literature reviews.

Jimmy Barnes: I wouldn't be where I am if it weren't for Billy Thorpe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/nov/07/jimmy-barnes-i-wouldnt-be-where-i-am-if-it-werent-for-billy-thorpe>
The Melbourne <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> of 1976 
was a very different place. Community radio was a new and radical idea, 
regarded with suspicion by many politicians and overt hostility by commercial 
broadcasters. It didn’t help that the people keenest to make use of the 
university’s temporary educational licence were enthusiasts for music the rest 
of the city found almost incomprehensible.

The station quickly became the only place in Melbourne you could hear punk 
rock – even if, in the early years, you had to be within the campus to get 
reception.

As Mark Phillips records in Radio <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 
City, his history of the station, the early years of Triple R were gloriously 
chaotic, dominated by legendary figures including Bohdan X, the British-born 
frontman of the band JAB, who used his Friday-night show to introduce listeners 
to the best punk and post-punk artists.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fafter-40-years-on-the-air-melbournes-triple-r-is-more-important-than-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b9c6c5048f1ba28bcfce3e5d2dd1251b8d236ab%2F0_0_3761_5591%2F3761.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%2040%20years%20on%20the%20air%2C%20Melbourne%E2%80%99s%20Triple%20R%20is%20more%20important%20than%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fafter-40-years-on-the-air-melbournes-triple-r-is-more-important-than-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%2040%20years%20on%20the%20air%2C%20Melbourne%E2%80%99s%20Triple%20R%20is%20more%20important%20than%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fafter-40-years-on-the-air-melbournes-triple-r-is-more-important-than-ever%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b9c6c5048f1ba28bcfce3e5d2dd1251b8d236ab%2F0_0_3761_5591%2F3761.jpg>
 ‘But Mum ... it’s educational!’ A poster from 1979 advertising Triple R, which 
began broadcasting on a temporary educational licence. Photograph: Michelle 
McFarlane 
“I used to love Bohdan X,” Tism’s Humphrey B Flaubert recalled, “because he 
was the most shambolic, crap radio announcer I’d ever heard in my life. He just 
sounded like he didn’t give a fuck and there’d be lengthy pauses and he sounded 
like he was pissed the whole time.”

In the same period, Martin Armiger’s New Wave Breakfast Show would frequently 
begin with 20 minutes of dead air as the hungover host struggled with the early 
start.

After someone played a Richard Pryor sketch in which the comedian used the 
word “motherfucker”, the station promised broadcasting authorities that 
offensive tracks in the record library would be daubed with nail polish so that 
they couldn’t be accidentally aired.

Such precautions didn’t prevent another near-fatal scandal later in 1978. The 
muckraking Melbourne tabloid Truth used the headline “Archbishop Slams Radio 
Beauty” to publicise Sir Frank Little’s outrage about Triple R playing what the 
tabloid dubbed “sex music” by the “attractive feminist” Robyn Archer.

These days, of course, the woman whose songs once so discomforted Sir Frank is 
better known as Robyn Archer AO, a mainstay of Australian culture.

That progression’s typical of Triple R’s own evolution. The station’s alumni 
is a roll call of today’s entertainment talent: Greig Pickhaver, Dave O’Neil, 
Brian Nankervis, Kate Langbroek, Marieke Hardy, John Safran, Dave Hughes, Ross 
Stevenson, Francis Leach, the Coodabeen Champions and many, many more.

Perhaps more importantly, the alternative culture Triple R championed has, 
over the past four decades, taken over the mainstream.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fafter-40-years-on-the-air-melbournes-triple-r-is-more-important-than-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ed93dc25fe67db620aeac68a82c072765921747%2F0_0_3751_5318%2F3751.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%2040%20years%20on%20the%20air%2C%20Melbourne%E2%80%99s%20Triple%20R%20is%20more%20important%20than%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fafter-40-years-on-the-air-melbournes-triple-r-is-more-important-than-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%2040%20years%20on%20the%20air%2C%20Melbourne%E2%80%99s%20Triple%20R%20is%20more%20important%20than%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fafter-40-years-on-the-air-melbournes-triple-r-is-more-important-than-ever%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ed93dc25fe67db620aeac68a82c072765921747%2F0_0_3751_5318%2F3751.jpg>
 A poster from Triple R’s Radiothon subscriber drive in 2006. Photograph: 
Michelle McFarlane 
In 1978 the station celebrated its Christmas party with a gig at RMIT’s Storey 
Hall <http://ondemand.rrr.org.au/player/128/201611031900>, headlined by Nick 
Cave’s band the Boys Next Door – a group that, back then, you couldn’t hear 
anywhere other than public radio.

These days Cave is regarded as a kind of expat national treasure, so much so 
that it’s hard to believe he once posed ina T-shirt proclaiming 
<https://65.media.tumblr.com/274afb7a9936b79a5b6538568fb560cd/tumblr_mnksytsbd61qbpr16o1_500.jpg>
 “A good cop is a dead cop”.

Quentin Crisp notes somewhere that “time is on the side of the outcast”, since 
“those who once inhabited the suburbs of human contempt find that without 
changing their address they eventually live in the metropolis”.

There’s something of that in Triple R.

From its scrappy beginnings, the station now operates from purpose-built 
studios it owns in Brunswick, with more than 200 volunteer broadcasters 
producing and presenting more than 60 programs and scores of regular segments 
reaching approximately 440,000 people each week. It hosts live music in its own 
performance space; it produces outside broadcasts throughout the state; it 
sponsors myriad, gigs and festivals and other cultural events.

There is no comparable community broadcaster anywhere in Australia – and 
perhaps not anywhere in the world.

In some respects, the (relatively) polished shows you hear on today’s station 
seem a long way from those humble beginnings back in 1976. But in other ways, 
the values forged back then have only become more paramount.

Archie Roach and a 100-year-old Indigenous brass band bring healing to tiny 
Queensland town
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/08/archie-roach-and-a-100-year-old-indigenous-brass-band-bring-healing-to-tiny-queensland-town>
After all, the station remains funded primarily by listener subscriptions – 
and that’s a business model entirely at odds with 21st century values. You can, 
after all, listen to the radio without paying a cent. Why, then, should anyone 
subscribe?

The deep affection that Melbourne has for Triple R goes back to the sense of 
community that the station has built and maintained. Subscribers don’t just 
fund the station. It belongs to them and they belong to it. Listeners become 
volunteers; volunteers become broadcasters. The people who pony up a 
subscription each year are the same people who come to the gigs and call in to 
correct the breakfast newsreader’s mangled pronunciation.

Back in 1976, the station’s first listeners spoke of how its broadcasts helped 
them find their tribe. Forty years later, in a society in which market values 
increasingly dominate, the need for human connection seems more important than 
ever.

That’s the reason Triple R still matters.

• Jeff Sparrow is a presenter on the Triple R Breakfasters show. The exhibition
On Air: 40 Years of 3RRR <https://www.slv.vic.gov.au/on-air> is showing at the 
State Library of Victoria from 18 November until 27 January
 