
After Brexit and the election of Donald Trump, Italy’s looming referendum on 
constitutional change has been cast as the next test of populism’s seemingly 
unstoppable rise across the western world – with some worrying that a defeat for
Matteo Renzi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/matteo-renzi>, the prime 
minister, could spell disaster for the eurozone and Europe.

But on a recent weekday in a sprawling American-style shopping mall on the 
outskirts of Rome, the 4 December vote was hardly seen as a make-or-break 
moment for the country, let alone onethat could sound the death knell of the 
euro <https://www.ft.com/content/7ea6837a-ad83-11e6-ba7d-76378e4fef24>. 

Echoing about 25% of Italian voters, 23-year-old Anna, an attendant who runs 
the Thomas the Tank Engine ride at the mall, said she had not yet made up her 
mind though she was certain to vote. But she was not particularly worried that 
the referendum – on measures intended to make Italy easier to govern by 
reducing the power of the senate – could hasten a general election and open the 
door to a victory for the anti-establishment Five Star Movement, the second 
most popular party inItaly <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy>.

“My friends say that voting yes [in favour of Renzi] would not be a good 
choice and would have bad consequences. They are interested in politics and I 
trust their opinion,” she said, adding that she might still vote in favour of 
the reform. “Whether Renzi stays or leaves, whether it has any possible 
effects, I don’t know.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fafter-trump-victory-italy-referendum-is-seen-as-test-of-populisms-rise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94b5b72fa354a11f101f846665b1fc0635948d05%2F373_36_1784_1070%2F1784.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20Trump%20victory%2C%20Italy%20referendum%20is%20seen%20as%20test%20of%20populism's%20rise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fafter-trump-victory-italy-referendum-is-seen-as-test-of-populisms-rise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20Trump%20victory%2C%20Italy%20referendum%20is%20seen%20as%20test%20of%20populism%27s%20rise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fafter-trump-victory-italy-referendum-is-seen-as-test-of-populisms-rise%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94b5b72fa354a11f101f846665b1fc0635948d05%2F373_36_1784_1070%2F1784.jpg>
 Donald Trump. Photograph: Carolyn Kaster/AP 
Many Italians simply do not believe the vote will have a big impact. “[Brexit 
and the election of Trump] are things that the political parties will seize on 
… but I doubt that the average Italian voter will see this referendum as a 
piece in the broader international framework,” said Vincenzo Scarpetta, an 
analyst at OpenEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> in London.

At a campaign rally in Pisa this week, Renzi pointed to the US election to 
bolster his case. Prompting some laughs from the mostly adoring crowd, Renzi, 
who had strongly backed Hillary Clinton and admires Barack Obama, asked whether 
anyone in the audience could have imagined that Donald Trump would be elected 
president. “The only ones whopredicted it were the Simpsons in 2000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/simpsons-predicted-president-trump-back-to-the-future>
, but they didn’t believe it either,” he said.

Back to the future: how the Simpsons and others predicted President Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/simpsons-predicted-president-trump-back-to-the-future>
While he acknowledged voters’ insecurities and apprehension, he said a yes 
victory would give Italy a “strong, stable” government at a time when “many 
people are worried about tomorrow”.

He also hit back at his biggest opponents on the right, including the populist 
leader of Five Star, Beppe Grillo, who called supporters of the reforms “serial 
killers” of Italy’s future and was full of praise for the Trump victory.

Renzi urged yes supporters to “stay calm”, however unsexy their message. “If 
they call you a serial killer, you have to talk to them about bicameralism,” 
Renzi said. “Nobody as a kid dreamed of abolishing bicameralism, this isn’t the 
aim in life. So why did it become so important, why is this reform so 
fundamental? It is important because Italy is at a crossroads,” he said.

The apparent indecision and apathy of millions of voters, along with those who 
have said they will not vote, could be linked to the complicated nature of the 
constitutional reform, which, if passed, would drastically weaken the power of 
the senate and make it easier to pass laws. It could also reflect 
disenchantment with Renzi himself, whohas vowed to resign if he loses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/17/matteo-renzi-repeats-vow-quit-italian-pm-loses-referendum>
.


In the final polls released before a pre-vote blackout, the campaign to reject 
Renzi’s reforms had a five-point lead.

Even for supporters of a yes vote – like 49-year-old Tania – the decision is 
driven by hope that changing the way Italy’s parliament works might get things 
done. It is not out of any loyalty to Renzi. “We had [Silvio] Berlusconi for 
years, Renzi is similar, so we have not seen a lot of changes,” she said.

Complicating matters is the fact that neither outcome would represent a clear 
victory for either populist forces or Renzi’s Democratic party in the long run.

A victory for yes would keep in a place one of Renzi’s earlier reforms giving 
the winning party in future elections an automatic majority of seats in 
parliament. The measure, stemming from a time when Renzi and the PD were far 
more popular, could instead benefit surging populists in the 2018 elections.

The Observer view on the worldwide threat to liberal democracy | Observer 
editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/19/liberal-democracy-trump-angela-merkel-france-netherlands-democratic>
While a win for no would see Renzi resign (bad news for the PD) and Italy’s 
president, Sergio Mattarella, appoint a caretaker government, it would also 
give the party an opportunity to change the electoral law back, making it more 
difficult for a rival party like Five Star to assume power.

A no victory could, therefore, stave off a populist takeover of Palazzo Chigi 
in the long run. “It’s true that a no vote is against the establishment, so its 
immediate meaning will be populist, but in the long term, a yes vote means the 
Five Star has a greater chance to win,” said Giovanni Orsina of LUISS 
university in Rome.

Orsina said it was anyone’s guess how Italians would respond to Trump’s 
victory. “Voters may think if Trump is fine then why shouldn’t the Five Star or 
the Lega [the rightwing Northern League] be OK in Italy?

“And of course, we can have a backlash, of people saying that to have Trump is 
enough. Who is able to read what is in the mind of democratic voters today?”
 