
Related: From Heathers to Stranger Things: Winona Ryder's best looks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2016/aug/10/from-heathers-to-stranger-things-winona-ryders-best-looks>

It’s no longer just a big, shiny effects budget and edgy subject matter that 
defines modern TV: increasingly it’s the place where 90s stars come to reassert 
their cult status. The most prominent example last year was the decade’s fave 
cult actor Winona Ryder’s redemptive turn inStranger Things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/stranger-things>, but see also Now 
And Then’s Gaby Hoffmann, now appearing in Transparent; Liv Tyler, of Empire 
Records fame, in apocalypse cult drama The Leftovers; Ryan “Cruel Intentions” 
Phillippe in the (admittedly terrible) Netflix series Shooter; and now Addams 
Family star Christina Ricci, who plays Zelda Fitzgerald in Amazon’s Z: The 
Beginning Of Everything, airing later this month. Basically, if you used to put 
their poster up on your bedroom wall and kiss it every night before bed, 
they’re having a career renaissance. Here are some other 90s teen-throbs who 
deserve their own HBO star vehicle in 2017…
 Sarah Michelle Gellar in Buffy the Vampire Slayer. Photograph: Fox/Everett/Rex
Sarah Michelle Gellar

Famous for Being Buffy The Vampire Slayer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/jun/15/buffy-the-vampire-slayer-best-episodes>
, obviously. Being evil in Cruel Intentions.

Last seen Trying to get the 2016 TV reboot of Cruel Intentions off the ground 
(US channel NBC just passed on it).

Elevator pitch Orange Is The New Black 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jun/07/orange-is-the-new-black-the-back-story>
 proved Netflix audiences justlove women who are both sarcastic and a bit 
scary. So please welcome Sarah Michelle Gellar’s edgy new sitcom: Neighbourhood 
Watcher’s Council! SMG plays a sassy suburban mom and head of Sunnydale 
Avenue’s community group, a role that requires strength, agility, fearlessness, 
fighting skills and the ability to run a 64-name mailing list. The series ends 
when the council makes everyone fill in paperwork to reapply for their 
on-street car parking permits and the residents choose the easier option: 
diving into a black portal straight to hell.
 Human anagram Devon Sawa in the 1999 horror Idle Hands. Photograph: 
Allstar/Columbia 
Devon Sawa

Famous for Playing the human form of ghost Casper, then dodging death in Final 
Destination.

Last seen Playing a maverick cop – with a good heart! – in one episode of 
Canadian TV show Real Detective.

Elevator pitch After Jude Law swept around the corridors of the Vatican as the 
Young Pope <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-young-pope>, Netflix 
brings you Young President. In an epic, $10m-budget, six-part series, the 
still-babyfaced Sawa plays a popular YouTuber who’s elected as US president 
aged 29, after a sustained “retweet to vote” campaign. But, get this: he 
smokes! And he’s got bleached blond hair! And he wears trainers to work! The 
tagline? Final Destination: White House.
 Fairuza Balk in 1996 teen horror The Craft. Photograph: 
Moviestore/REX/Shutterstock 
Related: How we made The Craft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/01/how-we-made-the-craft-horror-movie-interview>

Fairuza Balk

Famous for Inspiring teenagers to start their own covens in witchy drama The 
Craft.

Last seen Playing a sex worker in Liev Schreiber-led show Ray Donovan’s third 
season.

Elevator pitch After the success of American Crime Story: The People vs OJ 
Simpson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/02/the-people-v-oj-simpson-ryan-murphy-american-dream>
, Ryan Murphy tackles his most dramatic case yet: Lindsay Lohan vs the fashion 
jury! Set during LiLo’s 2011 shoplifting court case, Balk weeps her trademark 
eyeliner off while the assembled journalists rate her court outfits. A 
dramatic, “If the glove doesn’t fit, you must acquit” moment happens when 
Lindsay turns up to the courtroom in sheer mesh trousers.
 Alfonso Ribeiro in The Fresh Prince Of Bel Air. Photograph: NBCU/Rex 
Alfonso Ribeiro

Famous for Playing geeky cousin Carlton Banks in The Fresh Prince Of Bel-Air 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/mar/17/the-fresh-prince-of-bel-air-when-the-mainstream-met-afrocentric-style>
.

Last seen Complaining about being asked to do the Carlton Dance, then winning 
Dancing With The Stars … by doing the Carlton Dance.

Elevator pitch It’s 2034, and in a Westworld-style development the robots have 
finally taken over, mainly because all the humans were looking at Instagram on 
their phones, and when they looked up, the revolution had already happened and 
now they don’t want to be rude by protesting. Ribeiro is the mysterious, cowboy 
hat-wearing rebel fighting back with a secret weapon. You guessed it: it’s the 
Carlton Dance, which, for reasons unexplained in the show, is the only thing 
that renders our new metal overlords powerless.
 Kevin Sorbo in Hercules: The Legendary Journeys. Photograph: 
MCA/Universal/REX/Shutterstock 
Kevin Sorbo

Famous for Playing loinclothed hero Hercules in the cheesy TV show.

Last seen In 2016’s straight-to-streaming fantasy film Mythica, and 2015’s 
Sharknado 3: Oh, Hell No! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/mar/26/sharknado-star-david-hasselhoff>
.

Elevator pitch Mr Robot <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mr-robot>, 
step aside: the newest imaginary friend around here is Kevin Sorbo as Mr 
Motivator. Anarchy is out and self-improvement is in: Sorbo is 2017’s most 
hench lifestyle guru, who walks around New York in a hoodie whispering 
encouraging meme-friendly advice such as “Live your best life!” or “Try 
exercise instead of drugs” into the ears of passers-by. Bleak dystopian future? 
No thanks! (The series will eventually run into problems due to a legal 
challenge from actual Mr Motivator, and critics declaring Sorbo’s perfectly 
conditioned hair superior to his acting.)
 Rachael Leigh Cook with Freddie Prinze Jr in 1999 teen comedy She’s All That. 
Photograph: Allstar/Miramax/Sportsphoto/Allstar 
Rachael Leigh Cook

Famous for She’s All That.

Last seen TV movie Autumn In The Vineyard, about rowing wine-makers who divide 
a vineyard in half, only to fall in love!

Elevator pitch She’s (Still) All That. Twenty years after Rachael Leigh Cook’s 
character Laney Boggs walked down those stairs in a red dress, everything is 
different – and she needs another makeover. Confusingly for Laney, oversized 
shirts, thick-rimmed glasses, topknots and dungarees are now in – and being 
socially awkward and artsy is what every teenager aspires to be. Even the 
flower crown Laney wears at her part-time job in the original film looks like 
the flower crown Snapchat filter basic girls are obsessed with in 2017. Get 
back up those stairs, Rachel, and try not to think too hard about the lack of 
new ideas on TV!

Z: The Beginning Of Everything is on Amazon Prime from Friday 27 January
 