
It is a sprawling fantasy featuring deformed humans, superheroes who can read 
minds and fly, and plot lines exploring issues such as bigotry and raw 
political ambition. Like the blockbuster TV hitGame of Thrones, it is also 
based in part on the work of the cult fantasy writerGeorge RR Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/george-rr-martin>.

Now Hollywood is betting that a major TV adaptation of Wild Cards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/08/wild-cards-george-rr-martin-tv-adaptation>
, a series of science fiction books grounded in gritty realism that Martin 
began writing 30 years ago, can emulate the extraordinary worldwide success of 
the HBO show. If it does, it will fulfil the dreams of Martin’s collaborator on
Wild Cards, Melinda Snodgrass, who has struggled in vain for 12 years to 
interest film and television producers.

The US writer and editor was praised by executives, only to be given excuses 
about why the books were not for them. She refused to be bowed by rejection and 
her determination has finally paid off. She is now heading an ambitious TV 
adaption of the series backed by Universal Pictures.

The phenomenal global success of Game of Thrones got the industry’s attention, 
and Snodgrass has no doubt that it paved the way for the new show. She told the
Observer: “It’s been crucial. The success of Game of Thrones and George have 
really helped. People now see the possibilities in this other major work.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fgame-of-thrones-sci-fi-sibling-wild-cards-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7754e534688b2594e15f6562054d7e6e830dcfa8%2F0_0_1138_1422%2F1138.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20Westeros%2C%20a%20new%20TV%20epic%20from%20Game%20of%20Thrones%20author&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fgame-of-thrones-sci-fi-sibling-wild-cards-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20Westeros%2C%20a%20new%20TV%20epic%20from%20Game%20of%20Thrones%20author&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fgame-of-thrones-sci-fi-sibling-wild-cards-tv%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7754e534688b2594e15f6562054d7e6e830dcfa8%2F0_0_1138_1422%2F1138.jpg>
 Melinda Snodgrass has collaborated on Wild Cards with George RR Martin for 30 
years. 
Wild Cards imagines a world that was intentionally infected by an alien virus 
in 1946. Ninety per cent of those infected die. Of the remaining 10%, most are 
deformed (called Jokers) and 1% (called Aces) get superpowers, from flight to 
mind-reading, which they use for both good and evil.

The characters include the Sleeper, whose DNA-changing virus has enabled him 
to go without sleep for months on end. When he does sleep, he can wake up with 
a completely new face and new powers. Snodgrass said: “It is a superhero 
franchise, but it’s different in that it’s far more realistic than some 
superhero films, and grittier. If you die in theWild Cards books, you don’t get 
to come back. We want death to have consequences.”

The books also offer analogies for our times. Through the Jokers, for example, 
they explore persecution and bigotry. “Entertainment works best when it 
reflects what’s happening in the real world and when it allows people to 
reflect on it, perhaps in a safer space where it doesn’t feel so charged,” said 
Snodgrass.

George and I created Wild Cards, and then invited a bunch of writers to come 
play in the sandbox
Melinda Snodgrass 
She added that some of the stories mirror real life: “It’s not just about 
superheroes fighting super villains. We have political thrillers, with one 
about an unfit candidate trying to obtain the highest office in the US, for 
example. Most of it is set in the US, but we try to look at world issues. 
Interestingly enough, one of our books predicted the rise of a caliphate before 
Isis actually arose.”

While Martin and Snodgrass have each written some of the books, they have 
built up a consortium of about 30 authors, all creating stories set in the same 
world.

The first book was published in 1986, 10 years before Martin’s first Game of 
Thronesbook in 1996. Such is the series’ popularity that the 23rd volume will 
be released later this month, and Martin and Snodgrass are already working on 
the next three. Beyond publication worldwide, the books have inspired spin-off 
comics and games.

An announcement that Wild Cards is to be developed with Universal Cable 
Productions was made last week by Martin, who said that “there are thousands of 
stories to be told”.

As he has an exclusive development deal with HBO, he has handed Wild Cards to 
Snodgrass and producer Gregory Noveck: “They know and love theWild Cards 
universe almost as well as I do,” he said.

They hope to begin shooting next year. “It is very exciting. George and I 
createdWild Cards, and then invited a bunch of writers to come play in the 
sandbox. Then it’s just grown and grown,” said Snodgrass. Her passion for 
fantasy and science fiction began as a child, lapping up books by JRR Tolkien 
and watchingStar Trek. “I wanted to go to the stars.”

That passion never left her. She gave up a legal career to become a writer and 
was a story editor and executive script consultant onStar Trek: The Next 
Generation. Like Martin, she lives in New Mexico, where she trains horses and 
rides them in competition. Her latest science fiction novel,The High Ground, 
has just been published by Titan Books.

She says she had always seen the screen potential of Wild Cards. The emphasis 
was always the emotional content, dialogue and “characters with whom people can 
identify and care about, even if you may hate them”.
 