
This week I walked from Manhattan’s Upper West Side to a hotel in Midtown. It 
was one of thoseNew York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> 
mornings when the sky looks shellacked and the sun is impossibly bright, and as 
I walked by Columbus Circle, with a towering Trump building to the north, I 
passed two young policemen standing sentry outside. The tower looks different 
now, the gold lettering less a gaudy joke than a monument to our collective 
stupidity, but that’s not what I thought as I passed. Instead, I looked at the 
cops and thought: I bet you come from Staten Island and both voted for Trump.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fname-stripped-trump-place-apartments-new-york-protest-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Name%20stripped%20from%20Trump%20Place%20apartments%20in%20New%20York%20after%20residents%20protest%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fname-stripped-trump-place-apartments-new-york-protest-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Name%20stripped%20from%20Trump%20Place%20apartments%20in%20New%20York%20after%20residents%20protest%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fname-stripped-trump-place-apartments-new-york-protest-video&media=>
Name stripped from Trump Place apartments in New York after residents protest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/17/name-stripped-trump-place-apartments-new-york-protest-video>
Ten minutes later I skirted the northern reaches of Times Square and ran into 
the tourists. You did this, I thought, you people from out of town, who come in 
on coaches and think Mexicans should go home and thatJersey Boys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/mar/23/theatre1> is the best 
Broadway show ever made. A hot dog cart had been overturned by a car, and 
two rough sleepers were standing watching, smoking cigarettes, and I stopped 
for a moment, paralysed because I had no idea how to categorise 
them politically.

A block before the Hilton, I passed the Chase bank on the corner of 56th 
Street and 6th Avenue. It’s one of those branches reserved for account holders 
who clear a minimum balance many times higher than the average national wage 
and withChase Private Clients 
<https://www.chase.com/online/private_client/private-client-home.htm> hanging 
on a sign in the window. Pouring in and out of the glass towers either side, 
lots of young white men in suits with slicked-back hair. Aha! Here they were, 
the real villains of the piece, the masters of the universe etc.

So it went this week, walking around New York wearing goggles through which 
everyone looked like the “them” on the “us” and “them” divide. Of course, there 
has always been an element of this in the city; people who love Jersey Boys or 
wear too much gel in their hair will excite the derision of people who don’t. 
And if this election showed us anything, it’s that those superficial 
determinations are wrong. It’s the suburban mom who voted for Trump, the person 
who looks like Hillary Clinton or who once voted for Obama.

On the television, Trump talked unity then appointed the most divisive figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/15/steven-bannon-trump-chief-strategist-breitbart-white-house-dangerous>
 in the rightwing political landscape, while on the streets of New Yorkhis son 
was heckled by teenagers 
<http://ny.eater.com/2016/11/14/13621382/eric-trump-quality-italian>. All I 
could think of was that awful saying of Margaret Thatcher’s – “the enemy 
within” – though that referred more to my own thoughts than my view of other 
people.

Trump’s little sweetener


 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ftrump-victory-stuggling-with-enemy-within-manhattan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29700a6d98ae63f4b4952bdf15715992ed91723a%2F0_447_5002_3000%2F5002.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20victory%2C%20I%E2%80%99m%20struggling%20with%20the%20enemy%20within%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ftrump-victory-stuggling-with-enemy-within-manhattan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20victory%2C%20I%E2%80%99m%20struggling%20with%20the%20enemy%20within%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ftrump-victory-stuggling-with-enemy-within-manhattan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29700a6d98ae63f4b4952bdf15715992ed91723a%2F0_447_5002_3000%2F5002.jpg>
 No olives, please – we’re British. Photograph: Teubner/Getty Images/StockFood 
A couple of friends discover that, if Trump sticks to his proposed tax plan, 
they will be significantly better off than under Barack Obama. Both hate Trump 
and fear for their country. But after doing the maths, it was impossible to 
miss in their response the small leap of joy at having more money. This was a 
hard one. Everyone is at their keyboards already, poised to accuse everyone 
else of selling out, giving in, collaborating and the rest of it, but unless 
thought crime is a thing now, the Pavlovian response to increased wealth 
shouldn’t, I don’t suppose, be something to resent. But I did resent them for 
it. I really did.

Nostalgia ain’t what it was


Escape came in the form of that ITV import, The Durrells in Corfu 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/masterpiece/programs/series/durrells-corfu-s1/>, 
currently showing on PBS in the US. The script is good and the acting great, 
but it has about it that slightly deathly Sunday night feel, an air of 
something designed to soothe the unnerved in ways I find myself irritated to 
submit to. In this week’s episode there was a comedy English couple who hated 
abroad – “Should we go wild and risk an olive?” – that seemed less cute than it 
once might have done. People on the left used to accuse people on the right of 
retreating into nostalgia, since the world they valued had ceased to exist. I 
guess those roles might be about to reverse.
 