
Forgive me, proud nation of Scotland, if this feels like the short straw. It’s 
just that you have – not that you stand accused of doing it deliberately – 
failed to deliver when your cause has been promoted right here. Perhaps it 
wasn’t so last year, before your whitewash special, because to be honest, any 
claim that you might, in 2015, be about to unleash a 1990 special, one of those 
walk-out bravura campaigns, would have been a sackable offence.

In seasons before that, however, you certainly were presented – and regularly 
at that – as a tip for a dark-horse challenge. People chuckled and the 
credibility of the sponsor of your credentials shrank as you stayed in the grip 
of that fever that reduced you to jelly just short of the line. Your buildup 
work was so deft and precise; if only you could have scored tries. Ah, if only 
Mike Denness could have hit sixes with a thistle or Paul Lawrie strike a drive 
300 yards with a bulrush.

Six Nations preview: the bold will be rewarded in era of new beginnings | 
Eddie Butler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jan/30/six-nations-rugby-union-2016-england-wales-ireland-scotland-france-italy>
To be honest, you have been a disappointment. But here’s the thing. Drained of 
belief, I nevertheless found myself – and before witnesses, I swear – saying 
early on that Twickenham Sunday of Australia v Yourselves at the World Cup that 
the Wallabies would win, but only by the finest of margins because you were 
about toplay the game of your lives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/18/australia-scotland-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
.

So it is, based on that strangest day – when re-emergence ran headlong into 
oh, the injustice of it all – that you enter the Six Nations as genuine 
contenders. Vern’s vaccine has worked and you are free of the fever. Coach 
Cotter has cured you. Youstood firm against Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/23/scotland-japan-world-cup-2015-match-report>
 in precisely those channels whereSouth Africa had been exposed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/19/south-africa-japan-rugby-world-cup-2015-match-report>
. You backed up that organised defiance with aprofessional job on the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/27/scotland-usa-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
 and yourefused to give way to the intimidating Samoans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/oct/10/scotland-samoa-rugby-world-cup-2015-live>
 and scored 36 points into the bargain.

Australia and Bernard Foley break Scotland hearts in World Cup drama
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/18/australia-scotland-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
True, you lost to South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/03/south-africa-scotland-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
, but that was a tricky one – meeting the Springboks still in the grip of the 
shame that went with losing to Eddie Jones’s team was always going to be tough. 
South Africa took losing to a side known affectionately as the Brave Blossoms 
badly.

Here you are then, ready to launch yourselves at England for the Calcutta Cup 
that you have not won in the past eight attempts – another reason to be 
determined to set a few records straight. You have Stuart Hogg and Finn 
Russell, your players with a little something extra, rediscovering top form at 
just the right moment. You have to be quietly confident you can score a lot of 
points.

There will be no Alex Dunbar in the centre – he has an injured thigh – and no 
Adam Ashe in the back row. But any two from Mark Bennett (first-choice if fit), 
Matt Scott and Duncan Taylor in midfield should cause problems for any defence. 
If you take the plunge and pick a pair from a posse of 7s – John Hardie, Blair 
Cowan or John Barclay – you could have rich pickings from the breakdown. 
England reckon they can still do without a specialist openside; you might think 
differently and pick two. Goodness, in the light of Dave Denton, seemingly out 
of form at No8 since going south to Bath, you could even pick the three of them.

Greig Laidlaw does not have the speed of pass or foot of Ben Youngs or Danny 
Care, but he has a rugby brain the size of the Highlands and every team needs 
shrewdness and neatness and efficiency. If it’s an injection of speed you need 
on the hour, then Sam Hidalgo-Clyne can bring it off the bench.

The set-piece will be examined by England, but it was pretty good against the 
reborn scrummagers of Australia and the lineout has generally been secure. What 
was worrying against Australia was the defence, which leaked five tries. 
Against Japan, you plugged the holes that the BBs tried to find with plays 
straight from set-pieces, but Australia’s intricate switches in more broken 
play opened you up.

There is obvious danger there, but it is unlikely that Jones, who has coached 
Australia and Japan, will be able to make England pass as menacingly as Bernard 
Foley or find angles as instinctively as Kurtley Beale and Israel Folau. There 
is potential in the England team and a willingness to experiment, but they have 
had little time together.

You on the other hand have been through a lot and learned a lot. You have been 
through pain together – not the despair that goes with losing your mojo, but 
the agony of being denied when you stood close to something – a World Cup 
semi-final – beyond your wildest dreams.

Promoters and sponsors of your cause should be easy to find. But not here. 
It’s not superstition – the suspicion that to tout you is to sink you – but a 
little slap. A little ouch. Your game with England is all about turning pain to 
advantage.
 