
If Mark Carney tires of governing the Bank of England he could always try 
celebrity ballroom dancing. It doesn’t matter that he is not famous beyond 
Westminster and the City of London. Ed Balls toiled at the unglamorous coalface 
of politics and finance, bravely overcoming the handicap of Oxford and Harvard 
degrees in economics tomake it as a comedy hip-jiggler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/24/strictly-ed-balls-shadow-chancellor-dance-legend-politicians>
 on prime time television.

Mark Carney has had the last laugh at amateurish Theresa May | Nils Pratley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/oct/31/mark-carney-theresa-may-bank-of-england-tory-conference>
Or Carney could keep his job but the format could change. The BBC could 
broadcast Strictly Come Quantitative Easing, in which Carney, dressed in white 
tie and tails, explains the finer points of monetary policy, after whichTheresa 
May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> steers him to a panel of 
self-appointed Tory judges who pick apart his performance.

“Leaden, flat-footed – your interest rate is still too low,” says William 
Hague. “This is meant to be a Brexit dance,” tutsDaniel Hannan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/29/daniel-hannan-the-man-who-brought-you-brexit>
, “but your posture says remain.” “That emergency lift after the referendum was 
far too independent,” opines Michael Gove. A key difference between this show 
and the original would be that the roles of expert and amateur are reversed. 
The real Strictly judges can dance.

On the Brexit channel expertise is a real turnoff, the timid shuffle of a 
wallflower establishment. To identify technical obstacles on the path to 
freedom is to counsel continuing captivity. Don’t study the steps, feel the 
beat! Delicate understatement is the signature move of central bankers, who can 
spook markets with a mistimed turn. That is why Carney’s intervention on the 
morning of24 June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/video/2016/jun/24/mark-carney-seeks-to-reassure-financial-markets-after-brexit-video>
 was bold and controversial.

To recap: the country had just voted to leave the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, defying warnings by pretty much every 
democratically elected leader and serious financial institution in the world 
that doing so risked economic turmoil. The pound tanked.

As the first grownup on the scene, Carney made the Brexiteers look small and 
weak on their special day

David Cameron, who had promised not to resign if the vote went against him, 
resigned. The leaders of the leave campaign faced the nation with the solemn 
indignation of children whose Christmas present arrives in fiddly parts, 
batteries not included. Years of pester power had delivered a cherished gift to 
the Tory right, but they wanted someone else to make it work before they could 
play with it.

In the absence of British leadership, it fell to a Canadian technocrat to calm 
nerves. Carney told the world the UK economy was “resilient”, but that “a 
period of uncertainty and instability” could be expected. The Bank of England 
was making £250bn of funds available to cushion the shock. As the first grownup 
on the scene, Carney made the Brexiteers look small and weak on their special 
day. He strode across the fragments of their brittle campaign boasts, and they 
hate him for it.

Some hate him also for having been recruited by George Osborne. The former 
chancellor occupies a demonic role in the cult of Brexit. He deployed the power 
of the Treasury to make the case for remain. He activated his network of allies 
in parliament and brandished his power of patronage to the same end, hinting at 
preferment for those who stayed loyal to what was, after all, the official 
government position.

The present government is and isn’t the same one that sought to keep Britain 
in the EU. It has not been supplanted in a general election, but its purpose 
has been overwritten by plebiscite. So the prime minister has a misshapen 
mandate. She is constitutionally entitled to the job as the anointed Tory 
leader in command of a parliamentary majority, but that majority was won by a 
predecessor whose political project has burned to the ground. And May was a 
remainer.

To overcome the structural insecurity built into her position, May is 
embracing not just the goal of Brexit but its revolutionary ethos: the idea 
that 24 June was Day One of Year One of the New Era. Cameron has removed 
himself from the purgative line of fire. Osborne has not, which means that his 
legacy as chancellor – and his friends – are viewed with suspicion in No 10.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fmark-carney-brexit-bolsheviks-new-target-chancellor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f6dd489167b1ca8f6d4101a68ef89fb60b87ca8%2F0_198_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20Mark%20Carney%2C%20the%20Brexit%20Bolsheviks%20have%20a%20new%20target%20%7C%20Rafael%20Behr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fmark-carney-brexit-bolsheviks-new-target-chancellor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20Mark%20Carney%2C%20the%20Brexit%20Bolsheviks%20have%20a%20new%20target%20%7C%20Rafael%20Behr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fmark-carney-brexit-bolsheviks-new-target-chancellor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f6dd489167b1ca8f6d4101a68ef89fb60b87ca8%2F0_198_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Theresa May and Amber Rudd before the ceremonial welcome for Colombia’s 
president Juan Manuel Santos in London on 1 November. Photograph: POOL/Reuters 
That is partly why May took a casual dig at the Bank of England in her party 
conference speech, fretting about the harmful consequences of low interest 
rates and quantitative easing, adding – in the tone of ominous imprecision that 
is becoming her trademark – that “change has got to come”.

I doubt she realised that this would be taken as a licence to kill by Carney’s 
would-be Tory assassins. She may not even have grasped how brazen a departure 
from protocol it was for a prime minister to tread on the Bank of England’s 
independence. She has no Treasury veterans in her immediate entourage to flag 
the danger. Her target was simply the past: the old order, Osborne’s shadow.

But for Brexit Bolsheviks, bent on total revolution, the Treasury itself is 
untrustworthy – a redoubt of obstructive pro-Europeanism that can mesmerise 
Philip Hammond with evidential hocus-pocus. John Redwoodurges the chancellor 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/10/30/philip-hammond-will-make-a-huge-mistake-if-he-endorses-forecasts/>
 to resist any fiscal stimulus based on “nonsensical” forecasts of a 
Brexit-related downturn predicated on “wacky figures”. Those figures are 
produced by the independent Office for Budget Responsibility. But that too is a 
pillar of the Osbornite architecture, ripe for demolition.

Mark Carney's critics must let him do his job, says Virgin Money chief
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/01/mark-carney-critics-let-him-do-his-job-brexit-virgin-money-jayne-anne-gadhia>
Liam Fox tells Hammond that his forthcoming autumn statement must not resemble 
a “George Osborne-style emergency budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/oct/03/conservative-conference-philip-hammond-confirms-osbornes-austerity-timetable-has-been-dropped-politics-live?page=with:block-57f27a0be4b0643b5d8439f7#block-57f27a0be4b0643b5d8439f7>
”. Downing Street issues tepid statements of support for the chancellor, making 
it clear that her preferred position is enigmatic equidistance between the 
Treasury’s economic pragmatism and the ideological urgency of its enemies.

This is a natural continuation of the strategy that saw May rise stealthily to 
the top. She wanted to be prime minister long before she wanted Brexit, but she 
must now want Brexit all the more if she is to function as PM. She wants the 
referendum to be her mandate because it is fresher than the one on which she 
was elected.

As for how that mandate is to be fulfilled, she is happy for cabinet rivals to 
spin themselves breathless in competition over the detail, unconcerned if 
evidence and expertise are trampled underfoot while she hovers above the fray. 
In this bizarre game of Strictly Brexit, May wants to lift the glittering 
trophy but she doesn’t want to dance for it.

• You can catch up on our discussion on this article • You can catch up on our 
discussion on this article in our Your Opinions thread.">in our Your Opinions 
thread. <http://<span class=>
 