
If there is one bit of entertainment gossip that never goes away, it is the 
question of who will play the nextJames Bond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jamesbond>. Even when a new Bond is announced 
– and four films ago we were givenDaniel Craig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/08/daniel-craig-id-rather-slash-my-wrists-than-do-another-bond-movie>
, whose quizzical eyebrows have now haunted the face of the MI6 assassin for a 
decade – there is always the question of who’ll take over when that one gets 
too old for all the shooting and shagging. Will it beIdris Elba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/22/idris-elba-on-james-bond-odds-rumours-good-morning-america>
,Michael Fassbender <https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-fassbender> or 
Tom Hiddleston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/07/tom-hiddleston-james-bond-007-daniel-craig>
? Rather suddenly, the smart money is now on Aidan Turner, who stars in the hit 
BBC1 period dramaPoldark <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/poldark>. 
Bookmaker William Hill has made a statement about Turner’s impressive chances, 
withthe Sun backing up 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/tvandshowbiz/1546703/aidan-turner-is-once-again-favourite-to-be-next-james-bond-ahead-of-james-norton-and-tom-hiddleston/>
 its “staggering 6/4 odds he’ll nab the role”.

BBC orders Poldark series three starring Aidan Turner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/06/bbc-poldark-series-three-aidan-turner>
It’s such a hot topic that I am told, before interviewing Turner, he will not 
speak a word about it, which sort of suggests that it is true. Or that he’s 
trying not to put a foot wrong and say anything that might ruin his chances. 
Fortunately, our photographer has not been given this warning, and happily asks 
Turner if he’s going to be the nextJames Bond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jamesbond>. A fixed grin takes over Turner’s 
face, and he chuckles awkwardly. “I didn’t ask that,” I point out cheerily, my 
dictaphone sitting between us. “And I’m not going to answer it,” he replies. We 
are in the photographer’s sunny flat in west London, where Turner’s been 
happily tussling with a dog (he’s called Hank, and belongs to the 
photographer’s sister) and chatting to the assistants about how he was a 
ballroom dancer when he was a kid (he competed at a professional level in 
Ireland).

But when I ask him about the dancing, he says he doesn’t want to talk about 
that stuff, doesn’t want people digging up his past. He seems to find it 
embarrassing that, long before he was a TV star in London, he was a dancer in 
Dublin. I’m slightly surprised, but, given that he’s still grinning, we proceed 
to other subjects. Turner’s screen career began with a couple of uncredited 
lines in the first episode ofThe Tudors <http://www.sho.com/the-tudors> in 
2007, followed by various Irish arthouse films, and the bigger role of Dante 
Gabriel Rossetti <http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artists/dante-gabriel-rossetti-461>
in the BBC2 costume drama about the pre-Raphaelites,Desperate Romantics 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00lvyq2>. He then stopped being a human being 
for some time, casting off his earthly shackles to play a vampire inBeing Human 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1349938/>, a dwarf in Peter Jackson’s The Hobbit 
film trilogy <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0903624/>, and a werewolf in the 
action filmMortal Instruments: City of Bones 
<http://gb.imdb.com/title/tt1538403/>. His return to our DNA saw him make 
Poldark – a conflicted 18th-century Cornish posho, who has lost his family 
wealth in the tin-mining recession – into an unlikely national heart-throb.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Faidan-turner-interview-poldark-top-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F638d20b79d6d21977cea99469d894a5218710322%2F0_248_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aidan%20Turner%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20take%20a%20top%20off%2C%20and%20then%20it%E2%80%99s%20madness%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Faidan-turner-interview-poldark-top-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aidan%20Turner%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20take%20a%20top%20off%2C%20and%20then%20it%E2%80%99s%20madness%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Faidan-turner-interview-poldark-top-off%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F638d20b79d6d21977cea99469d894a5218710322%2F0_248_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
 ‘I don’t think Poldark knows where he’s at half the time.’ Photograph: Bella 
Howard for the Guardian 
One particular scene – where he is topless in the fields, hacking away with a 
scythe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/dec/31/poldark-aidan-turner-topless-scything-voted-top-tv-moment-2015-bbc-radio-times>
, rugged hair falling about his muscular shoulders – sent the swoonometers 
racing. Twitter went crazy. In a Radio Times readers’ poll, it was voted the 
best telly moment of the year. “He single-handedly made scything sexy,” says a 
Turner fan website, run by people clearly besotted with him.

What do you love about Cornwall? Share your stories and photographs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/aug/20/what-do-you-love-about-cornwall-share-your-stories-and-photographs>
Soon after, he appeared in a BBC adaptation of Agatha Christie’s And Then 
There Were None. At one point he appeared in just a towel, adding to the hype. 
So who are all these fans? “Poldark is one of those shows,” Turner says in his 
soft Irish accent, “that people my age might say, ‘Oh, yeah, my mum loves the 
show,’ or ‘My auntie loves the show, butI’ve never seen it. But then they seem 
to know quite a bit about it, all the same…” He laughs. “And they’re the person 
who has recognised me, and I’m just some guy with a beard, walking down Carnaby 
Street or whatever. I used to get that with The Hobbit a lot, somebody would 
say, ‘Oh, my little brother’s really into The Hobbit. I meanI can’t stand it, 
but would you sign all these photographs I have in my bag?’ And I’d go, ‘Who do 
I make it out to? Julie? Oh, OK, your brother’s called Julie, fair enough.’”

He sits on the sofa, always moving, a bit like a puppy waiting to get off its 
lead. Today, the flowingPoldark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/poldark> locks are scraped back into 
a man-bun and he looks like any young fashionable guy you’d see in Soho, where 
he is living.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Faidan-turner-interview-poldark-top-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1fe1368283e34c26eac967c028ca69eac9b3ef7%2F18_0_1638_2048%2F1638.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aidan%20Turner%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20take%20a%20top%20off%2C%20and%20then%20it%E2%80%99s%20madness%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Faidan-turner-interview-poldark-top-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aidan%20Turner%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20take%20a%20top%20off%2C%20and%20then%20it%E2%80%99s%20madness%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Faidan-turner-interview-poldark-top-off%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1fe1368283e34c26eac967c028ca69eac9b3ef7%2F18_0_1638_2048%2F1638.jpg>
 With Dean O’Gormon in The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey. Photograph: 
Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar/New Line Cinema 
The cast are about to start filming the third series, while we are about to 
start watching the second. Adapted fromWinston Graham’s novels 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Poldark>, the action follows the ruggedly 
handsome Captain Ross Poldark returning to his native Cornwall after fighting 
in the American War of Independence, to take over his father’s mine. His 
family’s fortunes have plummeted because tin is now cheaper elsewhere: this is 
the start of globalisation. The people of Cornwall are starving, and Poldark is 
caught between them and his wealthy cousins. He is also caught between two 
surprising love affairs, again straddling the class divide. The man is 
compelling viewing because he doesn’t give a damn about the things he is 
supposed to.

I ask Turner if he intentionally makes his character so hard to read. “Well, 
it struck me that Ross is a real man – not a heroic, legendary guy who comes 
into town and is the people’s hero, like Robin Hood. There’s a lot wrong with 
Ross, which is what I love about him – that he’s a multitude of ups and downs 
and rights and wrongs. And I don’t think he knows where he’s at half the time.” 
Poldark begins in love with Elizabeth, his childhood sweetheart, but she 
marries his cousin and (spoiler alert, if you haven’t caught up with season 
one) he begins a relationship with his mysterious maid, Demelza.

Horse riding is a confidence game, like everything. It’s just blagging.

“Emotionally, he’s way more comfortable being a soldier and being with the 
lads than he is with Demelza and his baby, Julia. Love is a complete mystery to 
him. He can’t quite figure that out – does he still fancy Elizabeth, is he 
still in love with Elizabeth? Does he feel betrayed? Was it her fault? All 
these questions are still there in the second series. And they’re real 
questions.”

It has recently been revealed that, in the novels, Ross rapes Elizabeth, but 
the television programme has turned that moment into consensual sex. Turner 
suggests that this might have been overblown. “There’s very little in the book, 
just two lines. I think he just picks up Elizabeth and sort of frogmarches her 
up the stairs. We don’t do it that way at all, really. I mean Ross kind of – 
well, you’ll see. I think it’s well-measured. I think if we had taken it 
literally from the book, it wouldn’t have seemed like Ross.”

If this causes any kind of public outcry, there’s a chance that Turner won’t 
even know about it, as he claims not to read anything written about the 
programme. “When a show that I’m in goes out, I don’t really watch it. I don’t 
Google it or tune into any of the press.” He doesn’t search for mentions of his 
own name on Twitter? “Oh my God, no. Can you imagine? I’d have a nervous 
breakdown. My friends and family even know not to send me stuff. The agents 
won’t send me the ratings, either. None of that matters a great deal to me.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Faidan-turner-interview-poldark-top-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48ee48f271520bbd22130ebe68128736907afd7b%2F0_0_6689_4460%2F6689.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aidan%20Turner%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20take%20a%20top%20off%2C%20and%20then%20it%E2%80%99s%20madness%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Faidan-turner-interview-poldark-top-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aidan%20Turner%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20take%20a%20top%20off%2C%20and%20then%20it%E2%80%99s%20madness%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Faidan-turner-interview-poldark-top-off%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48ee48f271520bbd22130ebe68128736907afd7b%2F0_0_6689_4460%2F6689.jpg>
 ‘You freak yourself out sometimes, thinking: what if I forget my lines?’ 
Photograph: Bella Howard for the Guardian 
He thinks about this. “Mind you, they’ll send me funny stuff now and again.” 
Like what? “Like, ‘Poldark’s hair has its own Twitter account. Check out what 
your hair is saying this week.’” Head hair or chest hair? “Probably both. I 
mean, I was talking about the head hair, but the chest hair had something else 
going on over the summer, so God knows, these days.”

He’s laughing a lot, but he does seem rather appalled. “Social media isn’t 
really my bag. I don’t do it.” He doesn’t even have a secret Facebook account? 
“I don’t! Not because I’m an actor and I want to protect my profile or whatever 
that means. It’s just not for me. I literally don’t care about it. I email 
people, I text people, and even that I have trouble keeping up with. There is 
shit that I really need to get done that I don’t get done, so imagine me on 
Facebook or Instagram – ah, it would just be a disaster. I was an hour and a 
half late to this interview today, for Christ’s sake! What would I be like if I 
was on Facebook?”

I don’t know what it is about actors but some of us are inherently lazy

I get the strong impression that he doesn’t want to discuss being a 
heart-throb, or the debate around objectifying men that opened up in the wake 
of Poldark’s topless imagery. I bring it up and a half smile/half grimace 
appears across his face. He doesn’t speak. I say, “Do you just want to say that 
you’re sick of it, then we can move on?”

“I’m sick of it,” he says. “Let’s move on.”

Turner grew up in Dublin. His mother, Eileen, is an accountant and his father, 
Pearse, is an electrician. In his early teens, Turner sometimes accompanied his 
dad to work. “He used to call me the Little Apprentice. I used to pop around 
with him and do odd jobs. But that kind of manual labour… I don’t have it in 
me. My dad loves what he does and he’s still intrigued by it. He’ll show me how 
neat that last job is, the spotlights he has just put up or whatever it might 
be. But I just don’t get that buzz at all.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Faidan-turner-interview-poldark-top-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe4463094d44f0c3da3cb8a9ac99a59a552572ae%2F149_290_1304_1629%2F1304.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aidan%20Turner%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20take%20a%20top%20off%2C%20and%20then%20it%E2%80%99s%20madness%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Faidan-turner-interview-poldark-top-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aidan%20Turner%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20take%20a%20top%20off%2C%20and%20then%20it%E2%80%99s%20madness%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Faidan-turner-interview-poldark-top-off%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe4463094d44f0c3da3cb8a9ac99a59a552572ae%2F149_290_1304_1629%2F1304.jpg>
 The Radio Times best TV moment of 2015, in Poldark. Photograph: PA/BBC 
But can he look at the spotlights in this room and instantly know what they 
are? “Oh, yeah. In fact,” he says, glancing at the ceiling, “they’re the same 
60 watt kind I have in my house. But after that I worked in a cinema for two 
years, while I was at school. I was an usher for a while, then I worked selling 
popcorn. Never got allowed in the projection room – that would have been asking 
for trouble. But maybe that was where it started – I used to go and watch 
movies when I should have been working. I used to sneak around and check out 
all these films. I remember American Beauty was on, Fight Club was on…” Ah, 
that halcyon bit of the 1990s when Hollywood started getting good again. He 
nods, “I’ve seen both those films more than a dozen times each. I was a 
terrible usher. You’re only supposed to go in for five minutes to check the 
screen is right and everyone’s OK. I totally took advantage. But,” he reflects, 
with a touch of irony, “that was my entrance into the movie world.”

Aged six Turner took up dancing, didn’t like it until he got good and then his 
competitive streak kicked in; he actually represented Ireland in ballroom and 
Latin American dancing for 10 years. He didn’t ever ride horses, but when 
auditioning for Poldark he lied and said he had, then quickly took lessons. 
“Horse riding is a confidence game, like everything,” he says. “It’s just 
blagging.”

He tells me about Poldark’s steed. “He’s an Irish horse! He was picked up at 
Smithfield market in Dublin, weirdly enough. Seamus is about as Irish as you 
can get, for a horse’s name. He doesn’t stand still. He’s so smart, when he 
sees the clapperboard and hears it he wants to take off. So they can’t say 
‘action’ on set. I think he may have been Tom Cruise’s horse onThe Last Samurai 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0325710/>.”

Did he not tell him for definite? “Seamus? No, he just mentioned something.”

At the age of 17, Turner took his first drama class and realised he was more 
than happy to give up other academic pursuits. Had he hated education? “It was 
more that the acting thing just happened. In my last eight months of school, I 
realised that this was what I wanted to do. I was very lucky to know – I mean, 
so many friends of mine, of my age, are still hopping around doing different 
courses, career changes. I realised early on.”

I ask if acting was a normal activity among his friends. “Well, it wasn’t 
really normal for me. I didn’t really care what people thought. If you tell 
people you want to be an actor, they say, ‘Jesus. Best of luck.’ I think 
everyone was quite surprised because I wasn’t a theatre kid, I never went to 
see plays. I didn’t do puppet shows in the living room for my grandparents, no, 
no. My brother did. But I was never an attention-seeker – I’d rather people 
didn’t look at me.” Well, apart from the dancing that he doesn’t want to talk 
about.

After school he went to one of Dublin’s two drama schools, the Gaiety School 
of Acting. “I’d realised I was still young enough to get away with not knowing 
anything, and drama school gives you this platform where you can fail all the 
time. You can constantly fuck up. That’s the luxury of going to drama school 
because, if you make those mistakes professionally, then it’s not quite the 
same; people aren’t so forgiving.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZFMUN-CIPUg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZFMUN-CIPUg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZFMUN-CIPUg&media=>
 Poldark. 
He went straight from graduation to a job at the Abbey Theatre, Ireland’s 
national theatre, and remained there, as a stage actor, for five years because 
play after play came up, and he was always in demand. Not that he didn’t still 
have the fear. “You freak yourself out sometimes, thinking: ‘I don’t know this 
well enough. What if I go dry? What if I forget my lines in the middle of that 
monologue?’ But when you walk on stage, that’s how you know if it’s for you. 
There is clarity. Your body is good at kicking into gear and knowing why you 
are there, what part of your brain to use.”

After auditioning for The Hobbit, his friends assumed that he would at least 
read the book. “And I thought, fuck that, I’m not going to read it unless I’m 
cast in it!” He says the filming schedule for Poldark is intense, “but you wait 
for months and months to work, and then you get given the shooting schedule and 
you go straight through it, circling your days off. I mean, I don’t know what 
it is about actors but some of us are inherently lazy.”

He clearly isn’t lazy at all these days, though it’s hard to get to the bottom 
of who he really is. On the one hand, he keeps joking about being a layabout, 
on the other, he’s desperate to be taken seriously as an actor, and only that. 
When I try to ask about other areas of his life, he puts up wall after wall. He 
will talk about Brexit and the possibility of Irish reunification off the 
record, but has to “steer clear of politics” when the tape is running “so I 
don’t get shot when I get home”.

He doesn’t want to give me anecdotes from his life, because that is “trivial”, 
and says he is worried that “you just slip into that celebrity bullshit and 
people don’t give a fuck about what you’re doing with the show. And I’ve 
noticed it’s happened – you stick on a tuxedo at an awards ceremony and people 
then start saying things, there are rumours of other things, you take a top 
off, and then it’s madness. I’d like to be casual about it, but I just can’t. 
Things blow up, you know? It’s interesting what people care about.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Faidan-turner-interview-poldark-top-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa66406f3a8481aada5fecf50e3e8b71417214657%2F0_99_2048_1266%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aidan%20Turner%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20take%20a%20top%20off%2C%20and%20then%20it%E2%80%99s%20madness%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Faidan-turner-interview-poldark-top-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aidan%20Turner%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20take%20a%20top%20off%2C%20and%20then%20it%E2%80%99s%20madness%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Faidan-turner-interview-poldark-top-off%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa66406f3a8481aada5fecf50e3e8b71417214657%2F0_99_2048_1266%2F2048.jpg>
 Turner in the BBC miniseries And Then There Were None, based on the Agatha 
Christie novel. Photograph: Robert Viglasky 
A couple of weeks later I speak to him again for a catch-up call. He is back 
home in Dublin, recovering from a stag do with old schoolfriends he hadn’t seen 
for 15 years. They leased a boat and sailed down the river Shannon for two 
days. Fifteen years seems like a really long time. “I know. I don’t know what 
kept us,” he says, “it was only an old email address that sort of reignited it. 
One of the boys, in a last-ditch effort, said, ‘Hey dude I’m getting married, 
if you’re around.’ I just went, ‘Holy shit, that’s James.’ He was using the 
email address I had when I was a kid. It was just one of those occasions of 
serendipity, where everything comes together.”

So they sailed a boat down an enormous river, got quite lost, “and there 
wasn’t a phone charger between 10 of us, it was desperate times,” he laughs. 
“At one stage we were floating around and we didn’t know where we were, it all 
got a bit crazy for a while. It was brilliant.” Did he take a turn at being 
captain? “Oh, I certainly didn’t take the helm. I had way more important things 
to do than that,” he says. “Like boozing, and the general craic.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Faidan-turner-interview-poldark-top-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8650d37f4421aeca44cae4746ed2c972ab3d7863%2F0_48_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aidan%20Turner%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20take%20a%20top%20off%2C%20and%20then%20it%E2%80%99s%20madness%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Faidan-turner-interview-poldark-top-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aidan%20Turner%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20take%20a%20top%20off%2C%20and%20then%20it%E2%80%99s%20madness%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Faidan-turner-interview-poldark-top-off%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8650d37f4421aeca44cae4746ed2c972ab3d7863%2F0_48_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Samuel Barnett as John Millais, Sam Crane as Fred Walters, Aidan Turner as 
Dante Gabriel Rossetti and Rafe Spall as William Holman Hunt. Photograph: 
BBC/Laurence Cendrowicz 
He has a few Irish friends in London – including three women who live on a 
houseboat, where he often stays, even though it moves round the Regent’s Canal 
every couple of weeks as they don’t own a fixed mooring. He doesn’t take the 
helm there, either, “They shout at me a lot, and I can’t do it. They’re well 
capable and don’t need my help; they’re three powerful women.” When he first 
moved to London, he lived in a flat above Mornington Crescent tube station, he 
says. What, I say, over that little minicab office?

“That’s right!” he says, with the greatest enthusiasm I’ve ever heard from 
him. “The one with the yellow sign!” But that is basically a traffic island on 
a big London junction, with a massive nightclub across the road and a tube 
station rumbling underneath. “I know! It was right beforeBeing Human 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/being-human>. I shared with a friend 
and it was my first experience of London. Living in Camden, at 24 – I was 
loving every bit of it. It was a madhole! It was crazy, but I loved it and that 
was my vibe back then.” I rather wish it was his vibe now. But I suspect it 
still is, when the journalists aren’t watching.

• Poldark <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b07pn8mz?ns> is on BBC1 on 4 
September.

 * This article was edited on 23 August 2016, to correct Turner’s father’s 
name and his mother’s occupation.  