
Following the International Monetary Fund’s controversial actions in the Asian 
financial crisis of 1998, when it conditioned liquidity assistance to 
distressed countries on government belt-tightening, it established an 
independent evaluation office (IEO) to undertake arm’s-length assessments of 
its policies and programmes. The office has now issued a comprehensivecritique 
<http://www.ieo-imf.org/ieo/pages/CompletedEvaluation267.aspx> of the IMF’s 
role in Europe’s post-2008 crisis.

Many of the IEO’s conclusions will be familiar. IMF surveillance, intended to 
detect economic vulnerabilities and imbalances, was inadequate. While staff 
sometimes pointed to booming credit, gaping current-account deficits or 
stagnant productivity, they downplayed the implications.

This reflected a tendency, conscious or not, to think that Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> was different. Its advanced 
economies did not display the same vulnerabilities as emerging markets. Strong 
institutions such as the European commission and the European Central Bank 
(ECB) had superior management skills. Monetary union, for some less-than-fully 
articulated reason, changed the rules of the game.

Such self-serving claims were in the interest of European officials, but why 
was the IMF prepared to accept them? One answer is that European governments 
are large shareholders in the Fund. Another is that the IMF is a predominantly 
European institution, with a European managing director, a heavily European 
staff and a European culture.

Still on familiar ground, the report goes on to criticise the IMF for 
acquiescing to European resistance to debt restructuring by Greece in 2010; and 
for setting ambitious targets for fiscal consolidation – necessary if debt 
restructuring was to be avoided – but underestimating austerity’s damaging 
economic effects.

More interestingly, the report then asks how the IMF should coordinate its 
operations with regional bodies such as the European commission and the ECB, 
the other members of the so-called troika of Greece’s official creditors. The 
report rejects claims that the IMF was effectively a junior member of the 
troika, insisting that all decisions were made by consensus.

That is difficult to square with everything we know about the fateful decision 
not to restructure Greece’s debt. IMF staff favoured restructuring, but the 
European commission and the ECB, which put up two-thirds of the money, 
ultimately had their way. He who has the largest wallet speaks with the loudest 
voice. In other words, there are different roads to “consensus”.

The Fund encountered the same problem in 2008, when it insisted on currency 
devaluation as part of an IMF-EU program for Latvia. In the end, it felt 
compelled to defer to the EU’s opposition to devaluation, because it 
contributed only 20% of the funds.

The implication is that the IMF should not participate in a programme to which 
it contributes only a minority share of the finance, but expecting it to 
provide majority funding implies the need to expand its financial resources. 
This is something that the IEO report evidently regarded as beyond its mandate 
– or too sensitive – to discuss.

Was the ECB even on the right side of the table in the European debt 
discussions? When negotiating with a country, the IMF ordinarily demands 
conditions of its government and central bank. In its programmes for Greece, 
Ireland and Portugal, however, it and the central bank demanded conditions of 
the government. This struck more than a few people as bizarre.

It would have been better if, in 2010, the IMF had demanded of the ECB a 
pledge “to do whatever it takes” and a programme of “outright monetary 
transactions” such as those the ECB president, Mario Draghi, eventuallyoffered 
<https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2012/html/sp120726.en.html> two years 
later. This would have addressed the contagion problem that was one basis for 
European officials’ resistance to a restructuring of Greece’s debt.

One objection to imposing conditions on the ECB is that the eurozone, as a 
regional entity, is not an IMF member. Only countries, not regions, are 
entitled to draw IMF resources. Nothing, however, prevents the Fund from 
demanding policy commitments from regional bodies when lending to their member 
governments. This has been done before when African and Caribbean monetary 
unions and central banks were involved.

Finally, the report criticises IMF management for failing to ensure the 
adequate involvement of its executive board, an oversight committee of 24 
national representatives. Board approval was sought, but only after the key 
decisions had already been made. The board was also forced to act under intense 
time pressure and lacked the information needed to challenge management 
recommendations.

The IEO’s report suggests involving the board more meaningfully, in order to 
provide a counterweight to political pressure from regional stakeholders, but 
this merely threatens to substitute one form of political influence for another.

It would be better to allow an independent management team to make decisions 
free of political interference, in the manner of a central bank policy 
committee. This, however, presupposes freeing the IMF from dependence on 
financial contributions from its regional stakeholders. It also requires its 
management to demonstrate that it can consistently make decisions based on 
programme countries’ economic interest, not on the political preferences of 
powerful national shareholders.

• Barry Eichengreen is professor of economics at the University of California, 
Berkeley; Pitt professor of American history and institutions at the University 
of Cambridge; and a former senior policy adviser at the IMF

© Project Syndicate <https://www.project-syndicate.org/>



 