
Less than three years after its launch, al-Jazeera America is shutting down. 
The news was abruptly announced to staff on Wednesday afternoon. The network’s 
last day on the air will be 30 April.

The enterprise was troubled from the beginning: seven hours into its first day 
on the air, al-Jazeera America was already mired in a lawsuit with one of its 
carriers, AT&T, which dropped the network before it even began. Its viewership 
was usually between 20,000 and 40,000 viewers in prime time – Fox News averaged 
1.95m viewers in the third quarter of 2015.

With few cable operators willing to add the network to already overcrowded 
cable plans (and even among the willing, only to the most expensive plans) and
skittishness 
<http://www.adweek.com/news/television/some-advertisers-view-al-jazeera-america-too-risky-151924>
 about the association of the channel with the Middle East in the conservative 
US advertising world, the network never found its footing.


Al-Jazeera expected to cut hundreds of jobs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/22/al-jazeera-expected-to-cut-hundreds-of-jobs-qatar-oil-price>
Al Anstey was brought in to turn the network around in May; its first CEO, 
Ehab El Shihabi, wasunceremoniously let go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/may/06/al-jazeera-america-ceo-fired-amid-reports-of-turmoil-in-the-newsroom>
. When the network’s employees announced its unionization a few weeks later, it 
noted that management hadrefused to include 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/03/al-jazeera-america-digital-newsroom-union>
 senior staff.

The network says it will expand digital operations. “I greatly respect the 
unrivaled commitment and excellent work of our team, which has created great 
journalism,” wrote Anstey in a press release confirming the shutdown. “We have 
increasingly set ourselves apart from all the rest, and the achievements of the 
past two-and-a-half years should be a source of immense pride for everyone.”

Andrew Tyndall, publisher of venerable TV news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/tvnews> industry newsletter The Tyndall 
Report, mused: “I’ve always said right from the start, ‘Why did they open up?’ 
I couldn’t see the point. Trying to start a cable news network is such a 1990s 
thing to do and they were trying to establish a brand in a medium that was 
yesterday’s medium. Why not just run a website?”


Al-Jazeera’s foray into American TV was a long time brewing; the 
state-operated, Qatar-based network had developed a reputation for clear 
reporting on the Middle East during a time when many US networks were being 
criticized for downsizing overseas staff and flying in inadequately 
knowledgeable reporters. Spurred by the approbation, the networkbought 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jan/03/al-jazeera-buys-current-tv> Al 
Gore’s flailing news network Current TV for half a billion dollars and prepared 
to relaunch it (that, too, produced alawsuit 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2014-08-15/al-gore-sues-al-jazeera-over-500-million-current-tv-deal>
).

“There will be less opinion, less yelling, and fewer celebrity sightings [than 
our competitors],” said El Shihabi during the company’s conference call with 
press just before al-Jazeera America’s launch. “We are not ‘infotainment’.”


The network, funded by the oil wealth of the Qatari royal family, never relied 
on traditional industry economics.

“There’s a 15-year-old effort by Qatar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/qatar> to establish itself as a global 
influence,” Tyndall pointed out. “That’s not only by spending enormous amounts 
of money as a sporting venue and a tourist venue and a prestige airline and an 
academic center; there are all kinds of ways they’ve spend their fossil fuel 
wealth establishing themselves as a global brand.”


But that wealth has diminished recently. Oil is now below $30 a barrel and 
salary rises across the tiny nation are projected to be the lowest in five 
years, according to arecent report 
<http://dohanews.co/report-salary-raises-in-qatar-to-be-lowest-in-five-years/>.

Ultimately, infotainment may have been what the people wanted. CNN’s Jeff 
Zucker, taking the reins from longtime boss Jim Walton in January of the same 
year, went the opposite direction, adding staff like former Travel Channel chef 
Anthony Bourdain in a bid to compete with the Discovery Channel, among others. 
CNN has spent the last few years growing; al-Jazeera, despite that initial 
interest, has not.

Peter Szekely, president of the News Guild, under which al-Jazeera was (and 
the Guardian US is) unionized, said: “Al-Jazeera America’s abrupt decision to 
shut down will deprive Americans of one of the most reliable, high quality 
digital and television news outlets in the country. It is a sad day for 
American journalism.”

 * This article was updated to add comment from the News Guild sent after 
publication  