
Al-Jazeera <https://www.theguardian.com/media/al-jazeera> is to cut about 500 
jobs worldwide, with most of the layoffs expected in the broadcaster’s home 
base in Qatar.

The news network said 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2016/03/al-jazeera-reduce-staff-part-optimisation-plan-160327091744466.html>
 the cuts were in line with changes in global media; many organisations have 
been forced to reduce staff and tighten budgets – though the state-funded 
channel will also have been impacted by falling oil prices.

The move will bring down al-Jazeera’s global staff of about 4,500 by more than 
10%.

What went wrong with al-Jazeera – and how can it be fixed?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/08/what-went-wrong-with-al-jazeera-and-how-can-it-be-fixed>
Acting director general, Mostefa Souag, said the network had spent months 
evaluating options. He said: “Based on this review, we have embarked on a 
workforce optimisation initiative that will allow us to evolve our business 
operation in order to maintain a leading position and continue our recognised 
commitment to high quality, independent and hard-hitting journalism around the 
world.”

Al-Jazeera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/08/what-went-wrong-with-al-jazeera-and-how-can-it-be-fixed>
 was launched in 1996 as an Arabic-language news channel. It radically altered 
reporting of the region and grew to have a global impact with more than 70 
bureaus around the world. An English-language channel was launched in 2006.

It has since scaled back its ambitions, announcing in January the closure of 
its American cable news channel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/13/al-jazeera-america-shut-down-cable-tv-news-network>
, launched in October 2013, after consistently low ratings.

The slump in oil prices, which has left crude selling at around $40 (£28) a 
barrel compared to more than $100 in mid-2014, has ledQatar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/qatar> to make cuts to other state-funded 
institutions, as well as laying off many workers in the energy sector. Even 
after slashing government spending, the Gulf state expects to run a budget 
deficit of more than $12bn this year.

But the al-Jazeera redundancies could also reflect a waning enthusiasm by 
rulers in Doha for the soft power and foreign influence offered by the 
broadcaster, which says its mission is to “provide a voice for the voiceless in 
some of the most underreported places on the planet”.

Al-Jazeera was heavily backed by the former emir Hamad bin Khalifa al-Thani at 
its inception, and won a large following across the Arab world with a style and 
openness that other broadcasters had rarely served up to the local audience. 
However, reports have suggested his son and successor Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad 
al-Thani was less prepared to fund a network whose English language service has 
insisted on editorial independence and antagonised other states in the region 
with its coverage.

Last year, Egypt jailed three al-Jazeera journalists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/29/egyptian-court-sentences-3-al-jazeera-english-journalists-to-3-years-in-prison>
 reporting on events in Cairo. Other governments have objected to the airtime 
it has given to Islamist groups in Syria, Libya and elsewhere. It has not shied 
from controversy in the region, having also broadcast the first televised 
interview with an Israeli speaking Hebrew.

In an email sent to employees on Sunday, and republished in Doha News 
<http://dohanews.co/500-staffers-laid-off-from-al-jazeera/>, Souag said: “As 
you know, other leading media organisations across the world are being forced 
to redefine their business models as well, with negative impact on their staff. 
Al-Jazeera is no exception.”

Other companies facing such cuts include the Guardian Media Group, which is 
seeking to lay off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/17/guardian-media-group-to-cut-250-jobs>
 a similar proportion of its workforce, 250 people. The Independent, a British 
daily, published its last ever print edition on Saturday, while in Australia 
the publisher Fairfax is planning toaxe 120 journalists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/17/guardian-media-group-to-cut-250-jobs>
 across the Sydney Morning Herald, the Age and the Australian Financial Review. 
The job losses at al-Jazeera are so far less severe than many staff feared when 
rumours first circulated in late 2015.

A second Qatar-backed Arabic news network, al-Araby al-Jadeed, launched in 
2014 and started broadcasting in 2015.
 