
Al-Jazeera <https://www.theguardian.com/media/al-jazeera> is expected to cut 
hundreds of jobs worldwide as the Qatari-owned broadcaster looks to make 
savings in the face of a falling oil price and a possible radical change in 
investment strategy.

The surprise move will not only see an estimated 800 to 1,000 staff go – 
almost one quarter of the total workforce – but could presage the emir ofQatar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/qatar> reducing the state’s commitment to 
the news media group that was supported by his father. The news organisation 
has been a hugely successful way of maintaining influence in the Arab world and 
beyond.

Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani has been Qatari ruler for the past two years 
since taking over from his father,Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani, 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hamad_bin_Khalifa_Al_Thani> who funded 
al-Jazeera at its launch in 1996.


The proposed job cuts, which could come after the end of this week’s Eid 
celebrations, comes amid falling oil and gas prices, and after the news 
organisation spent more than $600m (£390m) launching al-Jazeera America in 2013.


An internal email at al-Jazeera has already been prepared which warned some 
staff to expect “painful cuts”. There is a huge amount of confusion ahead of 
any final decision being made by the senior executive team.

Broadcasters, journalists, technicians and other support staff working in both 
English and Arabic language channels are all expected to be told of the planned 
cuts over the coming days. Only al-Jazeera America, launched after the purchase 
of former US vice-president Al Gore’s Current TV station, is expected to be 
protected from the cuts.

Most of al-Jazeera’s 4,700 employees work in its Arabic language division.

Insiders say Arabic language Doha-based journalists are particularly at risk 
as al-Jazeera’s stance of several of the Middle East’s most troubled areas of 
conflict could cause problems if they are forced to return home.

Launched by Amiri decree with a loan from the emir and state funded ever 
since, al-Jazeera has often been controversial in the region from the first 
televised interview with an Israeli speaking Hebrew to broadcasting video 
statements from al-Qaida leaders.

Al-Jazeera’s reporting of the 2011 Arab spring  
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2014/07/02/us-qatar-jazeera-media-idUSKBN0F70F120140702>
in countries such as Egypt and Tunisia won it millions of new viewers in the 
region but also saw its coverage come in for increased criticism from local 
governments, which accused the network of supporting Islamists. In Egypt, for 
example, its reporting on the Muslim Brotherhood has been sharply criticised by 
the current regime.


In August, three al-Jazeera journalists were sentenced to three years in prison
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/29/egyptian-court-sentences-3-al-jazeera-english-journalists-to-3-years-in-prison>
 by an Egyptian judge in a verdict which shocked both human rights groups and 
press freedom campaigners.

Although funded by the Qatari state, the English language service, which 
employs 530 people, has long insisted on its editorial independence. Several 
well-known journalists joined the network, most notablyDavid Frost,  
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Frost>who died two years ago.

Although most of the news organisation’s executives were locked in two-day 
budget meetings on Tuesday, one senior member of staff said of the job cuts: 
“It’s going to happen, unless there is an intervention at the highest level.”

Based in Doha, the satellite service and website operates out of three major 
headquarters, also including London and Washington DC.

Although Qatar is the richest country in the world per capita 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_GDP_(PPP)_per_capita>, much 
of its wealth is based on gas reserves which are likely to be hit by falling 
oil prices.


Rumours about cuts at al-Jazeera have circulated in Arab speaking news 
organisations for the past few days. One Egyptian newspaperreport 
<http://www.arabianbusiness.com/al-jazeera-cuts-dozens-of-jobs-601024.html> 
suggested, somewhat gleefully, that the job cuts were “the final nail in the 
coffin of al-Jazeera empire”.

The job cuts could mean that the Qatari authorities are prepared to invest in 
other media companies such as al-Araby Al-Jadeed. The year-old company has 
links to Azmi Bishara, a Palestinian former Israeli Knesset member who is 
understood to be close to the emir.

Although al-Jazeera America is expected to be protected from most of these 
cuts, it has already faced upheaval with the replacement of the US network’s 
chief executive in May following several senior staff departures and a lawsuit 
claiming wrongful employment. The network has struggled with low ratings since 
its launch.

A spokesperson for al-Jazeera would not confirm the job cuts but said “there 
was likely to be something soon”.

• This article was amended on 24 September 2015 to clarify Azmi Bishara’s 
relationship with al-Araby Al-Jadeed and the emir of Qatar.
 