
An Egyptian court released a detailed ruling on Sunday on why it sentenced 
three journalists working for al-Jazeera English to three years in prison for 
airing what it described as “false news” and biased coverage. The case has long 
been criticised by press freedom campaigners and others.

The ruling, published by the state news agency Mena, said Mohamed Fahmy, a 
Canadian national, Peter Greste, an Australian journalist, and BaherMohamed, an 
Egyptian producer, were by default members of the bannedMuslim Brotherhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/muslim-brotherhood> group, which Egyptian 
authorities consider a terrorist organisation.

Peter Greste: Egypt's press lost its freedom when my al-Jazeera colleagues and 
I lost ours
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/07/peter-greste-egypts-press-lost-its-freedom-with-me-and-my-al-jazeera-colleagues>
“It has been proven beyond reasonable doubt that the al-Jazeera media channel 
has dedicated its broadcasting to the service and support of the Muslim 
Brotherhood faction and that they have permanently sided with them at the 
expense of their media ethics,” the ruling said. “This provides enough ground 
for a conviction of belonging to a group based on violations of the law.”

The ruling also said the three operated without press credentials and secretly 
worked at the Marriott hotel in central Cairo without a permit. The journalists 
and the network deny the accusations.Al-Jazeera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/al-jazeera> said it would appeal.

After last weekend’s ruling, Mohamed and Fahmy were imprisoned, while Greste 
had been deported previously.

The case, which was widely condemned by the international community, has 
become an embarrassment for the Egyptian presidentAbdel Fatah al-Sisi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-fatah-al-sisi>.

Last week, the human rights lawyer Amal Clooney, who acts for Fahmy, said Sisi 
must pardon the men.

“It’s ironic that the conviction was for tarnishing Egypt’s reputation when 
... this [case] is what’s tarnished Egypt’s image,” Clooney told the BBC. “I do 
think he’s aware of that and he has a way to fix it.”

Al-Jazeera journalists sentenced to three years in prison by Egyptian court
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/29/egyptian-court-sentences-3-al-jazeera-english-journalists-to-3-years-in-prison>
The long-running trial is entangled in the wider political conflict between 
Egypt and Qatar, where al-Jazeera is based, following the Egyptian army’s 2013 
military ouster of the Islamist president,Mohamed Morsi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mohamed-morsi>, a Brotherhood member.

Evidence presented at the trial ventured into the absurd, including music 
videos and footage of animals, which defence lawyers and even the judge 
dismissed as irrelevant. Third-party observers said no evidence proved the 
charges. Critics describe the case as politically motivated.

The men are seeking a pardon from Sisi, who personally expressed regret over 
the trial and the damage it had done to Egypt’s reputation. He has said it 
would have been better to simply deport the journalists.

Al-Jazeera had been waiting for Sunday’s detailed ruling, which could have 
been released up to 30 days after the verdict, to appeal.

The case began in December 2013, when Egyptian security forces raided the 
hotel suite used by al-Jazeera at the time to report fromEgypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt>.

The journalists began using the hotel as a base of operations after the 
al-Jazeera English office near Tahrir Square was raided by police. Authorities 
arrested Fahmy, Greste and Mohamed, later charging them with allegedly being 
part of the Muslim Brotherhood, and airing falsified footage intended to damage 
national security.

The three men initially were convicted on 23 June 2014, with Greste and Fahmy 
sentenced to seven years in prison and Mohamed to 10 years for also being found 
with a spent bullet casing. That ruling was later overturned on appeal by 
Egypt’s court of cassation, the final stage of criminal appeals, which said the 
initial proceedings were marred by violations of the defendants’ rights. 
However, a retrial was ordered, ending with last week’s convictions.

The detailed ruling in the initial 2014 conviction said that the journalists 
had been brought together “by the devil” to destabilise Egypt. The detailed 
ruling released on Sunday made no such reference.
 