
Alan Carr is to leave BBC Radio 2, the latest big-name departure from the 
station following theexits of Zoe Ball 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/feb/10/anneka-rice-zoe-ball-radio-2?INTCMP=SRCH>
 andAlan Titchmarsh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/nov/25/classic-fm-alan-titchmarsh?INTCMP=SRCH>
.

Carr has presented his Saturday evening show, Going Out With Alan Carr, since 
2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/mar/13/paul-ogrady-alan-carr-emma-forbes?INTCMP=SRCH>
.

The Chatty Man host initially co-presented the slot with Emma Forbes and 
currently shares the microphone with Melanie Sykes.

Ball was replaced on weekend breakfast by Anneka Rice, while Titchmarsh was 
dropped byRadio 2 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-2> controller Bob 
Shennan last year after presenting his Sunday afternoon show, Melodies For You, 
for four years.

Radio <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 2 is the UK's most popular 
radio station with 14.3 million weekly listeners.

Shennan is facing budget cuts along with the rest of the BBC, and is under 
pressure from the BBC Trust to reverse a decline in listening by its older 
audience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/apr/11/bob-shennan-bbc-radio-2-6music-interview>
.

Head of programmes at BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Radio 2, 
Lewis Carnie, said: "We'd like to thank Alan for his contribution over the past 
three years. Alan and his co-presenter Mel Sykes have made a terrific 
contribution to Saturday evenings on Radio 2. We'll be announcing plans for a 
new Saturday evening programme shortly."

Carr said: "I've loved every minute of it but it's time to reclaim my 
weekends. I wish Radio 2 every success but I'll listen from my home in the 
future instead."

Radio 2 will announce plans for a new Saturday evening programme shortly.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 