
On the surface films and comics have a lot in common – most of them are 
juvenile crap, and there's that whole words/pictures thing too. These days 
adaptations between both media abound and the traditional film/comics 
(awesome/scum) hierarchy is breaking down.The fat guy behind Cop Out 
<http://www.time.com/time/arts/article/0,8599,1968309,00.html>, aka Kevin 
Smith, dabbles in comics while Frank Miller commits aesthetic atrocities with
The Spirit <http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/the_spirit/>.

But the greatest traveller between the two realms rarely gets attention for 
his comics, despite the fact that for 30 years he has channeled most of his 
creative energy into the medium. I am speaking aboutthe Peruvian 
"psycho-magician" Alejandro Jodorowsky 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alejandro_Jodorowsky>, the man behind such films 
as El Topo, The Holy Mountain and Santa Sangre – any one of which makes the 
most eccentric Werner Herzog movie look like an episode of Grange Hill.

Jodorowsky got into comics following the collapse of his Dune movie 
adaptation, which was to feature the talents ofFrench comics artist Jean 
"Moebius" Giraud <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jean_Giraud>, Alien designer HR 
Giger, Pink Floyd, Salvador Dali and many others. Working with Moebius he 
started pouring concepts from the aborted film into a six-volume, 
10-years-in-the-making SF-metaphysical saga called The Incal 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Incal>.

Long before I saw any Jodorowsky movies I read The Incal. It begins as a 
profane collision of hardboiled SF noir and Fritz Lang's Metropolis, before 
mutating into a cosmic quest/spiritual voyage as the reluctant heroJohn DiFool 
<http://www.shadowgallery.co.uk/angouleme/ville/difool.html> ventures across 
the universe copulating with aliens, doing battle with "technopopes", 
persuading the entire universe to take a nice nap, and finally meeting a 
godlike being called ORH. Toss in a berserk overload of sex and violence, 
dissolving bodies, symbols, archetypes, metaphysics and a heavy influence from 
the tarot and you may have a vague inkling of what goes on in The Incal. You 
won't be surprised to hear that the narrative spirals completely out of control 
at the end before crash landing in a swamp of impenetrable, New Age blather.

Fortunately the brilliance of Jodorowsky's imagination and the fantastic line 
art by Moebius overwhelm the magic crystal ending. More, the possibility of 
such a narrative disaster is evident early on – part of the thrill even, for 
creatively Jodorowsky is completely uninhibited and reckless. As he once put 
it: ''I am asking for more, I am asking more…"

The Incal spawned a horde of spin-offs, the most successful of which is The 
Metabarons <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metabarons>, a saga about a cosmic 
warrior clan, an early member of which gets castrated early on. My own tastes 
however tend towards Jodorowsky's non-SF work, and there are three series in 
particular that provide me with endless delight.

Son of the Gun is the demented tale of a baby with a tail who is dumped in a 
bin, suckled on a pistol by a transvestite dwarf prostitute and then grows up 
to be a cartel hit-man, all round Oedipal monster and finally crypto-saint who 
brings rain to his people via his self-crucifixion. It's much less New Age-y 
than The Incal, possibly due to the absence of Moebius, who spent years 
following a dubious guru on Fiji. Illustrations are provided instead by the 
grittier Georges Bess.

Borgia 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/s/ref=ntt_athr_dp_sr_1?_encoding=UTF8&search-alias=books-uk&field-author=Jodorowsky%20%26.%20Manara>
 is a historical saga about the legendarily depraved family during the reign of 
Pope Alexander VI, aka Rodrigo Borgia. Compared to most of Jodorowsky's other 
works, Borgia is striking for its lack of metaphysical subtext. Ultra-violent 
and outrageous, the narrative descends to depths that are almost 
transcendentally profane. Things happen in Borgia that I cannot describe in a 
respectable newspaper. Art is provided by Italian erotic comics maestro Milo 
Manara who here shows a great facility for mangled bodies and bloody stumps in 
addition to naked ladies.

The recently published English Madwoman of the Sacred Heart 
<http://www.humanoids.com/album/236> is the second major collaboration between 
Jodorowsky and Moebius. Alan Mangel, a professor of philosophy at the Sorbonne 
impregnates one of his students with the second John the Baptist (or so the 
student believes) and then finds himself on the run with a bizarre cult. As the 
saga unfolds, Mangel is subjected to an increasingly extreme series of 
humiliations stripping him of his identity; running throughout meanwhile is an 
unbelievably crass gag about his diarrhoea. Beautifully illustrated (Moebius 
drew Mangel as a portrait of Jodorowsky), this is a book to delight and appal 
in equal measure – at least until part three when, like the Incal, it all 
spirals out of control. Moebius starts drawing the story like it's a Belgian 
humour comic and Jodorowsky becomes barely coherent in his rush to tie up all 
the plot threads.

But then this is what you get with Jodorowsky – a fine dance on the edge of 
meaning and meaninglessness, creation and chaos. Regardless of the genre he 
works in, each panel will rip the top off your skull and force-feed your brain 
new ideas. There is nothing like a Jodorowsky comic, except perhaps a 
Jodorowsky film; and while Jodorowsky's books are not exactly wholesome, they 
are good for you. Like the man himself explained in an interview many years 
ago: "I broke the wall between the conscious and unconscious."

'Nuff said.
 