
Adjusting to life in the Premier League fast lane has been an eye-opener for 
Alex Iwobi. He still has to suppress the urge to beam when the television 
cameras pan down the lineup of players in the tunnel before a game. Look 
serious, Alex, he reminds himself, even if he is exhilarated inside.

Away from the pitch, dealing with attention is a new experience in itself. 
Whether it is a stranger bowling up to him in a shop while he is buying 
trainers for a friend to impersonate his goal celebration, or a fan following 
his car for miles while he was driving away from the Emirates with his mum, 
Iwobi is doing his utmost to take it all in his steady stride.

Premier League: 10 things to look out for this weekend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/09/premier-league-10-things-to-look-out-for-this-weekend>
“I thought, this fan is going to follow me to my destination. I need to take a 
detour,” he says. “It was crazy. I was almost scared. ‘Iwobi! Iwobi!’ For 20 
minutes. It was a bit too much.” One nifty move later the bizarre car chase was 
over and theArsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> youngster 
was able to see the lighter side of one of the many unexpected scenarios he has 
absorbed since his career trajectory suddenly rocketed.

At the tail end of the Champions League group stage a year ago Iwobi shone as 
Arsenalbeat Bayern Munich in the youth version of Europe’s elite competition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/oct/21/arsenal-under-19s-thierry-henry-andries-jonker>
. The game took place at Meadow Park in leafy Borehamwood in front of a few 
hundred enthusiasts. He scored twice (one an absolute peach). A week later he 
made his first-team debut. The milestones any young player aspires to pass were 
ticked off in rapid succession. League Cup appearance. Check. FA Cup. Check. 
Premier League. Check. First start. Check. First goal. Check. First Champions 
League start – that just happened to bein the Camp Nou 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/16/barcelona-arsenal-champions-league-match-report>
 to embellish that sense of whirlwind. Gargantuan check.

Attempting to reflect on the progress he has made, which culminated in his 
pride in tucking away his first goal in the Champions League properon Tuesday 
in Basel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/06/basel-arsenal-champions-league-match-report>
, Iwobi, 20, looks taken aback. He has barely had the time, or even the 
inclination, to over-analyse the bigger picture. Focusing on bite-sized 
challenges, game by game, keeps him grounded.

Ferris Bueller’s mantra suddenly springs to mind: “Life moves pretty fast. If 
you don’t stop and look around once in a while, you could miss it.” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HbR7axof1wk> Iwobi takes a moment 
metaphorically to stop and look around. “When I sit down and actually think 
about what I have done, to score in the under-19s a year ago and then to score 
my first Champions League goal for the senior team is mad,” he muses.

The glow had barely subsided from the goal in Basel when Iwobi was playfully 
tugged back down to earth by Mesut Özil. It was Arsenal’s master provider who 
had set him up with an agile reverse pass. “I have to call him ‘my boss’ 
because he assisted me,” Iwobi explains, chuckling. “Alexis likes to take the 
mick out of me when I don’t score in training. They are funny.”

For a rookie attacker there are worse places to be learning than in the sphere 
shaped by Özil and Sánchez. “They will tell you what you need to work on but in 
a jokey kind of way. They do advise me, saying I just need to compose myself, 
relax and the chances will come. They try to help in the best way they can.”

It means the world to a boy who was developed at Arsenal, the club he began to 
train with from the age of six. He was not necessarily the one from his age 
group who was expected to last the distance and make his way to the first-team 
dressing room. Iwobi came close to being released when he was in his early 
teens.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Falex-iwobi-arsenal-extra-sessions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb847ed81231da21cff8132a474ce436c91ee3b4%2F0_65_2679_1607%2F2679.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alex%20Iwobi%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20did%20extra%20training.%20My%20mum%20made%20me%20do%20kick-ups%20in%20the%20living%20room%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Falex-iwobi-arsenal-extra-sessions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alex%20Iwobi%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20did%20extra%20training.%20My%20mum%20made%20me%20do%20kick-ups%20in%20the%20living%20room%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Falex-iwobi-arsenal-extra-sessions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb847ed81231da21cff8132a474ce436c91ee3b4%2F0_65_2679_1607%2F2679.jpg>
 Alex Iwobi celebrates with Mesut Özil after scoring his first Champions League 
goal, in Arsenal’s win at Basel this week. Photograph: Andrew Couldridge/Reuters
“Because I wasn’t as big, fast or strong as everyone else, there were question 
marks on me and my ability that I wasn’t imposing myself on the game as I 
should,” Iwobi recalls. “It was upsetting because I was going to school 
thinking, ‘What can I do to improve?’ I would have extra sessions with my dad 
or friends. My mum made me do kick-ups in the living room. My sister even tried 
to play football. Everyone was trying to help me.”

Naturally they are all proud of how Iwobi turned things around. He is still 
very close to his sister, Marie. The other day he went to visit her at 
university, pulling a hood up so as not to draw any special attention. “I just 
want to enjoy the time with my sister,” he says. “We are close, we are always 
together, having a laugh. I’m always trying to take care of her.”

As a youth-team player Arsenal wanted Iwobi to be braver, learn not to shy 
away from physical challenges, use that platform to express himself. He has 
certainly responded and now he is aiming to hone his game further. He wants to 
build in more end product. “That’s what the big players get recognised for, 
scoring goals or creating goals,” he says. “I feel like I did, then I had a 
little drought, but I think that this goal against Basel will give me a 
confidence boost.” Iwobi seems to have his priorities in impressive shape.

He is conscious of the opportunities he has been given to make the best of his 
talent, and that point was reinforced when he spent a day recently visiting 
Arsenal in the Community’s headquarters. He was guided around by a guy his age 
who struck a chord with him. Lloyd, who grew up on an estate not far from the 
Emirates Stadium, was drifting on to the wrong side of the tracks but was 
offered a helping hand by Arsenal, who delivered football sessions on the pitch 
their foundation had built on the estate. The coaches look out for young people 
on the fringes and Lloyd was invited to take part in some initiatives.

Arsenal youngsters thrive in Europe, with help from Thierry Henry | Amy 
Lawrence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/oct/21/arsenal-under-19s-thierry-henry-andries-jonker>
“He almost reminded me of myself,” Iwobi says. “I used to play football on the 
streets with my friends and ended up where I am today. He used to do that and 
Arsenal is helping him to get to where he wants to be in the future. He told me 
he wants to be a physiotherapist and they are helping with that.”

Iwobi and all his team-mates are donating a day’s wages as part of the club’s 
fund-raising campaign. His contribution has risen notably since he signed a new 
contract. He understands why people are sceptical about whether young players 
are given too much too young nowadays. “With the money thing it is mad,” he 
says. “As a young kid earning so much, having a house and driving a nice car it 
is nice but it is something I keep level-headed about.”

One person who is particularly influential on that front is his uncle, Jay-Jay 
Okocha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2004/feb/29/newsstory.carlingcup0304>. 
“We speak every couple of weeks. He does advise me, not just on the pitch but 
off it too. Football is a short career so he is telling me to maintain the 
lifestyle you have to get businesses and properties. He is trying to keep me 
level-headed and to help me plan for the future after football.”

Following in Okocha’s footsteps, Iwobi has chosen to play for Nigeria instead 
of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/mar/26/arsenal-alex-iwobi-england-nigeria>
. He left Lagos when he was four years old and after a brief stay in Turkey, 
where his uncle was playing, was raised in east London.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSEVCuD0DurY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSEVCuD0DurY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSEVCuD0DurY&media=>
Having spent most of his life in England, he has been astounded by the 
reaction when he travels to Nigeria to represent the Super Eagles.

“Everyone appreciates you. You’re almost like a king!” he says. “When I 
arrived at the airport I thought, I’ll just have my earphones in, but everyone 
was like ‘Iwobi! Iwobi!’ Oh gosh. Hi guys! I didn’t know what to expect. It was 
just mad. I always go with Kelechi Iheanacho. When we go we get escorted. 
Because I’m not used to the Nigerian culture as much as they are, they do help 
me with it. I can’t really speak the language that well. They help me with the 
fans. The fans are very different there. They don’t ask me for autographs, they 
ask for boots, money.

We played in a stadium for 30,000 and there was 60,000! People were standing 
on the floodlights, on the scoreboard

“At my debut we played in a stadium that holds 30,000 and there was 60,000 – I 
don’t understand how. People were standing on the floodlights, on the 
scoreboard. I was thinking, ‘What? This isn’t even safe!’ But people there will 
do anything to watch the match. Sometimes in a Premier League game the fans are 
a bit quiet but in Nigeria you just hear trumpets, everything. The atmosphere 
is so different compared to England.”

The international scene has been yet another eye-opener in this young career. 
Iwobi cannot wait to experience more. He is hopeful he can one day win a medal 
with Arsenal. He remembers going to Wembley to see the FA Cup victories in 2014 
and 2015, and being hugged by an over-exuberant fan. “I was like, ‘Don’t kill 
me!’ but it was amazing. It gave me the motivation to try to get on the pitch 
and hold those trophies.” As for the title, he goes on to YouTube sometimes to 
watch footage from Arsenal’s last winners in 2004. “Some of the players Arsenal 
used to have were scary. But even now the quality we have now, this season 
could be our season. It is wide open.

“I walk past the corridors and see all the pictures of players holding a 
trophy and celebrating but my face is not there. I want to be there. Hopefully 
one day my face will be on the wall celebrating too. That would be amazing.”

Arsenal’s match against Stoke City is dedicated to The Arsenal Foundation. 
Arsène Wenger and the first-team squad will donate a day’s wages to support 
projects that make a positive and lasting impact in the lives of beneficiaries. 
For more information and to donate visitwww.arsenal.com/thearsenalfoundation 
<http://www.arsenal.com/thearsenalfoundation>
 