 One of the proudest moments in the life of Alex Glasgow, who has died aged 65 
after a long illness, at his home in Fremantle, Western Australia, was when he 
heard a miner on the radio saying: "It's like the old song says... 'Close the 
Coalhouse Door, lads, there's blood inside'..."
The reason for his pride was simple: it wasn't an old song. Alex, a pitman's 
son from Gateshead, wrote it originally for a radio programme, and it later 
became the title song for the 1968 stage musical which Alex and I wrote, in 
partnership with the novelist and short story writer, Sid Chaplin.

It's one of many songs that have an enduring place in the psyche of the 
north-east and the Labour movement. There are probably a few old comrades in 
Sedgefield who can sing My Daddy Is A Left-wing Intellectual or The Socialist 
ABC:

A is for Alienation, that made me the man that I am 

And B's for the Boss who's a Bastard, a bourgeois who don't give a damn... 

Alex was, in the words of his long-time friend and associate, Henry Livings, a 
supreme songmaker, but he was much else besides: a broadcaster on radio and 
television, a writer, a singer, a socialist and, to quote another of his songs, 
a proper man. He started his career in forces broadcasting and once had a 
record in the German charts, an experience echoed when his recording of Dance 
To Thi Daddy - the theme music of the BBC series, When The Boat Comes In, for 
which he wrote some memorable episodes - made it to the charts.

This revealed Alex at his most characteristic. He refused resolutely to go on 
Top of the Pops, or do guest shots on any television variety shows. "I'm not a 
bloody commodity," he said. Once, prior to an ideologically-acceptable 
appearance on television with Henry Livings, he was appalled when a make-up 
girl tried to cut his hair "to match the picture in the Radio Times".

"Leave my hair alone," he said. "I do not have a public image." 

He was highly principled and wonderfully combative. I once said to him: "Alex 
- I think I'm the only one of your friends you've never had a row with," and he 
didn't disagree.

But friends and colleagues were united in admiration of his unique talent. In 
the theatre he collaborated with Stan Barstow and Henry Livings, and wrote Joe 
Lives, a wonderful one-man show for John Woodvine, about the great 19th-century 
Tyneside radical and songwriter, Joe Wilson. This work revealed the huge range 
in Alex's musical palette, from angry polemic to knees-up music-hall to love 
songs of surpassing tenderness: In The Night There Is A Garden, The Harlequin 
and Sally Wheatley are as lovely as anything written in the last 40 years. The 
obvious explanation is that they were inspired by a 40-year love affair with 
his wife, Paddy.

As a performer, maybe the most accurate description of him was chansonnier. He 
was multi-lingual and once spent an evening with Jake Thackray trying to work 
out the joke in a key verse of a Georges Brassens' song before making the 
triumphant discovery that the tag line was sung in French, but with a Belgian 
accent.

He figured if he was doing his job properly, he should always be in trouble. 
One year in the 1970s, when the Tories were having their conference in 
Blackpool, the delegates awoke to Alex's sweet tones singing on a North Region 
radio programme:

I'm going to sell a little bomb to South Africa 

Just a teeny-weeny bomb to South Africa... 

Questions were asked, Alex's head rolled, and several of his associates on the 
programme left in sympathy, out of old-fashioned solidarity: those were the 
days.

But even his nearest and dearest were shocked when, in 1981, he left his 
native Gateshead and moved to Fremantle. The year before, he and Henry Livings 
had appeared at the Perth Festival in their legendary road show, The Northern 
Drift, and Alex fell in love with the place.

He and Paddy celebrated their 20th wedding anniversary in mid-air on their way 
to a new life. He justified the move with his special brew of unchallengeable 
assertions. "They're wonderful people. They're all like Geordies. And do you 
realise, 70% of the world's wild flowers are in Western Australia?" His Letters 
from a Pom, and Henry Livings's replies, were a regular feature in the Guardian 
during the early period of his migration.

The last few years of his life were cursed with illness of a particularly 
cruel nature. He went bravely but not gently. Gentle wasn't his style, except 
within the family. He lived long enough to take photographs of his first 
grandchild.

He is survived by Paddy, and by his children, Richard, Daniel and Ruth.

Â• Alex Glasgow, songwriter, born October 14 1935; died May 14 2001
 