
Alicia Machado became an American citizen just in time to vote against Donald 
Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. It’s a vote that has 
been a long time coming.

In May 1996, the Venezuelan beauty queen was just 19 years old when she was 
crowned the winner of the Miss Universe pageant, which had recently been bought 
by the Manhattan business mogul. That year should have been one of sheer 
happiness and possibility for Machado, and for a moment it was. “I remember I 
hug my mom and I tell her, now our lives is going to be changed forever,” she 
told the Guardian in an interview in her adopted hometown of Los Angeles.

Trump attacks Alicia Machado again: 'She gained a massive amount of weight. 
She was the worst'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/27/donald-trump-alicia-machado-miss-universe-fox-and-friends>
But when she put on weight soon after winning, Trump turned what should have 
been a golden year into the most traumatizing one of her life. It wasn’t just 
that Trump shamed her about about gaining weight, calling her things like “Miss 
Piggy” and “an eating machine”. It wasn’t even that he did so publicly. It was 
that he did it with the biggest audience he could find, in an attempt to sear 
her weight fluctuation into the public consciousness, forever changing how she 
would be remembered.

Then on Monday night, in a twist of cosmic justice, Trump – now the Republican 
nominee for president – was presented with a bigger audience for his comments 
about Machado’s weight than he ever could have imagined, or wanted.

In what has been billed as the most-watched debate in presidential history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/27/debate-clinton-trump-recap-presidential-election-hofstra>
, Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton made Trump’s remarks to Machado a 
centerpiece of their first televised clash,citing the name-calling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/27/donald-trump-alicia-machado-miss-universe-fox-and-friends>
 – in particular, Trump calling her “Miss Housekeeping” in reference to her 
Latina origins – as a prime example of her opponent’s demeaning views about 
women.

Trump’s treatment of Machado reached its nadir in January 1997 when, having 
put the recently crowned Miss Universe on a stringent diet and exercise regime, 
he scheduled a trip with her to a New York City gym. There he blindsided her 
with dozens of cameramen, who gathered to film her jumping rope, lifting 
weights and pedaling a stationary bike. Trump cast himself in the role of 
disapproving dad, leaning over Machado as she hid her mortification behind a 
show of charms only the world’s top beauty queen could have mustered, laughing 
along with reporters and even once planting a kiss on Trump’s cheek.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Falicia-machado-miss-universe-weight-shame-trump-speaks-out-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F182c369144cbcc05e3426777492f101cf5a3bc56%2F0_0_1478_1790%2F1478.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alicia%20Machado%2C%20Miss%20Universe%20weight-shamed%20by%20Trump%2C%20speaks%20out%20for%20Clinton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Falicia-machado-miss-universe-weight-shame-trump-speaks-out-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alicia%20Machado%2C%20Miss%20Universe%20weight-shamed%20by%20Trump%2C%20speaks%20out%20for%20Clinton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Falicia-machado-miss-universe-weight-shame-trump-speaks-out-clinton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F182c369144cbcc05e3426777492f101cf5a3bc56%2F0_0_1478_1790%2F1478.jpg>
 Alicia Machado of Venezuela reacts as she is crowned Miss Universe on 17 May 
1996. Photograph: Eric Draper/AP 
Although she appeared happy, smiling for the crowd of cameras as she dutifully 
skipped rope, she tells the Guardian she felt like a mouse in a cage, running 
endlessly on her fixed wheel for the entertainment of others. “I was in some 
gym in New York like a mouse,” she said. “Look at that mouse: how she run, how 
she jump, how she make exercise. Like that. In that moment is when … problems 
come to me and start.”

The media loved the spectacle, and so did Trump, who didn’t hesitate to pass 
out some memorable if fallacious tidbits himself. “She weighed 118 pounds or 
117 pounds and she went up to 170, so this is somebody who likes to eat,” he 
said in an interview at the time. In fact Machado says she gained only a 
fraction of that weight but she didn’t dare correct him; she was already 
frightened he’d make good on a threat to strip her of her crown if she didn’t 
follow through on the performance at the gym. (Trump’s campaign did not return 
a request for comment.)

Machado never did lose her crown, but she lost her health for a time. Though 
she had never suffered from eating disorders previously, in the years that 
followed the ordeal at the gym, she struggled with anorexia and bulimia. It 
took five years before she was fully recovered, and longer before she could 
talk about what she went through. Now she hopes to use the insights gleaned to 
help teenagers struggling to love their bodies.

“No matter what, no matter who tells you that you don’t look good, that is 
only outside,” she said, speaking partly, perhaps, to her younger self. “You 
are more than some weight. You are more than some phase. You are more than if 
you are short or tall, or you are black or you are white, or you are skinny or 
fat or whatever. Your value is how you can work, how you can feel for the 
people around you.”

She added: “In this moment 20 years later, the only thing I need to say is I’m 
a really happy person. I’m a very successful person. I have my family, my 
daughter, my career, my dreams, my ideas.” Referring to Trump’s character, she 
said: “And he can’t be a president of the United States of America.”

That Machado is thriving these days was readily apparent from where she sat in 
her publicist’s fourth-floor office in West Hollywood, and apparent in many 
different realms. She has traded pageants for success as an actor, starring in 
a string of telenovelas – a childhood dream come true. She is also a successful 
businesswoman, with a line of products bearing her name. And she is the proud 
mother of a seven-year-old girl, whose privacy she fiercely protects; a 
question about whether she would encourage her daughter to compete in beauty 
pageants was met with stern disapproval.

More recently, she has added another title to her list of identities: 
activist. In June, Machado teamed up with civil rights icon Dolores Huerta 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/virginia-politics/former-miss-universe-civil-rights-legend-delores-huerta-team-up-against-trump/2016/06/15/a287616e-3313-11e6-8758-d58e76e11b12_story.html>
 in Virginia to join immigrant advocacy groups in encouraging Latinos to 
register – and to vote for Clinton. She took her own advice to heart, too. On 
19 August she became a registered US citizen, pledging in a post on Instagram 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BJS8lOEjhGV/> to cast her ballot for Clinton. 
Later that month she traveled to Florida to lend her star power to a Clinton 
campaign drive to register Latino voters, posting video excerpts from the trip 
to social media accounts.

Her celebrity is at the nexus of two very important voter groups this election 
cycle, and they are groups overwhelmingly supportive of Clinton:women and 
Latinos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/15/donald-trump-republicans-newt-gingrich>
. Both have been broadly insulted by Trump, whohas called Mexican immigrants 
“rapists” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/02/donald-trump-racist-claims-mexico-rapes>
 and regularly refers to women as animals; Machado has the dubious distinction 
of being the recipient of both racial and gender-specific slurs, a powerful 
reference point that certainly isn’t lost on the Clinton campaign.

“Alicia Machado has seen first hand the dangerous impact Trump’s hateful and 
divisive rhetoric can have on people,” a Clinton spokesperson said of Machado’s 
involvement with the campaign. “As a Latina, as a first-time voter and as a 
respected leader in the Latino community, Alicia has become an invaluable voice 
of our campaign to help mobilize Latinos against Trump’s bigoted agenda and to 
educate the community about Hillary’s plans to build a better future for them.”

In the first presidential debate on Monday, Machado’s value could scarcely 
have been more evident. Clinton’s strongest moment in an already impressive 
debate performance –arguably her strongest moment in the cycle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/27/clinton-trump-debate-analysis> 
– came near the end when she seized on a question about what Trump had meant 
when he had said she didn’t “look” presidential. Trump tried to deflect the 
damaging line of inquiry, saying he had actually been questioning her stamina. 
Clinton wasn’t having it; and she used the concrete details of Machado’s story 
to pull him back in the ring of fire.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fpresidential-debate-highlights-clinton-and-trump-trade-blows-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Presidential%20debate%20highlights%3A%20Clinton%20and%20Trump%20trade%20blows%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fpresidential-debate-highlights-clinton-and-trump-trade-blows-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Presidential%20debate%20highlights%3A%20Clinton%20and%20Trump%20trade%20blows%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fpresidential-debate-highlights-clinton-and-trump-trade-blows-video&media=>
Presidential debate highlights: Clinton and Trump trade blows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/sep/27/presidential-debate-highlights-clinton-and-trump-trade-blows-video>
“He tried to switch from looks to stamina, but this is a man who has called 
women pigs, slobs, and dogs, and someone who has said, ‘Pregnancy is an 
inconvenience to employers.’ Who has said, ‘Women don’t deserve equal pay 
unless they do as good of a job as men,’” Clinton said as Trump tried to 
protest.

“One of the worst things he said was about a woman in a beauty contest,” 
Clinton continued. “Her name is Alicia Machado and she has become a US citizen, 
and you can bet she’s going to vote this November.” It was a rare moment in 
which Trump’s words were effectively weaponized against him. And, for the first 
time all debate, Trump had noticeably lost his cool, switching focus to 
offensive comments he had made about TV personality Rosie O’Donnell and saying: 
“I think everybody would agree that she deserves it and nobody feels sorry for 
her.”

Another measure of the attack’s effectiveness came the following morning, when 
Trump was asked on Fox and Friends what, if anything, from the debate had 
gotten under his skin.Without hesitation he singled out Machado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/27/donald-trump-alicia-machado-miss-universe-fox-and-friends>
. “She was the worst we ever had, the worst, the absolute worst. She was 
impossible,” he said of the former beauty queen.

“She was the winner and she gained a massive amount of weight and it was a 
problem,” Trump continued. “We had a real problem, not only that, her attitude 
and we had a real problem with her. Hillary went back into the years and found 
the girl and talked about her like she was Mother Teresa and it wasn’t quite 
that way, but that’s OK.”

Fat people, rise up! We could swing this election | Lindy West
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/27/fat-people-rise-up-we-could-swing-this-election>
But it isn’t 1996 any more; Machado, far from being a girl, is a 39-year-old 
woman, and if body-shaming constituted good press for Trump’s fledgling beauty 
pageant business then, it seems less of a good look for his presidential 
campaign today. It’s a similar case with his continued insistence on how right 
he is to call women out for their weight. Machado understands this, perhaps 
even more acutely than Clinton, because she’s lived it; and she is willing to 
relive and keep reliving this painful episode if it means shedding light on a 
man she feels has no business anywhere near the Oval Office.

On a call organized by the Clinton campaign on Tuesday afternoon billed as a 
chance to let Machado respond to Trump’s most recent attacks, the former beauty 
queen was much more interested in talking about his Democratic rival, whose 
mention of her story in the debate the night before had moved her to tears. She 
“never imagined it would matter to someone so powerful”, she said.

But as someone who straddles two powerful voting blocs this election cycle, 
Machado is a double threat to Trump, and she feels that her celebrity means she 
has a responsibility to speak up about her experiences when they can help 
people. “If I can be a voice for my Latino community in this moment, I will do 
it,” she told the Guardian.

It’s not just a matter of Trump: a few years ago she survived a battle with 
breast cancer, and as a person of faith, she said she struggled to make sense 
of why God sent her such a challenge. Tearing up ever so slightly for the first 
time in an hour-long interview, she said she finally determined it was because 
she needed to share her story: “People believe in my words,” she said. “People 
look at me as a strong person. That is my character – I’m a strong woman.”
 