
Leaving the EU could put £250bn of British trade at risk, former chancellor of 
the exchequerAlistair Darling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alistairdarling> has claimed, saying 
negotiating new free-trade deals with key export markets could take an average 
of six years.

Britain exports £637bn worth of goods and services to other EU member states 
and more than 50 countries with which the EU has free trade agreements (FTAs), 
according to analysis for Britain Stronger in Europe, the official campaign to 
keep Britain in the EU at the23 June referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>. Switching to less 
preferential World Trade Organisation rules – the stopgap arrangement Brexit 
campaigners suggest would be in place while talks on new trade deals get under 
way – could jeopardise more than a third of that trade, or £250bn, as tariffs 
on British exports increased, the campaign claimed.

Alistair Darling: Brexit would risk collapse of confidence in UK economy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/15/alistair-darling-brexit-would-risk-collapse-of-confidence-in-uk-economy>
“Those wanting to leave the EU want to pull Britain out of the single market, 
which would mean introducing tariffs and barriers to our trade and putting 
billions of vital trade at risk,” Darling said. “There is no trading 
arrangement outside the EU that gives us the free trade we rely on today. 
Leaving would put jobs, low prices and financial security at risk.”

Looking at all the FTAs negotiated by the EU since 1974, the average time 
taken to reach a deal was six years, the campaign found, underlining the 
challenge facing Britain if it sought to put in place new deals after leaving 
the EU.

The deal with Albania – which has been cited by some in Vote Leave as an 
indication of the kind of relationship Britain might hope to achieve – took six 
years to negotiate; Israel’s took eight years and Macedonia’s almost five.
Brexit companion 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/06/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?sheet=advanced&id=political_consequences>
The former chancellor is the latest in a series of politicians and economists, 
including Barack Obama, lined up by the remain campaign to encourage voters to 
reject the risks of ditching EU membership.

However, Vote Leave chief executive Matthew Elliott accused the remain 
campaign of underestimating the UK’s ability to make its way in the world. 
“Britain Stronger inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> 
can’t even be consistent or honest in their campaign to do down the British 
economy. Their underlying belief appears to be that Britain – the world’s fifth 
largest economy and a nation with a great history of trading across the globe – 
would be an economic backwater if it wasn’t for Brussels taking control of our 
trade deals. That’s absurd.”

While the remain camp continues to focus primarily on the economic risks of 
Brexit, former EU commissionerPeter Mandelson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/peter-mandelson> accused leave 
campaigners of playing on fears about immigration, as they struggled to win 
over swing voters.

Writing in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/03/brexit-camp-immigration-economic-vote-leave>
, Mandelson accused the justice secretary, Michael Gove, the chair of the Leave 
campaign, of “putting truth to one side” foran article 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-3566620/Michael-Gove-warns-EU-expansion-open-borders-88-million-Europe-s-poorest-countries.html>
 he wrote in Saturday’s Daily Mail warning of the risks of uncontrolled 
immigration, and the likelihood that Turkey will join the EU.

Why is the Brexit camp so obsessed with immigration? Because that’s all they 
have | Peter Mandelson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/03/brexit-camp-immigration-economic-vote-leave>
Mandelson said Vote Leave began the campaign determined to stick to the safer 
ground of the economy and leave migration to Nigel Farage, whose Ukip party has 
its own Leave campaign, Grassroots Out. But he claimed that as Vote Leave has 
struggled to win the argument, and the remain camp has edged ahead in the 
polls, they have decided to switch their tactics. “From Johnson questioning 
President Obama’s ‘part-Kenyan ancestry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/22/boris-johnson-barack-obama-kenyan-eu-referendum>
’ to EU immigrants being blamed for the problems in everything from British 
schools to our health service to our prisons, every recent Vote Leave 
intervention has had immigration at its heart,” Mandelson said.
 