
I am not a Christian. Ten weeks after embarking on one of the rare growing 
Christian movements of recent years, my position about the truth of the most 
popular religion in the universe is not altered. Perhaps this will not surprise 
you: I approached the Alpha Course with as open a mind as an orthodox atheist 
can have, but it seems that I need someone more charismatic (or Charismatic) to 
bring me to Jesus. Tuesday evenings at St Mary's in Islington were peaceful, 
interesting and oh so English, but also painfully shallow, and therefore 
frustrating. Again, perhaps this is not astounding, as Alpha offers fewer than 
24 hours' instruction on a religion that its disciples describe as a lifelong 
journey.

The high point, the most sensitive moments were listening to lessons on how to 
pray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2009/aug/14/alpha-male-course-prayer-christianity>
. I took from this not a dialogue with a deity, but the importance of mental 
peace. Tiresomereliance on historical hearsay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2009/jul/17/alpha-course-historical-jesus>
,death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2009/jul/24/alpha-course-religion-christianity>
 andfantasy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2009/jul/31/alpha-course-christianity>
 became almost bearable.

This course was not without personal revelation. We all got on just fine, and 
after the final session concluded, we went to the pub to wrap up a not 
insignificant time together. The low point followed, when Barbara, with whom I 
had had fun, explained that following my sturdy but polite defence of science 
andattack on healing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2009/sep/03/alpha-course-religion-christianity>
 (the most galling session), she became convinced that with regards to the 
supernatural, there was "something rather than nothing". I had managed to 
reinforce her latent suspicion of science towards a more faithful position. 
Christ alive, how disappointing is that? She is thoughtful and intelligent. She 
listened and argued with me, and chose an emotional and visceral position 
instead. As I do this for a living, I will certainly modify my rhetoric as a 
result.

In researching the Alpha Course, people expressed a broad range of animosity 
towards it: accusations of brainwashing; latent (or in some cases overt) 
homophobia; one friend who bewilderingly was promised that her student loan 
would be cleared within a year of finding faith. My experience did not reflect 
any of this. But that is the nature of the franchise. The course itself is
prescriptive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2009/aug/28/religion-christianity>
, with a rigid structure and bounteous books and DVDs. But how it goes down 
depends on who is standing at the front. Toby, the curate at St Mary's, is much 
more a kindly university tutor than a preacher. I'm not convinced that Alpha 
suits him at all, with its touchy-feely faux sincerity masking the unequivocal 
certainty of conservative Christianity. Frequently, his response to hard 
questions from my fellow course mates and me was a refreshing "I don't know".

God's franchise, Christianity <https://www.theguardian.com/world/christianity>
, works in the same way. I used to be utterly baffled that worshippers of the 
same god could not agree about whether it is ok for a man to have sex with a 
man, or if life begins at conception, or if hell exists, or if Mary had sex, or 
any of the multitude of contradictions between denominations of Christ. But 
these are strengths of the faith, because the disagreements exist to the 
exclusion of the unthinkable atheism. I witnessed a galvanising ethnocentrism 
in our discussions: probing enough for some to think or say "I don't buy it" 
(about the resurrection for example) but without that being nearly enough to 
push them into not buying any of it.

It may be impossible for someone like me to comprehend faith. As displayed 
during Alpha, evangelical Christianity simply fails to stand up to even the 
most superficial scrutiny. It seems unfathomable that intelligent people could 
genuinely believe that Christ rose from the dead, orthat the Bible is not 
frightening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2009/aug/07/alpha-course-religion-christian>
, or that disease can be cured by magic. But they do. This movement feeds off 
ignorance and the deep-rooted latent cultural Christianity that bestows 
familiarity with the language and promises, but doesn't offer up enough 
information to say "hang on, this doesn't make any sense, and isn't even very 
fair".

The conclusions I draw about Christianity based on this superficial 
introduction are far from profound. Organised religion is most concerned with 
self-preservation; church goes some way to answering a tribal and social need; 
personal faith and religion are related, but the latter strives to consume the 
former. On the course, the faithful were keen to stress that an atheist's 
bemusement with faith is effortlessly comparable with their continual struggle 
to understand their own emotional beliefs. Alpha preys upon that, asserting 
itself to the exclusion of any other position. As such it is manipulative, and 
in my opinion a dark force. Alpha encourages you to think, but not too hard.

The course was attended by kind and smart people, all curious about something 
they feel, something I do not. I hope we will see each other again: it is clear 
to me that hanging out with people of faith is a damned sight more productive 
than wailing at each other across internet threads or via books. I will be 
hooking up with the Reverend Toby Hole next week, when we are seeing the 
wondrous new film about the historical bearded man I most admire â€“ Charles 
Darwin. It's rather provocatively entitled "Creation 
<http://creationthemovie.com/>", and this irony is bewitching. The revelation 
and truth I witnessed is this: if you are an atheist, you could do a lot worse 
than spend some time around those with whom you most profoundly disagree. Amen.
 