
Amazon has a very uneven record when it comes to their original programming. 
Transparent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/transparent-episode-by-episode>
 is one of the best shows on television (or whatever it is that we’re calling 
Amazon streaming video these days) but it’s joined by the decidedly averageRed 
Oaks <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/05/catch-up-tv-guide>and
Mozart in the Jungle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2014/dec/23/mozart-in-the-jungle-amazon-show-review>
(despite its Golden Globe win), and the absolutely horribleBosch  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/feb/12/amazon-bosch-review-lapd-cop-show>
andHand of God 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/sep/04/hand-of-god-amazon-prime-ron-perlman-dana-delaney>
.

The same inconsistency usually applies to Amazon’s semi-regular pilot season, 
where a couple of times a year the streaming service and toothpaste vendor 
releases a bunch of pilots it made to the general public and lets them vote on 
which ones they would like to turn into original series. (Not that Amazon 
always listens to the people.) The most recent slate launched on Friday and 
features two shows that are currently streaming for free on the 
have-your-dog-food-and-diapers-delivered-the-next-day website. One of the new 
shows,The Interestings <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt5195428/reference>, shows 
promise and the other,The Last Tycoon 
<http://deadline.com/2016/05/the-interestings-the-last-tycoon-drama-amazon-pilots-1201763025/>
, is awful.

Writing partners Lynnie Greene and Richard Levine (veterans of Nip/Tuck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2010/jan/12/nip-tuck>, Masters of Sex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/masters-of-sex>, and more) adapted 
The Interestings from a 2013 book byMeg Wolitzer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/aug/21/interestings-meg-wolitzer-review>
. It focuses on a group of six friends who met at summer camp in the mid-70s 
and remained close for the next several decades even though a tragic (and so 
far unexplained event) threatened to rip them apart during those early summers.

The show is constantly shifting in time from the 70s when the characters are 
teens focusing on their future careers as artists at the Spirit in the Woods 
summer camp, to the 80s when they’re struggling in New York, to the 90s when 
they’ve all compromised their artistic ideals to some extent and achieved 
varying degrees of success.

The main focus is Jules (Lauren Ambrose) who wanted to be an actor and 
comedian but eventually settled for being a therapist. Her best friend is Ash 
(Mad Men’s Jessica Paré) who marries scruffy cartoonist Ethan (David 
Krumholtz). They’ve also remained close with Jonah (Corey Cott), who comes out 
later in life and has a famous mother. Ash’s brother Goodman (Matt Barr) is at 
the center of the mysterious event and is currently on the lam and living in 
Iceland.

It takes a little while to figure out exactly who is who and what their 
relationships are with one another (especially with different actors playing 
them in their younger years). Once that is sorted out, The Interestings is a 
sober and slightly depressing look at how the ideals of youth slowly dissolve 
into the compromises of middle age. That’s not an entirely original premise, 
but what makes the pilot especially moving is that we see these characters 
making huge decisions and then immediately see the consequences – intentional 
or otherwise.

The cast is stellar and the shifting timeline isn’t nearly as confusing as it 
could be. I worry a bit about how The Interestings will continue as a series 
after we’ve uncovered all of the secrets the group are keeping from one other. 
At 65 minutes (about 20 minutes longer than commercial TV dramas), the pilot 
just needs another 40 minutes and it could be a complete movie. Why it should 
be of ongoing concern will be the biggest thing for the creators to tackle, but 
since it’s jammed with interesting characters it shouldn’t be a hard challenge. 
It would be easy to say that The Interestings is interesting, but it’s more 
than that. It is truly insightful and gratifying.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Famazon-debuts-two-pilots-the-interestings-last-tycoon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd25547c4cb60c34ea3727b396321cf9f31ad0dc7%2F0_56_3900_2340%2F3900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amazon%20streams%20two%20new%20TV%20pilots%20%E2%80%93%20one%20that's%20great%20and%20one%20that's%20terrible&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Famazon-debuts-two-pilots-the-interestings-last-tycoon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amazon%20streams%20two%20new%20TV%20pilots%20%E2%80%93%20one%20that%27s%20great%20and%20one%20that%27s%20terrible&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Famazon-debuts-two-pilots-the-interestings-last-tycoon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd25547c4cb60c34ea3727b396321cf9f31ad0dc7%2F0_56_3900_2340%2F3900.jpg>
 The Last Tycoon: the dialogue falls like bricks. Photograph: Adam Rose/Amazon 
Prime 
The Last Tycoon isn’t nearly as satisfying. It’s an adaptation of F Scott 
Fitzgerald’s last, unfinished novel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2005/jan/29/classics.film>, a roman à clef 
about Hollywood, where Fitzgerald was writing screenplays just before his 
death. Originally developed for HBO with writer/directorBilly Ray 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0712753/reference>, the network passed on the 
project and it ended up with Amazon.

Monroe Stahr (Matt Bomer) is the Jewish creative director of a smaller 
Hollywood studio in the early 30s. He is still grieving from the death of his 
movie star wife two years earlier. He’s incensed when a Nazi cultural attache 
shows up and says that if they want to release movies in Germany they all need 
to meet the Führer’s standards. The Germans kill Stahr’s pet project, a biopic 
about his wife, and studio owner Pat Brady (Kelsey Grammer) goes along with it. 
Stahr gets his revenge by dreaming up a film with Brady’s headstrong daughter 
Cecelia (Lily Collins) and only slightly fending off her advances.

Strangely enough Ray, who wrote such excellent movies as The Hunger Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-hunger-games>, Shattered Glass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2004/oct/01/dvdreviews1> and Captain Phillips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/20/captain-phillips-review-mark-kermode>
, does a much better job as a director than as a writer. The production is 
absolutely gorgeous, recreating the art deco world of early Hollywood with 
tender detail and exhibiting some deft and daring camera work that drags the 
material out of the gutter.

Still, it doesn’t get that much further from the gutter than the dirty 
sidewalk. The dialogue is so clunky it lands like so many bricks out of the 
actors’ mouths. “It’s how pictures get made and they’re all I got. I can’t feel 
anything else,” Stahr says summarizing his inner turmoil a little too neatly. 
Later someone tells him, “Everyone who comes close to you pays for it.” 
Whatever happened to “show, don’t tell”?

The symbolism in The Last Tycoon is so blatant that Stahr’s movie is literally 
called The American Dream. Yes, the surface is really shiny but it’s so empty 
it will make your brain ache for something more challenging, like one of those 
find-a-word puzzles on a diner placemat. Bomer, who is always much more 
attractive as eye-candy than he is skilled as an actor, is sort of perfect for 
this part in that way, but he doesn’t have the skill or charm to save bad 
material.

What does save this bad material for Amazon is that there is still so much 
great material on Amazon hiding between Gunther Grass novels and discount 
Spanx. I can’t promise you that The Interestings is good enough that it could 
make you forget about how bad The Last Tycoon is, but it sure goes a long way.
 