
Amazon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> Web Services, the 
company’s cloud service division, has long provided the infrastructure for vast 
retail websites and plucky startups alike, from Netflix and Airbnb to Nasa and 
the Royal Opera House, but is now seen as the company’s biggest driver of 
growth.

AWS combined with enthusiastic take-up of its premium “Prime” service to 
generate better than expected revenue for the second quarter of the year.

Total revenue reached $30.4bn, up 31% from the same period in 2015 and higher 
than analysts’ expectations of $29.55bn, while AWS surged 58.2% to $2.89bn – 
slightly higher than the estimate of $2.83bn predicted by market research firm 
FactSet StreetAccount.

Prime offers free shipping on products from the site as well as exclusive film 
and TV content, advertising-free content and unlimited photo storage. A 
dedicated promotional “Prime Day” on 12 July is also expected to help drive 
sales of between $31.0bn and $33.5bn for the current quarter.

The company’s net sales rose 31.1% to $30.40bn in the second quarter ending 30 
June. Sales in North America, its biggest market, jumped 28.1% to $17.67bn.


Why so much coverage of Amazon Prime Day? The incentives, of course
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/12/amazon-prime-day-retailers-incentives>
Amazon also saw its net profit reach a record high of $857m, continuing a 
relatively new strategy of recording profit rather than reinvesting in its 
business – though it last quarter committed to investing $5bn into its business 
in India.

“It’s been a busy few months for Amazon around the world, and particularly in 
India,” said the CEO, Jeff Bezos, in a statement.

“We launched a new AWS region, introduced Prime with unlimited free shipping, 
and announced that Prime Video is coming soon, offering Prime members in India 
exclusive access to Amazon Original Series and Movies – including original 
content featuring top Indian creators and talent.”

The world’s biggest online retailer’s shares were up 2% in after-hours trading 
on Thursday.
 