
Amazon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> UK has been found 
guilty and fined £65,000 for breaking aviation safety laws after repeatedly 
trying to send dangerous goods by airmail.

A judge at Southwark crown court in London said on Friday that Amazon knew the 
rules, had been warned repeatedly, but had failed to take reasonable care. 
Although the risks from the goods sent for shipment by air were low, Judge 
Michael Grieve QC blamed the breaches on “systemic failure” at the online 
retailer.

As well as the fine, Amazon was ordered to pay £60,000 towards prosecution 
costs.

Earlier in the week, the jury found Amazon guilty of breaching rules for 
shipping dangerous goods by airmail on four counts between November 2013 and 
May 2015.

The prosecution was brought by the Civil Aviation Authority, after a complaint 
fromRoyal Mail <https://www.theguardian.com/business/royal-mail>. Some offences 
took place after Amazon knew it was under investigation.

In each case, the items – two packages containing laptop lithium batteries and 
two containing aerosols that used flammable gas propellant – had been flagged 
up by Amazon’s computer systems as possibly dangerous goods, and subject to 
restricted shipping rules.

In each case, however, further reviews of the items – carried out remotely by 
staff in China, Romania and India – led to the items being wrongly redesignated 
as non-dangerous.

Aerosols are stored separately at Amazon’s warehouse because they are deemed 
dangerous, and training literature for warehouse staff explains that lithium 
batteries are dangerous, “potentially causing burns, explosions or a fire”.

Royal Mail, which routinely scans goods bound for air delivery, stopped three 
of the Amazon packages from entering the airmail system. A fourth was stopped 
by UPS. Royal Mail wrote to Amazon repeatedly in 2013 raising concerns about 
the high number of dangerous goods it was sending via airmail.

In total, between November 2013 and May 2015, Royal Mail and other parcel 
carriers told Amazon of 782 packages containing potentially dangerous goods 
that should not be airmailed.

Earlier in the trial, Amazon’s defence counsel Stephen Spence said: “Seven 
hundred and eighty-two can be a big number and can be a small number.” The 
defence explained that Amazon dispatched 331,400,000 packages during the 
relevant period of the indictment. “We suggest it is a pretty cracking success 
rate.”

The CAA brought charges over 11 shipments. The jury failed to reach a verdict 
on six counts and acquitted Amazon on one count.

In a statement after the sentencing hearing, Amazon said: “The safety of the 
public, our customers, employees and partners is an absolute priority. We ship 
millions of products every week and are confident in the sophisticated 
technologies and processes we have developed to detect potential shipping 
hazards. We are constantly working to further improve and will continue to work 
with the CAA in this area.”

 