
Amazon’s next step in its global domination of commerce could be much closer 
to home. The internet retailer, which has grown into a $397bn company in the 22 
years since its founding, is reportedly planning to build a series of bricks 
and mortar corner stores selling milk, meat, orange juice and newspapers to 
further cement its recent expansion into the grocery market.


The company, founded by multibillonaire Jeff Bezos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/jeff-bezos> in 1994, is said to be 
preparing to build a chain of convenience stores as well as drive-through 
locations where customers can pick up groceries ordered online that day as they 
commute home.

The Wall Street Journal on Tuesday reported 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/amazon-to-expand-grocery-business-with-new-convenience-stores-1476189657>
 that the designers of the new stores, which are said to be code-named “Project 
Como”, are taking inspiration from budget chains Aldi and Lidl and would be 
sparsely stocked with mostly perishable items but also give customers the 
opportunity to order other items for pickup via their smartphones.

Amazon refused to comment on the speculation surrounding the new stores, which 
would follow the Seattle-based company’s launch ofa physical bookshop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/05/amazon-book-store-seattle> 
in its home town last year. Bookshops are also slated to open in San Diego, New 
York, Portland and Chicago.

While the company said “we don’t comment on rumors or speculations”, planning 
documents and building materials labelled “Amazon” at a construction site in 
Seattle’s Ballard neighbourhood appear to indicate that construction of the 
first store is well under way. Planning documents seen by technology site
GeekWire 
<http://www.geekwire.com/2016/amazons-secretive-drive-grocery-store-takes-shape-seattle-neighborhood/>
state: “Storage racks insulation plans on main floor for Amazon.”

It has been reported that the physical stores will be for the exclusive use of 
customers signed up to Amazon Fresh food delivery service, which is available 
for $15 a month on top ofAmazon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> 
Prime’s $99 annual fee.

The company, which has been offering its Fresh service in some densely 
populated parts of the US since 2007, has been expanding the grocery delivery 
service rapidly, recently adding new cities across the US. It is now available 
in Seattle, New York, Washington, Boston, northern New Jersey, Philadelphia, 
Stamford, Baltimore and large parts of California.

In June it launched outside of the US for the first time, offering grocery 
delivery to homes in parts of north and east London. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/09/amazon-starts-uk-fresh-food-delivery>

The British service is offered to Amazon Prime members in 69 postcodes for an 
additional £6.99 ($8.50) a month.

Amazon collected annual sales of $107bn last year, more than double the amount 
it generated just four years earlier. Its net income totaled $596m.
 