
Adventurers have long scoured Brazil's vast Amazon rainforest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/amazon-rainforest> for traces of 
hidden cities buried deep in the jungle. But new research shows the country's 
dense and inhospitable jungles were once home to an intricate network of towns 
and roads built by one of the world's earliest urban civilisations.

"These places were far more organised than your average medieval town," 
anthropologist Professor Mike Heckenberger, from the University of Florida, 
told the Guardian.

Co-written with a team of Brazilian anthropologists and one local indigenous 
leader, the paper published in the journal Science contains evidence that the 
Xingu region in the Brazilian state of Mato Grosso was home to thousands of 
native Indians spread across dozens of towns and villages. The settlements - 
which are thought to date back at least 1,500 years and are described by the 
authors as "garden cities" - were constructed around a central plaza and 
flanked by walls.

Heckenberger said the Amazon settlements were not "full-blown cities" but 
rather "super or mega-villages" and towns, connected by a sophisticated grid of 
roads. He first came across traces of this Amazonian urbanism in 1993 while 
living with the Kuikuro tribe in the remote Xingu park, a vast rainforest 
reservation.

In 2002, he returned and, using GPS technology and the traditional knowledge 
of the indigenous communities, his team began mapping the settlements.

The study suggests some truth in the theories of explorers such as the British 
colonel, Percy Fawcett, who set out to find a lost city in Xingu in 1925 but 
was never seen again. Instead of "garden cities", he "was looking for stone 
cities, he was looking for Athens," said Heckenberger.

As to what happened to the inhabitants, Heckenberger believed Xingu's towns 
and villages had been "crushed" by colonialism and particularly disease.
 