
Thora Birch and her mother arrive together as a kind of package, though I am 
not supposed to write about the mother, Carol, a middle-aged woman with long 
hair and a face free of the maquillage that usually camouflages the skins of 
the Beverly Hills animal kingdom. 'Please don't write about me,' says Carol. 'I 
always talk too much.' She is still angry about an article written about her 
daughter which suggested that the 19-year-old, whose parents manage her career, 
was not being allowed to break free of them. 'I could kill that writer,' says 
Carol vehemently. 'I really could.'

They do have a problem, the Birches. Jack and Carol. The shadow of Macaulay 
Culkin rests uneasily and the showbiz parent attracts bad press in a town where 
embarrassing mothers hog borrowed spotlight and spew inanities at the gawpers 
and stalkers.

The history of Hollywood relates that it is more sensible for an actress to 
employ her father than her husband. One cannot imagine that it is easy doing 
business with a person who is also the actress's father, but the trajectory of 
many a career would be very different if the woman had employed a person as 
concerned with her personal welfare as with her ability to make money.

The Birches are keen to keep a low profile, and Carol points out that she is 
not a stage mother - 'I hate that accusation!' She was not the one who noticed 
Birch's potential. A babysitter took her, aged four, to an audition for a 
commercial. 'It was like a fish to water,' Carol says.

The little girl was a success right away, appearing in television 
advertisements for California Raisins and Quaker Oats. At the age of six, she 
won an award for her appearance in Purple People Eater. By her third film, All 
I Want for Christmas, in 1991, she was being compared to Shirley Temple and 
giving interviews of uncanny self-possession.

The Evening Standard 's Angus McGill, finding her in a suite at the London 
Athenaeum Hotel, could not believe his eyes. 'How old are you?' He asked. 
'Nine,' she replied. 'How old are you?' Birch was in town to work on Patriot 
Games, in which she played Harrison Ford's daughter. McGill asked her if she 
liked the business. 'Like it?' She exclaimed. 'I love it. My father said I 
could give it up any time. It was up to me. I didn't have to go to auditions if 
I didn't want to. I told him no, I want to stay in the business - and here I 
am. It's amazing.' Then she asked him if he thought God was a man or a girl.

Self-possessed she was then, and self-possessed she is now. One cannot imagine 
anyone being able to bully Birch, now 19, for she is intelligent and determined 
and seems to know exactly what she is doing. She reads all the scripts that are 
sent to her and, while knowing what she likes, finds it more difficult to 
articulate why she does not like something. 'It would sound pretentious and 
nasty so I won't vocalise it.' Her parents tend to agree with her on things, 
though not always on 'how to handle them'.

We are in Le Conversation on Doheny Drive, on the outskirts of Beverly Hills. 
She has chosen it because it is near the West Hollywood apartment which also 
doubles as her office, and because it is funny. She is right. It is funny, a 
'café society' tea salon with striped wallpaper, pier gilt mirrors, faux-marble 
floor, several youngish directors eating scones, and a huge oil painting of two 
rabbits. Understated in jeans and jersey, Birch has a flawless complexion 
supervised by her mother, who has just discovered products made by Dr Hauschka.

She has talent, as was apparent to anyone who saw the Oscar-winning American 
Beauty <https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-beauty>, in which she played 
troubled teenager Jane Burnham. She was one of the first to audition for the 
part. 'I knew the script was good,' she says. 'And I knew the process would be 
amazing - how could working with Kevin Spacey not be brilliant? - but I didn't 
know what people would think of it, and I still don't really know if the 
audience actually liked it. I mean, they all saw it because it made a lot of 
money - I think they recognised it as being a brilliant film - but I don't 
think they were very comfortable with it.'

The success of American Beauty opened doors and she proceeded to corner a 
niche in nubile young women. The Smokers is about three teenage girls who rape 
their boyfriends at gunpoint; Ghost World saw her as Enid, a geeky outsider in 
thick-framed specs and Doc Martens. Dungeons and Dragons , a fantasy adventure, 
provided a departure. As heroic Empress Savina, she is involved in a difficult 
struggle with Jeremy Irons who, as the Mage Profion, employs various elves to 
help him take over the Empire of Izmer.

Now she has made The Hole, a sinister British thriller set in an upmarket 
boarding school (Downside was used as a location), which tells the story of a 
group of teenagers for whom a practical joke goes very badly wrong. As Liz, she 
plays a complex person summed up in the synopsis as a 'damaged and dangerous 
mind'.

She wears it well, the duplicitous psycho. Sometimes sweet and innocent, 
sometimes deranged with maniacal obsession, she provides the story with the 
layers required to give it depth and deflect the usual clichés of horror. It is 
a good movie, genuinely unnerving, and filmed imaginatively by first-time 
director Nick Hamm. It is also reflective of a dark cultural truth where, to a 
lot of schoolchildren, particularly in America, the high school has become a 
genuinely dangerous place to be.

Birch shrugs at 'damaged and dangerous'. It was hard work, she says. There was 
a lot of crying. She has never felt an emotional pain like that before in her 
life. But she is good at tapping into her hidden fury. 'Liz was about five 
different characters,' she says. 'She is totally sick, yes, but it was about 
love...'

She hopes people will see the character's point of view; it was a difficult 
role to shrug off, and she feels protective of her, as actors often do with the 
characters they have created. It is about obsession and, in particular 
obsessive love, a dark place experienced by many that can drive an individual 
to ruin. She understands that, has felt it, and thinks that once you have felt 
it, it effects your life and never entirely leaves you.

Is there a boyfriend, I wonder. 'I'm in between at the moment,' she says. She 
is used to the press, so she probably would not tell anyway, if she did not 
want to.

She lives at home with her parents and younger brother on their ranch in the 
Californian desert. She doesn't spend much, drives a 1998 Mustang, buys the 
occasional CD by Radiohead, the occasional book by Tom Wolfe, watches a lot of 
DVDs. Gary Oldman is a hero and she is desperate to work with Anthony Hopkins 
because he doesn't seem to, 'give a damn' about all that Hollywood stuff. She 
would be more excited by the idea of meeting Moby than some big-name actor. She 
has met most of them, after all, and worked with a lot of them. The only 
question she really wants to ask is: 'Have you got any good scripts for me?'

She went to school in West Hollywood where there are not many children, as it 
is a gay community, so pupils were 'bussed in ' from east LA. Older brothers 
were armed; younger ones would talk about joining gangs. Birch thought they 
were insane. She was usually off doing a commercial, anyway.

Her parents were involved in the music business; her father was a road manager 
and toured with struggling rock bands before going into property and making 
money from selling land. They had a sophisticated sound system that piped music 
through the house. Birch grew up listening to Lenny Bruce. 'Part of me would 
like to be Lenny Bruce for some reason. I would love to hear what he would say 
about Eminem and Clinton now.'

Pink Floyd also echoed through the family ranch. 'You listen to Dark Side of 
the Moon and you might think it is boring at first, then, after several times, 
it's like Oh my God, the genius of it. That is very English, I think.'

She likes the English and feels comfortable with them, unlike in Los Angeles, 
where she does not really feel a part of things. She enjoyed London from a 
tourist's eye - appreciating things like Sock Shop and Hyde Park and the pubs.

She visited Benenden, the girls' public school, to research her part for The 
Hole, and was surprised to discover how much they cared about what adults 
thought. 'I spent the night in a dorm. We had a midnight feast and everything. 
But even the kids who think they are really bad couldn't last five minutes on 
one of our urban streets...'

Nick Hamm's own experience, at a boarding school in Belfast, had not been 
enjoyable - though he insists his film is not an act of revenge. He thinks the 
British public-school system leaves a lot to be desired and was keen to reflect 
its dark side by keeping the film based in England and very British in its 
tone. To this end he tried, and failed, to find a British actress. After six 
months, he took the search to Hollywood. He wanted the film to be about 
teenagers and for the actors to be the right age - 20 would have been too old. 
A lot of actresses read for the part of Liz, but Birch, according to Hamm, 'had 
the Bette Davis quality of being able to lie and tell the truth at the same 
time'.

Young people, says Hamm, are capable of 'huge surliness one minute and massive 
love the next'. He made sure that all this was channelled into the work; 
everyone went to bed early. There was no time for emotional explosions.

To Birch, I repeat Hamm's observation that 'teenagers look down on all adults 
because adults don't understand them... and never will'.

'Most teens think that adults don't understand them,' she replies. 'And I 
think a lot of adults tell themselves they don't understand teens. But that is 
not true. All they have to do is remember being one, but the reason they don't 
is that it is an awful time and who wants to remember it?

'A lot of parents have this tendency to treat their kids like they're not 
people. It is not a malicious thing, it is more that this is my child and it is 
not really a person, it is a "beautiful alien" - a precious gift that cannot be 
treated like anything else on the planet - so everything gets muddled up.'

Her two most high-profile projects have seen her as short brunette playing 
against a tall blonde - Mena Suvari - in American Beauty, Keira Knightley in 
The Hole. I wonder if she has ever been aggrieved by the high-school diktat 
that says all teenagers must be thin and look like Hitler Youth in order to be 
popular.

'Everyone thinks that,' she says. 'But I think that it is the personality that 
is important. If you are gorgeous you are going to get attention - but it is 
about attitude. If there is fear you invoke fear, if you are a party person you 
are invited to parties. It is about your personal energy. Do you have an 
outgoing energy or the kind of energy that makes people want to hit you? Most 
people have a normal energy which means that no one pays them attention - then 
they say they are not popular because they do not have this or that, but, in 
fact it is because they are not opening up.'

'Jesus,' I say. 'I wish I had known all that when I was 18.'

 The Hole goes on general release on 20 April.
 