
Imagine an alternative universe where Dad’s Army 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/feb/01/freud-dads-army-and-the-nazis-what-our-anti-german-jokes-say-about-the-british>
,The Young Ones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/gallery/2015/mar/02/the-young-ones-rik-mayall-alternative-comedy-in-pictures>
,The Thick of It 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/mar/18/the-thick-of-it> and 
Spaced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2009/sep/24/spaced-pure-comedy-gold>
 never got past the pilot stage and Fawlty Towers was cancelled midway through 
series one. Well, that nightmarish world exists: it’s called the United States, 
and it’s the place where the brightest and best British sitcoms go to die.

Caitlin and Caroline Moran’s semi-autobiographical Raised By Wolves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/dec/24/raised-wolves-tv-review-caitlin-moran>
, about two sisters growing up in a large family in Wolverhampton, is the 
latest Britcom to arouse transatlantic interest. The Channel 4 original makes 
its US debut this week on streaming service Acorn. But, more mouth-wateringly,a 
deal for an American version has been agreed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/24/caitlin-moran-raised-by-wolves-us-juno-diablo-cody>
 with Oscar-winning screenwriter Diablo Cody (Juno, Young Adult) hired to write 
the pilot. Caitlin tells me she is “staggered” by the US interest: “When you 
set a sitcom in Wolverhampton, you’re obviously not expecting that.” But, 
despite all the flag-waving goodwill and agape expectation, it has little hope 
of succeeding, statistically at least.

 There was a golden period of intersection in the 1970s and early 80s, when 
three of America’s biggest sitcoms were adapted from British formats: All in 
the Family on CBS (Till Death Us Do Part 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/13/bbc-sitcom-steptoe-hancock-till-death-us-do-part-retrospective>
), Sanford and Son on NBC (Steptoe and Son) and Three’s Company on ABC (Man 
About the House). But the last of those went off-air in 1984, and since then 
the pickings have been slim.NBC’s free-spirited incarnation of The Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2007/may/18/iprefertheamericanversion>
 ran for 201 episodes and won five Emmys, but its transatlantic transformation 
was something of an exception.

ABC’s The Thick of It was an omnishambles. There was no swearing, because it 
was a network show
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fus-uk-comedy-remakes-raised-by-wolves-fawlty-towers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F765c40d87722c112e8ee9216606f31bf2a816457%2F0_0_2043_1226%2F2043.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=America%3A%20where%20British%20sitcoms%20go%20to%20die&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fus-uk-comedy-remakes-raised-by-wolves-fawlty-towers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=America%3A%20where%20British%20sitcoms%20go%20to%20die&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fus-uk-comedy-remakes-raised-by-wolves-fawlty-towers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F765c40d87722c112e8ee9216606f31bf2a816457%2F0_0_2043_1226%2F2043.jpg>
 Pottymouth politics … Malcolm Tucker in The Thick of It. Photograph: BBC/Mike 
Hogan/BBC 
 Why does US transfer remain such a holy grail for UK writers? I asked Kenton 
Allen, the hands-on CEO at Big Talk, home of Raised By Wolves,Rev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/28/rev-tv-comedy-undermines-church-of-england>
 and Friday Night Dinner (the returning Channel 4 show whose own attempted US 
transfer, adapted by Greg Daniels of The Office, never made it past pilot). 
“Comedy costs as much as drama but you get less for it, so you used to make 
money out of selling things like … do you remember DVDs? If you had a Gavin & 
Stacey, you would sell hundreds of thousands of DVDs. That changed when box-set 
streaming, Netflix and Sky came online. One of the ways of extracting value 
from your hard-won British comedy is to try to remake it in America.”

 So it is partly about the money. “We could make two series of The Thick of It 
for what it costs to make a single episode ofVeep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/veep>,” says Simon Blackwell, a 
writer and producer on the modest BBC4 original and its HBO translation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fus-uk-comedy-remakes-raised-by-wolves-fawlty-towers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13ff6442a0db6a68e4a27493ab260404d7b78253%2F0_34_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=America%3A%20where%20British%20sitcoms%20go%20to%20die&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fus-uk-comedy-remakes-raised-by-wolves-fawlty-towers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=America%3A%20where%20British%20sitcoms%20go%20to%20die&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fus-uk-comedy-remakes-raised-by-wolves-fawlty-towers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13ff6442a0db6a68e4a27493ab260404d7b78253%2F0_34_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
 Emmy-winning conversion … Veep. Photograph: Lacey Terrell/Home Box Office 
 Scan the Hollywood Reporter’s dedicated pilot section, or Variety’s 
Development Scorecard, and every pitch looks like a potential smash (“Rashida 
Jones nail salon dramedy Claws moves to TNT with pilot pickup”). But the odds 
of triumphing in the US’s annual Hunger Games-like pilot season are less than 
5%.

 The regimented season starts in early summer when writers pitch shows. If 
chosen, first drafts are revised right up until Christmas. In January, the 
networks pick which to shoot. The upward or downward thumb follows in May and, 
if lucky, your new show airs in the autumn. There are around 80 pilots 
currently in contention at the five networks (ABC, CBS, NBC, Fox, The CW). 
Around half are comedies. But even a hallowed series commission is no guarantee 
of a pension. In hock to advertiser expectations, the networks frequently 
cancel mid-season should your nail salon dramedy fail to deliver the numbers. 
Even a sharp dip after the commercial break can be enough to sound the death 
knell.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fus-uk-comedy-remakes-raised-by-wolves-fawlty-towers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85e6260e667a0158391675e6886e3b08f1185895%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=America%3A%20where%20British%20sitcoms%20go%20to%20die&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fus-uk-comedy-remakes-raised-by-wolves-fawlty-towers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=America%3A%20where%20British%20sitcoms%20go%20to%20die&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fus-uk-comedy-remakes-raised-by-wolves-fawlty-towers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85e6260e667a0158391675e6886e3b08f1185895%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 Chilled out entertainers Steve Carell and Ricky Gervais in The Office US and 
UK. Composite: Rex/BBC 
Allen co-produced the US version of Big Talk’s talent-agency black comedy Free 
Agents for NBC. It was cancelled after four episodes, having been suicidally 
scheduled against X Factor USA. This is how he learned of its fate: “I got a 
call on a Friday afternoon from the NBC parking attendant who said if you don’t 
get your parking permit back to us by the end of the week, there’ll be a $1,000 
fine.”

British writer Adrian Poynton, whose BBC3 handyman sitcom White Van Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/apr/12/alan-rowing-builder> was 
remade at ABC as Family Tools and cancelled, found out by reading the Hollywood 
Reporter website: “By the time I got to the production office to see everyone 
and give them a hug, the sets in the studio were already being dismantled.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fus-uk-comedy-remakes-raised-by-wolves-fawlty-towers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7857b1e1195f90df411eaadaff327562f501b72b%2F0_21_1985_1191%2F1985.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=America%3A%20where%20British%20sitcoms%20go%20to%20die&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fus-uk-comedy-remakes-raised-by-wolves-fawlty-towers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=America%3A%20where%20British%20sitcoms%20go%20to%20die&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fus-uk-comedy-remakes-raised-by-wolves-fawlty-towers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7857b1e1195f90df411eaadaff327562f501b72b%2F0_21_1985_1191%2F1985.jpg>
 Untranslatable … Fawlty Towers flopped when remade as Chateau Snavely. 
Photograph: BBC1 
 But both are in good company. Fawlty Towers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/sep/18/the-10-best-fawlty-towers-moments-40th-anniversary>
, by consent one of the greatest sitcoms ever, failed four times to translate 
into American: unsuccessfully piloted for ABC as Chateau Snavely in 1978; 
taken, again by ABC, to series as Amanda’s in 1983 (though three of its 13 
episodes were never shown); similar ignominy on CBS in 1999; ditto as Over the 
Top, back at ABC in 1997.

 Dad’s Army was piloted as The Rear Guard in 1976 and quickly demobilised. The 
Fall and Rise of Reginald Perrin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/aug/10/david-nobbs-reginald-perrin-drama-sitcom>
 was reincarnated in 1990 as Reggie (starring Soap’sRichard Mulligan 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8laJD6yZS8w>) but only for six episodes. The 
Young Ones morphed into Oh, No! Not THEM! underGarry Shandling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/video/2016/mar/25/comedian-garry-shandling-dies-aged-66-video>
 writer David Mirkin for Fox. They even flewNigel Planer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/aug/09/nigel-planer-family-values-charlie-chocolate>
 (hippie Neil) over, but it was not picked up.

Spaced creators Simon Pegg, Jessica Stevenson and Edgar Wright naively signed 
away their rights to ITV company LWT, who licensed the idea to ITV USA, who 
co-developeda Fox pilot <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YDsdBB1LUto> without 
the trio’s knowledge but used their names on press releases to cash in on 
interim kudos for Shaun of the Dead and Hot Fuzz. All three made their 
displeasure felt online and the project was shelved.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fus-uk-comedy-remakes-raised-by-wolves-fawlty-towers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a5894eb9d21d9ad557d73c504957d418c5a8cc4%2F0_118_1009_605%2F1009.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=America%3A%20where%20British%20sitcoms%20go%20to%20die&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fus-uk-comedy-remakes-raised-by-wolves-fawlty-towers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=America%3A%20where%20British%20sitcoms%20go%20to%20die&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fus-uk-comedy-remakes-raised-by-wolves-fawlty-towers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a5894eb9d21d9ad557d73c504957d418c5a8cc4%2F0_118_1009_605%2F1009.jpg>
 Spaced … there was a row over its transfer. Photograph: E4 Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYDsdBB1LUto&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYDsdBB1LUto>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYDsdBB1LUto&media=>
 Spaced’s ill-fated US remake. 
As for The Inbetweeners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-inbetweeners>, I ask its 
co-creator Iain Morris how much crossover there was between the E4 original and 
the adaptation for MTV. “Very, very little,” he says. “I mean they took the 
scripts and played with them, but we didn’t get a say over anything.”

ABC’s attempt to convert The Thick of It was a famous omnishambles. “It was 
static, no movement or energy to it, very conventionally shot,” says Blackwell. 
“No swearing either, because it was a network show.”Armando Iannucci  
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/armandoiannucci>denounced it as “terrible” 
and some of the staff “buffoons”, then bucked the whole system by taking his 
team to America to develop the Emmy-winning Veep for HBO. Blackwell finds HBO’s 
involvement empowering. “There isn’t an exec sitting at the monitors every day, 
as there can be with the networks.” The channel also quietly passed the 
three-season mark with a sombre remake of BBC4 hospital comedy Getting On.

 Of the rare exceptions, it’s worth taking a close look at Episodes. Somewhat 
ironically, this British-American co-production focuses on the trials of two 
British TV writers working in LA. What’s more, written by Americans and largely 
shot in the UK, it airs concurrently on Showtime and BBC2. Meanwhile, thanks to 
its transatlantic co-stars Rob Delaney and Sharon Horgan, Channel 4’sCatastrophe
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/28/catastrophe-review-channel-4-romcom-funny-postnatal-depression>
, licensed by Amazon, works without a shred of adaptation.

 Caitlin Moran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/mar/07/raised-by-wolves-caitlin-moran>
 seems unfazed. “We have no idea how the US version of Raised By Wolves will 
work or what our involvement will be,” she says. “But we’re hoping it will 
include sitting around a swimming pool in a silk dressing gown, likeFaye 
Dunaway the morning after the Oscars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/mar/14/faye-dunaway-oscars-breakfast>
. We wouldn’t do any writing, just sit around looking fucking awesome.”
 