
American Beauty 
<http://www.filmunlimited.co.uk/Film_Page/0,4061,104202,00.html> (pictured) has 
swept the board at this year's Golden Globe awards.

The film, a dark comedy about mid-life crisis and teenage angst in America's 
suburbia, directed by Britain's Sam Mendes, won awards for Best Drama, Director 
and Screenplay.

The Golden Globes <https://www.theguardian.com/film/golden-globes>, staged by 
the 82 members of the Hollywood Foreign Press Association, is regarded as a 
good indication of who will win Oscars in March.

It was also a good night for Britain's other hopefuls. Janet McTeer won Best 
Actress in a Musical or Comedy for her performance as the hippy southern mother 
inTumbleweeds <http://www.filmunlimited.co.uk/Film_Page/0,4061,110520,00.html>, 
while Phil Collins won the Best Original Song for You'll be in My Heart (from
Tarzan <http://www.filmunlimited.co.uk/Film_Page/0,4061,63632,00.html>).

The Golden Globe awards ceremony, which has been increasing in popularity and 
credibility over the last few years, was estimated to have been watched by 300m 
people worldwide. The full results are as follows:

Best Picture, Drama: American Beauty 
<http://www.filmunlimited.co.uk/Film_Page/0,4061,104202,00.html>. 

 Best Actress, Drama: Hilary Swank 
<http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?Swank,+Hilary> in Boys Don't Cry. 

 Best Actor, Drama: Denzel Washington 
<http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?Washington,+Denzel> in The Hurricane. 

 Best Picture, Musical or Comedy: Toy Story 2 
<http://www.filmunlimited.co.uk/Film_Page/0,4061,104207,00.html>. 

Best Actress, Musical or Comedy: Janet McTeer 
<http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?McTeer,+Janet> in Tumbleweeds. 

Best Actor, Musical or Comedy: Jim Carrey 
<http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?Carrey,+Jim> in Man on the Moon. 

 Best Foreign Language Picture: All About My Mother 
<http://www.filmunlimited.co.uk/Film_Page/0,4061,71782,00.html>. 

 Best Supporting Actress, Drama, Musical or Comedy: Angelina Jolie 
<http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?Jolie,+Angelina> in Girl, Interrupted. 

Best Supporting Actor, Drama, Musical or Comedy: Tom Cruise 
<http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?Cruise,+Tom> in Magnolia. 
Best Director: Sam Mendes <http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?Mendes,+Sam> for 
American Beauty.
Best Screenplay: Alan Ball <http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?Ball,+Alan+(I)> for 
American Beauty.
Best Original Score: Ennio Morricone 
<http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?Morricone,+Ennio> for The Legend of 1900. 

Best Original Song: You'll be in My Heart from Tarzan by Phil Collins 
<http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?Collins,+Phil>. 

Full-length Blackadder movie to be made

Rowan Atkinson 
<http://www.filmunlimited.co.uk/Player/Player_Page/0,4159,45355,00.html> is to 
make a film version of Blackadder, with our hero playing a pop manager who 
misses out on signing the Beatles.

There have been rumours of a feature-length version of the popular BBC series 
for a number of years now, intensified recently by the reunion of the 
characters in Back and Forth, the short film currently showing at the 
millennium dome in the Skyscape cinema. But the stumbling block for Atkinson 
and co-writers Ben Elton and Richard Curtis has been the period in which to set 
the film.

However, according to cast member Stephen Fry 
<http://www.filmunlimited.co.uk/Player/Player_Page/0,4159,45381,00.html>, the 
team have finally decided on the 60s. "We have had great fun thinking what the 
next one ought to be. We've decided it should be set in the 60s, where Rowan 
would be a manager of a band that was on the night after the Beatles played at 
the Cavern Club - so he just misses [them]... and he's enraged with 
bitterness," he said.

Atkinson will play the Svengali Brian Epstein-esque manager Edmund Blackadder, 
and as usual will be joined by Tony Robinson, this time as the band's bald 
drummer, Rick. The remainder of the band will be played by Hugh Laurie, Tim 
McInnerney and Rik Mayall. Together they spend the 60s trying and failing to 
make it big by emulating the Beatles.

It is not yet known when the film will go into production.

Ministers prepare to woo Spielberg

The government hopes to persuade Steven Spielberg 
<http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?Spielberg,+Steven> to make Harry Potter and the 
Philosopher's Stone in the UK, and are preparing a charm offensive to woo the 
director over here.

Ministers will highlight the success of Aardman Animations 
<http://www.aardman.com>, the company that make Wallace and Gromit, which 
signed a £150m deal with Spielberg's DreamWorks studio last year to produce 
five films.

One option for the dome at the end of the year is to turn it into a studio: a 
plan backed by Ministers. They believe that the move would plug one of the main 
weaknesses of the British film industry - lack of studio space.

Government support for the project will be a boost to the consortium headed by 
theMadame Tussaud's <http://www.madame-tussauds.com/> group, which is behind 
the plan to turn the dome into a state-of-the-art film and TV studio.

In brief

As well as cleaning up at the Golden Globes, American Beauty also did pretty 
well at theLas Vegas Film Critics Society Awards. It won Best Film, while Kevin 
Spacey walked away with the Best Actor award. Other winners include Haley Joel 
Osment for The Sixth Sense, and director Spike Jonze for Being John Malkovich. 
The awards themselves will be presented in late February.

Casting couch

 Nicole Kidman <http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?Kidman,+Nicole> is to star in 
Ang Lee <http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?Lee,+Ang>'s next film, a world war two 
drama set in Berlin. Kidman will play Marie Vassiltchikov, a Russian princess 
who worked for the Nazis in the German foreign office.

 Catherine Zeta-Jones 
<http://www.filmunlimited.co.uk/Player/Player_Page/0,4159,81094,00.html> is in 
talks to star inSteven Soderbergh 
<http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?Soderbergh,+Steven>'s forthcoming film, Traffic. 
Based on the British TV mini-series Traffik, Soderbergh's film will take a look 
at the business and politics of drug trafficking.
 