
 I'm in Houston at the moment, training with Nasa for a mission to the 
International Space Station <http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/main/>. 
I'll be blasting off in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/may/19/tim-peake-mission-space-station>
! Before I sawthis film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/07/gravity-review>, about two 
astronauts on a not entirely dissimilar mission, my friends warned me not to 
take it too seriously – since the astronauts end up floating in space. So I 
took their advice and loved it.

I found the scene where Sandra Bullock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sandra-bullock> flips out of her spacesuit in 
a couple of seconds very amusing. Anyone who's ever worn one knows that's 
impossible: it takes about three minutes just to wriggle into the upper torso 
section. And as for what she's wearing underneath: well, we certainly don't 
wear anything that sexy! We're in long-johns, a cooling suit covered in narrow 
tubes filled with water, and a nappy – since a spacewalk usually lasts around 
eight hours and you have to stay well-hydrated. But showing Bullock in a nappy 
probably wouldn't sell so many tickets.

It's unlikely, too, that her character, an engineer sent to attach some device 
to theHubble telescope <http://hubblesite.org/the_telescope/>, would be on a 
spacewalk after just six months of training. You can certainly go into space 
then: Sarah Brightman, for instance, is coming with us in 2015, and will have 
notched up that amount of time. But at that level, you're very much a space 
tourist rather than a fully fledged astronaut.
 'With six months' training, you're a space tourist' … Gravity 
 The shuttle that Bullock and veteran spaceman George Clooney use to get to 
the ISS has actually been retired: the only vehicle we have to get there and 
back today is the Russian Soyuz rocket. The film does capture the essence of 
what it's like to be in zero gravity, though: how difficult it is to move; how 
you have to struggle to stop yourself from just rotating endlessly. And the 
vistas of Earth and space are stunning, very much likethe movies you can see on 
YouTube <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kjf-SM0CIDs> made of time-lapse 
photographs taken from the ISS.

None of the astronauts I know have been put off going into space by seeing 
Gravity. We all know the risks. And the real dangers can be much worse: my 
spacemateLuca Parmitano 
<http://www.esa.int/Our_Activities/Human_Spaceflight/Volare/Luca_Parmitano> had 
his helmet fill up with water while on a spacewalk. It was just about the worst 
disaster Nasa had ever had at the ISS. Like Clooney, you do have to keep a cool 
head when you go out into space. You never know what might happen.

More on Gravity

• Gravity – review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/07/gravity-review>
• Oscar predictions 2014: Gravity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/aug/29/oscars-2014-gravity-sandra-bullock-george-clooney>
 