
Consumer Offers 
<http://www.guardianoffers.co.uk/mall/departmentpage.cfm/Guardian?INTCMP=SRCH>, 
which sells products and services to our readers, has focused for many years on 
ethical and environmental issues.

Over the last year, the team has added more services to its portfolio through 
the development of events and training programmes, such asMasterclasses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-masterclasses>. 

The retail team has always regarded customer experience and consumer safety as 
two of our key priorities. We always credit check potential suppliers to make 
sure that customers can order in confidence; and we enable customers to speak 
to GNM directly by publishing a dedicated telephone number and email address, 
as well as monitoring the volume of direct contacts with suppliers (again, 
phone and email), as well as being the first reader offers site to add customer 
comment functionality.

Last year, we had a breach of our third-party hosted main ecommerce site. At 
the beginning of November we discovered that the problem was not confined to 
one supplier, so we took the decision to make the entire website 
non-transactional.

At this stage we sent an email to all customers who could have been affected, 
advising them to look at their bank/credit card statements and to contact their 
issuer if they saw any transactions they didn't recognise. We set up a 
dedicated email address and telephone line for customers to contact us directly 
and made sure that these were manned at the weekend to cope with the expected 
volume of inquiries.

A significant number of customers contacted us, and feedback was generally 
positive that we have been open and proactive about the security breach.

Through Guardian Holidays <http://www.guardianholidayoffers.co.uk/home>, the 
department actively promotes train travel in the UK and Europe and invites 
readers to participate in theGuardian Home Exchange 
<http://www.guardianhomeexchange.co.uk/>, which encourages low-cost holidays. 
We are also launching a boutique hotels site this summer to provide 
accommodation-only options for Guardian customers who do not wish to join an 
escorted tour. This will have a high UK inventory too – promoting the 
staycation.

Guardian Holidays have also developed a Sustainability policy 
<http://www.guardiancottages.co.uk/sites/cottageselection/partners/gdn/pages//popups/GHOSustainablePolicy.pdf>
, which we will circulate to our travel partners soon and feature on the site 
for customers to see how we aim to work. This policy was developed based on an 
assessment of the sustainability risk of our offers and services to identify 
the priorities for the policy.

The process looked at the scale of the risk, the opportunity for improvement, 
and the influence or control GNM had over the risk. As a result the policy will 
focus on:

 * Social justice Respect for the rights of all individuals, protection of 
human rights and fair labour practices. 
 * The environment Respect and care for the environment to support human 
health, resources and the climate. 
 * Economic equity Ensure financial stability of partners, provide fair 
opportunities for small and local suppliers, and removal of corruption in all 
its forms. 
 * Passenger welfare Understanding the diverse needs, well-being and ensure 
the security and safety of our travellers. 
The publishing partner for Guardian Books 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/home.do?gclid=CJ_i7f3mlrECFUdvfAodLn2zeg>
' print business is Random House, the first consumer publishing group in the 
world to be awarded FSC chain-of-custody accreditation. They work with their 
paper mills to ensure that all black and white demy, royal, A format and B 
format titles are produced on FSC paper.

Random House also has a full paper procurement policy that looks to guarantee 
responsible use of natural resources in the production and distribution of 
books, the efficient use of energy, water, raw materials and space, the 
reduction of waste, the recycling of packaging, and the prevention of pollution.

In August 2011, Guardian Books launched Guardian Shorts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/series/guardian-shorts>, an ebook-only 
publishing programme. Digital publishing arguably reduces the environmental 
impact and waste associated with traditional publishing, as there is no risk of 
overprinting (which leads to paper wastage).

The Guardian Shorts list also features a range of titles highlighting 
environmental concerns and promoting more sustainable ways of life, including 
guides to walking and cycling in the UK, an urban wildlife spotting handbook, 
an exploration of the commercial opportunities and threats presented by the 
exploitation of Arctic natural resources, and a book about M-PESA, a company 
that provides mobile money services to more than 16 million Kenyans, sparking 
entrepreneurship and new business formation. 

Streetstories <https://www.theguardian.com/mobile/streetstories>

In April 2012, Guardian News & Media's business development and multimedia 
teams launched Streetstories, a prototype app for iPhone and Android, which 
triggered audio clips relevant to the users' location, using GPS.

It was launched to test whether there was consumer interest in apps that 
created immersive storytelling experiences in specific locations.

Streetstories worked in King's Cross, London – GNM's neighbourhood – and users 
could explore 70 stories with over two hours of audio. With subjects ranging 
from Charles Dickens's childhood to the 90s clubbing scene, the team recorded 
audio clips with artists, musicians, historians, architects and residents. 

The app attracted significant media interest, and the local community's help 
and support to create high quality content was key to this. Lead producer 
Shehani Fernando threw herself into the project and spoke to everyone from 
community members trying to regenerate sections of the canal to the children 
and pensioners of the Somers Town estate.

She climbed the tower of St Pancras hotel to talk to Harry Handelsman, a 
permanent resident there, and revisited theKing's Cross Voices project 
<http://camden.gov.uk/ccm/content/leisure/local-history/kings-cross-voices.en;jsessionid=776BA9A025B59AB51A27CE2B5174A08D>
, which Camden council ran a few years ago, trawling through their audio 
archive and transcripts, as well as working with oral historian Alan Dein.

It was a wonderful experience that really grounded the app launch team in the 
King's Cross area, as well as introducing them to new neighbours. 
 