
We often report big breaking stories as they happen, but have you ever 
wondered what stories we're working on - and what's about to drop? To help you 
find out,the Guardian newsdesk is opening its doors 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2011/oct/09/the-guardian-newslists-opening-up>.

You can now see (below) a live account of our plans in the form of the daily 
newslist kept by our editors. It provides a glimpse into the scheduled 
announcements, events and speeches that make up the news day. You will also be 
able to view what our editors think about the stories by reading their updates 
on Twitter in the panel opposite. We will include conversations we have about 
the day's news, story ideas we get from our correspondents and the latest 
information on stories that we get during the day.

We won't quite show you everything. We can't tell you about stories that are 
under embargo or, sometimes, exclusives that we want to keep from our 
competitors, but most of our plans will be there for all to see, from the 
parliamentary debates we plan to cover to the theatre we plan to review. We 
reserve the right to stick to our guns, but would love to know what you think.

Sometimes you will see how quiet it is; other times you will wonder how we 
intend to fit it all in. Above all, bear in mind these are real-time working 
documents and, by definition, only provisional.

You can tell us what you think of individual stories and suggest lines of 
inquiry using Twitter by tweeting to the hashtag#opennews 
<http://twitter.com/#!/search/%23opennews>. We will retweet a selection in the 
panel of our tweets opposite. Alternatively, try contacting whichever reporter 
has been assigned to the story by clicking on the link next to their name and 
sending them a Twitter message. For anything confidential, ask one of us to 
follow you and you can send a direct message instead, or if you'd rather not 
even do that you can send us an email vianewseditor@guardian.co.uk 
<mailto:newseditor@guardian.co.uk> - though this is less likely to be spotted 
than a tweet.

We're a busy newsdesk so we won't be able to reply to everything, but we will 
be reading it and taking your views into account. This is an experiment in 
openness that we hope to keep going for a fortnight. We'll see how we go.
 