
This series 
<https://www.itv.com/itvplayer/the-americans/series-1/episode-1-pilot> about a 
pair of Russian spies posing as an American couple in Washington DC in the 
1980s has some basis in reality, butit has been over-dramatised for TV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/jun/02/the-americans-tv-review>. 
I've never heard of any Russian agents being set up in this way – although an 
American couple calledthe Cohens 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1995/07/05/obituaries/morris-cohen-84-soviet-spy-who-passed-atom-plans-in-40-s.html>
 did spy for the Soviet Union in the 1950s. And a Russian agent,Rudolf Abel 
<http://www.spymuseum.com/pages/agent-abel-rudolf.html>, was sent to the US in 
the 1940s to pose as a photographer. I doubt Abel ever got up to anything quite 
as exciting or violent as Philip and Elizabeth Jennings do here, although I do 
wonder why neither of them has a trace of a Russian accent.

I like the fact that, as with the likes of Homeland, we don't quite know who 
to identify with: the FBI or the KGB. And the writers have certainly made an 
effort to reflect some real events. In the second episode, Elizabeth stabs a 
man in the leg with a poisoned umbrella tip. That really happened: in the 1970s,
Georgi Markov <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/2636459.stm>, a Bulgarian 
dissident, was killed with a ricin-tipped umbrella on London's Waterloo Bridge.

Soviet agents did sometimes bug the rooms of important American politicians, 
too. There's a story from the 1950s about the US ambassador to the Soviet Union 
being given a wooden US seal by some Russian schoolkids. He hung it on the wall 
of his office in Moscow only to discover, years later, that the seal had been 
fitted with a listening device.

It is possible, of course, that there were Soviet spies living undercover in 
this way: we don't know as much about the 1980s as we do about the earlier 
decades of the cold war; many documents are still classified. In the 1960s, for 
example, a number of Soviet defectors told the CIA and MI5 they were overrun by 
double agents. But was this true – or disinformation? Disputes still rage, but 
the paranoia had died down a bit by the 1980s. The Americans might work better 
if it were set in the 50s or 60s.

• Dr Michael Goodman is Reader in Intelligence & International Affairs in the 
Department of War Studies, King's College London. The Americans is on ITV on 
Saturdays.
 