
I served all over the world in the 1990s. There are several key similarities 
betweenthe work of the SAS <http://www.sasregiment.org.uk> and the Navy Seals, 
the elite American soldiers <http://www.sasregiment.org.uk> depicted in this 
film. Both involve highly trained soldiers operating in very small groups in 
remote enemy territory. The mountains of Afghanistan we see in the film are 
very like the area of Kenya where British soldiers train today.

The Seals face a moral dilemma: kill a group of Afghans in order not to 
compromise their mission, or let them go unharmed. It's a familiar situation. 
Not only isLone Survivor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/02/lone-survivor-mark-kermode-review>
 based on Marcus Luttrell's account of a real 2005 Seals mission, there have 
been a number of similar incidents over the years. Bravo Two Zero,the SAS 
patrol in Iraq made famous by Andy McNab 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Bravo-Two-Zero-Andy-McNab/dp/0552153575>, were 
compromised by a goatherd and had to make that same decision.

I would hope that any soldier – any human being, really – would choose not to 
harm a civilian, even if it meant their mission would be in danger. There was a 
case back in the 1960s, involving British soldiers in Aden, Yemen, where they 
made the choice to shoot. It still ended badly for all concerned.

The fighting scenes are pretty good for a Hollywood movie – the Seals are 
remarkably accurate shooters. In reality, if you get shot, you're not usually 
in a condition to continue. I suppose some people would find these scenes 
off-putting. It depends on your perspective. The opening scenes of Saving 
Private Ryan are routinely used by military recruiters to show how exciting 
soldiering is.

The film uses footage of the men in the real-life Seals mission. Some critics 
have called this crass 
<http://www.theblaze.com/stories/2014/01/14/marcus-luttrell-responds-to-lone-survivor-critics-as-only-he-can-in-megyn-kelly-interview/>
, but I disagree. If any recent film is crass, it's Black Hawk Down: 
essentially just white guys against black guys. Lone Survivor is both more 
nuanced and more realistic. It depicts the atmosphere within special operations 
forces quite well. You work in such small groups, in terrible conditions. 
Whether you're a Navy Seal or an SAS officer, your loyalty to your fellow 
soldiers is absolute.

• John Richards is a pseudonym
 