
An extensive archive of letters, book drafts, audio tapes and photographs 
relating to the film directorAndrei Tarkovsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrei-tarkovsky> is to appear at auction in 
London.

Sotheby's has announced it is to sell an archive of one of the most revered 
figures in cinema, a man whom Ingmar Bergman called "the greatest … the one who 
invented a new language of film."

Tarkovsky's films, always intellectually stimulating and usually long and 
slow-moving, routinely come top or very high in film lists. The Guardian named 
his 205-minute Andrei Rublev as thebest arthouse film of all time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/20/andrei-rublev-tarkovsky-arthouse>
, and the BFI's once-a-decadegreatest film poll 
<http://www.bfi.org.uk/news/50-greatest-films-all-time> put three Tarkovsky 
creations in the top 30 – Mirror at 19, Andrei Rublev at 26 and Stalker at 29. 
Mirror came ninth in aparallel BFI list 
<http://www.bfi.org.uk/news/sight-sound-2012-directors-top-ten> decided by 358 
directors.

Sotheby's head of books and manuscripts, Stephen Roe, said the archive gave 
fascinating insights into Tarkovsky's approach to cinema. "It is probably the 
only papers relating to Tarkovsky that are ever likely to come on the market in 
the near future," he said.

The archive is being sold by Olga Surkova, who was Tarkovsky's pupil, 
amanuensis and friend as well as co-author of the book Sculpting in Time, in 
which the director sets out his theories on cinema.

The archive covers his life as well as his work. One of the most poignant 
items is a draft of a letter he wrote to President Leonid Brezhnev in which he 
argues that he be allowed to work in the Soviet Union and calls for his films – 
banned by the authorities – to be released.

"For three and a half years the film has been kept away from the screen … 
Andrei Rublev was not and could not have been used for any kind of anti-Soviet 
propaganda … I do not have any opportunity to exercise my creative ideas," he 
wrote.

The situation was having a profound effect on Tarkovsky. "If I do not have any 
work, I cannot make a living, though I have a wife and a child. I do not feel 
comfortable talking about that, but my situation has been unchanged for so long 
that I cannot keep silence any longer."

The letter had little effect and in 1984 he vowed to never again return to the 
Soviet Union. He died of lung cancer in Paris in 1986 at the age of 54.

Also in the sale are notebooks with shot-by-shot analysis of his films; 
printed scripts for films, containing significant differences to the final 
versions; and a collection of 32 audio tapes and 13 MiniDiscs from his final 
years on which he talks about his films and cinema.

There are photo albums of Tarkovsky and his family on holiday in places such 
as the Grand Canyon in the US, Italy and Stonehenge in the UK, as well as 
pictures of the director with other Russian luminaries such as the cellist 
Mstislav Rostropovich.

Tarkovsky made seven feature films, including Solaris, Nostalghia, and The 
Sacrifice. "He is regarded as, after [Sergei] Eisenstein, the most important 
Russian film director of the 20th century and one of the greatest of all time," 
Roe said.

Tarkovsky has influenced a legion of film-makers. Explaining why he dedicated 
his film Antichrist to Tarkovsky, the director Lars von Triertold one 
interviewer 
<http://www.timeout.com/film/features/show-feature/8262/lars-von-trier-discusses-antichrist.html>
: "Have you ever seen a film called Mirror? I was hypnotised! I've seen it 20 
times. It's the closest I've got to a religion – to me he is God."

Steven Soderbergh, who remade Solaris with George Clooney in the lead role, 
once said <http://www.close-upfilm.com/features/Interviews/stevensoderbergh.htm>
: "I'm a big fan of Tarkovsky. I think he's an actual poet, which is very rare 
in the cinema, and the fact that he had such an impact with only seven features 
I think is a testament to his genius."

The archive will be sold by Sotheby's on 28 November and has an estimate of 
£80,000-£100,000. Strong Russian interest is expected. "Russians ought to be 
interested in it because it is so fundamental to their artistic history," Roe 
said.
 