
Arriving to interview Andrew Davies is rather like being in one of his TV 
dramas: events have reached a cliffhanger and there’s a naked woman on the 
loose. As he greets me in the hallway of his home, the first thing Davies says 
is: “There’s water pouring everywhere and Diana is upstairs with nothing on.”

The power shower has become as power crazed as Francis Urquhart 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hQPkvKhU4tA>, the post-Thatcherite plotter in 
Davies’s adaptation of House of Cards, the basis forthe current Kevin Spacey 
version 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/mar/06/house-of-cards-not-making-sense>
. Davies has managed to avoid the spray and so is not wearing a damp shirt – 
unlike Colin Firth inthe best remembered scene 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hasKmDr1yrA> in Davies’ version of Pride and 
Prejudice.

While a plumber is called, I spend the first part of our interview talking to 
Jake, the couple’s chocolate labrador retriever, in the kitchen of the house in 
Warwickshire where the writer, who just turned 80, has lived since he and Diana 
worked at a teacher training college in Coventry in the 1960s. A plumber 
arranged, Davies returns to take over the conversation from Jake.A comment he 
made 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/22/colin-firth-pride-and-prejudice-andrew-davies-mr-darcy-bbc>
 at a public event the previous night – revealing that he had insisted on Firth 
dyeing his ginger hair before playing Mr Darcy – has gone viral in a way that 
is common for a screenwriter to whom publicity sticks like Firth’s dripping 
garment.

“I hope Colin doesn’t mind,” laughs Davies. “But it is completely true. 
Shortly before Pride and Prejudice, he was in a little film I wrote called 
Circle of Friends and his hair in that was indeed gingerish.” Are Davies’ 
remarks calculated to gain publicity? “No. I just get very excited when I’ve 
got an audience. People ask me stuff and I can’t control myself. But these 
days, I suppose people Twitter things, do they? I mean ordinary people. Mmm. I 
need to watch out for that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fandrew-davies-tv-scriptwriter-interview-house-of-cards-war-and-peace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4dd322282f7e91bde848e5a12871132526e28537%2F0_0_2402_1445%2F2402.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrew%20Davies%3A%20'I%20can't%20control%20myself'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fandrew-davies-tv-scriptwriter-interview-house-of-cards-war-and-peace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrew%20Davies%3A%20%27I%20can%27t%20control%20myself%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fandrew-davies-tv-scriptwriter-interview-house-of-cards-war-and-peace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4dd322282f7e91bde848e5a12871132526e28537%2F0_0_2402_1445%2F2402.jpg>
 ‘His hair was indeed gingerish’ … Colin Firth as Mr Darcy in Pride and 
Prejudice. Photograph: BBC Photo Library/BBC 
Davies has always been prone to controversy. His first radio play, in 1964, 
was based on his teaching days in Wales. The producer decided to record it on 
location at the school, but the headteacher recognised himself in the script 
and threatened to sue. “So my writing career started with one of those 
announcements: ‘In place of the advertised programme …’”

The squawking doorbell sends Jake crazy. “That was quick,” says Davies, and 
goes to let the plumber in. In my experience, the lives of writers often 
conform to their work. When I interviewedHarold Pinter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/pinter>, a case of mistaken identity led 
to a series of requests I was unnervingly unable to answer. Equally fittingly, 
I have come to discuss with Davies not just his literary adaptations – the most 
recent beingWar and Peace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/13/clive-james-bbc-war-and-peace-measure-up>
 for the BBC – but the dark farces that were his first TV work.

In honour of his landmark birthday, the BBC has made available such programmes 
as 1981’sBavarian Night 
<https://store.bbc.com/play-for-today/play-for-today-series-11/bavarian-night>, 
in which a German-themed school fundraiser turns alarmingly Nazi, andA Very 
Peculiar Practice <https://store.bbc.com/a-very-peculiar-practice/series-1>, 
his prophetic comedy-drama from 1986 about the privatisation of an English 
university. “It wasn’t the plumber – it was Diana’s personal trainer,” says 
Davies on his return. Gary, a former dancer, joins us, crouching with Diana in 
the corner of the kitchen to hunt for the stopcock.

'This play isn't about our school,' said the head teacher. 'It is about Andrew 
Davies' diseased imagination'

The writer says he turned from original scripts to adapting books because he 
was an autobiographical playwright who ran out of material. “I was a young guy 
then, with lots going on in my head and in my life, which I wanted to write 
about. Now I live a very quiet life, apart from the occasional drama with a 
shower and a personal trainer. I have a very stable emotional relationship with 
Diana and the dog. My children live at a distance, but we all get on very well. 
There’s not very much to write plays about.”

Bavarian Night was based on parents’ evenings at his children’s school, though 
Davies added the Nazi salutes and the adultery in the infant cloakroom. For 
years, a video recording of the Play for Today was circulated among staff and 
parents, although Davies recalls: “The head was heard to say, ‘This play isn’t 
about our school at all. It’s about Davies’s diseased imagination.’’’

That imagination has often been strongly erotic: an actress originally cast in 
his House of Cards left the series rather than play out an incestuous subtext. 
Is he aware that sex has become his signature? “Yes. Or certainly a signature 
of what people say about my work. And it sort of irritates me, but on the other 
hand it helps to publicise the shows.” Also, surely many 19th-century novelists 
would have gone further if society and censorship had permitted it? “Yes, I 
think so. George Eliot, for example, is tremendously interested in sex. Tolstoy 
too.”

“There’s a little knob just swivelling round!” shouts Diana from the kitchen.

Dead authors are easier to adapt, says Davies. Living ones can be “delighted 
their books are being done, but think you’re going to use all their dialogue 
and plot”. There has sometimes seemed to be a war of credit between Davies and 
novelistMichael Dobbs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/feb/27/house-of-cards-michael-dobbs-bbc>
 over the British House of Cards, with Dobbs described as the creator of the 
lead character’s sardonic catchphrase: “You might very well think that; I 
couldn’t possibly comment.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fandrew-davies-tv-scriptwriter-interview-house-of-cards-war-and-peace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2771f4bdc8b4176cd44def97f3cd8a366d202cc9%2F192_394_3996_2397%2F3996.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrew%20Davies%3A%20'I%20can't%20control%20myself'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fandrew-davies-tv-scriptwriter-interview-house-of-cards-war-and-peace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrew%20Davies%3A%20%27I%20can%27t%20control%20myself%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fandrew-davies-tv-scriptwriter-interview-house-of-cards-war-and-peace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2771f4bdc8b4176cd44def97f3cd8a366d202cc9%2F192_394_3996_2397%2F3996.jpg>
 ‘Tolstoy is tremendously interested in sex’ … Davies’ War and Peace. 
Photograph: Mitch Jenkins/PR 
But Davies recalls “steeling myself to look right through the book and check. 
And I was pleased to discover that line wasn’t Dobbs, it was me. But to be fair 
to him, he created an absolutely cracking plot. And we’re not at war with our 
credits over the American series, where we are both very generously listed as 
executive producers. I don’t know about him, but I haven’t done a thing on it. 
I just get paid for allowing them to plunder my work on the British version. 
And for me not ever to say anything bad about their show. That’s in the 
contract.”

It is not, however, contractual obligation that makes him watch each season on 
Netflix as soon as it comes out. “I binge-watch the whole thing. We’ve all got 
into binge-watching though, personally, I still prefer my shows to go out once 
a week on a Sunday night. I like the way it can be written and talked about in 
between, and it sort of builds. I suppose binge-watching is bad for people’s 
characters because it’s instant gratification.” Has there been any talk of 
reviving the British House of Cards? “No. Although, with all the recent 
backstabbing over Brexit and the Labour party, there’s so much material.”

The doorbell heralds what must surely be the plumber. While the writer goes to 
answer, I calm Jake. Davies has won five Baftas and two Emmys, but the dog is a 
prize-winner, too. On the dresser is his Certificate of Canine Agricultural 
Achievement for various rounding-up contests at a farm show. Davies returns. It 
was a postal delivery.

I tried to be a showrunner on Mr Selfridge but I couldn't control my team, 
couldn't get a word in

If the writer were in his 30s now, he would be encouraged to set up an 
independent company and become a multimillionaire “showrunner”. Does he regret 
missing out on the era of writer control? “Not really. I’ve never been keen to 
have lots of money. Having more than I need is brilliant, but we more or less 
lead the lifestyle of retired university lecturers, which is what a lot of our 
friends are. I don’t like deals and the mechanics of TV. And when I tried to be 
a showrunner onMr Selfridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mr-selfridge>, I couldn’t control my 
team, couldn’t get a word in.”

“Do you have any WD40?” calls the personal trainer from linoleum level.

Davies’s current project is an adaptation of Victor Hugo’s Les Misérables, 
with the same team that made War and Peace. While working on any adaptation, 
Davies drives around Warwickshire listening to the audiobook version (“Trying 
to get the basic shape in your head”). He ended up hacking his edition of War 
and Peace into more manageable chunks with a carving knife. But for this, he 
has a “posh paperback translation which, when it falls open, stays open. I 
wouldn’t carve that up.”

Les Misérables falls, with Shaw’s Pygmalion and Dickens’ Oliver Twist, into 
that small subset of novels that are better known as musicals. This worries 
Davies. “I’ve never had that before. I thought the musical was a travesty 
personally. We may be cruising for a bruising because people will say, ‘Where 
are the songs?’ I must say I feel that slightly with adaptations of Oliver 
Twist. Where’sAs Long As He Needs Me? 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TkXQqYa0wrw> But those are good songs.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fandrew-davies-tv-scriptwriter-interview-house-of-cards-war-and-peace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd97231b2f9430bcd807b7c7ac2338849fc989688%2F534_310_1430_857%2F1430.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrew%20Davies%3A%20'I%20can't%20control%20myself'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fandrew-davies-tv-scriptwriter-interview-house-of-cards-war-and-peace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrew%20Davies%3A%20%27I%20can%27t%20control%20myself%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fandrew-davies-tv-scriptwriter-interview-house-of-cards-war-and-peace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd97231b2f9430bcd807b7c7ac2338849fc989688%2F534_310_1430_857%2F1430.jpg>
 Early work … Peter Davison in A Very Peculiar Practice Photograph: BBC 
At 80, Davies seems to have avoided TV ageism, but still suffers the 
insecurity of all freelance writers. When he started, he says, he just gave the 
producer an idea and it was made. “Now it has to go through so many people. I 
don’t think I’ve got a champion at the BBC any more. The only way of getting 
something on theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> now is to make 
someone think they’ve thought of it.”

His dream future projects would be adapting John Updike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/johnupdike>’s five Rabbit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/25/100-best-novels-rabbit-redux-john-updike-review>
 books, and doing “a big mash-up” ofAlison Lurie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/oct/25/featuresreviews.guardianreview15>
’s series of 10 novels featuring recurring characters in the American academic 
world during the second half of the 20th century.

“Gary’s got it off with a wrench,” reports Diana, triumphantly. The trainer 
leaves without putting her through her paces, having possibly seen a more 
lucrative future in plumbing.

In the waterless house, Davies will now get back to writing Les Misérables. 
Will there be more sex than Victor Hugo put in? “Oh yes, some,” says Davies. 
“But it’s mainly about redemption.”

 * Andrew Davies: Originals 
<https://store.bbc.com/collections/andrew-davies-originals> and Andrew Davies: 
Adaptations <https://store.bbc.com/collections/andrew-davies-adaptations> are 
now available.
 