
Andy Woodward, the former footballer who suffered years of sexual abuse from 
one of his coaches, has criticised Crewe Alexandra for their lack of apology in 
the first official statement the club have released about the escalating Barry 
Bennell case.

Woodward said it was “scandalous” that Crewe had taken so long to address a 
case that has nowled to six people contacting the police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/21/crewe-alexandra-andy-woodward>
 about Bennell, the serial paedophile who has served three separate prison 
sentences, totalling 16 years, in England and the United States for offences 
against young boys.

Second footballer reveals abuse by serial paedophile Barry Bennell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/steve-walters-andy-woodward-crewe-alexandra>
John Bowler, the Crewe chairman, issued the statement 
<http://www.crewealex.net/news/article/2016-17/club-statement-john-bowler-3430408.aspx>
 shortly before another of the club’s former players,Steve Walters, told the 
Guardian about his own ordeal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/steve-walters-andy-woodward-crewe-alexandra>
, at the age of 13, in the youth academy. Walters was also heavily critical of 
Crewe’s handling of the case but Bowler insisted the club were taking it 
seriously.

“Crewe Alexandra appreciate that concern has been expressed about the delay in 
the club making any comment to recent media coverage,” Bowler said. “When 
things come out of the blue like this, you first want to make inquiries and 
reflect from within. That is the process we started last week.

“We are a proud football club and would always take any allegation seriously. 
Any form of abuse has no place in football or society. We have already 
concurred with the statements made by the Football Association, the Premier 
League and the Football League that described Andy Woodward’s ordeal as 
‘heart-breaking’ and praised him for his ‘immense courage’.”

That statement matches almost word for word what Bowler had said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/21/crewe-alexandra-andy-woodward>
 to this newspaper the previous day and Woodward said the club needed to do 
more to show they were taking the matter seriously.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffootball-sexual-abuse-scandal-could-be-worse-than-jimmy-savile-case-says-andy-woodward-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20sexual%20abuse%20scandal%20could%20be%20worse%20than%20Jimmy%20Savile%20case%2C%20says%20Andy%20Woodward%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffootball-sexual-abuse-scandal-could-be-worse-than-jimmy-savile-case-says-andy-woodward-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20sexual%20abuse%20scandal%20could%20be%20worse%20than%20Jimmy%20Savile%20case%2C%20says%20Andy%20Woodward%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffootball-sexual-abuse-scandal-could-be-worse-than-jimmy-savile-case-says-andy-woodward-video&media=>
Football sexual abuse scandal could be worse than Jimmy Savile case, says Andy 
Woodward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/nov/23/football-sexual-abuse-scandal-could-be-worse-than-jimmy-savile-case-says-andy-woodward-video>
“I feel really hurt that in 1998 when he was convicted of those offences not 
one person from Crewe Alexandra has ever contact me to see if I was OK or to 
say they were really sorry this happened at their football club,” Woodward said.

“Even now, they’re still failing to say they are really sorry this happened. I 
need them to say sorry. Everyone who was involved – and there are people coming 
forward every day – will want them to say sorry but unfortunately this 
statement doesn’t surprise me and it feels like to me there is almost an air of 
arrogance on their part. There aren’t really the words to explain how it leaves 
me feeling.”

Woodward went on to praise Walters for being the first former player to come 
forward who was never previously involved in the criminal proceedings against 
Bennell. Walters, the youngest player in Crewe’s history, has waived his right 
to anonymity on the back ofWoodward’s interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/andy-woodward> to reveal how 
he was also targeted when he left home in Plymouth to join Crewe. He and 
Woodward have been in contact over the past week for the first time in more 
than 20 years and both men are convinced there are others who are still to come 
forward.

“It’s been incredibly emotional being in contact with Steve and knowing, after 
all this time, that there were other people out there who I had never known 
about before,” Woodward said. “The first time we spoke, he just said: ‘I was 
one as well, Woody,’ and then we burst into tears.

Andy Woodward: ‘It was the softer, weaker boys he targeted’
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/andy-woodward> 
“To hear his voice, listening to what he was telling me, my heart sank for him 
but I also knew that, finally, I had someone else behind me and I wasn’t alone. 
Then the next thought was: ‘I need to help you.’

“I always knew there would be others who have never come forward but it was 
very emotional to hear those words, that it was someone new who had not been 
involved before, and that he had managed to pluck up the courage and the 
bravery to think: ‘You know what, I’m going to speak about this and I’m not 
going to live with that secret any longer.’ That takes an immense amount of 
strength because I know myself from back in 1998, when I finally let it out, it 
was such an incredibly emotional time.”

Bennell was sentenced to nine years in prison in 1998 after admitting 23 
specimen charges of sexual offences against six boys aged nine to 15, with 
another 22 offences left on file. He previously served a four-year sentence in 
Florida and was jailed for two years in May 2015 for another historical 
offence, committed against a boy of 12 on a football course in Macclesfield.

Walters, now 44, was once regarded as the one of the brightest prospects in 
English football and tipped to join Liverpool as the first £1m teenager in the 
sport. “He was an amazing player,” Woodward said. “You could see from a really 
young age.

“There were lots of talented players at the club but everyone used to talk 
about Steve being that extra bit special and the next big thing. There was talk 
of him potentially going to Liverpool and it looked like he was going right to 
the top. He had a lovely left foot and he was a similar kind of player to Jack 
Wilshere. He had a great career ahead of him and it is devastating to learn 
what has happened to him.”
 