
An amusement park in Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> has been 
forced to close its skating rink after a torrent of online criticism over its 
centrepiece: thousands of fish frozen into the ice.


Space World <http://www.spaceworld.co.jp/english/> in the city of Kitakyushu, 
south-west Japan, bowed to pressure to close the facility on Sunday after an 
online campaign denouncing the piscine graveyard as “cruel”, “immoral” and 
“weird”.

The rink, which was supposed to have stayed open until the spring, featured 
about 5,000 dead sprats, mackerel and other fish that had been bought from a 
local market embedded in the ice, some with their mouths still open in apparent 
suspended animation, according to local media reports.

For Japan’s ‘stranded singles’, virtual love beats the real thing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/20/japan-stranded-singles-virtual-love>
The fish were also used to spell out “hello” under the ice and to form an 
arrow showing skaters which direction to follow.

Other parts of the rink showed rays and whale sharks that, the park pointed 
out, were merely enlarged photos that had been placed beneath the ice.


The outcry was prompted after the fish, some of which appear to be swimming in 
formation around a pillar, were featured in a local TV report last week.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fanger-as-japanese-skating-rink-freezes-thousands-of-fish-into-ice-as-gimmick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2a03b7a8b5b2ee97d6a02635ce1716e24a28878%2F55_0_2361_1417%2F2361.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anger%20as%20Japanese%20skating%20rink%20freezes%20thousands%20of%20fish%20into%20ice%20as%20gimmick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fanger-as-japanese-skating-rink-freezes-thousands-of-fish-into-ice-as-gimmick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anger%20as%20Japanese%20skating%20rink%20freezes%20thousands%20of%20fish%20into%20ice%20as%20gimmick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fanger-as-japanese-skating-rink-freezes-thousands-of-fish-into-ice-as-gimmick%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2a03b7a8b5b2ee97d6a02635ce1716e24a28878%2F55_0_2361_1417%2F2361.jpg>
 Skaters on the rink at Space World in Kitakyushu with enlarged photos of rays 
under the ice. Photograph: STR/AFP/Getty Images 
Space World’s Facebook page was inundated with complaints and calls for the 
attraction to close.

One commenter said the park was “disrespectful of life”, while another said it 
was displaying an “appalling lack of morality”.

The facility’s website had touted the Ice Aquarium as an opportunity for 
visitors to “glide across the sea” in what it called the first attraction of 
its kind in the world.

But on Sunday, the park announced it was closing the ice rink. “We deeply 
apologise to people who felt uncomfortable about the Ice Aquarium event,” it 
said in a statement quoted in theJapan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>
 Times. “As a result, we have stopped the event from today.”

A spokesperson told the Asahi Shimbun that the park was considering holding a 
memorial service for the fish next year, adding that the fish were already dead 
when they were bought from a local wholesaler.

“Misunderstandings spread on the internet that the fish were frozen while they 
were still alive, but that was not the case,” the spokesperson told the 
newspaper. “We should have explained more.”
 