
Newspaper columnists, and other opinion-havers, love few things so much as 
bemoaning our “culture of outrage”. But we’re actually rather conflicted when 
it comes to the subject of anger. Sure, it’s bad when our political opponents 
express it, yet it’s amply justified when it’s us; we condemn some people for 
being angry, and others for not being angry enough. (And those tirades against 
outrage culture often appear in publications that rely on outrage for clicks.)
The philosopher Martha Nussbaum <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Martha_Nussbaum>
, in her arresting new bookAnger And Forgiveness 
<https://global.oup.com/academic/product/anger-and-forgiveness-9780199335879?cc=us&lang=en&>
, has no such qualms. Anger is essentiallyalways wrong, she insists. It’s a 
mental error we’d do well to eliminate in ourselves and, if possible, in our 
kids. I can already hear some people responding to this notion with… well, 
outrage. But hold that thought.

Nussbaum endorses Aristotle’s idea that anger inherently involves an element 
of payback. If I’m honest with myself, that rings true: when I fire off an 
angry tweet about, say, a certain dead-souled presidential candidate, my secret 
wish is that he might see it and feel wounded. This wish can be subtle, as
Nussbaum explained in Aeon magazine 
<https://aeon.co/essays/there-s-no-emotion-we-ought-to-think-harder-about-than-anger>
: maybe you just idly hope your ex-spouse’s second marriage will go poorly, for 
example. But you do want him or her to hurt. And, sooner or later, if you’re a 
rationalist like Nussbaum, you’ll have to confront an awkward fact: this desire 
for retaliation makes absolutely no sense.

Consider an extreme scenario: someone commits a horrifyingly sadistic murder. 
Naturally, lots of people think he ought to be punished. There are excellent 
reasons to put him in prison: to stop him murdering others; to dissuade other 
potential murderers; perhaps to rehabilitate him. But what useful goal is 
accomplished by his suffering, in and of itself? None. “Inflicting pain on the 
wrongdoer does not restore the thing that was lost,” Nussbaum writes. Nor does 
it prevent future losses. The best we can come up with is that it just “feels 
right”.

When life deals a bad hand, the clever gambler will twist, not stick
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/26/this-column-will-change-your-life-oliver-burkeman>
In other words, retaliation makes the urge to retaliate go away. But that’s 
like a smoker arguing that smoking is good because it calms you down, when 
really it’s nicotine withdrawal that causes the agitation to begin with. 
Anger’s only real effect is to make things worse, by turning your attention 
from what can be changed to what can’t: “It makes one think that progress will 
have been made if the betrayer suffers, when, in reality, this does nothing to 
solve the real problem.”

The jarring conclusion is that my anger is never justified, even when the 
person I’m sparring with is utterly factually wrong, filled with hate or 
causing harm to others. Is my anger understandable? Sure, I’m only human. Is it 
forgivable? Maybe sometimes. But it’s never an actively good thing. (You might 
be wondering about “righteous anger”. I think Nussbaum would say the angry part 
isn’t righteous, because it involves the desire to wound, while the righteous 
part isn’t really anger.) In short, it’s time to stop finding sneaky 
justifications for my own anger, while condemning other people’s. I won’t lie: 
that’s pretty infuriating.

oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com>
 