
After 37 years in power, Angola’s president José Eduardo dos Santos has 
announced that he will be stepping down 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-35784066> in 2018.

“I took the decision to leave and end my political life in 2018,” he told a 
meeting of the ruling party, the People’s Movement for the Liberation ofAngola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/angola>.

On the face of it, this is a momentous moment in Angola’s – and Africa’s – 
postcolonial history. There are few leaders like Dos Santos who have stepped 
down voluntarily, and his move could show otherso-called “presidents for life” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/quiz/2014/nov/12/africa-presidents-for-life-quiz>
 that itis possible to voluntarily depart from the presidential palace.


But most reactions to the news have been cynical. This is not the first time 
Dos Santos has announced his departure from the political stage, only to 
backpedal at a later date.

In 2001 the president promised not to stand in the next presidential 
elections, only for elections to bedelayed until 2008 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2008/08/13/angola-doubts-over-free-and-fair-elections>
, by which time Dos Santos had conveniently forgotten his earlier pronouncement.


There are also questions about the timing of the announcement, which comes in 
the midst of economic turmoil brought on by the falling price of oil 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/wires/afp/article-3429474/Angola-economy-crisis-oil-price-sinks-currency.html>
. The crisis is a clear indictment of the Dos Santos leadership: he bears 
responsibility for the fact that Angola has failed to capitalise on its 
enormous oil wealth.

We don’t believe it because it is not the first time he says that… He is still 
there, so let us wait and see
Alcides Sakala, Unita  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fangola-president-dos-santos-giving-up-power-2018-should-we-believe-him%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a9278a4f79a22ecd63bdba11830d8a3aa6cce2f%2F0_0_4256_2555%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Angola's%20president%20says%20he's%20giving%20up%2037-year%20rule.%20Should%20we%20believe%20him%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fangola-president-dos-santos-giving-up-power-2018-should-we-believe-him%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Angola%27s%20president%20says%20he%27s%20giving%20up%2037-year%20rule.%20Should%20we%20believe%20him%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fangola-president-dos-santos-giving-up-power-2018-should-we-believe-him%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a9278a4f79a22ecd63bdba11830d8a3aa6cce2f%2F0_0_4256_2555%2F4256.jpg>
 MPLA supporters attend a rally for Angolan president Jose Eduardo dos Santos 
in Kilamba Kaixi, 2012. Photograph: Stephane de Sakutin/AFP/Getty Images 
Then there’s the question of a successor: if not Dos Santos, then who? 

There is no obvious candidate to fill Dos Santos’s ageing boots, although vice 
president Manuel Vicente and Dos Santos’s son,Jose Filomeno 
<http://mg.co.za/article/2012-11-02-00-angola-whos-who-in-the-palace>, are 
likely contenders. But neither is likely to usher in dramatic change – at least 
not of their own volition.

“None of these people will find favour with an increasingly restless public, 
or with MPLA old-timers, who will resent a political newcomer being appointed 
simply because of connections with the veteran leader. So two years hence, the 
president might again present himself as the least bad option. But, at age 73, 
he must know the question cannot be put off forever,” Angola expert Justin 
Pearcetold the BBC <http://bbc.in/1Untx3d>.

Angola’s main opposition, the National Union for the Total Independence of 
Angola (Unita), is just as sceptical. “We don’t believe it because it is not 
the first time he says that… He is still there, so let us wait and see. On the 
other side, it’s true Mr Dos Santos is tired because he has been in power for 
[37] years and it’s quite a lot of time,” spokespersonAlcides Sakala told 
Voices of Africa 
<http://www.voanews.com/content/angola-leaders-plan-to-step-down-draws-skepticism-speculation/3233345.html>
.

Will he leave?

If Dos Santos does leave, his departure will have significant ramifications 
for Angola.

Key to Dos Santos’ regime has been his skilful manipulation of friend and foe 
alike. Any successor will struggle to match his political might, greatly 
increasing the potential for upheaval and unrest within the ruling elite.

Forty years on from independence, Angola still lacks freedom
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/11/angola-forty-years-on-from-independence-lacks-freedom>
The identity of Dos Santos’s chosen successor is also key. Dos Santos would be 
wise to recall the example ofEgypt’s Hosni Mubarak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/blog/2011/feb/11/egypt-hosni-mubarak-left-cairo>
, whose blatant grooming of his sonGamal Mubarak for the presidency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/12/egypt-court-hosni-mubarak-sons-gamal-alaa-release-corruption-conviction>
 played a key role in sparking the social unrest which led to the Egyptian 
revolution in 2011.

Not that stage-managed successions have to be a backward step. Sometimes, 
changing the status quo forces a rethink from within the political 
establishment that can pave the way for reform. Take Cuba, where Raul Castro’s 
economic policies are markedlymore open than his brother Fidel’s ever were 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/18/barack-obama-visit-cuba-march>
, despite being rooted in the same orthodoxy.

At this point, however, such a positive outcome seems unlikely. Angola is 
still very much Dos Santos’s baby, and perhaps it would be unwise to predict on 
any kind of change until the 73-year-old has actually been escorted out of the 
presidential palace — voluntarily or otherwise.

A version of this article first appeared on the Daily Maverick 
<http://www.dailymaverick.co.za/article/2016-03-13-angola-dos-santos-to-bid-farewell-in-2018-maybe/#.VubkrmThC3A>
 