
An Angolan court has ordered the conditional release of 17 young activists, 
including a well-known rapper, three months after they werejailed for rebellion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/28/angola-jails-17-activists-rebellion-public-book-reading>
 against long-serving president Jose Eduardo dos Santos.

Most of the group were arrested during a book club meeting in June last year, 
where one of the works under discussion was a book about nonviolent resistance 
to repressive regimes by the US political philosopher Gene Sharp.

Reading the revolution: the book club that terrified the Angolan regime
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/30/angola-book-club-dos-santos-arrests>
The activists maintained throughout their trial they were peaceful campaigners 
for the departure of dos Santos, who has been in power since 1979 and rules the 
oil-rich country with an iron fist.

“Release warrants under house arrest were issued on behalf of 17 applicants to 
be executed from the present day,” the supreme court in Luanda said in a 
statement.

The ruling overturns sentences ranging from two to eight years in prison, 
which were handed down at the end of a lengthy trial in March amid complaints 
about political repression.

One of the accused, rapper Luaty Beirao, went on hunger strike for over a month
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/16/angola-rapper-hunger-strike-luaty-beirao-interview>
 last year to protest against his detention.

Beirao, who holds dual Portuguese and Angolan nationality, has a loyal fan 
base in Portugal, Angola’s former colonial ruler.

As supporters waited for the 15 men and two women to leave prison late 
Wednesday, defence lawyer Francisco Miguel Michel said he was “very happy”.

“Any court concerned with the application of justice would have ruled the 
same,” he said, insisting his clients “committed no crime”.

Human Rights Watch researcher Zenaida Machado told AFP the ruling was “long 
overdue”.

“The order should have been given immediately after the verdict in March ... I 
am satisfied that the supreme court is upholding the law of the country,” she 
said.

Prominent independent journalist and campaigner Rafael Marques said the group 
should never have been arrested.

“Their release was a political decision as a result of public pressure,” he 
added.

In March, a Portuguese branch of the Anonymous hacking collective said it had 
shut down about 20 Angolan government websites in retaliation for the jailing, 
while at the sentencing about 30 protesters chanted for the arrest of the 
president.

Dos Santos said earlier this year he would stand down in 2018, but there was 
scepticism over whether he would do so after similar pledges in the past.

His current mandate ends at the end of next year.

Rights groups say activists in Angola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/angola>, Africa’s second-largest oil 
producer, are being increasingly targeted by the government.

The 17 were charged with “preparatory acts of rebellion” and “criminal 
conspiracy”.

Earlier this month, rallies were held in several foreign cities to mark one 
year since their arrest.
 