
A court in Angola has jailed 17 young activists, some for more than eight 
years, for rebelling against the government of José Eduardo dos Santos, after
they organised a reading of a US academic’s book 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/30/angola-book-club-dos-santos-arrests>
.

Angola's president says he's giving up 37-year rule. Should we believe him?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/14/angola-president-dos-santos-giving-up-power-2018-should-we-believe-him>
The activists were arrested in the capital, Luanda, last June after organising 
the reading of From Dictatorship to Democracy: A Conceptual Framework for 
Liberation, by Gene Sharp. The book’s blurb describes it as “a blueprint for 
non-violent resistance to repressive regimes”.


They were charged with acts of rebellion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/17/angolan-activists-charged-rebellion-state-book-reading>
, planning mass action of civil disobedience in Luanda and producing fake 
passports, among other charges. Their sentences ranged from two years and three 
months to eight years and six months.

 They were sent to jail immediately but their defence lawyer requested the 
sentences be suspended pending an appeal inAngola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/angola>’s supreme court.

 “These boys who were debating their rights are the ones they want to condemn 
but President José Eduardo who steals everything is getting protected,” the 
mother of one of the activists, Adalia Chivonde, told Reuters after the 
sentence was handed down. “This sentence is garbage for me, it means nothing.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F28%2Fangola-jails-17-activists-rebellion-public-book-reading%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1fc25230b99d37cdb63c907e866c37e03a77116%2F878_293_2066_1240%2F2066.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Angola%20jails%2017%20activists%20for%20rebellion%20after%20public%20reading%20of%20political%20book&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F28%2Fangola-jails-17-activists-rebellion-public-book-reading%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Angola%20jails%2017%20activists%20for%20rebellion%20after%20public%20reading%20of%20political%20book&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F28%2Fangola-jails-17-activists-rebellion-public-book-reading%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1fc25230b99d37cdb63c907e866c37e03a77116%2F878_293_2066_1240%2F2066.jpg>
 José Eduardo dos Santos. Photograph: Alain Jocard/AFP/Getty Images 
Forty years on from independence, Angola still lacks freedom
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/11/angola-forty-years-on-from-independence-lacks-freedom>
A halving of oil prices last year has piled hardship on Angolans as its 
currency, the kwanza, plummeted in value and the government cut public spending 
in one of the most unequal societies in the world, leading to an increase in 
anti-government sentiment.

 Human rights groups have accused Dos Santos of using the judiciary to crush 
dissent. Angola’s state secretary for human rights said last year the country 
needed to restore trust in its justice system.

A prominent human rights activist, José Marcos Mavungo, was sentenced to six 
years in prison last year for an “attack on the sovereignty of the Angolan 
state” after he organised anti-government protests in the northern oil region 
of Cabinda.

 Dos Santos has been in power for 37 years but announced earlier this month 
that he planned to step down in 2018 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/14/angola-president-dos-santos-giving-up-power-2018-should-we-believe-him>
.

 