
Angola was declared polio-free 
<http://www.portalangop.co.ao/angola/en_us/noticias/saude/2016/2/9/Moxico-Angola-eligible-for-WHO-polio-free-certificate,08b566bf-0d4c-486a-9283-d9f8b98fa4c1.html>
 by the World Health Organisation (WHO) in December – a public health triumph. 
It set the stage for a similar declaration in Nigeria, a major landmark in the
global battle against this disabling disease 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/11/africa-year-free-polio-giant-step-towards-eradication>
.

But while Angolan officials are rightly proud of the declaration, the recent 
yellow fever outbreak 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2016/03/150-killed-angola-yellow-fever-outbreak-160318134708459.html>
 in the southern African country underscores the challenges governments and 
public health workers face as they seek to expand routine immunisation 
programmes that save lives.

The problems and barriers to immunisation are well known – as are the 
solutions. But what has been lacking is the political will to devote the money 
and manpower needed to make it all work. These hurdles are likely to grow as 
both Angola and Nigeria, which only recently reaped huge oil windfalls, face 
drastic belt-tightening in the face ofcollapsing world energy prices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/13/africa-oil-giants-anxious-times-commodities-boom-oil-metals>
.

Polio cases could be wiped out within 12 months, says World Health Organisation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/11/polio-cases-wiped-out-12-months-world-health-organisation-pakistan>
The yellow fever outbreak in Angola, which has killed more than 240 people 
<http://www.afro.who.int/index.php?option=com_docman&task=doc_download&gid=10118&Itemid=2593>
, emphasises the need to reinforce the WHO’s expanded programme on 
immunisation, even in countries that are making sustained progress against 
polio. Cases of yellow fever have also been detected across the border in the 
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where21 people have died 
<http://www.who.int/csr/don/11-april-2016-yellow-fever-drc/en/> since January.

Yellow fever and polio infections are both of viral origins and do share a 
common risk factor – the environment. While polio istransmitted predominantly 
from poorly disposed faecal waste 
<http://www.polioeradication.org/polioandprevention.aspx>, yellow fever is 
transmitted by the bite of an infected mosquito 
<http://www.who.int/csr/disease/yellowfev/en/> – most commonly Aedes aeqypti.

The resurgence of yellow fever is directly attributable to a sharp drop in 
health funding. The government’s revised budget for health this year is about 
33% lower than its allocation in 2015, making vaccines more difficult to 
purchase.Spending was also slashed 
<http://www.ipsnews.net/2016/03/angola-battles-yellow-fever-outbreak> for 
public sanitation and mosquito control, leaving piles of uncollected waste 
lying around in poorer areas – fertile conditions for viruses to breed and 
spread.

Both polio and yellow fever can be prevented with vaccination. Angola reported 
its last polio case in July 2011 <http://www.unicef.org/media/media_65516.html>
. But public health expertswarn 
<http://www.polioeradication.org/Keycountries/Angola/Angolastrategy.aspx> that 
the country remains at risk as high numbers of children fail to receive the 
oral polio vaccine (OPV). And Angola has been here before: the country wiped 
out polio in 2001, but the diseasere-emerged 
<http://www.unicef.org/media/media_65516.html> in 2005.

Polio <https://www.theguardian.com/society/polio> remains a devastating and 
potentially fatal infectious disease. Although there is no cure, there are safe 
and effective vaccines. As long as the wild polio virus, which can cause 
lifelong paralysis or even death, circulates anywhere on the globe, all 
polio-free countries risk reinfection through an “importation” of the virus.

Nigeria, the last country with polio cases in Africa, was removed from the 
list of endemic countries 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2015/nigeria-polio/en/> in 
September after more than a year of zero confirmed cases of wild polio virus. 
Now only two countries,Afghanistan and Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/05/pakistan-afghanistan-join-forces-to-wipe-out-polio-taliban>
, have endemic polio.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fangola-yellow-fever-outbreak-shows-that-funding-vaccines-is-critical%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1aef7aefc3b6613ba00d8608741b71766ae216f5%2F0_0_4355_3033%2F4355.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Angola's%20yellow%20fever%20outbreak%20shows%20funding%20vaccines%20is%20critical%20%7C%20Sam%20Agbo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fangola-yellow-fever-outbreak-shows-that-funding-vaccines-is-critical%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Angola%27s%20yellow%20fever%20outbreak%20shows%20funding%20vaccines%20is%20critical%20%7C%20Sam%20Agbo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fangola-yellow-fever-outbreak-shows-that-funding-vaccines-is-critical%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1aef7aefc3b6613ba00d8608741b71766ae216f5%2F0_0_4355_3033%2F4355.jpg>
 A child in Luanda, Angola, is given a yellow fever vaccine. Photograph: Joost 
de Raeymaeker/EPA 
But, as yellow fever demonstrates, the endgame will be hard fought. The 
government needs to show its commitment by investing at least $60 (£42.50) per 
child per year as well as earmarking significant funds to support newborn and 
child health; as opposed to its current investment of less than 15% (2001 Abuja 
target <http://www.who.int/healthsystems/publications/abuja_declaration/en/>) 
of its national annual budget to health. This investment could help to ensure 
that at least 90% of Angolans are fully vaccinated by their first birthday – 
sparing them the risk of both yellow fever and polio, among a host of other 
communicable diseases.

Vaccines don’t just save lives – their benefits extend far beyond health. When 
children are vaccinated, they have fewer illnesses, which ultimately leads to 
reduced healthcare costs for families and the health system. Vaccinated 
children are more likely to stay in school, strengthening the economic outlook 
for themselves and their communities. Vaccines are relatively cheap and 
amazingly effective.

We can turn this yellow fever outbreak into an opportunity by redoubling 
efforts to improve the overall vaccination programme. Yellow fever kills an
estimated <http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs100/en/> 60,000 people 
globally each year, and because it is carried by mosquitoes it is not a quick 
target for total eradication. But polio is – and vaccines are getting us there.

 * Dr Sam Agbo is chief of survival and development for Unicef Angola  