 Last week we met Xanana Gusmao, the East Timorese leader, who was then under 
house arrest in Jakarta. Now released, he is currently under the protection of 
the British embassy. When we met him, he was cautious. He thought that when 
President Habibie made the offer of independence to East Timor, he may not have 
been serious and that all along there were covert plans to ensure a victory for 
Indonesia by devious means.
Many in Indonesia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia> and 
particularly the military, do not accept what they see as its Balkanisation. 
Xanana criticised what he and others saw as the flawed agreement made by the 
United Nations with the Indonesian government. In the event of violence there 
should have been arrangements for armed peacekeepers on the ground.

In addition, as I suggested to Robin Cook, the foreign secretary, in May, it 
was essential to disarm the militia before the referendum over which the 
politicians seem to have no control. The military, after all, want to teach 
provinces such as Aceh and Irian Jaya, who might also seek independence, a 
salutary lesson if East Timor descends into genocide.

Ten years earlier I had last been in East Timor with a parliamentary 
delegation officially visiting Indonesia. President Suharto, beaming benignly, 
told us we were to be the first visiting MPs to East Timor since the 1975 
invasion. East Timor, he assured us, was an open book. Indonesia had nothing to 
hide.

At the Becora prison in Dili I met Alexel Guterres, one of the political 
prisoners mentioned in Amnesty's 1989 report. He described his brutal torture 
by the military. Others were held where the Red Cross had no access. Violence, 
torture and rape was common practice. Bishop Belo, a Nobel peace prizewinner, 
had written to the UN calling for a referendum on East Timor. We were not 
allowed to meet him.

When I spoke at the UN decolonisation committee in New York to argue for that 
referendum, Indonesian government representatives heckled me: "You are a liar."

Two years later, a peaceful funeral procession was headed for the Santa Cruz 
cemetery in Dili, to place flowers on the grave of a young Timorese, who was 
shot by the troops. The troops opened fire again. At least 273 people were 
killed .

The Santa Cruz massacre was one in a long, tragic history of death and 
atrocity that has engulfed the people of East Timor since their country was 
invaded and illegally occupied by Indonesia in 1975.

The vote on August 30 was a historic moment. East Timorese came out in massive 
numbers, defying threats and intimidation. Everyone here knew that the most 
dangerous time would be after the declaration of the result. East Timorese and 
Indonesian forces opposed to independence had made repeated threats to attack 
and kill pro-independence leaders and supporters and UN personnel.

We heard much evidence of active collaboration between the military and its 
militia. There are at least an estimated 14,000 Indonesian troops in East 
Timor. They could easily control the militia if the will was there.

In the meantime, the British government should muscle in on the Indonesian 
government. We have, after all, supported extended credit to the Indonesians in 
the international financial institutions; we have underwritten, through export 
credit guarantees, about £1.8bn worth of exports including £800m worth of arms 
sales. We are continuing to invite them to buy more arms, though we have no 
control over their end use; and we refused to revoke the previous licences 
given.

Robin Cook argues that none of the arms Labour has sold have been used in East 
Timor. What about the weapons used on the streets of Jakarta? What about Aceh 
and Irian Jaya? And now we have taken the words of the same government that it 
would guarantee security for all in East Timor. What a mammoth miscalculation 
for the brave people there!

The UN and the international community already have the blood of the people of 
Rwanda on its conscience. It must not twiddle its thumbs while another Rwanda 
unfolds, hour by hour, in East Timor.

 Ann Clwyd <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ann-clwyd>, Labour MP for 
Cynon Valley, chairs the Parliamentary Human Rights Group. She was accompanied 
to East Timor by MPs Alice Mahon and Jeremy Corbyn
 