
Any anthropologist feels pleased when the hidden peoples of the world get a 
chance to appear on television, but Tribal Wives is misleading. The episode I 
watched last week followed a British woman called Karen who spent a month with 
the Huaorani tribe in Ecuador. You wouldn't know it, but this village is a 
well-known eco-tourism destination. So Karen is not going to an isolated, 
hidden community. They've got an airstrip in the middle of the village! Scores 
of westerners go there every year.

The fundamental stance of anthropology is to listen to the native point of 
view. This film claims to be a window on another world, but the Huaorani point 
of view doesn't come over at all. We do learn a lot about what it means to be a 
westerner in that situation, and Karen is extremely thoughtful and determined 
to learn all about this way of life.

One of the purposes of anthropology on TV is to portray different perspectives 
on what it is to be human. But a show like this operates on the pretence that 
someone in search of a romantic attachment can find an equivalent desire in an 
entirely different culture.

Karen is supposedly going out to discover if she can change her life, but the 
film stops as soon as she leaves the village. They should talk to her six 
months later to see if she really has changed. Instead, we get a romantic 
notion of a Shangri-La. The idea that we have lost something that only the 
"savage" can teach us is hardly new. A serious series about what marriage means 
in different parts of the world would have been far more interesting.

Frankly, the only reason this show works at all is because the volunteers are 
women. If they called it Tribal Husbands, and featured 48-year-old men going to 
Ecuador to find a bride, just imagine the squeals.

· Michael Stewart is a social anthropologist at University College, London. 

· Tribal Wives is on BB2 at 9pm Wednesdays.
 