
Roe v Wade wasn’t overruled in the 1992 US supreme court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/us-supreme-court> case Planned Parenthood v 
Casey, but the justices did give states the power to regulate and restrict the 
procedure. In the years since, many states did make abortion much harder to 
obtain without officially outlawing it. But the pro-life movement means to push 
until restrictions turn into bans. And as the electoral primaries heat up, it’s 
becoming clear that that radicalism has moved into the mainstream in the 
Republican Party.

The latest anti-choice move: try to take custody of a woman's fetus | Jessica 
Valenti
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/31/the-latest-anti-abortion-move-alabama-custody-fetus>
The most obvious example of this was from the candidate debate on Thursday. 
Moderator Megyn Kelly asked Wisconsin governor Scott Walker, “You recently 
signed an abortion law in Wisconsin that does have an exception for the 
mother’s life,” shequeried 
<http://www.msnbc.com/msnbc/gop-candidates-ban-abortion-no-exceptions>, “but 
you’re on the record as having objected to it. Would you really let a mother 
die rather than have an abortion, and with 83% of the American public in favor 
of a life exception, are you too out of the mainstream on this issue to win the 
general election?”

Walker was given a chance to evade or repudiate his extreme position, perhaps 
by merely expressing support for the law he signed. In what is a credit to his 
integrity (although not his humanity), Walker held firm to his extremist 
position: “I believe that that is an unborn child that’s in need of protection 
out there, and I’ve said many a time that that unborn child can be protected, 
and there are many other alternatives that can also protect the life of that 
mother.”

It’s is almost impossible to overstate how radical and indefensible Walker’s 
position is. His argument that there are “alternatives” to abortion when a 
pregnancy is life-threatening ispure gibberish 
<http://thinkprogress.org/health/2015/08/07/3689094/extreme-abortion-rhetoric-debate/>
. The draconian bans common in the period before the supreme court’s 1973 
decision in Roe v Wade almost always included an exemption for the life of the 
mother. (The Texas statute at issue in the case did.) Even Catholic doctrine
makes an exception 
<https://reason.com/blog/2015/08/07/scott-walker-life-of-fetus-more-importan> 
for the life of the mother. And as Kelly observed, Walker’s position is 
massively unpopular, and for good reason: the idea that a woman should be 
coerced by the state to carry a pregnancy to term even at the risk of her life 
is the purest barbarism.

The law Walker signed was radical enough, banning abortions after 20 weeks, 
even in cases of rape and incest, although second trimester abortions remain 
constitutionally protected under Planned Parenthood v Casey. And Senate 
majority leader Mitch McConnellviews 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/10/texas-abortion-law-supreme-court>
 the Wisconsin statute as a national model.

Nor is Walker an outlier. Consider Mike Huckabee, the former Arkansas 
governor. In his 2008 bid for the presidency – which peaked with winning the 
Iowa caucus before flaming out – Huckabee ran as a relatively affable social 
conservative. That approach having failed, Huckabee’s approach this time seems 
to be to appeal to voters who consider Donald Trump excessively tactful and 
cool-tempered. His over-the-top-all-the-time approach has definitely extended 
to reproductive rights – in late July, hemused about 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/mike-huckabee-troops-abortion_55bbc20ee4b06363d5a22323>
 sending federal troops to stop women from having abortions.

Huckabee was true to form in the first debate. Scoffing at the idea of merely 
defunding Planned Parenthood, Huckabee advocated a truly “bold” idea: “I think 
the next president ought to invoke the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments to the 
constitution now that we clearly know that that baby inside the mother’s womb 
is a person at the moment of conception.”

If taken seriously, the idea that the fetus is a “person” under the Fifth and 
Fourteenth Amendments would mean that a woman who obtained an abortion and a 
doctor who performed one would be guilty of first-degree murder in all 50 
states and under federal law. If Huckabee doesn’t mean this, it’s not clear 
what he does mean, but it would certainly be nothing good for American women.

Granted, Mike Huckabee is not going to be the Republican candidate for 
president. But Marco Rubio might be, and he denied last week that he had ever 
supported a rape or incest exception to abortion laws. “What I have advocated 
is that we pass law in this country that says all human life at every stage of 
its development is worthy of protection,” he told the audience. “In fact, I 
think that law already exists. It is called the Constitution of the United 
States.”

The anti-Planned Parenthood videos fail to make a case against abortion | 
Scott Lemieux
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/28/anti-planned-parenthood-videos-abortion>
It’s not news that Rubio disagrees with reproductive freedom – he opposed 
<http://www.politico.com/news/stories/0809/25788.html> Obama supreme court 
nominee Sonia Sotomayor because of his opposition not only to Roe v Wade but to 
any constitutional right to privacy. Indeed, Rubiointroduced a 20-week abortion 
ban 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/07/02/marco-rubio-abortion_n_3537494.html> 
while asserting that while science doesn’t prove that the climate is warming, 
it does prove that “life begins at conception.” It’s worth noting that this 
position puts him far to the right of justices Antonin Scalia and Clarence 
Thomas, who have held that while the Constitution does not protect a woman’s 
right to choose, it does not make a fetus a legal person. This theory also 
repudiates theclassic Republican evasion 
<http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/2005/07/overturning-roe-will-not-return-the-issue-to-the-states>
, the argument that they wish to overrule Roe v Wade merely to “send the issue 
back to the states.”

Followers of policy at the state level could see all this coming. Opponents of 
reproductive freedom, especially in the reddest states, are no longer satisfied 
with merely making abortion less accessible (especially for poor and rural 
women). They want it all. And those awful ideas from the state level are 
floating to the top. Some of the frontrunner Republicans are explicit about 
wanting women to have even fewer reproductive rights than 19th-century American 
women did.

American women, then, face a stark choice. Two of the frontrunners would seek 
to extinguish a woman’s right to choose entirely. If Scott Walker had his way, 
women who get pregnant would potentially face a state-imposed death sentence. 
Given that the next president could be in a position to replace Supreme Court 
justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Stephen Breyer – two of the members of the 
razor-thin five-vote majority supportingRoe v Wade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/roe-v-wade> – Americans who don’t want to 
return women to the reproductive dark ages should vote accordingly come 
November.

 