
Protesters across the US are gearing up for weekend demonstrations over the 
election ofDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, as 
other activists begin work on plans to disrupt the Republican’s inauguration in 
Washington early next year.

White House taken into uncharted territory by Trump's conflicts of interest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/donald-trump-conflicts-of-interest-business>
Rowdy protests against Trump and his divisive campaign have spread to cities 
all over the country following his victory on Tuesday, leading to dozens of 
arrests and a complaint from Trump in one of his first public remarks as 
president-elect.

On Friday night in Portland <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/portland>, 
Orgeon, an unidentified man was wounded at 12.45am local time, as he and dozens 
of other protesters crossed Morrison Bridge during one of a number of 
demonstrations. Police said in a statement a man got out of a vehicle on the 
bridge, confronted and then shot the protester, who was taken to hospital with 
non-life threatening injuries. The suspect was still at large, police said.

Earlier in the night, for the second night in a row, Portland protesters 
blocked traffic and threw objects at police dressed in riot gear who responded 
with pepper spray and flash-bang devices. At one point, police pushed 
protesters back and appeared to take at least one person into custody, 
according to footage on a local NBC affiliate.

Hundreds marched in the streets of Los Angeles, blocking traffic as they waved 
signs and chanted “We reject the president elect” and “Whose streets? Our 
streets”.

Several thousand activists marched through downtown Miami, with a few hundred 
making their way onto a highway, halting traffic in both directions.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fanti-trump-protests-continue-across-us-cities-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anti-Trump%20protests%20continue%20across%20US%20cities%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fanti-trump-protests-continue-across-us-cities-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anti-Trump%20protests%20continue%20across%20US%20cities%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fanti-trump-protests-continue-across-us-cities-video&media=>
Anti-Trump protests continue across US cities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/12/anti-trump-protests-continue-across-us-cities-video>
In New York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>, demonstrators 
again gathered in Washington Square Park and by Trump Tower on Fifth Avenue. 
More than 10,000 people signed up to attend a noon march on Saturday from Union 
Square to Trump Tower, the future president’s home and corporate headquarters. 
Several other actions are planned for other cities.

“Join us in the streets! Stop Trump and his bigoted agenda,” the organizers of 
the New York event said in a Facebook post.


Trump complained 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/796900183955095552> in a tweet late 
on Thursday that “professional protesters, incited by the media” were 
tarnishing his electoral success, which he said was “very unfair”. Amid intense 
criticism, Trump said hours laterin a second post 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/797034721075228672> that he 
appreciated the “passion for our great country” shown by demonstrators.

Activists expressed determination to build momentum for major activity on 20 
January, when Trump will officially enter the White House.

A “million women” march on the capital is being planned for the day of Trump’s 
inauguration, amid intense anger that the next US president allegedly sexually 
assaulted multiple women andboasted of doing so in a leaked recording 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
.

A timeline of Donald Trump's alleged sexual misconduct: who, when and what
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/13/list-of-donald-trump-sexual-misconduct-allegations>
Leftwing and anarchist groups were also making plans for protests in 
Washington on inauguration day, according to flyers circulating online, raising 
the prospect of chaotic scenes as Trump takes the oath of office.

Other activists were biding their time before mounting a response to Trump’s 
election. Patrisse Cullors, one of the founders of Black Lives Matter, said 
their movement was “grieving and mourning” following the result.

“We are bringing folks together to imagine what kinds of organizing we will 
need to do under a Trump presidency,” said Cullors. “I do think we can organize 
as we have been, and build something bigger and stronger than the hate Trump 
and his team have exhibited towards marginalized communities.”


From Thursday night into Friday, thousands of people took to the streets in 
Denver, Minneapolis, Milwaukee, Portland, Oakland and several other US cities, 
as well as Vancouver, Canada. The protests were mostly peaceful and orderly, 
though there were scattered acts of civil disobedience and damage to property.

The rowdiest scenes were in Portland, where about 4,000 people marched into 
the city centre late on Thursday. At least 29 people were arrested after 
protesters threw objects at officers, smashed shop windows and damaged a car 
dealership, the Portland police department said, declaring the demonstration a 
riot. Officers used pepper spray and rubber projectiles to disperse the crowd, 
the department added.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fanti-trump-protests-weekend-new-york-trump-tower%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F024131172cdf020dee8eb6c2ff8530d7b7555693%2F0_235_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anti-Trump%20protesters%20gear%20up%20for%20weekend%20demonstrations%20across%20the%20US&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fanti-trump-protests-weekend-new-york-trump-tower%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anti-Trump%20protesters%20gear%20up%20for%20weekend%20demonstrations%20across%20the%20US&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fanti-trump-protests-weekend-new-york-trump-tower%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F024131172cdf020dee8eb6c2ff8530d7b7555693%2F0_235_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Protesters in Portland, Oregon, on the night of Thursday 10 November. 
Photograph: STRINGER/Reuters 
In Minneapolis, dozens of people marched on to Interstate 94, blocking traffic 
in both directions for at least an hour as police stood by. A smaller band of 
demonstrators briefly halted traffic on a busy Los Angeles highway before 
police cleared them off.


Baltimore police reported that about 600 people marched through the Inner 
Harbor area, with some blocking roadways by sitting in the street. Two people 
were arrested, police said. One of the largest demonstrations was in Denver, 
where a crowd estimated to number about 3,000 gathered on the grounds of the 
Colorado state capitol and marched through the city centre.

Earlier in the day, high school students staged walkouts across the country, 
including in Los Angeles and San Francisco

Elsewhere on Thursday, hundreds protested in Salt Lake City, Utah 
<https://twitter.com/AshleyMoser/status/796895558505897984>; San Francisco; 
Houston, Texas; and inWashington DC 
<https://twitter.com/tatzanx/status/796901212931112960>, where about 100 
protesters marched from the White House to Donald Trump’s newly opened hotel 
several blocks away.

At least 200 people rallied there after dark, many of them chanting “No hate! 
No fear! Immigrants are welcome here!” and carrying signs with such slogans as 
“Impeach Trump” and “Not my president”.


“I can’t support someone who supports so much bigotry and hatred. It’s 
heart-breaking,” said 25-year-old Joe Daniels from Virginia.

While protesters marched against Trump, at least one group was preparing to 
take to the streets in celebration. The Loyal White Knights of the Ku Klux Klan 
said on their website they would be holding a “victory parade” in North 
Carolina next month. Men in KKK-style white hoods were seen walking in the 
state on the morning after Trump was elected.

 