
On drawings and photographs, it looks almost funny. At the end of the stripped 
classical facade of the Beaumont Hotel in Mayfair – an interwar building 
originally designed as a garage – sits a cubic, humanoid figure occupying most 
of one wing of the structure. There has been some attempt to integrate it with 
the stone facade but the gap is still obvious. The figure appears to be 
squatting, folding its arms and staring, blank-faced, like a muted, reduced 
version of an ancient Assyrian sculpture, hieratic, pompous and faintly silly. 
It's even sillier when you realise that this is not merely a sculpture but 
actually a hotel room – and not by any sculptor, but the sculptor who has 
presided over the past 20 years of public art in Britain:Antony Gormley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/jun/10/antony-gormley-room-sculpture-beaumont-hotel>
.

Such a radical shift from the nominally public, all those enigmatic figures 
lurking in "regenerated" public spaces 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/feb/24/gormley-google-public-art-schools>
, to the spectacularly private – a luxury Mayfair hotel room as sculpture – 
may, if nothing else, be indicative of the directions certain kinds of art are 
going to have to take now that public funding has been switched off. You can 
stay, for the expected exorbitant fee, inside the Beaumont Hotel sculpture; the 
bedroom is in the head. The public may get to see inside on open days, but 
otherwise this is strictly for those curious enough to want to stay for the 
night inside Antony Gormley. It's quite the metamorphosis for an artist who has 
been so prominent in actual public space.

The first of Gormley's major public sculptures – Iron: Man 
<http://birminghammatch.tumblr.com/post/695236496/ironman> – was erected in 
1993, but so prescient of the New Labour era that you could easily expect it to 
have been put there 10 years later. It is a metal figure modelled, as is usual 
for Gormley, on the artist's own body, standing in front of the Roman temple of 
Birmingham town hall.

Like much of the public art of the 90s and 00s it is conspicuous for being at 
once notably "high" – classical and austere in proportion, serene of 
countenance, lacking in obvious rhetoric – and "low" in the abundance of local 
reference, ranging from a deliberate evocation of Brum's historic metal trades 
to theBlack Sabbath reference of its title 
<http://www.birminghampost.co.uk/whats-on/music/birmingham-birthplace-of-heavy-metal-4031445>
; the metal man stands in the home also of heavy metal. Accordingly, it was 
uniquely capable of satisfying most possible tastes and prejudices, quite a 
feat in the box-ticking world of public art.

Then, for 15 years or so, it seemed the slim, faceless, cast-iron body of 
Gormley was everywhere. With outspread wings, asThe Angel of the North 
<https://www.theguardian.com/arts/pictures/image/0,8543,-10105043771,00.html>, 
he heralded regeneration on the approach road to Gateshead. AtCrosby beach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2009/jun/06/antony-gormley-coastline-crosby-merseyside-walk>
 in Merseyside, 100 of him stand gazing at the sea, in the sea, half-buried by 
sand or gradually overtaken by barnacles; at the temporaryEvent Horizon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/arts/gallery/2007/may/03/art> in London, for a 
summer 31 Gormleys stared out from various prominent London locations.

Even the moves away from the cast-iron figure still gave off a sense of 
unnerving ubiquity, as atQuantum Cloud 
<http://www.lusas.com/case/civil/gormley.html>, near the Millennium Dome (as 
was), where a flurry of steel shards can be seen, if you look closely enough, 
to delineate that same looming figure.

Any corporation would envy Gormley's branding skills – and he was to be repaid 
by the most sincere form of flattery, when imitated at various lesser 
regeneration sites, where Gormleyesque figures would try to be as enigmatic as 
the man himself.

The money is not there any more for such projects – the regional development 
agencies that helped fund them were abolished, and the Arts Council suffered 
heavy cuts. So instead of standing in a Birmingham square, on a mundane 
Merseyside beach or on the way to Gateshead, Gormley's figures now become 
basically private entities, things that can only truly be explored by those who 
can afford it.

Sir Antony Gormley 
<http://www.liverpoolecho.co.uk/news/liverpool-news/crosby-beach-iron-men-creator-6993473>
 had become theSir Thomas Brock  <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thomas_Brock>of 
the 21st century, his alternately sententious and populist works saying as much 
about the aspirations of New Labour's optimistic, vacuous culture asBrock's 
Venuses and Victorias <http://www.victorianweb.org/sculpture/brock/salaman.html>
 said about the sickness and pomposity of empire.

It's only appropriate he would adapt to the new climate, where what is left of 
the public is enthusiastically eviscerated in favour of an ever more confident 
plutocracy. For once, the figure is not visibly that of the artist himself but 
of a much more reduced, angular body: still recognisable as human, but only 
just.

• This article was amended on 17 June 2014 because an earlier version said 
there were 20 statues on Crosby beach. This has been corrected to say 100.
 