
Standing on a granite precipice, with the churning Bristol Channel stretching 
out endlessly before him,Antony Gormley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gormley> throws his arms wide. “Isn’t 
it utterly magical?” he roars into a gale force wind so strong it almost knocks 
the breath from you. “You feel like all the silliness of the world has just 
been blown out of you.” Laughing, I follow his lead and throw out my limbs, 
letting my body be battered by the elements. But Gormley is already off, 
bounding with admirable agility down the treacherous path to get a better view 
of the nesting birds below us.

We have only been together on Lundy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/aug/18/country-diary-lundy-1964>, 
the tiny former Norse settlement 12 miles off the coast of Devon, for less than 
an hour but one thing has become apparent. While Gormley’s sculptures have, for 
almost four decades, been firmly rooted in the physicality of the human body, 
he finds the natural world in its raw, untameable form just as intoxicating. He 
grabs armfuls of the white granite pebbles at our feet, marvelling at their 
milky colour; runs his hands over the rough lichen coating the rocks; and 
delightedly walks me over to a drystone wall where ancient ivy had grown into 
strange pointed shapes “like penises blowing in the wind”. Later, in the 
evening, he insists we collect wood to build a fire, and takes to breaking 
fallen branches with the enthusiasm of a huntsman.

I haven’t just come to this stark granite outpost to admire the view, though. 
The three-mile-long island recently became home to a work from the sculptor’s 
latest series, Land. A modernist figure, of human height and made from stacked 
cubes of weathered iron, the piece was installed right on the edge of the 
island, peering westwards over Lundy’s dramatic natural landmark,Devil’s 
Limekiln <http://www.lundy.org.uk/tour/location.php?loc=3>. The sculpture is 
one of five body forms that Gormley has erected across the UK to mark the 50th 
anniversary of theLandmark Trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/nov/06/antony-gormley-sculptures-landmark-trust>
, which rescues buildings of historical merit and repurposes them by renting 
them out. As well as the west-facing figure on Lundy, Gormley has crafted a 
bodily sculpture to stand on three other isolated coastal spots:Saddell Beach 
<http://www.landmarktrust.org.uk/search-and-book/properties/saddell-castle-11597/>
 on the Mull of Kintyre (facing east),Clavell Tower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2008/aug/29/architecture.heritage> on 
Dorset’s Jurassic Coast (facing south) and theMartello Tower 
<http://www.landmarktrust.org.uk/search-and-book/properties/martello-tower-9317>
 in Aldeburgh (facing north).

I want these sculptures to be markers, 21st-century standing stones
Antony Gormley 
They are, he says, places “potent” for contemplation, where the sculptures and 
any visitors stand fully exposed to the natural elements and the expansive 
horizon. One final sculpture will be placed inland, looking down into the canal 
lock atLengthsman’s cottage in Warwickshire 
<http://www.landmarktrust.org.uk/our-landmarks/properties/lengthsmans-cottage-3703/>
, a nod to the exploitation of nature for industrial means. “In many senses, I 
want these sculptures to be markers, 21st-century standing stones,” says 
Gormley. “Rather than being representative or narrative, I just want them to be 
catalysts for retrospection.”

Indeed, as we first reach the figure on Lundy, Gormley insists we just sit on 
the clifftop in contemplative silence. With the distractions of phone and 3G 
signal a resolute 12 miles away, I oblige and together we perch at the feet of 
the sculpture, following its gaze westwards. For 10 minutes, neither of us 
exchanges a word.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Fantony-gormley-sculpture-lundy-landmark-trust%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F5%2F1430841444413%2F6f716544-06cc-4418-ac71-7a795bffe202-1330x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Antony%20Gormley%3A%20'I%20am%20beginning%20to%20learn%20how%20to%20make%20sculpture'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Fantony-gormley-sculpture-lundy-landmark-trust%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Antony%20Gormley%3A%20%27I%20am%20beginning%20to%20learn%20how%20to%20make%20sculpture%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Fantony-gormley-sculpture-lundy-landmark-trust%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F5%2F1430841444413%2F6f716544-06cc-4418-ac71-7a795bffe202-1330x2040.jpeg>
 Antony Gormley. Photograph: Stephen White 
It is only later, when we take shelter from the wind in the top of the 
island’s old lighthouse and sit in two shabby deckchairs sharing a bar of 
chocolate and some mixed nuts, that Gormley elaborates on why he took on the 
project. “I just love the philosophy of the Landmark Trust, that idea that 
these rural and isolated places – that would otherwise have fallen into disuse 
– suddenly become imaginative spaces. You can come and live in a lighthouse 
like you’ve always wanted to. I’m interested in the future but I think the 
future is made by an engagement with what has been.”

The relationship between past and present preoccupies these five Land 
sculptures: they’re rooted in Britain’s industrial heritage – yet also address 
the current restlessness of the human condition. He is vocal in his disdain for 
the “perfect and shiny” work of his contemporaries such asJeff Koons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/koons>, describing them as a “road to 
nowhere” as they are so distanced from real life.

“I am aware that many of the things I used to make this work are in peril,” he 
says. “We have outsourced English language, we no longer build ships, we no 
longer build locomotives, we no longer believe we should be making things. I 
think it is a profound mistake that we have accepted this secondhand world. I’m 
shocked we have let our manufacturing industry decline to the level it has. I 
wonder what we lose when we no longer make things?”

Sculpture <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/sculpture> and the 
implicit silence of sculpture have, he says, a vital role to play in society 
today, where moments of uninterrupted self-reflection are rare, which is why he 
insisted on those 10 minutes of silence when I first encountered the statue. 
“The reason I was so keen we didn’t fill the time and space with words was 
because I want this to be about experiencing something beyond that,” he says. 
“With Land, I’m more interested in people just stumbling across these works and 
thinking, ‘What the hell is this thing doing here?’ This then leads to that 
reciprocal question, ‘What am I doing here?’” He pauses. “We spend so much of 
the time on our smartphones, engaged in this easy communication which isn’t 
really communication at all. Communication is touching and feeling and 
registering and I think that’s what sculpture is good for.” Laughing, he adds: 
“Sculpture is the absolute antithesis to a selfie.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Fantony-gormley-sculpture-lundy-landmark-trust%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F5%2F1430841540243%2Faa4795de-b917-4003-abda-021a32b0f6cf-2060x1158.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Antony%20Gormley%3A%20'I%20am%20beginning%20to%20learn%20how%20to%20make%20sculpture'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Fantony-gormley-sculpture-lundy-landmark-trust%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Antony%20Gormley%3A%20%27I%20am%20beginning%20to%20learn%20how%20to%20make%20sculpture%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Fantony-gormley-sculpture-lundy-landmark-trust%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F5%2F1430841540243%2Faa4795de-b917-4003-abda-021a32b0f6cf-2060x1158.jpeg>
 The Land figure at Saddell Bay, Argyll and Bute. Photograph: Landmark Trust 
Despite his aversion to such shallow distractions, Gormley has come to embrace 
technology in his creative process. While he still uses his own body as the 
basis of all his sculpture, instead of moulding himself through a laborious 
process of Vaseline, clingfilm and plaster as he has famously done throughout 
his career, he now uses an advanced 3D scanner to build the form. It has 
revolutionised his work, he says, allowing him more flexibility with how to 
pose his pieces.

It may be our arcadian backdrop, or the fact that he has just returned from 
installing a show in the idyllic 16th-centuryForte di Belvedere 
<http://museicivicifiorentini.comune.fi.it/en/fortebelvedere/> in Florence, but 
for a man who has battled accusations of pandering to populism throughout his 
career, Gormley seems at 64 to have made his peace with his craft. “I am only 
beginning to recognise what sculpture can do and it is very humbling. When I 
see the reactions I have had from people on Lundy, having been here less than 
24 hours, it is extraordinary. It proves you don’t need the gallery or the 
catalogue or the explanatory label. It’s simply about people looking at 
something and it changing the way they feel.”

Placing a last piece of chocolate in his mouth with a soft smile, Gormley 
says: “I think I am beginning to learn how to make sculpture.”

• Land runs until May 2016. A ‘golden weekend’ takes place at each of the five 
sites on 16 and 17 May;landmarktrust.org.uk <http://www.landmarktrust.org.uk/>
 