
Poles living in Britain are so anxious about their right to remain after 
Brexit that they are failing to report hate crimes, according to the head of 
the Polish Social and Cultural Association.

Joanna Młudzińska, who will give evidence on Tuesday to a home affairs select 
committeeinquiry on the issue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/14/uk-hate-crime-inquiry-yvette-cooper-prejudice-brexit-trump-campaigns>
, said EU nationalsfelt so disenfranchised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/12/end-brexit-uncertainty-for-eu-citizens-in-the-uk-report-urges>
 at being used as “pawns” in Brexit negotiations that they were opting to keep 
a low profile, rather than contact the authorities.

The situation has become so acute that the London-based East European Resource 
Centre (EERC) is launching a pilot scheme to encourage EU nationals to report 
hate crimes.

Młudzińska, who was born in London to Polish parents, said the government’s 
failure to clarify the standing of the UK’s 2.9 million EU citizens was 
“immoral” and was putting Polish and other EU migrants living in Britain in an 
impossible position.

“Very few people are reporting hate crimes at the moment. People are very 
scared, because often this occurs in the workplace and they are scared they 
might lose their job. Or it’s from a neighbour and they don’t want to cause 
more problems.” Młudzińska added: “They can’t turn around and say: ‘No, I don’t 
have to go home because your government has said I am allowed to stay.’ That 
puts you in a weaker position, doesn’t it? It makes people vulnerable. It makes 
them scared to stand up for themselves, to properly report things.”

Last year the number of Polish-born UK residents was estimated at 831,000, 
making Poles the largest overseas-born group in the country and Polish the
second most 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/28/poland-pm-beata-szydlo-theresa-may-teaching-polish-uk-schools>
 spoken language in England.

Various agencies have documented that incidents of hate crime soared in the 
aftermath of June’s EU referendum vote. On Friday, a 15-year-old boyappeared in 
Chelmsford youth court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/06/boy-charged-manslaughter-polish-arkadiusz-jozwik-essex>
 charged with the manslaughter of a Polish man who was attacked in Essex weeks 
after the UK voted to leave the EU.

The death of Arkadiusz Jóźwik, 40, in Harlow was initially reported as a 
possible hate crime, becoming one of the most high-profile incidents of 
violence linked to the result of the EU referendum, although it is understood 
that prosecutors are not treating it as such.

A number of sources recorded an increase in hate crime in the wake of the 
Brexit vote. Racist or religious abuse incidents recorded by police in England 
and Walesjumped 41% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/13/hate-crimes-eu-referendum-home-office-figures-confirm>
 with 5,468 such crimes being logged in the month after the UK voted to quit 
the EU, according to the Home Office.

The uncertainty facing EU nationals living in Britain has been highlighted by 
a series of cases, including that of Dom Wolf, born in London to German 
parents, whotold the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/05/man-told-to-take-citizenship-test-despite-living-entire-life-in-uk>
 on Thursday that he could not get a British passport unless he took a UK 
citizenship test because he could not prove his mother had been in England 
legally when she gave birth to him. The 32-year-old said he felt betrayed by 
the country in which he was born. His parents arrived in 1974, when his mother 
worked for the University of London as a lecturer and his father was 
self-employed.

Other examples include Monique Hawkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/28/dutch-woman-with-two-british-children-told-to-leave-uk-after-24-years>
, a Dutch woman who has lived in the UK for 24 years and has two children with 
her British husband, but has been told by the Home Office that she should make 
arrangements to leave the country after applying for citizenship.

Professor Matthew Goodwin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/19/islamophobia-government-engagement-muslims-anti-hatred-taskforce>
, professor of politics at the University of Kent, said that, despite the 
apparent rise in hate crimes following the referendum, there were inherent 
difficulties in quantifying the issue.

“The police measures for recording hate crime and how it is categorised have 
only recently become more sophisticated, so we’re not really able to say 
whether things are actually getting worse or better,” he said. “Historically, 
it’s been an area where we haven’t really invested much.”

Goodwin, who will also appear before the select committee hearing, said that 
monitoring the far right was problematic because easily identifiable 
organisations, such as the EDL and BNP, had fractured into small, disparate 
factions. “This has made it harder for researchers, as well as the security 
services, to keep on top. There are 20 tiny groups and it’s quite difficult to 
know what they are doing and how,” he said.
 