
Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> has invested $1bn in Didi 
Chuxing, China’s version of Uber, CEO Tim Cook said on Thursday.

Ahead of a high-profile visit to the country later in May, Cook told Reuters 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-apple-china-idUSKCN0Y404W> that the 
investment would create opportunities to partner with Didi – fuelling 
speculation that Apple is making a strategic investment that complements its 
own plans for a new electric car.

Uber CEO says company is losing $1bn a year as it tries to compete in China
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/18/uber-ceo-company-losing-1-billion-a-year-compete-in-china>
“We are making the investment for a number of strategic reasons, including a 
chance to learn more about certain segments of the China market,” Cook said in 
theReuters interview 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-apple-china-idUSKCN0Y404W>. “Of course, we 
believe it will deliver a strong return for our invested capital over time as 
well.”


Cook did acknowledge Apple’s electric car project, described by Tesla CEO Elon 
Musk as “an open secret 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/09/elon-musk-apple-graveyard-fired-tesla-staff>
”, which has included hiring specialist engineers and designers from companies 
including Tesla, Ford and GM, and public documentation that has shown Apple’s
search for testing locations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/14/apple-self-driving-car-project-titan-sooner-than-expected>
.

Apple’s only public car product is currently its CarPlay 
<http://www.apple.com/ios/carplay/> system, which connects Apple smartphones to 
a car’s entertainment system. “That is what we do today in the car business, so 
we will have to see what the future holds,” Cook said.


Electric, self-driving cars are a hot topic in the technology and auto 
industries, with rivals including Google, Tesla, Apple and others racing to 
developing compelling technologies and products.

Ride-hailing companies currently rely on independent human drivers, whose 
status as contractors has generated a string of legal cases – particularly for
Uber <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> – around regulation and 
employment law. Self-driving technologies would erase these complexities but 
also allow ride-hailing firms to focus on managing complex and lucrative data 
on the movement of people around cities, and the opportunities to monetise that 
by operating a fleet of self-driving cars.

An Uber for everything: the surge in on-demand apps
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/03/an-uber-for-everything-the-surge-in-on-demand-apps>
Didi Chuxing dominates the country’s private ride-hailing market, and claims 
to have 300 million users in 400 cities acrossChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> who take 11m rides every day. Founder 
and CEO Cheng Wei said in a statement that Apple’s investment marks the 
company’s single largest investment so far.


Didi Chuxing also claims it accounts for 87% of China’s ride-hailing market, 
in which US-based Uber is trying to break through. According to its last 
funding round in December 2015, Uber is currently valued at $62.5bn; a funding 
round reported in February 2016 valued Didi Chuxing at $20bn.


Apple will be on a charm offensive during Cook’s visit to China, where its 
books and film services were shut down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/22/itunes-movies-ibooks-blocked-china-apple>
 by the government only six months after launch. Its device sales are still 
growing China yet have slowed significantly along with the Chinese economy, and
iPhone sales started 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/26/apple-iphone-first-revenue-decline-13-years>
 falling for the first time in 2016 along with a general slowdown in 
smartphones.
 