
In one of the more unusual analyses of the Apple v FBI debate, former NSA 
general counsel Stewart Baker has comparedTim Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/tim-cook> to 1940s Hollywood star Doris 
Day.

Addressing an audience at SXSW young enough to have no idea who Doris Day was, 
Baker quoted Hollywood musician and actorOscar Levant 
<https://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Oscar_Levant>, who said: “I remember her before 
she was a virgin.”

He then said Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> had only 
recently changed its strategy in handling law enforcement requests for access.

“Who remembers Tim Cook before he was a virgin? Look at his record in China,” 
Baker said. “WhenChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> asked, [Apple] 
didn’t even tell us they were doing it. Other countries are going to request 
access, and companies are going to give it to them once they demonstrate that 
they really need it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fapple-fbi-debate-sxsw-former-nsa-lawyer-tim-cook%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd65eb5fef9fb8df3b4a8e5dc63f14d1e1ddddf7b%2F0_0_2105_1264%2F2105.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20is%20'arrogant'%20and%20encryption%20is%20'oversold'%2C%20ex-NSA%20lawyer%20tells%20SXSW&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fapple-fbi-debate-sxsw-former-nsa-lawyer-tim-cook%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Apple%20is%20%27arrogant%27%20and%20encryption%20is%20%27oversold%27%2C%20ex-NSA%20lawyer%20tells%20SXSW&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fapple-fbi-debate-sxsw-former-nsa-lawyer-tim-cook%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd65eb5fef9fb8df3b4a8e5dc63f14d1e1ddddf7b%2F0_0_2105_1264%2F2105.jpg>
 Doris Day (she’s a film star). Photograph: Ronald Grant Archive 
“Europe and the rest of the world hates Silicon Valley,” he said, giving the 
example of the recent vote by theFrench assembly on an anti-terrorism bill 
<http://en.europeonline-magazine.eu/frances-lower-house-votes-in-favour-of-anti-terrorism-bill_442938.html>
 that expanded powers to search and detain.

Baker, now a private lawyer and a regular on the conference circuit, was 
speaking on a SXSW panel about the attempt by the FBI to order Apple to help 
access data on a phone used by one of the San Bernardino shooters. The issue 
has reignited discussion about whether the government should have access to 
backdoors in encryption software, following a similar situation in the 1990s – 
thedamaging effects of which are still being felt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/02/secure-https-connections-data-passwords-drown-attack>
. Baker was general counsel at the NSA from 1992 to 1994.

Baker repeatedly laid into Apple, claiming encryption was “the single most 
oversold technology in the public sphere” and that Apple would accommodate 
requests by the Chinese government becauseChina is now its biggest market 
<http://www.cnet.com/news/china-passes-us-to-become-apples-biggest-iphone-market/>
. He said that Apple had previously cooperated with intelligence requests from 
the Chinese government and called the tech industry “arrogant”.

“How about this: if you refuse to provide access to the government, the 
government is entitled to get every disclosure you have ever made for every 
other country. Because Apple is not telling us about China,” he said. “And if 
Apple is assuming the benefits of the privacy it is selling, how about it takes 
on some of the costs of crime? How about letting victims of crimes that have 
not been solved because of encryption sue Apple for damages?”

He said that Apple had spent money proving its social responsibility by making 
sure minors were no longer employed on its third-party production lines. “So 
for them to turn around and say that if you take pictures of kids while you are 
molesting them, we are going to protect you as well? That’s not socially 
responsible. They need to take into account the misuse of their technology and 
ask how to fix it.”

Slightly bemused fellow panelist Matt Blaze, associate professor of computer 
and information science at the University of Pennsylvania, said that it was 
irrelevant to focus on Apple’s reputation or corporate responsibility. “That’s 
like asking if Al Gore is a nice guy relevant to climate change,” he said. 
“It’s a sideshow.

“This could charitably be described as a crisis.”

Three days earlier, Barack Obama spoke at SXSW 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/11/barack-obama-sxsw-south-by-southwest-austin--apple-fbi>
, urging both sides of the debate not to be absolutist and to work for a 
constructive solution. Baker suggested that the president had taken a more 
moderate line than others in the White House.

“It was a surprise, because many people around him would come out 
differently,” he said. “TheFBI <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> had 
enormous trouble pushing its agenda through the White House … so for him to 
come out in this direction means he clearly believes it, because plenty of 
people told him not to come out and say that.”

Obama attempts to heal rift between tech world and government at SXSW
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/11/barack-obama-sxsw-south-by-southwest-austin--apple-fbi>
Amit Yoran, president of the computer security company RSA, cautioned against 
oversimplifying the debate as security v privacy, or Washington v Silicon 
Valley. “We have heard resoundingly from the [intelligence community] that it 
does not favour weakening security or encryption, so this is not really a 
national security issue,” he said. “This is a law enforcement issue.


“From a business and internet perspective, we’re on a shaky world stage post-
Snowden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/06/edward-snowden-democratic-debate>
. The corporate world doesn’t have lots of trust in the US government and our 
own citizens have all-time low trust … [the FBI order] would be a dangerous 
move against US economic interests.”

Blaze said the technology industry relies on consumers updating hardware 
regularly so that security fixes can be rolled out, and that trust in those 
updates could be jeopardized.

“So far the choice has been law enforcement shutting down v weakening 
encryption – I don’t think anybody wants either of those things,” he said. 
“What alternatives are there? They could explore hacking techniques of their 
own, or existing weaknesses in the product, or use hardware reverse engineering 
… law enforcement has been largely reactive on a case-by-case basis.

“These things require a healthy debate that we just haven’t had, and over the 
course of two crypto-wars, we’ve made remarkably little progress.”

Last week, Apple’s general counsel, Bruce Sewell, defended the company’s 
business in China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/10/apple-v-fbi-encryption-case-digital-privacy-san-bernardino>
 against claims made in the FBI’s legal case, including that the company had 
provided data in response to 74% of 4,000 state requests.

“The ridiculous section on China where an AUSA, an officer of the court, uses 
unidentified internet sources to raise the spectre that Apple has a different 
and sinister relationship with China. Of course that is not true, and the 
speculation is based on no substance at all. To do this in a brief before a 
magistrate judge just shows the desperation that the Department of Justice now 
feels.”
 