
To Wall Street, Apple is a company where the glass is constantly half-full. Its
quarterly results on Tuesday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/21/apple-quarterly-results-watch-sales>
 showed revenues up 33% and operating profits up 37% to $49bn (£31bn) and 
$14.1bn respectively.

However, there were disappointments for investors grown used to quarter after 
quarter of stellar figures. Unit sales of iPhones rose 35% to 47.5m in the 
three months ending June, about four times more than the broader smartphone 
market, but analysts had expected 50m or better.

Revenues in China more than doubled; but the stock market there has been 
volatile recently 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/10/china-stock-market-rebounds-second-day>
, raising questions about the company’s ability to keep growing in a country 
that generates more than a quarter of sales. And forward guidance for the 
current quarter, of sequentially flatrevenues, was given a lacklustre reception.

Apple financial report: Cook hints at strong watch sales after shares sink
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/21/apple-quarterly-results-watch-sales>
Then there was the Apple Watch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/28/apple-watch-review-smartwatch-iphone-taptic-siri>
: while Tim Cook, the chief executive, gave no numbers, to avoid giving 
competitors useful data, analysts poring over the results reckon it generated 
about $1bn, or perhaps 2.5m units sold. That would make Apple the largest and 
most valuable seller of wearables in the world from a standing start in a 
single quarter – but shouldn’t it have sold more, at higher prices?
Apple share price graph 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/07/apple_share_price-zip/giv-21277cC1rjMoZS2Jf>
The company is also expanding, perhaps Napoleonically, on multiple fronts. It 
has launched Apple Music, an ambitious paid-for streaming service that aims to 
win over customers from services such as Spotify; introduced the contactless
Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> Pay payments system to the 
UK before Google’s Android Pay scheme; and is expected to try to breathe new 
life into the fading iPad line, which has seen six successive quarters of 
year-on-year shrinking sales, with a larger model in the autumn.

So what’s the truth about Apple? Is it washed up or tearing ahead?
For industry analysts, the best way to view it is in comparison to rivals. As 
Cook was warming up, Microsoft was also announcing its own results, which 
contained its own version of Napoleon’s retreat from Moscow in the form of a 
$7.5bn writeoff of its 2013acquisition of Nokia’s mobile handset business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/sep/03/microsoft-buys-nokia-handset-business>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Fapple-leaves-wall-street-hungry-for-more-can-it-deliver%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437561511258%2Fb4653ac9-382c-49c0-9c7e-3ab3205085c9-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20leaves%20Wall%20Street%20hungry%20for%20more%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0can%20it%20deliver%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Fapple-leaves-wall-street-hungry-for-more-can-it-deliver%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Apple%20leaves%20Wall%20Street%20hungry%20for%20more%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0can%20it%20deliver%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Fapple-leaves-wall-street-hungry-for-more-can-it-deliver%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F22%2F1437561511258%2Fb4653ac9-382c-49c0-9c7e-3ab3205085c9-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Apple boss Tim Cook launches the Apple Watch in March in San Francisco. 
Photograph: Eric Risberg/AP 
It spent only $7.3bn there, but seen no benefit as its Windows Phone business 
obstinately refuses to grow (it sold 8.4m phones in the past quarter) and 
increasingly loses money. Its other efforts in hardware, with the Surface 
tablet line, haven’t taken off either: despite revenues of $888m (and unknown, 
if any, profits). The iPad, with 10.9m units and $4.5bn in revenues in the 
latest quarter, still outsells it easily.
Instead Microsoft’s chief executive, Satya Nadella, is taking the company back 
to its knitting, focussing on software and services by making its most 
lucrative apps, such as Office, available on every software platform, including 
Apple’siPhone <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> and Google’s 
Android.

It is also about to launch Windows 10 by providing it free to any of the 
world’s 1.5bn PC users, rather than charging for it as in the past 30-odd 
years. And this is taking place against the backdrop of a PC market where sales 
are dwindling by about 10% annually. But the market seems satisfied with that, 
pushing Microsoft’s stock near to its five-year high.
Similarly Google, where a new cost-cutting regime has improved the bottom line,
delighted the markets last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/16/google-beats-expectations-ad-revenue>
. Analyst consensus is for 22% year-on-year growth in this quarter. Noticeably, 
that figure is near identical to Apple’s. Yet one company is seen as taking 
off, and the other as mired.

Carl Howe, formerly of the analyst business Yankee Group, remarked on Twitter 
<http://twitter.com/cdhowe/status/623628378386624512> that Apple is now heading 
for $200bn revenues in its current fiscal year: “Wall Street seems to have no 
clue that 21% year-over-year growth for a $200bn company is unprecedented.”


But as ever with Wall Street, it’s the promise of growth, not its realisation, 
that gets it excited. That feeling was summed up by Colin Gills, of BGC 
Partners,who told Reuters of his foreboding at Apple’s growing success 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/07/22/us-apple-results-idUSKCN0PV2AT20150722>
 married to its reliance on China: “Where are you going to find growth in the 
world?” he said. “You’ve done an amazing job sucking all the smartphone profits 
into your balance sheet, but smartphone sales are slowing. What’s going to 
happen when the industry matures, just like PCs did?”

To that, there’s no immediate answer from Cook and Apple. There is only the 
implied promise of an expanding user base to whom to sell new or replacement 
phones, watches and music services.

Speaking to analysts in the earnings call 
<http://seekingalpha.com/article/3344115-apples-aapl-ceo-tim-cook-on-q3-2015-results-earnings-call-transcript>
 , Cook was firm: “I think everybody’s going to own a smartphone, and I think 
we’ve proven that we can compete for a fair number of those … We think the 
phone has a lot of legs to it. I mean, many, many, many years. There’s tons of 
innovation left at the phone. I think we’re in the early innings of it, not in 
the late innings, and I think the market rate of growth over the long haul will 
also be impressive.”

Horace Dediu, a former Nokia executive who now works at the Clayton 
Christensen Institute at Harvard Business School, likes to say that Apple is 
like an object in orbit: the maths suggests it is constantly falling, yet it 
never hits the earth. For Cook, considering another drubbing by the analysts, 
that might have to do.
 