
Europe’s competition commissioner, Margrethe Vestager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/margrethe-vestager>, has defended her €13bn 
(£11bn) ruling against Apple’s Irish tax affairs, hitting back at claims made 
by a predecessor that EU state aid laws should not be used to fight sweetheart 
tax deals.

Vestager made clear the rationale for the Apple ruling following comments by 
Neelie Kroes, who said on Thursday that EU member stateshave a sovereign right 
to determine their own tax laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/01/apple-tax-ruling-fundamentally-unfair-former-ec-competition-chief>
. Kroes served as competition commissioner between 2004 and 2010. 

Speaking at a tax conference in Copenhagen on Friday, Vestager said: “Giving a 
specific tax treatment to a particular company gives that company a benefit 
just as surely as if it had been handed a bundle of cash. So the state aid 
rules apply to tax exemption just as much as to any other type of aid.”

Why EU state aid is not the right tool to fight tax avoidance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/01/eu-state-aid-tax-avoidance-apple>
Historically, Brussels competition officials have only used state aid powers 
in limited circumstances, which have not involved private tax deals awarded by 
member states to multinationals.

The European commission only began using these powers to investigate suspected 
sweetheart tax deals <http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-14-663_en.htm> – 
including Apple’s agreements with Ireland – in 2014, under Kroes’s successor 
Joaquín Almunia.

Many tax experts had not anticipated such tax deals would be scrutinised by 
Brussels as corporate tax has for years been widely considered a sovereign 
matter for member states.

But Vestager insisted she and Almunia had not moved the goal posts. “This is 
not new,” she said. “The state aid rules applied since 1958. They are laid down 
in the treaty and ratified by parliaments in each and every member state.

“It’s never been a secret that tax exemptions could be state aid, and that if 
so, they’d have to be paid back. The only secret was the tax rulings 
themselves.”

She pointed out that Brussels gave guidance to member states as long ago as 
1998, warning them how tax deals to big businesses might, in some 
circumstances, risk being classed as state aid. There was also European case 
law on the treatment of sweetheart tax deals and state aid.

Also on Friday morning, the European commission’s chief spokesman, Margaritis 
Schinas, separately gave another critical response to Kroes’s remarks at a 
press conference in Brussels. “We understand it may sometimes be challenging to 
reconcile the role [held by Kroes] as a former commissioner with the temptation 
to publicly express the views of those – in Silicon Valley or elsewhere - who 
oppose the commission’s decisions,” he said.


Schinas’s words appear to have been a thinly veiled reference to the fact that 
Kroes wasappointed to the advisory board 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-05-04/uber-names-former-eu-vice-president-kroes-to-new-advisory-board>
 of taxi-hailing app group Uber Technologies in May. Uber is based in Silicon 
Valley and has set up complex tax structures in Europe.


The extent to which private tax deals were being handed out to big 
multinationals by some European countries was laid bare by the2014 LuxLeaks 
scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/05/-sp-luxembourg-tax-files-tax-avoidance-industrial-scale>
. Hundreds of leaked tax deals awarded to large international businesses by 
Luxmebourg’s tax office revealed companies were able to exploit legal loopholes 
and access tax rates as low as 1%.

In the case of Apple, vital financial revelations came from a 2013 inquiry 
into the iPhone maker’s tax affairs by the US Senate’s subcommittee on 
investigations, then chaired by Carl Levin. For may years,Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> had used unorthodox corporate 
arrangements to ensure it did not have to file publicly available accounts for 
its Irish subsidiaries, making scrutiny harder.


Speaking in Copenhagen, Vestager said: “I am often asked why it took so long 
for us to start investigating tax rulings that go back to the 90s. The answer 
is that, for a very long time, fiscal secrecy prevailed over transparency.”

Earlier this week, she announced Apple’s tax deals in Ireland were so generous 
as to amount to illegal state aid.Billions of dollars of income had been 
flowing through Apple subsidiaries in Cork, attracting tax rates of a fraction 
of 1%. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/sep/01/apple-tax-time-open-up-macbooks-tim-cook-eu-avoidance>
As a result, the commission ordered Ireland to bill Apple for €13bn in back 
taxes, plus interest. Apple has said it will appeal against the decision. 
Ireland is also considering a legal challenge.
 