
Apple is exploring major changes to its app store, including allowing 
developers to pay to have their app promoted to users,Bloomberg News 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-14/apple-said-to-pursue-new-search-features-for-crowded-app-store>
 has reported.

The company has a dedicated team of 100 people working on plans to overhaul 
the store, the report claims – citing sources familiar with the project – and 
is led by Todd Teresi, formerly the head of Apple’s iAd advertising group.

A new paid search option would let developers pay for their app to appear 
alongside related search terms such as weather or puzzle. It could also create 
a new revenue stream forApple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> 
and deploy staff from iA, which is being cut back.


It is also exploring how to improve search for users, making apps easier to 
find.

The app store sells more than 1.5m apps for Apple phones, tablets, and now the 
Apple Watch. But developers commonly complain that there are so many apps for 
sale it can be hard to promote their apps.

Apple also tightly controls curation of its app store, and the highest profile 
apps are either hand-selected by them or are already in the store’s list of the 
20 bestselling paid and free apps in each genre.

Developers had a mixed response to the report.
Kori Handy (@KoriDHandy) 
@ttayl0r <https://twitter.com/ttayl0r> @verge <https://twitter.com/verge> 
@AppStore <https://twitter.com/AppStore> I see better ways to make money then 
pissing off 99% of the@AppStore <https://twitter.com/AppStore> developers 
@pschiller <https://twitter.com/pschiller>
 <https://twitter.com/KoriDHandy/status/720750464208244736> April 14, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/KoriDHandy/status/720750464208244736> Tom Moss 
(@rebelleader) 
@c_pruett <https://twitter.com/c_pruett> you're missing the point, what has 
been lacking is a way to directly pay Apple. That's what every developer has 
been clamoring for
 <https://twitter.com/rebelleader/status/720757362785538048> April 14, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/rebelleader/status/720757362785538048> 
Apple was contacted for comment.

 