
Apple boss Tim Cook is furious. How dare Brussels’ meddling competition 
regulatorsretrospectively unpick a tax deal 
<http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-16-2923_en.htm> that the iPhone-maker 
had secured from Ireland a quarter of a century ago. What business is it of 
theirs? Tax, after all, is a sovereign issue for each individual member state 
within the European Union. The European commission’s ruling would have a 
“profound and harmful effect” on investment and job creation in Europe, he said.

His political allies at home have waded in too. US Treasury secretary Jack Lew 
warned last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/24/apple-taxes-european-commission>
 that the move could have a “chilling effect on US-EU cross-border investment”. 
The US would have to “consider potential responses”.

According to the Cook script, Apple is a good corporate citizen with a long 
history of investment and employment in Ireland. That is why, quite properly, 
almost two-third’s of the group’s profits arise in its Irish-registered 
subsidiaries. On Tuesday, he posted a lengthymessage direct to customers 
<http://www.apple.com/ie/customer-letter/> explaining what a travesty of 
justice Brussels’ intervention had been, with “no basis in fact or in law”.

That, of course, is hogwash. Whatever you think of the commission’s 
intervention, any honest discussion of Apple’s taxes must start with the 
admission that its subsidiaries in Knocknaheeny, a run-down suburb of Cork, do 
not produce almost two-thirds of the group’s profits.

Apple ordered to pay up to €13bn after EU rules Ireland broke state aid laws
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/30/apple-pay-back-taxes-eu-ruling-ireland-state-aid>
That Cook still clings to this narrative is disappointing, and does not 
reflect well on those advisers he has gathered around him.

The Apple CEO would do well to listen a little to the candid reflections of 
the firm’s co-founder Steve Wozniak. Earlier this year,he said 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-36108378>: “I don’t like the idea that 
Apple might be unfair – not paying taxes the way I do as a person.”

For all that, Wozniak noted, on the other hand there are always commercial 
pressures at play. “Any company that is a public company, its shareholders are 
going to force it to be as profitable as possible. And that means financial 
people studying all the laws of the world and figuring out all the schemes that 
work that are technically legal.”

Cook, though, has his own, cleaner, less equivocal, version of events. And 
Tuesday was not the first time he has taken to the stage, with faux 
exasperation, offering justifications of Apple’s huge Irish profits that have 
for years gone almost entirely untaxed. In 2013, he appeared before the US 
senate subcommittee on investigations to reject a detailed analysis of the 
group’s tax planning from Carl Levin (Democrat) and John McCain (Republican).

“You shifted that golden goose to Ireland,” Levin accused Cook, summing up his 
verdict during a six-hour hearing. “You shifted it to three companies that do 
not pay taxes inIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> … These are 
the crown jewels of Apple Inc … Folks, it’s not right.”

Cook affected incredulity. “There is no [profit] shifting going on that I see 
at all,” he said. “Apple has real operations in real places, withApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> employees selling real products 
to real customers. We pay all the taxes we owe – every single dollar … We don’t 
depend on tax gimmicks.”

That message is now as obsolete as an iPod Classic. Nevertheless, sorting out 
a fair resolution of Apple’s tax affairs remains less obvious. Where exactly 
has the tech firm be avoiding its dues? If not Ireland, then where are Apple’s 
profits truly made?


The Apple tax ruling – what this means for Ireland, tax and multinationals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/30/eu-apple-ireland-tax-ruling-q-and-a>
The fact that the group’s tax structure has been subject to fierce attack from 
critics in both Washington and Brussels shows that there are several parties 
who feel they are entitled to spoils from any revised tax settlement.


At present though, it is Ireland that is set to benefit from the European 
commission’s decision. And the result could be a one of the largest ever bills 
for back taxes, running into many billions of euros. Brussels officials have 
suggested the figure could be up to €13bn (£11bn), though the final sum will be 
for the Irish tax office to determine.

Add to that sum interest charges stretching back more than 10 years and the 
final tally could put a modest, but not insignificant, dent in Apple’s colossal 
offshore reserves. At last count, this cash pile stood at more than $200bn 
(£152bn).

 However dim the view you take of Apple’s tax planning, though, a multibillion 
euro windfall for Ireland looks perverse. Critics on both sides of the Atlantic 
have castigated Dublin’s politicians and regulators for helping Apple spirit 
taxable profits away from other jurisdictions. Why should Irish taxpayers end 
up winners?


It is an uncomfortable irony that Margrethe Vestager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/margrethe-vestager>, Europe’s competition 
commissioner, is well aware of. After announcing her Apple decision, she 
stressed that it was now open to other countries to draw on the commission’s 
analysis and make their own sub-claims on Apple’s Irish back taxes. Even 
America, she appeared to hint, could have a call on this money.


All of which looks a messy prospect, which is unlikely to be resolved for many 
years. As Vestager noted, her powers are limited. Occasional moves by Brussels 
to police the taxation of multinationals need to be complemented by 
co-ordinated and sustained international efforts that close loopholes and 
ensure tax regimes keep pace with the digital economy.

Some argue that Vestager did more on Tuesday to damage than to assist this 
fragile international consensus on tackling tax avoidance. Certainly her 
intervention has ruffled feathers and, in the short term at least, appears to 
offer a far from perfect resolution.


That said, any serious effort to root out toxic tax behaviour is bound to 
create upset along the way. There are powerful vested interests that would like 
to see the taxation of corporate profits wither and fade into history. Vestager 
has set herself against such ambitions. A few more politicians showing her 
courage would be a fine thing.


 * This article was amended on 31 August.  