
Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> has agreed to pay €318m 
(£234m) to settle a tax dispute with Italian authorities after the iPhone and 
iPad maker was investigated for suspected fraud.


The US technology giant’s Italian subsidiary and several of its senior 
executives had been under investigation for fraud over its alleged failure to 
comply with obligations to declare its earnings inItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> between 2008 and 2013.

Italy says international tax dodger amnesty is bringing in billions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/10/italy-says-international-tax-dodger-amnesty-is-bringing-in-billions>
According to the Italian daily newspaper La Repubblica, Apple Italia should 
have paid corporation tax of €880m for the period. But, after months of 
negotiations, the tax authorities agreed to close the case in return for about 
a third of that amount.

An Italy tax office spokesman confirmed the newspaper’s report was accurate 
but would not divulge further details. Apple did not respond to a request for 
comment.

The settlement comes amid mounting controversy over the tax arrangements of 
multinational groups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/21/starbucks-and-fiat-tax-deals-with-eu-nations-ruled-unlawful>
 which stand accused of utilising complex cross-border corporate structures to 
reduce tax bills.

Apple Italia is part of the company’s European operation which is 
headquartered in Ireland, a country with one of the lowest levels of 
corporation tax in the European Union and wherelarge portions of the group’s 
worldwide profits have been booked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/may/29/apple-tax-profits-ireland-cork>
.

Ireland taxes corporate earnings from normal business activities at a rate of 
12.5%, which compares with a standard rate of 27.5% in Italy.

This month, the Apple chief executive, Tim Cook, described accusations that 
the world’s richest company was sidestepping US taxes by stashing cash overseas 
as “political crap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/19/tim-cook-calls-notion-of-apple-avoiding-us-taxes-political-crap>
” and insisted: “We pay every tax dollar we owe.”

The settlement of the tax dispute will not halt the criminal investigation 
into the conduct of three Apple Italia executives but will likely reduce the 
severity of any potential sanctions, La Repubblica said.

The decision to sanction Apple Italia marks a broader push by Italian 
authorities to shake off the country’s bad reputation for tax dodging. By the 
government’s own estimates, annual losses to tax evasion exceed €90bn with 
almost half that down to sales taxes not being paid.

Recent efforts by Matteo Renzi’s government have sought to rein in the 
country’s vast shadow economy and convince both individuals and companies to 
boost the state coffers.

Earlier this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/10/italy-says-international-tax-dodger-amnesty-is-bringing-in-billions>
, the economy ministry hailed the success of a year-long voluntary disclosure 
scheme, which is expected to bring in at least €3.8bn. There were 130,000 
declarations made under the amnesty, the ministry said, with the majority of 
hidden cash and assets held in Switzerland.

Italians working across the Swiss border will also have to face a stricter tax 
regime, after the two countriesreached an agreement last week 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-swiss-italy-tax-idUKKBN0U51MB20151222> on how 
to tackle the issue. Once approved by both governments, the deal is expected to 
see commuters continue to pay tax in Switzerland and deduct this from income 
tax in Italy.

The murky finances of the Vatican have also been put under the spotlight this 
year, with the Holy See and Italyagreeing in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/01/vatican-bank-agrees-tax-treaty-italy>
 to share financial information. While the increased cooperation marks Italy’s 
drive to catch tax evaders, it also reflects Pope Francis’ bid to reform the 
Vatican administration which has been hit by waves of financial scandal and 
allegations of money laundering.
 