
US businesses have warned European leaders they risk a “grievous 
self-inflicted wound” unless they overturn Brussels’ demand thatApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> pay the Irish government €13bn 
(£11.4bn).

In an open letter 
<http://businessroundtable.org/resources/business-roundtable-letter-eu-heads-state-or-government-regarding-state-aid-investigations>
 to the leaders of the 28 European Union countries, the Business Roundtable 
group defended Apple over its tax dispute with the European commission.

The US tech giant was ordered to pay €13bn to Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/30/apple-pay-back-taxes-eu-ruling-ireland-state-aid>
 last month, after Brussels ruled that the tax breaks it was given between 1991 
and 2015 amounted to unlawful state aid.

But the group of US chief executives, who between them run companies with $7tn 
of revenue and 16 million employees, said the decision “must not be allowed to 
stand”.

“The precedent set by this decision, if upheld, would increase uncertainty 
significantly with a consequent adverse effect on foreign investment in Europe, 
making this decision a grievous self-inflicted wound for theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> and its citizens.”

Apple tax: European commissioner defends €13bn ruling
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/02/apple-tax-ruling-eu-margethe-vestager-13bn-euro-state-aid>
It said that non-EU countries would interpret the ruling – if left 
unchallenged – as a signal that companies could have their assets seized by 
states “seeking extra revenue or seeking to punish a successful foreign 
competitor”.

Business Roundtable said the 185 chief executives who it counts as members 
were particularly aggrieved by the retrospective nature of the ruling on a tax 
deal reached in 1991.

“Commercial success is uncertain for any business endeavour but companies 
should have complete confidence that sovereign countries are committed to 
honouring their laws and have the authority to do so,” they wrote.

“The retroactive nature of the EC decision means that business can never have 
certainty even on its past tax liability unless or until the EC chooses to 
decide accordingly.”

Apple chief executive, Tim Cook, has previously labelled the multibillion 
pound demand“total political crap” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/01/political-crap-tim-cook-apple-tax-ruling>
 and warned that it could affect investment in the EU.

The letter from Business Roundtable, which was also sent to senior politicians 
including the German finance minister, Wolfgang Schäuble, the European Union 
president, Donald Tusk, and the US secretary of state, John Kerry, echoed the 
threat.

It said the commission’s actions “promote tax uncertainty – and unless 
overturned they will disrupt trade and investment, with the most direct 
consequences to be borne directly by EU countries and their citizens”.

The letter called on member states to “put an end to the use of state aid 
investigations that will hamper economic growth by undermining cross-border 
investment”.

The group has previously lashed out 
<http://businessroundtable.org/media/news-releases/business-roundtable-statement-european-commission-ruling-against-apple>
 against what it perceives as Europe’s “new and dangerous form of 
protectionism” amidtax investigations into American firms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/30/after-apple-the-other-tax-deals-in-the-european-commissions-sights>
 such as Starbucks, McDonald’s and Amazon.

The commission’s ruling  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/30/the-guardian-view-on-tax-and-ireland-apple-pay-your-way>
againstApple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> was based on its 
objection to an agreement allowing Apple to pay a maximum tax rate of just 1%. 
In 2014, the tech firm paid tax at 0.005%. The usual rate of corporation tax in 
Ireland is 12.5%.

Silicon Valley outraged by Apple tax bill: 'Europe is changing rules 
retroactively'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/30/apple-eu-tax-bill-silicon-valley-response>
The commission said Ireland’s tax arrangements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/14/ireland-abolish-double-irish-tax-scheme-apple>
 with Apple between 1991 and 2015 had allowed the US company to attribute sales 
to a “head office” that only existed on paper and could not have generated such 
profits.

The result was that Apple avoided tax on almost all the profit generated from 
its multibillion-euro sales of iPhones and other products across the EU’s 
single market. It booked the profits in Ireland rather than the country in 
which the product was sold.
 