
I’m having a bit of an existential crisis. According to new research 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0151588>, if 
I’m anything like the average person, around half the people I consider my 
friends don’t consider me theirs in return: that’s how chronically bad we are 
at judging the reciprocity of friendship. Of course, I already knew lopsided 
friendships existed; I’ve got several, and I’m sure you have, too. But in every 
case I can think of, it’s me who’s not especially invested, and the other 
person who doesn’t realise it.I’m not supposed to be the desperate one. Yet if 
studies such as this are correct, the phenomenon is so widespread that it’s 
highly unlikely I’m an exception. As with the famous finding thatalmost 
everyone thinks they’re in the top 50% of safe drivers 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0001691881900056>, we can’t 
all be the ones with an accurate sense of who really likes us.

And if we’re stumbling through life with such a distorted understanding of our 
social circles, where does that leave all the other received wisdom about 
friendship’s importance? It has been found that friends keep us physically 
healthy,alive for longer 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2005/06/28/health/longevity-bonds-of-friendship-not-family-may-add-years.html>
,less vulnerable to depression 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2015/08/how-friendship-fights-depression/401807/>
 andmore financially successful 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2013/10/social-connection-makes-a-better-brain/280934/>
 – but how much of that, especially when the research is based on self-reports, 
comes from actually having friends, versus believing that you do?

It also makes you wonder if there’s a friendship version of that old (and 
true) observation about romance: that in any relationship, the person who cares 
about it the least controls it the most. Are we shackled to our lopsided 
friendships because we intuit that the other person still needs to be persuaded 
that it’s worth hanging out with us?

Perhaps it shouldn’t be surprising to learn that, when it comes to friendship, 
we’re in the grip of an ego-boosting delusion: that’s true in many domains of 
life. People with healthy self-esteem habituallyoverestimate both their 
interpersonal skills 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0110470> and 
their control over events; some psychologists argue thatmildly depressed people 
have a more accurate grasp 
<http://www.newyorker.com/science/maria-konnikova/dont-worry-be-happy> of their 
abilities than the non-depressed. To thrive in the world, it’s often more 
useful to feel good about yourself than it is to see things as they are.

Don’t think you’re lucky? Think again | Oliver Burkeman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/06/dont-think-youre-lucky-think-again>
Oh, and one more reason not to freak out over the thought that your “friends” 
might secretly not like you: this particular study, as with so many in social 
psychology, focused on university students (and their friends and young family 
members). It’s well-known that our social circles shrink as we mature, too 
often culminating in a friend-starved old age. But isn’t it possible that this 
shrinkage is better thought of as a winnowing, as we zero in on those 
friendships that are actually reciprocated? There are certainly reasons to 
worry abouta loneliness crisis among the elderly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/01/loneliness-forces-older-people-into-hospitals-and-strains-services-say-senior-doctors>
, but having only a few friends may not be good evidence for it. If I make it 
to my final years with only a handful of friendships, because life has filtered 
them down to the ones that really count, I’m not sure I’d call that a sad state 
of affairs. I’d call it an efficient use of my remaining time.

oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <>
 