
Italians will vote on constitutional reforms to the country’s political system 
on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/27/matteo-renzi-politics-italy-european-union-brexit-trump>
, in a vote some see as the next big anti-establishment threat after the US 
presidential election and the UK’s EU vote.

The reforms, proposed by prime minister Matteo Renzi, aim to streamline and 
reduce the powers of the Senate, including making the country’s 20 regional 
governments less influential. Renzi says that by trimming the political system 
the country’s economy would be given a much needed boost.

Italian referendum worries grip stock markets – business live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/nov/29/italian-referendum-worries-stock-markets-opec-oil-executive-pay-live>
Renzi has promised to step down as prime minister if he loses the referendum, 
which has seen the no vote morph into a vote against his leadership. The 
Five-Star Movement, founded seven years ago by comedian Beppe Grillo, is now 
the main opposition inItaly <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> and it is 
campaigning hard against him. The movement finds support among right and left 
through its tough stance on immigration and devotion to direct democracy and 
the environment.

During his two years in office, Renzi has made himself hugely unpopular with 
the left by implementing two reforms. The liberalising Jobs Act intended to 
free up the country’s labour market, but not only has it failed to improve 
permanent employment it has given employers too much power. The educational 
reform package gave new powers to headteachers, and proved widely unpopular 
among teachers.

A banking meltdown is a strong possibility if there’s a no vote. Up to eight 
Italian banks could fail, as Renzi’s bank bailout programme would likely to be 
scrapped if he resigns. One-fifth of loans in the banking system are 
categorised as troubled. Further ahead, if Five Star movement becomes the 
government Grillo has promised a referendum on leaving the Euro. This could 
plummet Italy into the centre of a Eurozone crisis.

If you’re voting in the referendum we’d like you to share your thoughts. You 
can fill in the form below – anonymously if you prefer – and we’ll use a 
selection of responses in our reporting.
 