
Related: Taylor Swift is the world's best-paid musician 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/30/taylor-swift-worlds-best-paid-musician-forbes-magazine>

Not to resort to hyperbole or anything, but the worst music marketing ploy 
ever devised must be the fan-made music promo. Along with the lyric video, it’s 
a modern phenomenon, a half-cynical and wholly transparent way of “giving back 
to the fans” by getting them to film themselves dancing or making some delicate 
paper creation and then stitching those clips together for a music video the 
band doesn’t have to get out of bed and into makeup for. Am I talking about 
Coldplay right now? Yes, Coldplay, I am talking about you. The world’s biggest 
touring band, worth an estimated £385m, recently asked their fans to 
collaborate with them on the exceptionally on-the-cheapvideo for Amazing Day 
<https://www.facebook.com/coldplay/videos/10158047873670253>, and frankly I’ve 
had enough of it.

Where did all this nonsense start? Hard to say exactly, but an accusatory 
finger can be jabbed at niche sex term-turned-alt-rock trio Feeder, whose 2001
video for Just A Day <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3wzqGI_4fIM> was compiled 
from grainy VHS reels of fans moshing and earnestly lip-synching in their 
bedrooms. It wasn’t until the early YouTube era, though – when everyone got a 
free webcam in their desktop PC deal from Currys and figured out how to use it 
– that this trend really took hold. Barenaked Ladies’ 2006 singleSound Of Your 
Voice <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FoFMRXlNJ6Y> harnessed the star power of 
early YouTube celebrities (remember Numa Numa Man? Be thankful we have Zoella 
instead). Weezer repeated the same trick in 2008 with Tay Zonday andPork And 
Beans <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PQHPYelqr0E>, but that seemed to be the 
moment everyone realised this idea was terrible and scrapped it for a bit.

Related: Ed Sheeran's Thinking Out Loud wins song of the year at the 2016 
Grammy awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/15/ed-sheerans-thinking-out-loud-wins-song-of-the-year-at-the-2016-grammy-awards>

Around 2015, however, the fan-collab music video bounced back with a new 
weapon: the smartphone. Blur made all their fortysomething fans figure out how 
to do video on their iPhones for I Broadcast. Bieber’sWhere Are U Now 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nntGTK2Fhb0> video was made using scribbled 
fan art. Ed Sheeran’s fan-made alternative for 2014’s Thinking Out Loud managed 
to be twee-er than the official video of him ballroom dancing. Even Radiohead – 
Radiohead! – had fans submit “‘vignettes” for an Instagram campaign for A Moon 
Shaped Pool.


It’s not just that these videos are so lo-fi as to be embarrassing. There is a 
certain hypocrisy in artists who complain about streaming rights and anything 
else that wicks money away from them then turning around and asking their 
followers – under the guise of “this is for you!” – to make the music videos 
for free. Let’s draw a line under it withColdplay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/coldplay> and say: listen, we’ve had some 
fun, we’ve done some real 
fifth-single-off-the-album-really-can’t-be-bothered-now filler, and now we’re 
done. Give Supersonic director Mat Whitecross a multimillion-pound budget and 
bring back the CGI monkeys.
 