
The thing most people find hardest to believe about the Simple Sabotage Field 
Manual 
<https://www.cia.gov/news-information/featured-story-archive/2012-featured-story-archive/simple-sabotage.html>
 is that it isn’t a joke. It really was a top-secret document, created in 1944 
by the predecessor to the CIA, and it really was distributed to agents working 
behind enemy lines in the second world war. (It was made public in 2008 and now 
gets rediscoveredonline 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/cia-manual-sabotage-productivity-2016-6> every 
year or two.) The manual is a guide to the art of “purposeful stupidity” – easy 
ways in which the citizens of occupied Europe might be encouraged to lower 
morale and wreak havoc in their workplaces, thereby helping bring down the Axis 
powers. What’s amazing is that it reads like a description of every modern
jobsworth <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jobsworth> you’ve ever encountered.

“Insist on doing everything through ‘channels’,” one section advises. “Never 
permit shortcuts to be taken in order to expedite decisions.” When possible, 
“refer all matters to committees, for ‘further study and consideration’. 
Attempt to make the committee as large as possible – never less than five.” 
Misfile papers. Give out wrong phone numbers. Haggle over the wording of 
documents. And if there’s truly critical work to be done? Hold a conference 
instead.

“Purposeful stupidity” is infuriating, of course, but I defy anyone to claim 
they’ve never used it – and probably in the service of causes less noble than 
defeating the Nazis. The classic tactic is the crafty use of telephone tennis, 
or its email equivalent: to buy yourself time on a late-running project, simply 
lob a question about some minor detail back to your boss’s side of the court. 
Then the pressure’s off until he or she gets a moment to respond, which could 
take days. (Be sure to call office landlines before 8am or after 10pm.)

Need to declutter? Don't bother
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/12/need-to-declutter-dont-bother-oliver-burkeman>
If the manual were rewritten today, it would surely also include the “cc: 
everyone” manoeuvre, as Robert Galford and his coauthors observe intheir 2015 
book about it <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/simple-sabotage.html>, also 
called Simple Sabotage. Copying the whole office lets you “effortlessly spray 
information in many directions at once”. Sit back and relax while 100 people 
contribute useless insights on a topic that’s none of their business!

Yet the really telling thing about the Simple Sabotage manual, as Galford et 
al point out, is how many of its prescriptions for sowing chaos resemble not 
disobedience but extreme obedience – following procedures to the letter, 
obsessing about perfect accuracy, chewing over every detail. We’ve all fumed 
about customer service reps who refuse to be flexible. But usually the real 
problem is that they’re working in organisational structures that permit zero 
autonomy. Too often, managers assume the key to improvement must be clearer 
procedures and standards, more exactingly enforced. But when your management 
philosophy encourages the kind of behaviour that US intelligence services once 
sincerely believed might cause the collapse of nations, perhaps it’s time to 
reconsider. One way rules go wrong is when people don’t follow them. But 
another is what happens when they do.

oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com>
 