
Despite my best intentions, I have found it virtually impossible to escape 
middle-class cliches. From Farrow & Ball paint, organic veg deliveries, Gap 
briefs and Ray-Ban sunglasses to a Smeg oven, I am thoroughly hackneyed.

Families are also cliches – if we are to believe advertising, fiction and most 
TV drama. The father is well meaning but incompetent, likes watching football, 
drinking beer and retreating to his man cave with his PC and iPod. He is an 
emotional idiot. If there is abuse in the relationship, he is the abuser. He 
likes Top Gear and gadgets. He earns most of the money. He wants sex as often 
as possible. He cooks, but poorly. He has friends, but they are social rather 
than intimate. He hates shopping.

The mother also wants sex, but not as often. She is doing part-time paid work 
as well as most of the cooking, childcare and domestic chores. She is more 
emotionally intelligent and often secretly prefers her friends and her children 
to her husband, whom she nags. She loves Facebook and posts pictures of her 
children and cats. She buys glossy magazines featuring fashion or lifestyle 
articles. She cooks better and more often than her partner. If she’s a Guardian 
reader, she belongs to a book group and does yoga. She likes shopping.

Meanwhile, the children are difficult but lovable up to about the age of 
three, when they become less difficult, and then at the age of about 13 they 
become bestially awful, until somewhere around their mid-20s they become OK 
again. If they are girls, they like reading, but are sneaky and mean to other 
girls, if they are boys, they like video games, violence and playing football.

My family defies some of these cliches. I have never seen my wife reading a 
woman’s glossy magazine, and my children were recognisably the same people 
during childhood and adolescence. I have no interest in Top Gear and I do not 
care much for beer or football. My wife has a cave, but I do not.

But that’s just in my case. Is there any more general substance to the 
cliches? I’ve just been trying to find out by trawling statistics – which may 
be misleading, but I’ve found the most reliable and recent ones I can.

Among the middle classes, 71% of partnerships have the man as the top earner 
(63% in lower earning groups). About 70% of women say they are mostly 
responsible for cooking, food shopping and household cleaning.

Some 69% of book groups were women only 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/bookclub/8330332/Forget-fight-club-join-book-club.html>
. Andgirls not only like reading more than boys, they are also much better at it
 <https://www.literacytrust.org.uk/assets/0001/4056/Boys_Commission_Report.pdf> 
– even as early as five,there is a gap of 11 percentage points between boys’ 
and girls’ reading levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/oct/13/boys-trail-girls-literacy-numeracy-when-starting-school>
. As for shopping, men tended to get bored after about 25 minutes whereas for a 
woman it was about two hours.

So far, so unsurprising. However, 73% of men online use social media, which is 
fairly close to the 80% of women online who say they do 
<http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2015/08/28/men-catch-up-with-women-on-overall-social-media-use/>
. Also a surprisingly large number of women watch Top Gear – 40% of its 
audience is female. And as for abuse within relationships,women are the 
culprits in 40% of cases 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2010/sep/05/men-victims-domestic-violence>
. As for video games –women make up more than half of the game-playing 
population, at 52% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/18/52-percent-people-playing-games-women-industry-doesnt-know>
.

The statistics on whether men or women want sex the most are contradictory. 
However, a 2013 book by Daniel Bergner,What do Women Want?, 
<http://danielbergner.com/what-do-women-want/> concluded that women want sex 
just as much as men do 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/sexes/archive/2013/06/turns-out-women-have-really-really-strong-sex-drives-can-men-handle-it/276598/>
, and this drive is “not, for the most part, sparked or sustained by emotional 
intimacy and safety”.

I could find no reliable statistics on nagging, girl meanness, quality of 
gender friendships, teenage lovability, yoga attendance, violence or emotional 
intelligence. So I’ll carry on stereotyping, which is all we’ve got in lieu of 
the facts. I just try to bear in mind that the stereotype is probably wrong.

And equally probably right.

@timlottwriter <https://twitter.com/timlottwriter>
 