
Getting donors' money smoothly and quickly into the hands of those who 
desperately need it - and know how to use it - is a perennial problem faced by 
both governments and non-government agencies. Joseph Malinga, our reporter 
based in Katine, north-easternUganda <https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda>
, only yesterday wrote on our site that it has now taken five months for 
funding to arrive in Katine to replace the losses suffered by a farmers' 
savings group following a robbery last year.

Katine is a community development project 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/katine/2008/sep/23/background.news/>, involving 66 
villages in six parishes across a large area and covering the full range of 
development issues. The non-government agencyAmref (African Medical Research 
Foundation (Amref) <http://www.guardian.co.uk/katine/amref/>, which is 
implementing the project, funded by Guardian readers and Barclays Bank, works 
in several countries and through various national and local administration 
offices in Africa and elsewhere. Each office handling the funds requires them 
to go through an exhaustive checking procedure to ensure the targeted community 
group receives the money.

The question is whether there is a faster, more efficient way of processing 
funds. Incomprehensible or unexplained delays in funds reaching destinations 
can shatter people's hopes and dreams - delays sadly common within many NGOs 
funding development work. Despite the Guardian's repeated calls to Amref to 
speed up the transfer of funds to the Emorikikinos farmers' village saving and 
loan association, Amref has still taken five months to move the money from its 
HQ office in Nairobi, Kenya, to Katine, Uganda - Kenya's southern neighbour.

Surely, regardless of all the sound reasons given for delays, there needs to 
be an change in procedures? For not only in this case have the farmers, who 
have long been complaining about the delay, probably been disadvantraged 
(perhaps they can let us know how?), but the morale of much of the community 
will, inevitably, have been affected too.

Are there, in fact, ways to improve dissemination of funds, given the need to 
keep funding processes clear, transparent and secure? How can systems such as 
theM-pesa money transfer service, 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/activate/mobile-networks-social-change-third-world/> 
launched in Kenya in 2007, be used to plug gaps in processes used now between 
funding agencies and beneficiaries?

Funding is a complicated process but modern technology should be able to 
simplify and speed up payments. What processes are readers using? What works 
and what doesn't? Have your say below as a donor or recipient.
 