
At what age are you too old to achieve breakthrough success in your field? 
That question fascinates so many people, I suspect, because almost nobody 
considers themselves already entirely successful. The unpublished novelist 
longs to be published, the published one yearns for bestsellerdom, the 
bestselling superstar craves the Booker prize. (Also, everyone always thinks 
they’re just a few years from being “over the hill”. The web iscluttered with 
listicles 
<http://www.refinery29.com/2013/07/50115/famous-late-bloomers%C2%A3slide> 
offering the supposedly reassuring information that, say,JK Rowling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jkrowling> wasn’t a publishing sensation 
until, well, her early 30s.)

But a huge new study <http://science.sciencemag.org/content/354/6312/aaf5239>, 
examining the careers of nearly 3,000 physicists from 1893 on, reaches an 
unexpected result. It’s not that youth wins out, nor that years of experience 
lead to late triumphs. Rather, age just isn’t much of a factor. A physicist’s 
highest-impact work “could be the first publication, mid-career, or last 
publication”. What counted more was productivity. If you want to publish a 
celebrated physics paper, the crucial thing isn’t to be young and energetic, 
nor old and wise. It’s to publish a lot of papers.

To be fair, other studies show age does matter sometimes: maths favours the 
young; and physical pursuits, such as ballet or athletics, aren’t exactly 
welcoming to the achy-kneed. Personality also influences the age at which 
success strikes.The economist David Galenson splits creative geniuses 
<http://www.nber.org/papers/w12034> into “conceptual” prodigies such as Picasso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/pablo-picasso> – who burst on to the 
scene with a radical new viewpoint – and “experimental” ones such asCézanne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/cezanne>, whose brilliance emerges 
through trial and error. (In his podcast 
<http://revisionisthistory.com/episodes/07-hallelujah> Revisionist History, 
Malcolm Gladwell <https://www.theguardian.com/books/malcolm-gladwell> applies 
the Cézanne model toLeonard Cohen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/leonard-cohen>’s song Hallelujah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/dec/19/leonard-cohen-hallelujah-christmas>
, which sounds as if it popped into existence as a perfect gem, yet went 
through years of being turgid.) But even Galenson’s work implies age matters 
little.He once polled literary scholars 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2008/10/20/late-bloomers-malcolm-gladwell> 
to make a list of America’s 11 most important poems, then looked up the ages at 
which they’d been composed: a wide span, from 23 to 59.

How to cope with loneliness | Oliver Burkeman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/11/how-to-cope-with-loneliness-oliver-burkeman>
We’re back in the world of the “focusing illusion” 
<https://www.edge.org/response-detail/11984>, whereby we exaggerate the 
importance of one variable (in this case, age) merely by thinking about it 
lots. Something similar happens in romance: we fret about whether partners 
should have similar personalities, or whether opposites attract – when in fact,
psychologists argue 
<https://www.gottman.com/blog/psychology-finally-reveals-the-answer-to-finding-your-soulmate/>
, neither plays a big role in predicting relationship success.

Then there’s childrearing. As a new parent (of which more, doubtless, in 
future columns), I’ve been buffeted by endless contradictory advice on what 
works, so I was pleased to stumble acrossDo Parents Matter? 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/04/books/review/do-parents-matter-robert-levine-sarah-levine.html>
, a new book by Robert and Sarah LeVine. On all sorts of fractious debates 
(sleep training, attachment parenting) they show how neither side holds the 
key: cultures around the world take every kind of approach, and most kids turn 
out OK. In short: you’re probably not too old to find success. You don’t need 
to worry about “romantic compatibility”. And your parenting style probably 
won’t end in disaster – though that last one might be wishful thinking on my 
part.

oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com>
 