
When Arianna Huffington <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ariannahuffington> 
was surviving on three or four hours’ sleep a night, fairly standard for many 
CEOs, decision-making was more difficult. She was also “more irritable, more 
reactive, less present and absolutely less joyful in my life. When I’m sleep 
deprived, I tend to focus on what is not working rather than what is working.” 
Then, in 2007, the founder of the Huffington Post collapsed and woke in a pool 
of her own blood (thanks to a broken cheekbone). Her doctors told her she was 
exhausted – not so much a wake-up call as one that told her to get more sleep. 
Since then, she has become a champion for slumber.

Huffington is running a competition 
<https://www.airbnb.co.uk/night-at/arianna-huffington> to promote her new book, 
The Sleep Revolution 
<http://www.vogue.com/13423144/arianna-huffington-the-sleep-revolution-new-book-interview/>
, in whichthe prize is her bedroom (“a sleep sanctuary”) 
<http://qz.com/655456/arianna-huffington-is-giving-away-a-one-night-stay-in-her-rigidly-controlled-sleep-paradise-on-airbnb/>
 for the night, which means you, too, can sleep like she does: wearing proper 
nightclothes, no pets, with mobile phones and tablets replaced by candles and 
poetry, and, hopefully, eight full hours of sleep.

“I started setting ground rules, such as turning off my devices,” says 
Huffington on how she turned around her sleep habits. “Creating a transition 
ritual to sleep is absolutely key.” This included having a bath, getting into 
pyjamas, and “reading only physical books that have nothing to do with work – 
poetry, novels, philosophy. It’s a 30-minute ritual now, it’s not as if it 
takes a long time. I’ve given myself time to slow down.”

What did she notice about herself when she got more sleep? “I’m much more 
present in my life, much more joyful. I am, without question, a better leader, 
because I can look ahead with more clarity.” But she was the boss when she 
decided she needed eight hours. Could she have built the Huffington Post in 
those years when she was staying awake for longer? “I think the biggest growth 
of the Huffington Post happened after [she slept more]. I think it’s a delusion 
that in order to succeed as an entrepreneur you need to burn out.”

Her goal is to “change cultural norms. It started with the industrial 
revolution, when we began to think human beings could be treated like machines. 
The goal of a machine is to minimise downtime, but human beings are not 
machines. The need for eight hours’ sleep is evolutionary, it’s not negotiable. 
If we ignore that need, we pay a huge price in every aspect of our health and 
cognitive performance.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Farianna-huffington-on-why-she-wants-you-to-sleep-in-her-bed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b481d22f4c0822c67495c50d7f4c5ded9c7087f%2F288_471_6260_3757%2F6260.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arianna%20Huffington%20on%20why%20she%20wants%20you%20to%20sleep%20in%20her%20bed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Farianna-huffington-on-why-she-wants-you-to-sleep-in-her-bed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arianna%20Huffington%20on%20why%20she%20wants%20you%20to%20sleep%20in%20her%20bed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Farianna-huffington-on-why-she-wants-you-to-sleep-in-her-bed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b481d22f4c0822c67495c50d7f4c5ded9c7087f%2F288_471_6260_3757%2F6260.jpg>
 Arianna Huffington in 2013. Photograph: Sarah Lee for the Guardian 
We know that most adults need between seven and nine hours a night. Judging 
from the number of articles (yes, this one included) published on the topic, we 
are endlessly fascinated by the sleep habits of the rich and successful. These 
seem to imply that we would be more productive if only we synchronised our body 
clocks to those of Yahoo’s CEO, Marissa Mayer (four hours’ sleep), or Richard 
Branson, or PepsiCo’s CEO, Indra Nooyi (both are said to get around five hours).

One theory 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/26/opinion/a-unified-theory-of-trump.html?_r=0>
, currently gaining popularity, is that Donald Trump seems so deranged because 
he is chronically sleep-deprived. In his book Trump: Think Like a Billionaire, 
the mogul says he sleeps only between 1am and 5am: “Don’t sleep any more than 
you have to. No matter how brilliant you are, there’s not enough time in the 
day.” On the campaign trail, he has claimed to have slept even less – sometimes 
just an hour a night.

It’s a serious point, says Huffington. “Maybe his biggest contribution to 
politics is going to be as a case study of the dangers of sleep deprivation,” 
she says. “He really displays what the American Academy ofSleep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/sleep> Medicine has described as 
symptoms of chronic sleep deprivation: inability to process information, 
impulsiveness, trouble listening to others, being prone to paranoid tendencies 
such as claiming that thousands of Muslims were cheering the fall of the Twin 
Towers. [These] are all symptoms of someone who is clearly not operating from a 
centred place, which is where you want leaders to operate.” For a president, 
she adds: “Being sleep-deprived is like leading while drunk.”
 