
Reading this on a mobile? Click here to view 
<http://soundcloud.com/arlissa/arlissa-hard-to-love>

Hometown: London.

The lineup: Arlissa <https://www.theguardian.com/music/arlissa> (vocals).

The background: Arlissa is a 19-year-old singer-songwriter of mixed German and 
American parentage. Her debut single isHard to Love Somebody 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/musicblog/2012/aug/09/new-music-arlissa-nas-love-somebody>
, a team-up withNas 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/jul/05/nas-hiphop-belongs-to-all-of-us> 
that looks set to be as successful as his last collaboration with a British 
female artist –Cherry Wine featuring Amy Winehouse 
<http://idolator.com/6982491/nas-amy-winehouse-cherry-wine-video>. And that's 
notwithstanding the part of the song where the legendary rapper promises to 
"lick you off my lips like salt and vinegar chips".

However, although the song is red hot commercially, it's also something of a 
red herring. Arlissa's other songs are in a completely different vein, positing 
her, if anything, as a blackFlorence 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/florence-and-the-machine>. Her voice has some 
of Ms Welch's tremulousness, if less of her tendency to blare. She opened 
Bestival's Big Top stage this year, but only makes her London live debuton 24 
October at Hoxton Bar & Kitchen in London 
<http://www.timeout.com/london/music/event/278270/post-war-years-syron-arlissa>
, pointedly on a mixed bill with Post War Years and Syron.

After hearing her, Nigel Harding, the Radio 1 music policy executive named by 
the Guardian as the fourth most powerful player in the music business 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2011/may/26/nigel-harding-radio-1-bbc>, 
tweeted: "A star is born." Wait till he hears her album tracks, not due for 
release until next year. They're percussive, but not in a club/R&B way – more 
in an indie/tribal way that bears out her fondness forCrystal Fighters 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2009/jun/23/new-band-crystal-fighters>, 
London's premier Basque folk-techno band. Entirely self-penned, they have the 
pensive, self-examining edge ofEmeli Sandé 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/emeli-sande>.

Sticks and Stones, mooted as her first single proper, makes it clear from the 
start: Arlissa is not the newRita Ora <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/rita-ora>
 or another UKRihanna <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/rihanna>, with the sort 
of rhythm you could imagine encouraging Flamenco dancing and an 
ee-oh-ee-oh-ee-oh hook that would makeSting 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/sting> either very proud or very jealous. 
Braveheart opens with a woah-oh-oh and moves into a section with an oriental 
mood, but the pace and melody are undeniably of the type that could make the 
charts here. Into the Light has an almost Riverdance momentum and an epic, 
anthemic quality that could work at Harding's HQ but could also suit the more 
adult-contemporary tone of Radio 2. There hasn't been a woman at the top of the
BBC "sound of" poll for, ooh, a year at least 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/music/soundof/2011/artists/>. Here's a contender for 
2013's one, then.

The buzz: "That chorus is just endlessly infectious" 
<http://www.muumuse.com/2012/08/introduucing-arlissa.html/> – MuuMuse.

The truth: She's the female Sound of 2013.

Most likely to: Taste success next year.

Least likely to: Eat salt and vinegar chips.

What to buy: Arlissa v Nas' Hard to Love Somebody is released on 25 November. 
Her debut single proper, Sticks and Stones, is released by London in February 
2013.

File next to: Florence, Ellie Goulding, Clare Maguire, Dolores O'Riordan 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/artist/13c10976-99f1-4cb4-8fbe-56067e91d865>.

Links: Facebook.com/ArlissaMusic <http://www.facebook.com/ArlissaMusic>.

Monday's new band: Ryan Hemsworth.
 