
Arsène Wenger, outlining his support for the safe-standing movement, has 
expressed his concern thatthe crowd trouble on Wednesday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/27/west-ham-ban-200-supporters-trouble-chelsea-london-stadium>
 at the match between West Ham United and Chelsea could set back the debate.

“It gives an argument, especially to people who are against it,” Wenger said. 
“Personally I am in favour of the resurgence of standing opportunities behind 
the goals and that is not a very good advert to come back to it. Hopefully West 
Ham will get rid of the problem very quickly.”

‘Safe standing’ would not be a return to English football’s dark ages | Daniel 
Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/09/safe-standing-hillsborough-rail-seating-bundesliga-celtic>
Wenger is a rarity among Premier League managers in vocalising his support for 
introducing the kind of rail seating that is commonplace in Germany and has 
been introduced at Celtic this season without any issues so far.

“I feel the closer you are to the positions of the players, the more 
passionate you are about it. It would allow lower prices because you could get 
more spectators inside the stadiums, and maybe a more passionate atmosphere,” 
he said.

English legislation insists on all-seater stadiums but Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> are monitoring the situation in 
case of a change in policy.

Wenger was “surprised” to see the trouble that flared at the London Stadium in 
theEFL Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/efl-cup> match on Wednesday, 
with stewards overwhelmed and riot police needed to keep the opposing fans 
apart.

“We are not used, in England, to face these kind of problems anymore,” the 
Arsenal manager said. “Basically I don’t believe there is a problem with 
hooliganism in England. You cannot say that one minor incident – I heard about 
200 people – is a general problem in the country.”

He is not an advocate of a match behind closed doors if the situation worsens. 
“There is nothing more dull than that. I prefer not to play than playing games 
behind closed doors.”

West Ham to ban 200 supporters after derby trouble against Chelsea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/27/west-ham-ban-200-supporters-trouble-chelsea-london-stadium>
Arsenal travel to Sunderland for the lunchtime fixture on Saturday and welcome 
back both Olivier Giroud and Aaron Ramsey but will be without the forward Lucas 
Pérez.

“We are now in November, they have not played so it’s good to have them back,” 
he said. “I have to be abit cautious, especially with Aaron Ramsey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/23/arsene-wenger-confirms-aaron-ramsey-is-struggling-with-his-hamstring-injury-arsenal>
, because he has not played at all yet. He has only had one week with the team 
so I will be a bit cautious with him.”

Theo Walcott, Nacho Monreal and Santi Cazorla all had fitness tests on Friday.
 