
Arsène Wenger <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsene-wenger> has issued 
a warning about the impact of excessive drinking for elite footballers, 
suggesting that it is significant enough to compromise a player’s position in 
the team. “At the top level every player has to know what he can do and what he 
cannot do,” he said. “There is a lot of competition inside the club and if you 
don’t compete, you don’t play.”

Wenger was at the vanguard when it came to limiting alcohol intake in English 
football when he arrived atArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> in the mid-1990s. A drinking 
culture was pervasive throughout the game then and Wenger wasted little time in 
forbidding alcohol around the club and trying to educate his players about the 
effects it can have for high-performance athletes. “We don’t serve any alcohol 
at the club,” he said on Thursday. “Tony Adams came out and said he wanted to 
change. It was the right period to stop serving alcohol.”

The decision to turn the players’ lounge into a dry bar and to banish 
alcoholic drinks from the team coach coincided with the era that Adams, then 
the club captain, admitted to his struggle with alcoholism. While Wenger does 
not set firm rules on how players choose to spend their free time, he allows 
them to self‑police their behaviour and expects them to keep reasonable 
restraint. “You have to accept you cannot control the players everywhere,” he 
says. “I don’t think it is a major problem now in English sport.”

Wenger was reluctant to get too involved in the details of Wayne Rooney’s 
escapades last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/wayen-rooney-spokesman-celebrations-defends-england>
. It was probably wise not to gee up a player who has enjoyed regular success 
against his team over the years. Besides, the Arsenal manager has enough 
considerations preparing his squad for an important and challenging game on 
Saturday at Old Trafford.

The two most obvious decisions are how he covers for the absence of Héctor 
Bellerín and how much – if any – game time he can allow Alexis Sánchez on his 
return from international duty having played with a hamstring worry.

Wenger watched a recording of the Chile-Uruguay game, during which Sánchez 
scored twice, on Thursday. Unusually for a man who spends so much time watching 
televised football from around the world he missed the live broadcast. “I fell 
asleep,” he said.

In fairness, it took place in the early hours of Wednesday morning UK time. 
Sánchez returned at 4pm on Thursday – less than 48 hours before the lunchtime 
kick‑off atManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>. Watching the video 
will inform Wenger’s decision about whether or not to play Sánchez.

“I know him so well, like all my players that I observe every day, so I will 
be able to see if he was playing with a restriction or not. But the first goal 
he scored he ran from the halfway line and resisted two defenders – if you are 
really injured with a hamstring you cannot do that. It is a very difficult one 
because I am sure he will come back saying he is all right.”

Bellerín is out for four weeks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/17/arsenal-suffer-blow-as-hector-bellerin-is-ruled-out-for-four-weeks-injured-manchester-united>
 after an ankle problem sustained in a challenge from Danny Rose in the last 10 
secondsof the draw against Tottenham Hotspur last time out in the Premier League
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/06/arsenal-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
. “It was a bad one,” Wenger said. “Did Rose want to injure Bellerín? I don’t 
think so. He just went in for the tackle. But it’s annoying to lose Bellerín, 
that’s for sure.” There is no straightforward alternative who is fully fit at 
the moment.

Wenger, however, is keyed up to get these decisions right. “We go into a 
period of big games, one after another. The way we deal with these kinds of 
games will be very important to our position in the league and our ambitions.”
 