
Contemplating the influence of his new centre-back Shkodran Mustafi, Arsène 
Wenger <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsene-wenger> flashed a knowing 
look as his mind turned to Turf Moor. It was not quite on the scale of the 
wet-Tuesday-night-in-Stoke stereotype – for a start those notions tend to be 
addressed to flashier forward players rather than a determined defender – but 
the inference was there.

Mustafi has had a quietly impressive introduction to Premier League life, 
intensifying his efforts in the past week as Arsenal swatted aside Chelsea and 
thenBasel in the Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/28/arsenal-basel-champions-league-match-report>
. But now, Wenger muses, comes a different type of test. “Let’s see how he 
survives in games like Sunday against Burnley, where it is a case of ‘Can I 
head the ball? Can I win the second ball?’” Wenger ponders.

Burnley v Arsenal: match preview
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/30/burnley-arsenal-match-preview>
He is certainly hopeful. Mustafi is no shrinking violet and has made his 
presence felt quite strongly around the place since he wasprised away from 
Valencia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/30/arsenal-complete-signing-shkodran-mustafi>
 at the end of the summer transfer window. A notable characteristic is his 
confident verbals. Whether it is on the training ground, in the dressing room 
or on the pitch, Mustafi is happy to make himself heard.

According to Theo Walcott <https://www.theguardian.com/football/theo-walcott>, 
that has been a blessing for the team. “Of the new players, he especially gets 
people up for games,” Walcott said. “If you are not doing something right he 
tells you. He is a German international and that is the way he is.”

Wenger speaks frequently at the moment about how mature he feels this current 
group are. Mustafi is 24, not exactly ancient for a defender, but he carries 
himself with a lot of experience behind him – he has played, adapted and lived 
in three new countries already (England, Italy and Spain). He has become an 
effective communicator. Wenger likes the look of this ready leadership. 
“Mustafi is a player who is highly focused,” he says.

“On that front he is a typical German. He wants to do the job well every day 
and he speaks his mind. He is vocal in the dressing room. He is not a quiet guy 
who hides. Even when you isolate the pictures of the game and look at that he 
speaks a lot during the game.

“Laurent Koscielny is the leader because he is captain but Mustafi looks like 
he is taking leadership as well at the back. What is surprising is how quickly 
he has integrated into the team and how quickly they have formed a pair that 
works well together.”

Wenger started the season feeling the heat for reacting slowly to a central 
defensive crisis, with Per Mertesacker injured until the new year and the 
Brazilian Gabriel also ruled out for a number of weeks. A rookie pairing for
Arsenal’s opening game against Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/14/arsenal-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
, with Calum Chambers (since sent on loan to Middlesbrough) and the 
inexperienced Rob Holding, got caught in the crossfire as Jürgen Klopp’s 
attackers turned on the style.

Wenger took the flak and waited for his man, welcoming Mustafi at the end of 
August for a fee in excess of £30m. At 6ft, he is small for a central defender 
– at some stage that is bound to be tested by the strongest aerial opponents – 
but so far he has shown a knack for reading danger and dealing with it 
efficiently. The emergence of the Mustafi-Koscielny connection, a partnership 
that shows an instinctive understanding to cover one another, has evolved 
naturally.

In the past week he has quietened down Diego Costa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/24/arsenal-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
 and snuffed out Basel. Consecutive clean sheets may not have been the most 
newsworthy element from those effervescent attacking displays but Wenger is 
thankful for a defensive platform to take to Burnley. It is the kind of game 
Arsenal have been known to trip over on the back of a promising run. Sean 
Dyche’s team made light work of dismantling Liverpooland Watford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/26/burnley-watford-premier-league-match-report>
 on home soil, and Arsenal’s eyes are wide open about what to expect as they 
try to impose their own game.

Arsenal’s back four have played every minute of every Premier League and 
European game together since Mustafi arrived. Wenger is encouraged, but quick 
to point out it is early days to assess how important the defender can become 
in a team who have found a sudden and enticing improvement.

“He has the potential, which is interesting at the moment. It is a bit too 
early. You have to be cautious when a guy has played only three or four games. 
What makes me positive is he is focused, has the desire to do well, and is 24 
years old. For a central defender that is quite young. I would say I have a 
positive feeling.”

Mustafi is absolutely concentrated on doing his job and will cajole his 
team-mates to do the same. As Walcott said: “We are more and more experienced 
in the league now and the intensity starts from the front. We act when the 
opposition gets the ball and we do it as a unit. Everyone acts together, not 
just one or two. Everyone is on a high and we have to make sure it stays that 
way.”
 