
Arsène Wenger plans to offer Jack Wilshere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/jack-wilshere> a contract extension 
around the new year.

The midfielder, on a season-long loan at Bournemouth, will have one year 
remaining when he returns toArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> in the summer and Wenger wants 
to begin talks in January to retain the services of a homegrown player whose 
association with the club goes back to boyhood. Wenger quipped that 
negotiations would not be imminent – “not before the Bournemouth game” – but he 
did want to get cracking on talks soon. “Ideally, yes.”

Jack Wilshere’s struggle to find a role and rhythm eased by Howe’s alchemy | 
Barney Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/25/jack-wilshere-bournemouth-arsenal-eddie-howe>
Wenger has not spoken to Wilshere directly since the player moved to 
Bournemouth. “I leave him to deal with his manager. Every week I ask: ‘How did 
he play?’ I read the reports and when I can see highlights or watch him on 
television, I will watch him. I’m happy that he hasn’t had any injuries since 
he left us.”

Wilshere will be unavailable on Sunday when Eddie Howe’s team visit the 
Emirates, under the regulations that prevent a loan player from featuring 
against his parent club.

Wenger is hoping his team can rediscover some of the verve that has slowed 
down in recent weeks as Arsenal mustered three consecutive drawsagainst 
Tottenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/06/arsenal-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
,Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/manchester-united-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
and Paris Saint-Germain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/23/arsenal-psg-champions-league-match-report>
. “We have to find our game back,” he says. “We didn’t lose but if you do not 
create, that will not last. It’s important that we find our simplicity, speed 
and pacy combinations back. We missed that fluency, that security in our 
decision-making that made us dangerous in the final third. That is what is at 
stake for us.”

Arsène Wenger not panicking on Arsenal second place in Champions League
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/arsene-wenger-no-panic-arsenal-second-champions-league-psg>
There has been quite regular rotation in midfield in the absence of Santi 
Cazorla, and the balance is not yet quite right. “In November you see the first 
signs of players who need a little breather, especially in areas where you 
fight and run a lot. I try to combine both to give players fresh legs and also 
get around the fact that Santi’s not there.”

This weekend might provide an opening for Granit Xhaka, the £35m midfielder 
who has found match time hard to come by since joining in the summer – one of 
the reasons why Wilshere felt a loan would give him more games of his own. 
Wenger outlined his confidence that Xhaka will come good: “I’m very happy with 
his commitment. I think he’s developing well. He hasn’t maybe started enough 
since the start of the season but he is adapting to a different league, a 
different way of playing. Overall I’m happy because every day he’s focused on 
working hard and I’m confident he’ll get his number of games.”
 