
Hi, Art. Lovely weather we’re having. Although they do say you shouldn’t 
really sit in the sun these days …

That’s something I think about all the time as I walk across continents (1). I 
walked across America – beforeForrest Gump 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QgnJ8GpsBG8>, he stole it from me! – and I 
walked across Europe, and I always think about skin cancer on the nose.


Did you get stopped by people who recognised you?


Never. If you carry a spirit inside that says, “I am Mr Nobody,” you become Mr 
Nobody. There are times when I’m in New York when I’m that famous guy, and I 
carry the attitude – then I get stopped all the time.


So no one said, “Why is Art Garfunkel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/art-garfunkel> walking through our town?”


It just never happened. I had a goofy hat on to protect against the sun. I go 
invisible.


Did anyone try to rob you?


No, Paul. The world is a very friendly place. People mind their own business. 
They all want to get to heaven in their own quiet way. Gangs do not roam the 
earth – 99.999% of the earth. I had one incident in Ohio. It was Friday night, 
and that’s very telling. When the sun goes down on a Friday night, people get a 
little nutty. There were three guys in a car, they threw a beer can at me, it 
was three-quarters full and it hit me on the sternum. That was an ouch. I 
thought I’d broken a bone.

Did they shout out anything, like, “That’s for Bright Eyes 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cGyQmH9NZcw>!”? (2)

They didn’t recognise me. They were just assholes being mischievous and drunk. 
It was an Ohio thing.


Have you ever used your celebrity to get a decent table at a restaurant?


Sometimes. 


Ever uttered the immortal phrase: “Don’t you know who I am?”


Never! I’d be so embarrassed. It would be useful, though.


How’s the voice these days? (3)


It’s back. I’ve now done 150 shows since I had vocal trouble. The first 30 to 
40 were dodgy, but I did them anyway. It was very brave stuff. I give myself 
credit for kicking my ass onto the stage and singing, even if I wasn’t quite 
ready. I’m grateful to God. I delight in hearing that Artie Garfunkel sound 
coming out of my mouth.


You’ve described yourself, growing up, as the “weird blond kid”.


“Weird” is a fair word for me. [Pauses to reconsider.] “Weird blond kid”, 
that’s not quite right – that makes me think of Dr Strangelove, and I wasn’t 
that. I was popular and a momma’s boy, easy to like, not weird at all. I was 
the singer and I played a lot of sports. When you’re the ball player, you’re 
not weird – you’re quite normal. Later on, in my adolescence, like so many 
kids, I went introverted and quiet. It’s weird how much homework I did.


You were highly academic (4). Are you the most qualified man in pop?


If the answer is no, who would be my second? It’s odd that I had hit records 
with this academia.


Around 1971, you did both simultaneously by spending nine months working as a 
maths teacher at a private school in Connecticut.

We make weird left and right turns in our lives. You imagine that the country 
and not the city is where you want to be, that a cottage in the country might 
be good. I got in front of the kids and put geometry stuff on the blackboard 
and I would say, “Yeah, I’ve hadBridge Over Troubled Water 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H_a46WJ1viA>, but we’re not going to talk 
about that, we’re going to talk about geometry, and at the end of the year I’ll 
deal with the fame trip.” And they were like, “He’s really talking geometry!”


You’re one of few countercultural musicians with a prehistory in the 1950s …


But I’m a New Yorker, so I had access to the Brill Building. I had a talented 
buddy who played good rhythm guitar named Paul Simon. I had the ability to do 
rockabilly like Buddy Holly. Paul plays great rhythm rock guitar, and we could 
harmonise and be slick. We becameprofessional recording artists at age 16 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1yYkGB0xpzE> [as Tom & Jerry].


The Everly Brothers were your heroes, weren’t they?


Don and Phil are not praised enough. As much as we think they’re gods, they’re 
higher than gods. To me they beat Elvis.


Do you feel embarrassed to have outsold them?


Yes, I do. Because we learned it from them and we outstripped them. But they’d 
say, “Yes, but we didn’t have the songs of Paul Simon.” And we’d say, “Yes, 
that’s right.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdTCNwgzM2rQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdTCNwgzM2rQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdTCNwgzM2rQ&media=>
You and Paul fell out early on, for five years. What happened? 


He made a record without telling me. That was 1956, maybe 1957. He was my best 
friend and I thought friendship involves candour and telling a friend what’s 
up, so the fact that he had a hidden surprise shocked and hurt me.


Did the friendship eventually recover?


Not really.


So it was a sign of splits to come?


Yes. 


It’s ironic that one of rock’s iconic unions is essentially flawed …


It’s fascinating – worth a whole book. 


Strange also that Simon & Garfunkel’s sound is so emblematic of the 1960s, and 
yet so apart from the tumult. It’s so reflective and melancholic …


Good point. Paul’s poetic style was so advanced, so shades of dark grey. He 
had an unusual, sophisticated poetic gift.


In a way, you were a precursor of the early-70s troubadours, the James Taylors 
and Jackson Brownes, weren’t you?


You could say those artists are children of my sound, yeah. We were folkies – 
softer, more thoughtful. We work with goosebumps, with melody.


Did you feel like you were at the centre of things?


There were a lot of moments where I pinched myself with my good fortune. I was 
certainly aware that we were heroes in this age.


Who were your peers?


The Mamas and the Papas. John Sebastian and the Lovin’ Spoonful. The Beatles, 
of course; I wasn’t a great Stones fan. The Beatles were it, when they made 
Rubber Soul and moved onto Revolver and Sgt Pepper – not just a collection of 
songs, but the album as art form. We were terribly impressed, and that shone a 
light on the path that led to Bookends [Simon & Garfunkel’s 1968 album].


You were involved in the production and arrangements on those Simon & 
Garfunkel albums. Do you feel your role has been undervalued?


Absolutely. 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Fart-garfunkel-paul-simon-jack-nicholson-bridge-over-troubled-water-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435143991794%2F3ff9a84f-5a93-4caa-bbc6-ef80e3d8840a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Art%20Garfunkel%3A%20'Weird%20is%20a%20fair%20word%20for%20me'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Fart-garfunkel-paul-simon-jack-nicholson-bridge-over-troubled-water-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Art%20Garfunkel%3A%20%27Weird%20is%20a%20fair%20word%20for%20me%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Fart-garfunkel-paul-simon-jack-nicholson-bridge-over-troubled-water-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435143991794%2F3ff9a84f-5a93-4caa-bbc6-ef80e3d8840a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Simon & Garfunkel … Going Grammy crazy with David Bowie, Yoko Ono and John 
Lennon. Photograph: Ron Galella/WireImage 
In 2002, McCartney wanted to change the credits to McCartney-Lennon. Have you 
ever thought it should be Garfunkel & Simon?


I’m not even going to touch that question – the word “silly” comes to mind. I 
think the world gives me respect. You do make a good point when you say the 
production of a record is not valued. Yes, I was a record producer. I sent Paul 
and Artie out to sing, and then I – and Paul, and [engineer] Roy Halee – put it 
together and made the record.


Frank Sinatra changed the lyric on his version of Mrs Robinson from “Jesus” to 
“Jilly loves you more than you will know”, didn’t he?


I never met Frank. People who met him say he was a very nice guy. Paul had 
correspondence with him. He said, “I don’t like it, you’re not respecting the 
writer.” And his office came back with, “Shut up, kid.”


Have you heard the versions of Bridge Over Troubled Water by Elvis, Aretha, 
Johnny Cash and Bon Jovi?


I don’t know the Bon Jovi version. I’m not a fan of Aretha’s rhythm and blues 
version. I thought I topped them all. I’m sorry; it sounds inflated. The song’s 
brilliant, it should be quite possible to do another great version, but it was 
a hell of a tour de force that I went from so soft to so strong at the end.


Sometimes people call it Bridge Over Troubled Waters, plural. The same goes 
for the Sound(s) of Silence (5). Do you upbraid people for getting it wrong?


I lash them. 


You do have a reputation for not suffering fools gladly …


Correct. I’m working at it.


Do you meet many fools?


In this day and age, a lot. 


Do you care less about the niceties of social convention as you get older?


Well, you’re going to paint me as a ballbuster when you say that. Do you mean, 
am I more judgmental? Yes, Paul. You laugh, but the laugh won’t show.


Duly noted. Was Bridge … the last record of the 60s or the first of the 70s?


I’m a 60s guy, and that capped it off. Aren’t the Beatles a 60s thing? The 
Beatles were to the 60s what Elton John was to the 70s.


Did that represent a handing over of the baton, or a vertiginous drop down in 
terms of quality?


A vertiginous drop down; a real precipice that fell off.


How about David Bowie? I can’t quite see you as a Bowie man …


I like David. I skied with him once. He’s a very charming Jack of all trades. 
Like Dylan, he’s a clever charlatan; he wears many hats. But this interview 
shouldn’t be of me putting anybody down.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DC-PNun-Pfb4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DC-PNun-Pfb4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DC-PNun-Pfb4&media=>
You were really into the charts when you were younger, and nicknamed yourself 
Tom Graph because of your love of statistics. Did you check to see whose album 
charted higher in 1975 out of your Breakaway and Paul Simon’s Still Crazy After 
All These Years?


Oh, I don’t compare against Paul. I’m just aware of who’s popular and how 
popular they are. You’re raising the comparison as too much of an issue.


You have famously read more than a thousand books, haven’t you?


What a nutcase. It’s 1,217 now. The last one I read? I don’t know. 


You also read the Random House dictionary.


Yes, all 1,664 pages. It took me a couple of years.


Why?


Why not? I collected words I liked, words that would improve my vocabulary, so 
I could be more erudite and talk to you. Words that are lovely-sounding shells 
on the beach.


Is there a finer-sounding word than eschatological?


You’ve taken the “c” and made it a “ch”, I see. It’s a very Lenny Bruce word …


Not scatological – eschatological. 


I don’t know that one. I’m not that bright.


You starred in several movies – Carnal Knowledge (1971), Bad Timing (1980), 
Boxing Helena (1993) – about sexual obsession.


Oh yeah. Interesting point.


Did you pick them, or did they pick you?


When I started my [solo] career [in 1973] with Angel Clare, there was a song 
called Down in the Willow Garden that went: “He stabs his lover with a bayonet 
and throws her in the river.” I think I was playing counterpoint to my sweet 
tenor. I’m a bit of a momma’s boy – I had the sweetest mom. I was raised middle 
class. I might be working against such a sweet suburban background when I look 
to play the disturbed killer. It’s counterpoint. I do this time and again.


Did it take you a long time to get over the suicide of your [actress] 
girlfriend Laurie Bird (6)?


It took half of the 80s. Laurie Bird died on me when I was coming home from 
Bad Timing. That was 1979, and I was suitably shocked. I became very reclusive. 
I did the Concert In Central Park with Paul [in 1981], but I had a very 
introverted time while I dwelled upon how great Laurie Bird was. People would 
say, “Yes, but she’s gone,” and I would say, “I also think about how great JS 
Bach was, and he’s gone, too.”


Did your rock’n’roll cachet increase after your 2004-5 arrests for possession 
of cannabis?


You’re going for all the joys, aren’t you, Paul? Let me talk about some of the 
things I found out about you … Listen, who doesn’t smoke a joint? So I’m the 
celebrity and I get to have to talk about this …


Sorry.


You’re not that sorry.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Fart-garfunkel-paul-simon-jack-nicholson-bridge-over-troubled-water-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435144066434%2F17f142a9-4eea-43ef-bef0-d6c208d606b0-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Art%20Garfunkel%3A%20'Weird%20is%20a%20fair%20word%20for%20me'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Fart-garfunkel-paul-simon-jack-nicholson-bridge-over-troubled-water-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Art%20Garfunkel%3A%20%27Weird%20is%20a%20fair%20word%20for%20me%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Fart-garfunkel-paul-simon-jack-nicholson-bridge-over-troubled-water-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435144066434%2F17f142a9-4eea-43ef-bef0-d6c208d606b0-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Brothers in suits … Simon and Garfunkel in the 1960s. Photograph: GAB 
Archive/Redferns 
It’s interesting to ask someone with the aura of the choirboy about their 
debauched side. How much of a party animal were you in the 70s?


I discovered Hollywood, I lived in LA, in Malibu, I was with Laurie then, I 
made a film with Jack [Nicholson – Carnal Knowledge]. I liked the acting 
community. We hung out. I went to dinner, and some film director would 
recognise you and say, “Come to the house,” and you’d go and smoke a joint. 
You’d trade scraps of paper with phone numbers on. That was the time of staying 
up well after midnight.


How wild was Jack?


Jack’s not that wild. Jack is a fucking first-class artist, a brilliant artist 
who looks to do brilliant work with intelligent scripts – that’s Jack. Sure, he 
loves women. Why do we seek to become famous? We want the women. That’s what 
it’s about. He’s just a great, funny New Jersey guy with a medieval code of 
honour, who is very loyal. We have a lot of mutual respect.


On the other hand, you once said your relationship with Paul Simon caused more 
pain than your relationships with anybody else you could name.


I said that? That seems so flamboyant. Some journalist pulled that nonsense 
out of me. That’s not me.


Surveying the last 60 years of that friendship …


Paul Simon is a man who has enormously enriched my life, period. 


And vice versa?


Yeah, we’ve enriched each other’s lives. What would have been his life if his 
friend Artie didn’t sing so good and been so good and produced those records so 
good? What would it have been? Something smaller.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcGyQmH9NZcw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcGyQmH9NZcw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcGyQmH9NZcw&media=>
Nevertheless, it’s a mythically turbulent relationship.


It’s quite imperfect, and the imperfection makes you miss that they couldn’t 
make more albums. “Can’t you guys get it together, we like those albums, you’re 
almost a terrifically fused set of talents, almost” – the “almost” thing is 
driving us crazy. I see it. I get it. I share it. I’m a huge Simon & Garfunkel 
fan. Tell that to Paul! I want to see them get it on. There’s a sixth album in 
them.


Maybe because you reached such stratospheric heights with the last one (7), 
who would want the pressure of trying to match it?


That’s what he says. I don’t see it that way. We do everything by taking first 
one step, then a second, and letting it grow. You mean Simon & Garfunkel 
couldn’t gather around the next Paul Simon song that was different to 
everything we did, a nice departure, more jazz-inflected? [Imagining the 
dialogue between Simon, Garfunkel and Roy Halee:] “You haven’t played that card 
yet, boys, let’s see what you got, Paul.” “Oh quite interesting, Artie, what 
could you do with that, oh, that’s great, Artie!” There you go, we’re on to the 
first song on the next album. Never mind the pressure of what you’re supposed 
to do. I don’t live with the pressure with how hard it would be to top [Bridge 
Over Troubled Water]. Roy Halee lives in Denver, he’s alive and well. I’m alive 
and well. I’ve continued to grow musically. My respect for Paul Simon is 
undimmed here in 2015. “Get it together, boys! What’s your problem?” I’ll tell 
you the problem: Paul Simon is shadow-boxing against Simon & Garfunkel.


Art Garfunkel is touring the UK in September 
<http://www.ticketmaster.co.uk/Art-Garfunkel-tickets/artist/735151>.


Footnotes

(1) In the early 80s, Art walked across Japan. From 1983 to 1997, he walked 
across the US, and between 1998 and 2011, he walked across Europe.

(2) His 1979 hit from Watership Down, the UK’s biggest-selling song that year. 

(3) In 2010, he had a vocal-cord paresis.

(4) After majoring in architecture, he earned a BA in art history, followed by 
an MA in mathematics. He also completed coursework towards a doctorate in maths 
education during Simon & Garfunkel’s heyday.

(5) The single was singular; the album (of almost the same name) was plural. 


(6) She had a small part in Woody Allen’s Annie Hall, as did, coincidentally, 
Paul Simon.

(7) Bridge Over Troubled Water was the biggest-selling album of all time – 
until Thriller.
 