
David Hockney's elderly parents, Marc Quinn's blood-filled head 
<http://www.npg.org.uk/collections/search/portrait/mw138260/Marc-Quinn-Self> 
and Dora Carrington's painting of an idyllic Lake District farmhouse are among 
25 works that will be plastered on 30,000 billboard and poster sites across the 
UK this summer.

Details for the Art Everywhere <http://arteverywhere.org.uk/> project, which 
aims to be the UK's biggest art exhibition, were announced on Wednesday. After 
its successful launch last year, the organisers promised 2014 would be bigger 
and better, and this year will run over six weeks instead of last year's two.

"This is a fantastic initiative and I hope it goes on for many, many years to 
come," said the artistAntony Gormley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gormley>, who has donated a piece of 
digital art that will be available to download for free. "Why is it in our 
culture that we value numeracy and literacy but not visual awareness? All 
children, if you give them a piece of paper and a pencil, they will draw just 
like they talk or play with a ball."

The 25 artworks were voted on by the public - 38,000 votes via Facebook - 
chosen from a longlist of 70 works in public galleries. The most popular was
Hockney's My Parents (1977) 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/hockney-my-parents-t03255>, followed by 
Carrington's Farm at Watendlath (1921) 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/carrington-farm-at-watendlath-t04945> and 
Dame Laura Knight's second world war work Ruby Loftus screwing a Breech-ring 
<http://www.iwm.org.uk/collections/item/object/15504>. Fourth was Grayson 
Perry's tapestry The Annunciation of the Virgin Deal from 2012.

Perry said he was flattered although, with Gormley, refused to be drawn in to 
a debate on the list itself. "Popularity is a dangerous drug to flirt with in 
the art world," he said. "Being popular is sometimes something to avoid." Perry 
said given that street art was everywhere these days, it was nice to put 
gallery art on the streets.

Art Everywhere was dreamt up Richard Reed, the co-founder of Innocent Drinks, 
and is supported by charity theArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Fund. Its director Stephen 
Deuchar said it was significant that all the art is publicly owned. "Our hope 
is that this project will help encourage people to visit art galleries more 
than they do already."
 