
If you wanted relief from stories about tyre factories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/03/michelin-to-close-factory-northern-ireland-ballymena>
 andsteel plants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/20/tata-steel-expected-to-announce-1200-job-losses-in-uk>
 closing, you could try relaxing witha new 300-page report from Bank of America 
Merrill Lynch 
<http://www.bofaml.com/content/dam/boamlimages/documents/articles/D3_006/11511357.pdf>
 which looks at the likely effects of a robot revolution.

But you might not end up reassured. Though it promises robot carers for an 
ageing population,it also forecasts huge numbers of jobs being wiped out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/05/robot-revolution-rise-machines-could-displace-third-of-uk-jobs>
: up to 35% of all workers in the UK and 47% of those in the US, including 
white-collar jobs, seeing their livelihoods taken away by machines.

Haven’t we heard all this before, though? From the luddites of the 19th 
century to print unions protesting in the 1980s about computers, there have 
always been people fearful about the march of mechanisation. And yet we keep on 
creating new job categories.

However, there are still concerns that the combination of artificial 
intelligence (AI) – which is able to make logical inferences about its 
surroundings and experience – married to ever-improving robotics, will wipe 
away entire swaths of work and radically reshape society.

“The poster child for automation is agriculture,” says Calum Chace, author of 
Surviving AI and the novel Pandora’s Brain. “In 1900, 40% of the US labour 
force worked in agriculture. By 1960, the figure was a few per cent. And yet 
people had jobs; the nature of the jobs had changed.

“But then again, there were 21 million horses in the US in 1900. By 1960, 
there were just three million. The difference was that humans have cognitive 
skills – we could learn to do new things. But that might not always be the case 
as machines get smarter and smarter.”

What if we’re the horses to AI’s humans? To those who don’t watch the industry 
closely, it’s hard to see how quickly the combination of robotics and 
artificial intelligence is advancing. Last week a team from the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technologyreleased a video showing a tiny drone flying through a 
lightly forested area at 30mph <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_qah8oIzCwk>, 
avoiding the trees – all without a pilot, using only its onboard processors. Of 
course it can outrun a human-piloted one.

MIT has also built a “robot cheetah” which can jump over obstacles of up to 
40cm without help <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_luhn7TLfWU>. Add to that 
the standard progress of computing, where processing power doubles roughly 
every 18 months (or, equally, prices for capability halve), and you can see why 
people like Chace are getting worried.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_qah8oIzCwk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_qah8oIzCwk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_qah8oIzCwk&media=>
 Drone flies autonomously through a forested area 
But the incursion of AI into our daily life won’t begin with robot cheetahs. 
In fact, it began long ago; the edge is thin, but the wedge is long. Cooking 
systems with vision processors can decide whether burgers are properly cooked. 
Restaurants can give customers access to tablets with the menu and let people 
choose without needing service staff.

Lawyers who used to slog through giant files for the “discovery” phase of a 
trial can turn it over to a computer.An “intelligent assistant” called Amy 
<https://x.ai/about/> will, via email, set up meetings autonomously. Google 
announced last week that you can getGmail to write appropriate responses to 
incoming emails 
<http://gmailblog.blogspot.co.uk/2015/11/computer-respond-to-this-email.html>. 
(You still have to act on your responses, of course.)

Further afield, Foxconn, the Taiwanese company which assembles devices for 
Apple and others,aims to replace much of its workforce with automated systems 
<http://www.pcworld.com/article/2890032/foxconn-expects-robots-to-take-over-more-factory-work.html>
. The AP news agency gets news stories written automatically about sports and 
businessby a system developed by Automated Insights 
<http://www.theverge.com/2015/10/20/9572975/automated-insights-wordsmith-natural-language>
. The longer you look, the more you find computers displacing simple work. And 
the harder it becomes to find jobs for everyone.

So how much impact will robotics and AI have on jobs, and on society? Carl 
Benedikt Frey, who with Michael Osborne in 2013 published the seminal paperThe 
Future of Employment: How Susceptible Are Jobs to Computerisation? 
<http://www.futuretech.ox.ac.uk/future-employment-how-susceptible-are-jobs-computerisation-oms-working-paper-dr-carl-benedikt-frey-m>
 – on which the BoA report draws heavily – says that he doesn’t like to be 
labelled a “doomsday predictor”.

He points out that even while some jobs are replaced, new ones spring up that 
focus more on services and interaction with and between people. “The 
fastest-growing occupations in the past five years are all related to 
services,” he tells theObserver. “The two biggest are Zumba instructor and 
personal trainer.”

Frey observes that technology is leading to a rarification of leading-edge 
employment, where fewer and fewer people have the necessary skills to work in 
the frontline of its advances. “In the 1980s, 8.2% of the US workforce were 
employed in new technologies introduced in that decade,” he notes. “By the 
1990s, it was 4.2%. For the 2000s, our estimate is that it’s just 0.5%. That 
tells me that, on the one hand, the potential for automation is expanding – but 
also that technology doesn’t create that many new jobs now compared to the 
past.”

This worries Chace. “There will be people who own the AI, and therefore own 
everything else,” he says. “Which means homo sapiens will be split into a 
handful of ‘gods’, and then the rest of us.

“I think our best hope going forward is figuring out how to live in an economy 
of radical abundance, where machines do all the work, and we basically play.”

Arguably, we might be part of the way there already; is a dance fitness 
programme like Zumba anything more than adult play? But, as Chace says, a 
workless lifestyle also means “you have to think about a universal income” – a 
basic, unconditional level of state support.

Perhaps the biggest problem is that there has been so little examination of 
the social effects of AI. Frey and Osborne are contributing to Oxford 
University’s programme on the future impacts of technology; at Cambridge,
Observer columnist John Naughton and David Runciman are leading a project to 
map the social impacts of such change. But technology moves fast; it’s hard 
enough figuring out what happened in the past, let alone what the future will 
bring.

But some jobs probably won’t be vulnerable. Does Frey, now 31, think that he 
will still have a job in 20 years’ time? There’s a brief laugh. “Yes.” 
Academia, at least, looks safe for now – at least in the view of the academics.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fartificial-intelligence-homo-sapiens-split-handful-gods%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F156bebd67ca02f648c6c7dee317cb3c3344cd19a%2F0_0_2200_1320%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Artificial%20intelligence%3A%20%E2%80%98Homo%20sapiens%20will%20be%20split%20into%20a%20handful%20of%20gods%20and%20the%20rest%20of%20us%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fartificial-intelligence-homo-sapiens-split-handful-gods%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Artificial%20intelligence%3A%20%E2%80%98Homo%20sapiens%20will%20be%20split%20into%20a%20handful%20of%20gods%20and%20the%20rest%20of%20us%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fartificial-intelligence-homo-sapiens-split-handful-gods%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F156bebd67ca02f648c6c7dee317cb3c3344cd19a%2F0_0_2200_1320%2F2200.jpg>
 Smartphone manufacturer Foxconn is aiming to automate much of its production 
facility. Photograph: Pichi Chuang/Reuters 
The danger of change is not destitution, but inequality

Productivity is the secret ingredient in economic growth. In the late 18th 
century, the cleric and scholar Thomas Malthus notoriously predicted that a 
rapidly rising human population would result in misery and starvation.

But Malthus failed to anticipate the drastic technological changes - from the 
steam-powered loom to the combine harvester - that would allow the production 
of food and the other necessities of life to expand even more rapidly than the 
number of hungry mouths. The key to economic progress is this ability to do 
more with the same investment of capital and labour.

The latest round of rapid innovation, driven by the advance of robots and AI, 
is likely to power continued improvements.

Recent research <http://www.voxeu.org/article/robots-productivity-and-jobs> 
led by Guy Michaels at the London School of Economics looked at detailed data 
across 14 industries and 17 countries over more than a decade, and found that 
the adoption of robots boosted productivity and wages without significantly 
undermining jobs.

Robotisation has reduced the number of working hours needed to make things; 
but at the same time as workers have been laid off from production lines, new 
jobs have been created elsewhere, many of them more creative and less dirty. So 
far, fears of mass layoffs as the machines take over have proven almost as 
unfounded as those that have always accompanied other great technological leaps 
forward.

There is an important caveat to this reassuring picture, however. The 
relatively low-skilled factory workers who have been displaced by robots are 
rarely the same people who land up as app developers or analysts, and
technological progress is already being blamed for exacerbating inequality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/05/robot-revolution-rise-machines-could-displace-third-of-uk-jobs>
, a trend Bank of America Merrill Lynch believes may continue in future.

So the rise of the machines may generate huge economic benefits; but unless it 
is carefully managed, those gains may be captured by shareholders and highly 
educated knowledge workers, exacerbating inequality and leaving some groups out 
in the cold. Heather Stewart
 