
A solar eclipse mirror ball, giant cuddly toys and an experimental 
16th-century costume drama filmed on the banks of the river Tamar will all 
feature in new commissions celebrating 70 years of one of the UK’s most 
important public art collections.

The Arts Council collection <http://www.artscouncilcollection.org.uk/> was 
established in 1946 “to promote and enrich knowledge of modern and contemporary 
art” and is the UK’s most widely seen body of art of its type. It now has 8,000 
works by over 2,000 artists, it organises touring exhibitions, and it lends to 
public institutions including hospitals, schools and universities.

To celebrate its 70th year, the ACC on Friday announced details of eight new 
commissions that will go on display in 2016 before joining the permanent 
collection.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F151454360&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F151454360>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F151454360&media=>
The first to be seen is a film by John Akomfrah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jan/07/john-akomfrah-vertical-sea-arnolfini-bristol-lisson-gallery-london-migration>
 which gets its first full premiere at Arnolfini in Bristol on Saturday. Called 
Tropikos, the film features characters in 16th-century costume and a narrative 
exploring the relationship between waterways in south-west England and the 
slave trade.

The other commissions are from artists Hurvin Anderson, Marvin Gaye Chetwynd, 
Ryan Gander, Mark Leckey, Heather Phillipson, Keith Piper and Katie Paterson. 
Paterson is making a mirror ball that will have images of nearly every solar 
eclipse documented by humankind.

Phillipson’s work, called TRUE TO SIZE, will open at Plymouth Arts Centre in 
June and while it is still in the planning and thought stage it will, she said, 
feature giant cuddly toys for visitors to interact with.

“It is great to be part of a collection which has this history,” said 
Phillipson. “You are in the company of so many incredible works ... which is 
also slightly intimidating.”

As well as the eight new works, there will be two new touring exhibitions. 
Night at the Museum, curated by Ryan Gander, will explore the collection’s 
holdings of figurative sculptures; and Drawing from Life: People on Paper, a 
drawings show that will feature surprising works from early careers such as a 
1939 self-portrait by Richard Hamilton and Eduardo Paolozzi’s Drawings from 
Rembrandt, 1945.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Farts-council-collection-announces-70th-anniversary-commissions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fabd1f3698007290e80f61dc54801408bffe0d567%2F0_345_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arts%20Council%20Collection%20announces%2070th%20anniversary%20commissions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Farts-council-collection-announces-70th-anniversary-commissions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arts%20Council%20Collection%20announces%2070th%20anniversary%20commissions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Farts-council-collection-announces-70th-anniversary-commissions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fabd1f3698007290e80f61dc54801408bffe0d567%2F0_345_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
 Detail from Eduardo Paolozzi’s Drawings from Rembrandt. Photograph: Arts 
Council Collection 
Jill Constantine, head of the ACC, said: “Our 70th anniversary commissions 
demonstrate what we do best – putting artists at the heart of the collection. 
We are thrilled that the artists, half of whom are joining the collection for 
the first time, will all be represented by such significant pieces.”

More established British artists also paid tribute to the collection. Bridget 
Riley <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/bridget-riley> recalled the ACC 
purchasing a work called Movement in Squares from her first exhibition in 1962. 
“This was a most surprising and encouraging event,” she said. “It was my first 
acquisition by a public collection. It made me feel that I had indeed at last 
found my way.”

The collection owns Antony Gormley’s Field for the British Isles, a sea of 
around 40,000 miniature terracotta figures. Gormley said: “I will never forget 
seeing Field reflected in the mirrored pillars of an old supermarket in 
Colchester, under the perpendicular vaults of Gloucester cathedral cloisters, 
in the haunting environment of the old carriage works in Gateshead, against the 
verdant landscape of a 19th-century park in Wakefield – and most recently in a 
very fully adapted church in Scunthorpe.

“I cannot imagine a better collection for Field to exist in than the Arts 
Council collection and it is a huge privilege to be part of it. I trust and 
hope that this important reservoir of the fruits of this country’s unique 
creativity continues robustly, well into the 21st century.”

Roger Hiorns said: “The spine and the backbone of national art is the Arts 
Council collection. It collects artists at a young age and supports them at a 
tender time, usually broke and up against it.

“In the early stages of establishing who knows what, the Arts Council 
collection made it clear that it wanted to talk seriously and collect liberally 
with a wide and enlightened mind. A rare thing today.”

Mark Wallinger said: “The collection acquired my work Angel in 1997. Since 
then it has been exhibited in no less than 22 different galleries the length 
and breadth of this country. I can’t tell you the amount of people I bump into 
who cite seeing this work.”

Tropikos is at Arnolfini, Bristol, until 10 April
 