
The end of the tax year is just around the corner, so you’ve only got a few 
days to make sure your money is working as hard as possible for you before the 
new tax allowances and bands come in.

This tax year ends on Tuesday 5 April. Here are four things to do before then.

• Use your Isa allowance Savers have 10 days to make use of their Isa allowance
 <https://www.gov.uk/individual-savings-accounts/overview>. The amount you can 
invest resets at the end of the tax year, and there’s no way of carrying it 
over. In other words, this is a “use it or lose it” annual allowance.

There are two types of Isa – cash, and stocks and shares – and if you are a UK 
resident aged 18 or over you can invest up to £15,240 this tax year. You can 
save it in one type of account or split the allowance across both types.

Those aged 16 and 17 also have a £15,240 Isa allowance, but may only sign up 
for a cash Isa. Meanwhile, parents can also put up to £4,080 intojunior Isas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/junior-isa> for each of their children under 
the age of 18 (though you cannot have a junior Isa as well as a child trust 
fund).

Many people wait until the last few days as they deliberate over what to 
invest in, or whether they should invest at all, says Jason Hollands, managing 
director of investment firm Tilney Bestinvest. He argues that if you are 
mulling over whether to sign up for a stocks and shares Isa, the important 
thing is to secure your allowance now, “and that doesn’t matter whether you are 
bullish or bearish on the markets. The important thing is to fund your Isa with 
cash. You can then come back later and decide where to invest it when you are 
more confident in your plan.”

There are products that let you do this. Investment giant Fidelity offers the 
Isa Cash Park, which can operate as a cash shelter, giving you more time to 
decide where to invest (it currently doesn’t pay any interest).

Many people would probably prefer to take out a cash Isa, but the interest 
rates are dismal. One of the best rates for those looking for instant/easy 
access is Coventry building society’s 1.4%, while even top-paying five-year 
fixed-rateIsas <https://www.theguardian.com/money/isas> aren’t offering much 
above 2%.

In this month’s budget the chancellor announced that the total amount you can 
save each year into all Isas will be increased to £20,000 from April 2017. And 
from the same date under-40s will be able to take out alifetime Isa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/19/lifetime-isa-budget-first-time-buyers-workplace-pension>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F26%2Ftax-year-ends-new-allowances-rules-get-finances-in-order%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b572d2215f91b7d98bc3ad59c061d7767071570%2F0_1163_3440_2062%2F3440.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=As%20the%20tax%20year%20ends%2C%20four%20things%20you%20must%20do%20in%20the%20next%2010%20days&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F26%2Ftax-year-ends-new-allowances-rules-get-finances-in-order%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=As%20the%20tax%20year%20ends%2C%20four%20things%20you%20must%20do%20in%20the%20next%2010%20days&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F26%2Ftax-year-ends-new-allowances-rules-get-finances-in-order%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b572d2215f91b7d98bc3ad59c061d7767071570%2F0_1163_3440_2062%2F3440.jpg>
 Child benefit will be clawed back via the tax system if you or your partner 
have an ‘adjusted net income’ of more than £50,000. Photograph: Janine Wiedel 
Photolibrary/Alamy 
• Keep your child benefit If you are a parent who earns a little over £50,000 
a year, then now is the time to act if you haven’t already.

Lots of families have already been hit by the government’s “high income child 
benefit charge <https://www.gov.uk/child-benefit-tax-charge/overview>” – child 
benefit is clawed back via the tax system if either you or your partner have an 
“adjusted net income” of more than £50,000. That means total taxable income 
(ie, basic salary plus any company benefits, plus savings interest and 
dividend/rental income) minus things such as pension contributions and 
charitable giving.

The clawback is at the rate of 1% of the amount of child benefit for every 
£100 of income in excess of £50,000. So when your adjusted net income hits 
£60,000 you effectively lose all the benefit. If you earn, say, £53,000 or 
£54,000, you may be able to get yourself below the vital £50,000 threshold and 
keep all your child benefit.

Personal savings allowance changes: should I still get a cash Isa?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/12/should-i-still-get-cash-isa-personal-savings-allowance-interest-tax-free>
This isn’t some kind of shady tax dodge – the most obvious way to reduce your 
adjusted net income is topay more into your workplace pension scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/sep/28/child-benefit-pension-contributions-higher-earners>
, which is precisely what everyone is always being told they should do. For 
example, you could make additional voluntary contributions. With some 
employers, for every £1 you pay in AVCs the company will pay an extra 50p or 
even £1 into your account – making this even more of a no-brainer.

• Reduce your inheritance tax bill If your estate, including your home, is 
likely to be hit byinheritance tax <https://www.gov.uk/inheritance-tax/overview>
 when you die, and you can afford to give some money away now, then do it.

IHT is paid if someone dies leaving an estate worth more than £325,000. The 
tax is charged at 40% on anything above that threshold, so reducing the value 
of the part of your estate that is above £325,000 will cut the IHT payable when 
you do pass away.

One way to do this is by using your annual exemption, which allows you to give 
away £3,000 of gifts each tax year (6 April-5 April) without being liable for 
IHT.

You can carry over any leftover annual exemption from one tax year to the 
next, but the maximum in one year is £6,000. On top of that you can make small 
gifts of up to £250 each to as many individuals as you like. Also, there is no 
tax on wedding or civil partnership gifts worth up to £5,000 to a child, £2,500 
to a grandchild or great-grandchild, and £1,000 to anyone else.

A new allowance that applies when a family home is passed on to a child or 
grandchildis being phased in from April 2017 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/inheritance-tax-main-residence-nil-rate-band-and-the-existing-nil-rate-band/inheritance-tax-main-residence-nil-rate-band-and-the-existing-nil-rate-band>
 (it starts at £100,000, rising to £175,000 in 2020-21) and will sit on top of 
the existing £325,000 threshold. The government has claimed this will take the 
family home out of IHT “for all but the wealthiest”.

• Take advantage of employee benefits Many employers offer salary sacrifice 
schemes such as Cycle to Work which can save you up to 42% off the cost of a 
bike; or childcare vouchers which effectively allow you to pay for part of your 
childcare tax-free – the vouchers are worth up to £55 a week, or £243 a month. 
Don’t miss your chance to sign up – the deadline for registration is often 
around 31 March or 1 April.
 