
For some reason I find myself in the market for some comfort reading. Despite 
an unprecedentedly brutal recent cull, I have more than 5,000 books. There must 
be something.

But finding the right comfort read is a delicate art. If you’re looking for 
something to while away the time when you are ill or convalescing, it can be 
relatively straightforward. Something you have already read – and reread, and 
reread – and which it will take virtually no energy at all to reread again. 
Hell, I could probably lie back, close my eyes and reciteMaeve Binchy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jul/31/maeve-binchy>’s Light a Penny 
Candle to myself if I had to. In fact, I know I could. It’s how I get through 
sex.

But if you’re banishing a mood rather than a condition, things are trickier. I 
am looking at my beloved Wodehouses at the moment and want to burn them. You 
unthinking fool, Wooster! You lucky, prewar, club-dwelling bastard! Where’s my 
Jeeves? Where’s the omniscient valet the nation needs to clean up a 
proliferating set of potentially disastrous consequences set in motion by the 
idiocies of a group of pea-brained Old Etonians like yourself? Where do you get 
off, being fictional when the rest of us are stuck in the real world? Wodehouse 
will not serve today.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Feu-apocalypse-jeeves-wodehouse-comfort-reading%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fedf42cca74f29f3870b1043c52b81ca8d64a23ff%2F86_0_2190_1314%2F2190.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=As%20the%20EU-apocalypse%20beckons%2C%20where%E2%80%99s%20Jeeves%20when%20you%20need%20him%3F%20%7C%20Lucy%20Mangan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Feu-apocalypse-jeeves-wodehouse-comfort-reading%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=As%20the%20EU-apocalypse%20beckons%2C%20where%E2%80%99s%20Jeeves%20when%20you%20need%20him%3F%20%7C%20Lucy%20Mangan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Feu-apocalypse-jeeves-wodehouse-comfort-reading%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fedf42cca74f29f3870b1043c52b81ca8d64a23ff%2F86_0_2190_1314%2F2190.jpg>
 The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe (2005): 
‘Children’s books – they’re almost always a safe bet. I could head back down 
the burrow with the Wombles, or escape through the back of a wardrobe with the 
Pevensies.’ Photograph: Alamy 
Children’s books – they’re almost always a safe bet. I could head back down 
the burrow with theWombles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/apr/22/how-we-made-the-wombles>, 
or escape through the back of awardrobe with the Pevensies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/nov/29/cs-lewis-the-lion-the-witch-and-the-wardrobe-play>
, or have my spiritual agonies soothed byThe Secret Garden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/aug/05/secret-garden-frances-hodgson-burnett>
.The Little House on the Prairie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/nov/15/family-book-little-house-prairie>
 books might do the job too – imagine striking out for the west, further and 
further on until there was nothing but grass below and sky above, with nowt to 
do but build a log cabin and start wrenching a living from the earth. The 
simple – if frequently locust-and-scarlet-fever-filled – life.

But sometimes when you read the books of your childhood, it just makes you 
miss those halcyon days too much.

“Hello darkness, my old friend,” I whisper as I glide towards the shelf of 
apocalyptic’n’post-apocalyptic fiction, where barren wastelands are peopled by 
stunned protagonists doing their best to make sense of their new worlds. A 
former shelf of entertainment and escapism transforms into a shelf of how-to 
manuals. Learning, not escapism, is the watchword for these perilous times. And 
nothing can be too bad withJohn Christopher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/feb/06/john-christopher-samuel-youd> as 
your guide.

Bully for them



New research <https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2016/06/160629135255.htm> 
from Mount Sinai Hospital in New York City vouchsafes us the news that bullying 
gives some people the same amount of pleasure as most of us get from eating 
chocolate. A few questions:

1 YOU DON’T SAY?

2 Where did you find the research subjects? Who replies to an advert saying 
“Bullies wanted! For brain experiments!”

3 Could you not have discovered this 30 years ago when I was trying to pay off 
my bullies in Mars Bars but they kept banging my face on the water fountain 
instead? “The dopamine hit’s the same!” I could have cried through my 
splintered teeth.

My disc drive is full



Yesterday I told my husband that I “didn’t have the bandwith” to deal with his 
latest health crisis (suspected finger cancer) because I was “too busy 
processing all my emotions about everything”. Apparently I’m a computer now.

Technology has colonised our language as well as everything else. And all I 
can think is that I am ready for IBM’s latest answer to Deep Blue to come in 
and do the job. Take my emotions, crunch the data and give me a printout of 
what to do next.
 