
The camera pans along what appears to be a Parisian street into a vast square 
thronging with chanting crowds. On a rooftop a mysterious figure watches as the 
excitement below reaches fever pitch; and then a dramatic shot of the 
guillotine as the blade drops.

Last week, US news site Kotaku revealed that it had been sent screenshots 
<http://kotaku.com/leaked-images-reveal-one-of-this-falls-two-assassins-1547111652>
 of the next Assassin's Creed title – subtitled Unity – by an anonymous source. 
The site also claimed that publisher Ubisoft was planning to release the new 
instalment in its best-selling historical adventure series in Autumn, and that 
it would be for PC, PS4 and Xbox One only.
 Assassin's Creed: Unity – mystery and intrigue in the shadow of the guillotine
Its hand forced, Ubisoft announced on Friday, that Unity is indeed the next 
Assassin's Creed <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/assassins-creed> 
title, and that it has been in development for three years. The short trailer 
not only shows the setting, but almost certainly the new assassin lead 
character – looking down on the revolutionary chaos.


Little else is known about the game right now – apart from rumours of a 
four-player co-op mode 
<http://www.examiner.com/article/rumor-next-assasin-s-creed-code-names-unity-offers-4-player-co-op>
. It's likely Ubisoft will be making a big reveal at this year's E3 video game 
event in Los Angeles. Interestingly, while the last title in the series, the 
critically acclaimed Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag, was a cross-generational 
release, it seems this titlewill be on PC and the "next-gen" machines only. 
Meanwhile, Kotaku and other sources have hinted that a separate adventure – 
allegedly codenamed Comet – is being developed for the PS3 and Xbox 360.

So, on which side of the French Revolution will our assassin sit? And what 
legendary figures will form part of the cast? Certainly the period is rife with 
the sort of intrigue and conspiracy that the Assassin's Creed development team 
adores. Theories abound that the conflict was actually ignited by the Bavarian 
order of the Illuminati and the Masons, rather than simply popular discontent 
with King Louis XVI (who will surely get at least a cameo in the game).

Whatever the case, it's an intriguing follow-on from Assassin's Creed III, 
which took in the American War of Independence from the decade before. And a 
decade after the French Revolution? We see the emergence of Napoleon Bonaparte 
whose empire building may well form the basis of Assassin's Creed: Comet. After 
all,this happened <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_Comet_of_1811> right in 
the middle of the Napoleonic Wars...

Next stop, E3.

•  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/oct/29/assassins-creed-iv-black-flag-review>
Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag review - plenty of plunder in store 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/oct/29/assassins-creed-iv-black-flag-review>
 