
For the past two years the 300-strong team at Ubisoft’s Quebec office has been 
pondering a vital question. It’s something that gets to the heart of the 
Assassin’s Creed series, a multimillion dollar action adventure franchise that 
follows a shadowy cabal of killers throughout history. The question is: how do 
you modernise a franchise that is, by its very nature, stuck in the past?

After a decade of making games like Prince of Persia: The Forgotten Sands on 
Nintendo Wii, as well as collaborating on Assassin’s games in a supportive role 
since the days of Brotherhood back in 2010, the Quebec studio now has now been 
handed the reins on Ubisoft’s largest franchise. Its job is to continue 
refining the series in new and interesting directions as it evolves on current 
gen consoles. Perhaps most interestingly, Ubisoft Quebec has been told it can 
add new perspectives to a series desperate to modernise.

Which was always going to be important. Assassin’s Creed is a self sustaining 
behemoth of a franchise, but it has had a troubled few years. Assassin’s Creed 
3 was a critical disappointment, and while last year’s Assassin’s Creed: Unity 
made great improvements to the mechanics that had remained so stagnant for so 
long, it had real technical problems when it was released, leading to huge 
boycotts and fan outrage. There’s no room for error this time around, and the 
team at Ubi Quebec are fully aware of the pressure that sits firmly on its 
shoulders.

“I actually remember the day I started working on Brotherhood.” says 
Marc-Alexis Côté, creative director on Syndicate. “From that day, I was 
aspiring to lead on an Assassin’s Creed game, and over the years I’ve been 
building my list of notes – the stuff I would do if I was in a leadership 
position.”

“It’s a completely different team.” continues executive producer, Francois 
Pelland. “A different core team and a different culture. Even though it’s just 
250km away from Montreal, it has a different way of approaching the creation 
and the production of a game. And it shows! That’s a good thing. It’s a 
different process and a different mentality.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fassassins-creed-syndicate-gangs-london-gaming-ubisoft%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F12%2F1431439854085%2F396d3506-2350-4498-b34b-1d9183d316b0-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Assassin's%20Creed%3A%20Syndicate%20%E2%80%93%20murder%20and%20mayhem%20amid%20the%20gangs%20of%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fassassins-creed-syndicate-gangs-london-gaming-ubisoft%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Assassin%27s%20Creed%3A%20Syndicate%20%E2%80%93%20murder%20and%20mayhem%20amid%20the%20gangs%20of%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fassassins-creed-syndicate-gangs-london-gaming-ubisoft%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F12%2F1431439854085%2F396d3506-2350-4498-b34b-1d9183d316b0-1020x612.jpeg>
 Factories belching acrid black smoke into the air beyond a snaking, highly 
polluted river? It can only be Victorian London. Photograph: Ubisoft 
Some of what you’ve heard about this game already is accurate - it’s set in 
London, for example. The year is 1868, the midst of the Industrial Revolution. 
Britain is changing, the world is changing, and these monumental 
transformations set a perfect revolutionary stage for Assassin’s Creed. And 
change is at the forefront of Syndicate.

It begins with the game’s two brand new assassins, the twins Jacob and Evie 
Frye, who are both playable and both at the centre of the game’s narrative. 
Right now we’ve only heard much about Jacob, as Evie is barely mentioned during 
our presentation at the Quebec office. It’s an odd decision, especially 
considering how much criticism that Ubisoft has received in the past for not 
fully featuring female characters, but Evie is described as a real driving 
force in Syndicate. We’ll just have to wait to find out more.

“I like to say that creating a new Assassin’s Creed game is like creating a 
new IP.” says Pelland. “We made the decision on London, 1868, the Industrial 
Revolution, and Jacob and Evie all very early on. And all of that shaped the 
way we made decisions in terms of innovation. We have the chance to make 
something interesting and something that’s new.”

“Top of my wish list was ‘how can we tell a different story, and how can we 
tell a story differently?’” continues Côté. “I think two protagonists is 
something that can bring a lot of freshness to the way that we do storytelling. 
We tried that on Assassin’s Creed 3 with Haytham and Connor, but they were 
coming one after the other. So, one of the things I was wondering was, what if 
we had those two bouncing off each other. “They’re twins, with the playfulness 
of twins, but still have their own very different personalities. This was the 
intention we had from the beginning – to bring a different tone to the story.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fassassins-creed-syndicate-gangs-london-gaming-ubisoft%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F12%2F1431440482931%2F958eb69b-022a-417d-9022-9a3278b0aef6-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Assassin's%20Creed%3A%20Syndicate%20%E2%80%93%20murder%20and%20mayhem%20amid%20the%20gangs%20of%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fassassins-creed-syndicate-gangs-london-gaming-ubisoft%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Assassin%27s%20Creed%3A%20Syndicate%20%E2%80%93%20murder%20and%20mayhem%20amid%20the%20gangs%20of%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fassassins-creed-syndicate-gangs-london-gaming-ubisoft%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F12%2F1431440482931%2F958eb69b-022a-417d-9022-9a3278b0aef6-1020x612.jpeg>
 The game has a suitably dark Dickensian tone. Photograph: Ubisoft 
The tone of Syndicate is clearly much darker than, say, Black Flag, but the 
cheekiness of Jacob and Evie came through in the gameplay demo. Subtle glances, 
winks and eyebrow-raises gave a real sense of companionship between them. From 
a gameplay point of view, it’s not entirely clear how much the two characters 
will differ from one another. Evie is a presentation that we are going to 
save,” says Pelland, perhaps eyeing up a bigger audience at the huge E3 games 
event in June. “When we focus on her, we’ll really focus on her,” he assures.

He elaborates enough to explain that Jacob is the hot-headed and more volatile 
character of the two, while Evie is a master of stealth, but it’s not clear 
whether this will determine the kinds of weapons and gear that you’ll have 
access to. Players will be able to switch between the two in the open world, 
but whether or not Ubisoft Quebec has gone as far as to adopt a Grand Theft 
Auto V style ‘multiple perspective’ approach to different missions and 
assassinations is yet to be seen.

What we do know is that there will be no co-op play, or indeed any multiplayer 
at all. It’s a surprising omission, especially as this series has worked hard 
to innovate on standard competitive game modes. So was it cast out late in the 
day when deadlines loomed? Not according to Pelland. “We decided very early on 
to focus Assassin’s Creed: Syndicate solely on single player,” is all he’ll say 
on the matter.

Dark city

The London of Assassin’s Creed: Syndicate is huge – 30% larger than Unity’s 
Paris. This vast Victorian sprawl is divided into several very different 
boroughs - City of London, Westminster, Southwark, Whitechapel, Thames and the 
Strand – and each plays differently along with the obvious cosmetic changes. 
You’ll find rich, opulent buildings in the large streets of Westminster while 
the slums of Whitechapel rot into a fetid bog of filth so filled with crime 
that even the game’s police daren’t venture in. The studio is looking to 
“contextualise” the missions and activities in its world rather than creating 
endless stuff to do, much like Ubisoft did so well with Far Cry 4.

With a focus on the people of London, Jacob and Evie are part of the street 
gang called The Rooks, and the mission is to unite the populace under its 
banner. In the announcement demo, we watched an armed Jacob infiltrate the 
stronghold of enemy gang, The Blighters, in order to kill one of its leaders 
and gain influence across a section of London. Much of what’s new in Syndicate 
is designed to modernise the experience; to overhaul the perception of what it 
means to play an Assassin’s Creed game.


“We’ve chosen the Victorian era this time because, the team felt it would 
really allow us to modernise the gameplay pillars” says Côté. “We’re 
modernising stealth, we’re modernising weapons, we’re modernising movement, and 
we’re modernising a lot else. The key thing is making a great game and a game 
that will feel great for our players.”

The most distinct modernisations shown so far are combat additions like the 
assassin’s gauntlet, fitted with a rope launcher that allows you to zip to the 
top of buildings without needing to climb. It also allows you to create 
horizontal platforms for your own aerial assassination opportunities – think 
Dickensian Batman. Up close and personal, combat is much more about brawling: 
there are knuckle dusters and brutal kukri blades, and there’s a revolver for 
taking out the drivers of other carriages. You can now commandeer a horse and 
carriage to get around London quicker. After we sneek through a stronghold 
using a refined stealth system, stabbing gang thugs in the neck with the 
ever-satisfying hidden blade, a hectic carriage chase ensues to catch Bloody 
Nora, one of the Blighters’ top dogs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fassassins-creed-syndicate-gangs-london-gaming-ubisoft%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F12%2F1431440343646%2F5f9601bc-e46a-40e5-b8a4-067035291e3d-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Assassin's%20Creed%3A%20Syndicate%20%E2%80%93%20murder%20and%20mayhem%20amid%20the%20gangs%20of%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fassassins-creed-syndicate-gangs-london-gaming-ubisoft%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Assassin%27s%20Creed%3A%20Syndicate%20%E2%80%93%20murder%20and%20mayhem%20amid%20the%20gangs%20of%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fassassins-creed-syndicate-gangs-london-gaming-ubisoft%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F12%2F1431440343646%2F5f9601bc-e46a-40e5-b8a4-067035291e3d-1020x612.jpeg>
 You can now commandeer a horse and carriage whenever you need to get around 
quicker. Like GTA with hooves. Photograph: Ubisoft 
The chase itself isn’t perfect, with some clunky looking navigation – we’re 
told that the build being demonstrated is only pre-alpha - but it is something 
new, something exciting. That’s what was clearest about Syndicate – there are a 
few sweeping new ideas but there are also subtle changes, like how AI crowds 
now form on pavements rather than anywhere and everywhere. It’s impressive how 
significant the comparatively small 75-year leap in history is, even just on a 
cosmetic level.

It’s a shame though, that we were shown a comparatively short Outpost-style 
assault rather than an assassination mission: i.e. the core of the game. We 
were told, however, that assassinations will be much more open than they were 
in Unity – a welcome promise. “The open spaces for assassinations was something 
really loved by fans,” says Côté, “So, we are improving upon that by making 
them even more open and even more spectacular. We want to make sure that the 
player understands the amount of opportunity that each one of those sandboxes 
offers them, and each assassination in the game will take place in one.”

For Côté and Pelland, the aim is to keep moving forward – to help the series 
recover from the slight stumble that Unity represented. “We don’t want to get 
back into the past,” says Pelland, when questioned about the lessons learned 
from Unity. “There’s so much that we’ve learned from a tech point of view, a 
design point of view. If there’s one thing we focused on a lot it’s what you’ve 
seen today: a pre-alpha build, played on consoles, running on target at a very 
high frame rate. We want to be in the position where we can polish the game, 
and that’s probably the biggest learning we’ve had over the years.”

 * Sam White attended the Quebec press trip with other journalists from 
Europe. Travel and accommodation costs were covered by Ubisoft  