
There was a telling moment at last week’s women’s rights forum in Brazil when, 
in a rallying call, one of the speakers called out: “What do we want?” The 
reply was a low mumble of confusion.

It was clear that expecting 1,800 women’s and transgender rights activists 
from 120 countries to align on one answer was a huge ask. They campaign on such 
a diverse range of issues – from sexual and reproductive health, environmental 
justice and better employment, to peace, sex workers and political freedoms.

Funding for women’s rights groups in poor countries falls by more than half
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/08/funding-womens-rights-groups-poor-countries-falls-awid-forum-brazil>
The forum, organised by the Association for Women’s Rights in Development 
<http://www.awid.org/> (Awid), in the tropical state of Bahia, in Brazil’s 
north-east, didn’t explicitly set out to answer that question, or to define a 
common agenda. But the event was an attempt to coalesce and drive momentum for 
the feminist movement.

It is no easy task. One constant complaint among feminists in poorer countries 
is that their needs are less likely to be heard than those of women in more 
privileged settings.

“In terms of the women’s movement or feminist agenda, we feel that at times we 
are a bit let down by developed countries,” said Emma Kaliya, from Malawi, 
chair of the board of theAfrican Women’s Development and Communication Network 
<http://femnet.co/>. “When you come to a conference like this you want to see 
how we are going to address the challenges that specific countries are facing.

“In my country, people believe that you can’t have full realisation of certain 
rights if you live in abject poverty, if the whole issue of livelihoods is not 
addressed … Those issues are not coming out.”

There has been much for feminists to celebrate over the past few decades. Women
 <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> have more freedoms to earn 
money, get educated, choose when and if they want to marry and have children.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fglobal-forum-feminists-where-you-live-that-counts-association-womens-rights-development-conference-brazil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fabc34cbc12d9f429e03925b66b8170b0c4cc84ab%2F0_79_1278_767%2F1278.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=At%20a%20global%20gathering%20of%20feminists%2C%20one%20thing%20is%20clear%3A%20it's%20where%20you%20live%20that%20counts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fglobal-forum-feminists-where-you-live-that-counts-association-womens-rights-development-conference-brazil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=At%20a%20global%20gathering%20of%20feminists%2C%20one%20thing%20is%20clear%3A%20it%27s%20where%20you%20live%20that%20counts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fglobal-forum-feminists-where-you-live-that-counts-association-womens-rights-development-conference-brazil%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fabc34cbc12d9f429e03925b66b8170b0c4cc84ab%2F0_79_1278_767%2F1278.jpg>
 Delegates at the Awid conference in Bahia. Photograph: Claudia Ferreira/Awid 
Ending violence against women and girls, for example, is now high on the agenda
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2014/sep/15/global-violence-against-women-girls-uk-priority>
 at national and international level. Forty years ago, things were very 
different, asCharlotte Bunch 
<http://www.cwgl.rutgers.edu/about-110/founding-director>, founding director of 
the Centre for Women’s Global Leadership at Rutgers University, told the forum: 
“If you tried to talk about it in the 1970s, you were told it’s not an issue. 
It was a private matter. Human rights organisations said it was not a human 
rights issue.”

The historic Beijing Platform for Action 
<http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/beijing/platform/>, agreed at the fourth 
world conference on women in 1995, did much to solidify the calls for change, 
with demands for structural change to end gender inequality.

But the backlash against women’s rights has been brutal. Religious 
fundamentalism and a rise of rightwing conservative groups, particularly over 
the past 15 years and most notably in the Middle East and Latin America, has 
left women fighting to retain the very ground they’ve worked so hard to claim.

The resistance from governments that would rather women stick to traditional 
roles in the home, producing children on demand, is all too familiar to anyone 
who attends theCommission on the Status of Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/09/un-declaration-step-backwards-for-womens-rights-csw>
 at the UN, the annual meeting for member states to assess progress towards 
gender equality.

What has become clear is that the extent of change for women is largely 
dependent on where they live, their class and their race. A poor woman from a 
rural area of Niger, for example, will be among the last to see any real gains.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fglobal-forum-feminists-where-you-live-that-counts-association-womens-rights-development-conference-brazil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb35157080a0c8e129f05625b2a3de7ca822db15%2F0_66_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=At%20a%20global%20gathering%20of%20feminists%2C%20one%20thing%20is%20clear%3A%20it's%20where%20you%20live%20that%20counts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fglobal-forum-feminists-where-you-live-that-counts-association-womens-rights-development-conference-brazil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=At%20a%20global%20gathering%20of%20feminists%2C%20one%20thing%20is%20clear%3A%20it%27s%20where%20you%20live%20that%20counts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fglobal-forum-feminists-where-you-live-that-counts-association-womens-rights-development-conference-brazil%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb35157080a0c8e129f05625b2a3de7ca822db15%2F0_66_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 A Nigerien woman digs a trench for rainwater. Women in rural areas in the 
world’s poorest countries have seen little progress in gender equality. 
Photograph: Issouf Sanogo/AFP/Getty 
“We are all in different sites of struggle and all making significant impact 
no matter how small, local that may feel,” said Hakima Abbas, Awid’s director 
of programmes, who will take over as joint-executive director of the 
organisation from January. “The fact you can be in a room like this [at the 
forum] and have so much diversity and still all be connected … that means we 
are chipping away at the wall.”

However, she warned that if we don’t engage with one another, “I don’t think 
there is much of a future for the movement.” There is so much to gain if we 
start talking, she added.

One organisation that is attempting to engage is Resurj 
<http://www.resurj.org/about>, a global alliance of young feminists. Members 
are already exploring ways to collaborate and better understand the needs of 
women in different places.

“What we’re trying to do is go back to the power of storytelling. We need to 
be able to hear about concrete experiences,” said Resurj member Sinara Gumieri, 
a researcher and a legal advisor atAnis <http://www.anis.org.br/>, the 
Institute of Bioethics, Human Rights and Gender in Brazil.

“We can’t be naive [enough] to think we are the first to do this. Movements 
for decades have developed the language we need … and ways to connect. We’re 
not doing anything new, but we’re very aware now that this is the way forward.”

That desire to work more closely together is the “most important thing that 
will come out of the forum”, said Ani Hao, a research consultant and founder of 
Agora Juntas, a hub for feminists in Rio de Janeiro. “What will determine 
whether feminist movements evolve, strengthen and work more closely together is 
if they connect their issues.”

Less pay, more work, no pension: the 21st-century woman's lot laid bare
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/27/un-women-report-less-pay-more-work-no-pension-the-21st-century-womans-lot-laid-bare>
The executive director of UN Women, Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, believes all women 
have a role to play to effect change but society needs to change first. “We 
have tried so hard to fit into the world order, but patriarchy is not 
constructed as an enabler,” she said. “It has to be about changing society so 
women are not trying to fit into a broken society. Society has to be better 
constructed.”

Greater tolerance and respect within the feminist movement are also required.


Tiffany Mugo, a black, bisexual, feminist activist living in South Africa 
<http://www.essence.com/2016/05/17/tiffany-mugo-technology-stories-african-queer-women>
, said she has been criticised by other women for pandering to patriarchy 
because she’s “not lesbian enough”. “The central message of smashing patriarchy 
in the face is the easiest message,” she said. “But maybe we need to support 
doing it in different ways. That’s where we need to get to.”

Over the four days of the conference, it became clear why the question of what 
women want was so hard to answer. It depends on who you are, where you live 
and, probably, which stage of life you’re at.

“We don’t have all the answers, but we are here and we are celebrating and 
affirming our own choices around feminism,” said Abbas. “And we can do that 
with respect for one another.”
 