
Forty-eight hours in downtown Mogadishu with armed guards for company may not 
be everyone’s idea of a great holiday, but asthis week’s attack on a 
sightseeing tour of Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/04/foreign-tourists-attacked-in-western-afghanistan-says-officials>
 shows, not everyone has the same idea of what a great holiday is.

Five western tourists – members of a group that included eight Britons, three 
US citizens and a German – were injured in the western Afghan province of Herat 
on Thursday when their minibus and army escort were hit by gunfire from Taliban 
militants, officials said.

No one was seriously hurt in the attack, but the incident has focused 
attention on extreme or adventure tourism, a growing travel market covering 
anything from relatively “soft” activity holidays such as whitewater rafting to 
hardcore trips in hostile environments.

“It’s not about being a war tourist, though war can be a part of it,” says 
Andrew Drury, a 50-year-old builder from Surrey who holidays two or three times 
a year in destinations as insecure as Iraq, Iran, Syria,Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>, Pakistan, Chechnya, North 
Korea and Somalia.

“It’s not really the thrill or the danger. For me it’s the people; it’s about 
getting closer, beyond the stereotypes. You see more and you understand more. 
This year I wasin a sniper pit in Iraq with a guy fighting Isis 
<http://www.getsurrey.co.uk/news/surrey-news/watch-guildford-adventure-tourist-who-11126243>
. He wasn’t a soldier, he was a schoolteacher, just trying to get his village 
back.”

Drury says he acquired a taste for travelling to places the Foreign Office 
advises against more than 20 years ago, when he was attacked by a 
machete-wielding militant after accidentally straying across the border from 
Uganda, where he was on a wildlife safari, into the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo.

He travels mainly alone or with a cousin, and says careful preparation and 
reliable local contacts are key. “I monitor everything closely for a few weeks 
in advance. I look at roads, I work out who supports who, I have maps of places 
in my head. I know where I’m going even if something unexpected happens.”

Nowadays, Drury says, he is experienced enough to be able to organise some of 
his trips by himself. For others he relies on specialist operators such as 
Untamed Borders, a Kent-based companywhose scheduled holidays 
<http://www.untamedborders.com/> include polo-playing in the Hindu Kush and ski 
touring in Afghanistan.

James Willcox, founder of Untamed Borders, says most of the company’s business 
consists of bespoke, on-demand trips organised for individuals, couples or very 
small groups of tourists or professionals such as researchers, journalists and 
photographers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fattack-afghanistan-tourists-spotlight-extreme-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff51b7e826b8043e463b47024009908e1a9782787%2F0_0_2300_1512%2F2300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Attack%20on%20Afghanistan%20tourists%20puts%20spotlight%20on%20extreme%20holidays&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fattack-afghanistan-tourists-spotlight-extreme-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Attack%20on%20Afghanistan%20tourists%20puts%20spotlight%20on%20extreme%20holidays&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fattack-afghanistan-tourists-spotlight-extreme-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff51b7e826b8043e463b47024009908e1a9782787%2F0_0_2300_1512%2F2300.jpg>
 A US rescue helicopter flies over Kallam in Swat valley, Pakistan. Requests 
for tours of the region have been rejected amid security concerns. Photograph: 
A Majeed/AFP/Getty Images 
Some riskier requests – tours of the Khyber Pass, for example, or the Swat 
valley in Pakistan and Ghazni in Afghanistan – get rejected strictly on 
security grounds, Willcox says. But sometimes a “moral decision” has to be made.

The company has, for example, helped a documentary crew film the Yazidi people 
in north-west Iraq, “because it was important that their story was told. But 
would we take tourists there, for personal interest? Maybe not.”

The company’s most dangerous regular destination is Mogadishu, the lawless 
capital of war-hitSomalia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/somalia>, whose 
colourful markets, spectacular beaches and picturesque colonial Italian 
waterfront outweigh, for some, the more or less constant risk of terror 
attacks, opportunist shootings and kidnappings.

“People invariably find it completely fascinating,” Willcox says, although 
tours last no longer than 48 hours and are accompanied at all times by a local 
interpreter and a four-man, heavily armed security detail travelling in two 
vehicles. “The secret is in planning, and not following a routine. Leaving no 
footprint.”

Willcox says his tours have not used the road between Bamiyan and Herat, where 
Thursday’s attack took place, since 2009. Jonny Bealby, founder of therival 
operator Wild Frontiers <https://www.wildfrontierstravel.com/en_GB/>, which 
favours private planes over road transport within Afghanistan but has run no 
tours there at all this season, says security concerns are increasing in parts 
of the country.

“But for those who are willing to accept a higher risk – which we make sure 
they are fully aware of – the rewards of this kind of travel are amazing,” 
Bealby says. “Extraordinary history, a remarkable culture, incredible beauty – 
and because there are so few other tourists, a very pure travel experience.”

Neither company founder wants to comment on Hinterland Tours, the 
Yorkshire-based operator run by the veteran British tour guide Geoff Hann, 
whose group was the target of Thursday’s attack.

But Drury is less reluctant: “No one else uses that road these days, it was 
quite a large group, and the itinerary was on the internet. I’m not sure I’d be 
travelling there in those conditions.”
 