
Housewife "gigastar", and perhaps Australia's single most famous comedy export,
Edna Everage claims in her autobiography 
<http://www.amazon.com/Dame-Edna-Everage-Gorgeous-Life/dp/044050614X> to have 
been born in the humble New South Wales inland township of Wagga Wagga. From 
there she relocated to the developing suburbia of Melbourne's Moonee Ponds and, 
on 12 December 1955, she made her first public stage appearance at Melbourne 
University's Union theatre, to promote herself as a potential "Olympic hostess" 
for the 1956 Olympic Games. She boasted of a home furnished with wall-to-wall 
burgundy carpet "and reindeers frosted on glass dining-room doors".

Edna's true origin – as is celebrity habit – diverges from accounts provided 
by her creator, the multitalented Australian writer-performerBarry Humphries 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/news/victoria/barry-humphries-witty-plea-not-to-ruin-flinders-st-station/story-fni0fit3-1226699035073>
, although Humphries has always been mindful to delineate "Mrs Norm Everage" as 
not a performance by himself in drag but a separate entity to whom he refers in 
the third person.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8ysINNySRAo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8ysINNySRAo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8ysINNySRAo&media=>
Humphries was barely in his 21st year and already notorious for a number of 
undergraduate "Dadaist" pranks around Melbourne (involving fake vomit, eating 
out of bins and pretending to kick blind people on trams) when, on tour as a 
young actor for a repertory company, he claims he began creating Edna to 
satirise the earnest, aspirational ladies of the regions his company were 
encountering on the road.


Yet Humphries' own claim has been challenged by those who identify in Edna's 
domestic obsessions traits strikingly similar to real-life Tasmanian 
self-help-and-home-hint queen,Marjorie Bligh 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2013-09-25/housewife-icon-and-author-marjorie-bligh-dies-at-96/4980346>
. Bligh's numerous books advising how to make pot scourers from nail clippings, 
prepare "mock duck" for dinner and crochet polyester pants suits were an 
ubiquitous Australian bridal-gift staple at the time of Edna's development, and 
rumours of her influence have persisted for years. "I don't think Edna has ever 
admired anybody," Humphries has admitted, "as much as she admires Marjorie 
Bligh."


Whatever her precise inspiration, Edna's unselfconscious kitsch was as 
recognisable to her initial revue audiences as her double entendres and 
seemingly effortless satirical barbs were delightful. Subsequent appearances 
around Melbourne's cabarets and fledgling comedy clubs gained Edna such a 
following that by 1957 she was performing as herself for the very first day of 
broadcasting for what is now Australian television's Seven Network.

In 1959, Humphries/Edna yielded to the lure of London and once there she had 
the very good fortune of stumbling into the embrace ofPeter Cook's legendary 
West End club, the Establishment, and its comedy coterie 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2Hanulj5heg>. In the 1960s, with Cook's 
encouragement, Edna developed a revue act that consisted of monologues and 
audience interaction, her couture gradually evolving from suburban leisurewear 
to an inimitable purple barnet, frocks sequinned to themes andiconic cats-eye 
spectacles <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CdjuqwMnnpg&app=desktop>. 


The success of her touring stage shows of the 70s won her a cameo in no less 
thanthe Beatles' spin-off Sgt Peppers movie as 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HOiq19SAvMw> well as a significant supporting 
role in the Australian-in-London satirical classicThe Adventures of Barry 
Mackenzie <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sk1cULdqjSw&app=desktop> – adapted 
for the screen by Barry Humphries from the comic strip he created for Peter 
Cook's magazine venture,Private Eye <http://www.private-eye.co.uk/>. 

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D43b0Acc9Rxk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D43b0Acc9Rxk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D43b0Acc9Rxk&media=>
With television opportunities in the 80s, Edna – always the consummate 
ad-libber – developed a particular talent for televised celebrity interviews so 
charmingly scathing that mere participation became something of a badge of 
status for the cultural elite.

In 2000 she finally claimed success on Broadway with a show that was mostly 
improvised – she won a Tony, and added to her extraordinary CV with a 
inexplicable – if recurring – guest role on Ally McBeal as well as a 
short-lived, controversial column for Vanity Fair.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQSxDymNFTnQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQSxDymNFTnQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQSxDymNFTnQ&media=>
 In 2011 she commentated on the royal wedding for Channel 7, and, as this is 
written,she is still filming TV specials 
<http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=JzukBruUuzo>, has recently appeared in a Sydney 
Opera House production of Peter and the Wolf and is concluding her "first 
farewell tour" in a show calledEat, Pray, Laugh 
<http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=J1EdGi72QiU> (note Humphries is now 80 years old).

In all the discussion of Tony Abbott's reintroduction of British-style 
"knights and dames" honours to Australia, it is worth remembering that our 
great social reformist prime minister Gough Whitlam used the privilege of his 
office to confer but one "imperial honour" during his all-too-short term in 
office. That he bestowed it in person upon Edna Everage – in the arrivals 
lounge at Sydney airport in the final scene of Barry Mackenzie Holds His Own – 
demands all contemporary Australians consider a serious question: in light of 
all this singular woman has achieved in her life, how could any other 
Australian possibly be fit for the honour?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFGmdxBGUoic&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFGmdxBGUoic>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFGmdxBGUoic&media=>

 