
 A is for Anderson

It was by no means guaranteed that Wil Anderson would become an Australian 
comedy superstar: in his early 20s, the gags were unsurprising: penises, drugs, 
pop culture and the wackiness of people from other countries 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Eg57nCr7CjM>. But as he matured, so did his 
material, increasingly revealing the centre-left political bent of a yappy 
undergraduate. That well informed his formidable partnership with Adam Spencer 
on Triple J's breakfast show for three years from 2001. The pair were 
broadcasting at the height of the notoriously conservative reign of then prime 
minister John Howard, and this, to my mind, was Anderson's Golden Age, if not, 
actually, Australia's: the combination of his drop-voiced political one-liners 
and Spencer’s cynical raves resonating with a politically frustrated generation.

As young, hot and funny as Howard was old, grumpy and sly, Anderson's 
telegenic anti-authoritarianism soon found him hosting half-hour TV television 
panel show The Glass House, where he, Corinne Grant and Dave Hughes continued 
the criticism of Howard’s Coalition government 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C2iPGaIi87M&list=PL8A12B48A762F6EF1>. The ABC 
unexpectedly canned the show after a record-breaking five-year run in 2006 – it 
was just an unfortunate coincidence that the previous day a Coalition senator 
had attacked Grant for fronting a trade union campaign.

Anderson is rarely deterred from the pursuit of mockery; Australian Idol’s 
Shannon Noll copped derision from the comedian so regularly that the two 
assumed something of a "Brangelina" symbiosis. But reducing Noll's father's 
name to a mere grunt in his archive of funny nasal sounds ended badly for 
Anderson: Shannon's dad had been killed in a farming accident, and Anderson 
also got his name wrong. Enraged, the singer challenged Anderson to a “charity” 
fistfight. "I am not going to box Shannon," he demurred, "because I am a coward 
who cried at the end of Miss Congeniality." Shannon was revenged, a cancer 
charity got a cheque and Anderson got one of his best jokes: "If I went into 
the ring with everyone that I offended on stage I would have no jaw."

These days Anderson returns to Australia to fit in episodes of the ABC’s Gruen 
Transfer <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cpp0tyitSug>, amid a touring schedule 
taxing for its repeated use of titular puns: from I am the Wilrus in 1998 to 
2014’s Wiluminati. But while the punning remains constant, Anderson’s comedy 
has evolved – he’s now at least the level of a junior politics lecturer, 
throwing some jokes into the tutorial 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G2TBWj8bZCA>, hoping the kids will make the 
links.

A is for Aunty
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2F2014%2Fjan%2F09%2Faustralian-comedy-a-to-z-a-is-for-anderson-aunty-and-acropolis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F1%2F9%2F1389230300766%2Fd8618d53-5a95-431b-b864-d4a7c565fdbc-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australian%20comedy%20A-Z%3A%20A%20is%20for%20Anderson%2C%20Aunty%20and%20Acropolis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2F2014%2Fjan%2F09%2Faustralian-comedy-a-to-z-a-is-for-anderson-aunty-and-acropolis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australian%20comedy%20A-Z%3A%20A%20is%20for%20Anderson%2C%20Aunty%20and%20Acropolis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2F2014%2Fjan%2F09%2Faustralian-comedy-a-to-z-a-is-for-anderson-aunty-and-acropolis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F1%2F9%2F1389230300766%2Fd8618d53-5a95-431b-b864-d4a7c565fdbc-1020x612.jpeg>
 Often referred to as the Australian Monty Python, Aunty Jack’s creation 
pre-dates Python by several months. Photograph: AAP/Lantern 
In 1972, the kids were getting an altogether different comedy experience from 
the ABC, thanks to a moustachioed, pony-tailed, gravel-voiced transvestite 
wearing a gold boxing glove, blue dress and footy socks – the beloved hero(ine) 
of the surreal and anarchic Aunty Jack Show 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gevw2htTOno>, born out of the strange, shared 
humour <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wzH-j_X-EQ4> of Graham Bond, Rory 
O'Donoghue and Peter Weir <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KpNhN-L9L-g>.

No young Australian had ever seen anything like it. Part of its hypnotic 
appeal was that it was destined to never last long – the ABC had first 
scheduled the show as a radio program for children, but had "concerns" over the 
suggested title Aunty Jack's Abattoir. Moved to television, we thralled to 
craft demonstrations with elephants, love stories narrated entirely by 
harmonica, and "Country and Eastern" folk singers . Often referred to as the 
Australian Monty Python, Aunty Jack’s creation pre-dates Python by several 
months. Her legacy remains in the immortalised Australian threat, to “rip your 
bloody arms off <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KnEOr1MgwTM>.”

A is for Acropolis

Less experimental in form, though (disturbingly) unique in content for its 
day, was Acropolis Now – a TV spinoff of the runaway hit of the 1987 Melbourne 
Comedy Festival, Wogs Out of Work. <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4a-Xp4lQbbA> 
The show, both slapstick and sly consideration of racism, struck a popular 
nerve; speaking to kids – like me – who'd grown up in urban neighbourhoods 
among such stereotypical cultural signifiers as big hair, Monaros, Saturday 
morning Greek school and yeeros vendor hierarchies. It ran for years, with 
plots that may have been variations on Happy Days but won fans for sparing no 
group from its equal-opportunity, loving satire of ethnic stereotypes 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M5WKRlluuFw> and portraying a community that 
actually looked like Australia.
 