
B is for Big Gig



Like a last-minute assistant obstetrician arriving at a long and difficult 
birth still in her golf-gear, television variety showthe Big Gig 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jFeRKvlclc0> appeared on the screens of ABC 
television in 1989, just as the Melbourne standup comedy scene was emerging 
into the popular consciousness. Hosted by comedy polymath Wendy Harmer with 
true Vaudeville “we’re all in this together” appeal, The Big Gig bought the 
dark anarchy of comedy clubs such as the Comedy Store and the Last Laugh into 
the loungerooms of suburbia, creating mainstream stars from speciality fringe 
acts.



With a live audience, a multi-camera studio setup that flew from one act to 
another, sets from zydeco bands and a stage design heaving with exploding 
puppets of large birds, the aesthetic was that of a wild party every younger 
viewer longed to join. The mixture of guests and regulars, recorded and live 
slots, ensured that the pace never slackened, even as standups such as Glynn 
Nicholas, Denise Scott and Anthony Aykroyd, character comedians like Jean 
Kittson and Phil Scott, and troupes such as the bogan-satirising Empty Pockets 
and art-student-musical-comedy-anarchiststhe Doug Anthony Allstars 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_bRQ5Aa2Wmg> turned experimental acts into 
permanent fixtures.



The concept was based on Saturday Live, but under the firm hand of Aunty Jack 
Show directing alumnus Ted Robinson The Big Gig achieved its particularly 
Australian cult status. It harnessed the shambolic appeal of live Melbourne 
standup within a sketch-show format, with everything lassooed together by 
Harmer’s friendly introductions and consistently political weekly monologue. 
The list of irregular guests given their TV break reads like a roll call of 
Australian comedy royalty: Judith Lucy, Anthony Morgan, Greg Fleet, the 
Umbilical Brothers and Lano and Woodley all did their time in front of the 
giant galah.



The pressure of developing new material every week probably exhausted the 
comics by the show’s 63rd and final episode, but the demand no doubt led most 
to realise their full potential. No one who watched Kittson’s transformation 
into Pritikin-cake-eating yogamonster Candida, Nicholas’ intopsychotic 
children’s storyteller and songstress Pate Biscuit 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0B560bMiDmU>, or the explosion of tunes from 
the Doug Anthony Allstars at their harmonious prime could doubt they were in 
the presence of genius.

B is for Birmo




 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2F2014%2Fjan%2F29%2Faustralian-comedy-a-z-b-is-for-the-big-gig-and-birmo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F1%2F28%2F1390952888517%2Fb9b8cc95-dee4-42bd-9b2f-611399c1316b-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australian%20comedy%20A-Z%3A%20B%20is%20for%20The%20Big%20Gig%20and%20Birmo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2F2014%2Fjan%2F29%2Faustralian-comedy-a-z-b-is-for-the-big-gig-and-birmo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australian%20comedy%20A-Z%3A%20B%20is%20for%20The%20Big%20Gig%20and%20Birmo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2F2014%2Fjan%2F29%2Faustralian-comedy-a-z-b-is-for-the-big-gig-and-birmo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F1%2F28%2F1390952888517%2Fb9b8cc95-dee4-42bd-9b2f-611399c1316b-1020x612.jpeg>
 Writer John Birmingham, the old man of Australian satire. Photograph: AAP 
The old man of Australian satire, John Birmingham, is perhaps best known now 
as a popular commercial novelist and grumpy political commentator, but his 
legacy as a countercultural Australian comedian is profound.


British born and bred in the working class Queensland ghettoes of Ipswich, in 
the 1980s Birmo the radical was one of Brisbane’s last arrestees under its 
infamous anti-gathering laws – he carried a piece of paper to a demo emblazoned 
with the words "free speech" in very small type.


With a satirical journey that commenced in the pages of the University of 
Queensland student newspaper through his creation of man's man Harrison 
Biscuit, Birmo became a feature writer for Australian Rolling Stone and 
subsequently compiled his gonzo experiences of interstate flatsharing into the 
infamousHe Died With a Felafel in His Hand 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=42Q7obO1-aE>, a hilarious compendium of every 
shit housemate ever – the book spawned a sequel, a film and Australia's most 
performed play.


When living on the streets to research a magazine piece, a "fellow" homeless 
person asked Birmo how he wound up living rough. "I'm actually a journalist for 
Rolling Stone," he replied. "Yeah," said his new friend. "Me, too."

Honourable mentions

B is also for … standup Brendon Burns, the Late Show's satire of Australian 
cop shows, Bargearse, feminist comedy role model Rachel Berger, and political 
sketch/panel show BackBerner, and Olympic trainingwith this guy 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vpS31FJO8_o>.
 