
F is for Frontline



Made by alumni from Australian sketch show The D-Generation, Frontline 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Frontline_%28Australian_TV_series%29>’s satire on 
TV tabloid journalism was a landmark moment in Australian black comedy.

The setting was the newsroom of a current affairs show. Rob Sitch played Mike 
Moore, the show's helmet-haired, brainless and inexplicably popular anchor. He 
was locked in a perpetual status rivalry with the equally vain Brooke 
Vanderberg (Jane Kennedy), an ambitious senior reporter not averse to spreading 
rumours about her own affairs with celebrities to boost her profile.


Accompanied by the perpetually dishevelled cynical slob journo Marty di Stasio 
(Tiriel Mora), ruthless station executives and thuggish camera-crew, each 
episode revolved around the ethical crisis faced by well-meaning producer Emma 
(Alison Whyte), torn between the demands of ratings-winning sensationalism and 
the truth. Why torn? “Because … she’s intelligent,” Marty once explained to 
confounded producers.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dx_dJ58DurQc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dx_dJ58DurQc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dx_dJ58DurQc&media=>
A sitcom made without a laugh track, and using the handheld, insider-look 
photography later employed to much acclaim in shows like The Office in the UK, 
Frontline aired over three seasons on the ABC in 1994, ’95 and ’97. These were 
the golden years of Australian tabloid news shows, and Frontline did not too 
gently resemble Channel 9’s once-flagship,A Current Affair 
<http://aca.ninemsn.com.au/>, and the now-cancelled Today Tonight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/feb/04/11-worst-today-tonight-moments> 
on Seven.


Frontline based its stories on recent real events to bleakly satirise their 
media coverage. In 1996, when the show took a break from filming, the hapless
Paxton family <http://www.abc.net.au/mediawatch/transcripts/s2698834.htm> was 
promised job opportunities by A Current Affair that turned out to be setup to 
humiliate them as “dole-bludgers”. It was difficult to tell the difference 
between Frontline’s comedy and a media tragedy – which explains why Frontline 
is now a set text for many Australian high school students.

Frontline also marked the last screen appearance of the great New Zealand 
actor Bruno Lawrence, whose star turn as the powder-keg executive producer 
Thommo was cut short by the actor’s death from lung cancer.


F is for Fear of a Brown Planet <https://www.facebook.com/fearofabrownplanet>

Aamer Rahman <http://aamerrahman.tumblr.com/> and Nazeem Hussain 
<https://twitter.com/nazeem_hussain> are two Muslim Australian comics whose 
routines satirise racism. Coming of age in an era of “white nationalist fear 
propaganda of the Howard government 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=38j8pSOekiY>”, the paranoid political backlash 
to 9/11 and theCronulla race riots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/postcolonial/2013/dec/11/still-capacity-for-cronulla-riot>
, the two law school graduates met at an Islamic awards ceremony where they 
were being honoured for their community work; Hussain has been a director of 
the Islamic Council of Victoria.


Politically frustrated and culturally underrepresented, the two pursued 
standup as a means to communicate politically. "You can write aQuarterly Essay 
<http://www.quarterlyessay.com/> or you can go on Q&A and have someone 
interrupt you,"says Rahman 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/comedy/brown-humour-20101013-16k15.html#ixzz30tt4hH8a>
, "but with standup, you've got a mic and an audience who are ready to listen."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D38j8pSOekiY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D38j8pSOekiY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D38j8pSOekiY&media=>
The comics work together, “tag-teaming” the writing process, but performing 
separately – taking an individual half of each set. They mine rich material 
from their own experiences of being harassed byAsio <https://www.asio.gov.au/>, 
innocently causing disquiet on planes and living in the contradiction of being 
easily both Muslim and Australian in a culture whose media pretends that such a 
thing cannot exist. "If you ever wake up in hospital and there are no brown or 
Asian doctors,"Hussain has said 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/comedy/brown-humour-20101013-16k15.html#ixzz30tuS3JWQ>
, "get out of there because you're not actually in a hospital – you're on the 
set of an Australian TV series."

Runners up: Fast Forward <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b_ykrrbFK3k> – which 
also starred Frontline’s Jane Turner – Australia’s “highest rating, longest 
running and most critically awarded” sketch comedy show, and its spin-off Full 
Frontal, which both launched the career ofEric Bana 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NqFcdz4gGKA> and also advertising 
copywriter-turned-standup-comedy-legend and The Project regular,Kitty Flanagan 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fXnaGJXXAiQ>. 

Greg Fleet <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z9tOTURjU5s>, Australia's 
favourite ex-heroin-addict Neighbours star standup.

And the First Dog on Moon <http://firstdogonthemoon.com.au/>, legendary 
cartoonist who used to work for Crikey, but whose unique world of politicised 
bandicoots and socially agitated crumpets now appears online forGuardian 
Australia. <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/first-dog-on-the-moon>
 