
Australian unions have thrown their weight behind a transition away from 
coal-generated electricity, calling for a new statutory authority to manage a 
“just transition”, supporting workers and communities that rely on fossil 
fuel-related jobs.


A policy discussion paper written by the Australian Council of Trade Unions 
(ACTU) said a planned closure of coal power stations – along with both a jobs 
and energy plan for the country – would “create a more prosperous and 
diversified economy”.

It called for an independent statutory body, Energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> Transition Australia (ETA), to 
be created inside the environment and energy portfolio, which would be 
responsible for managing an orderly move to a clean energy economy.

A clean energy transition is already happening, but it is at risk | Alexander 
White
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/southern-crossroads/2016/oct/11/clean-energy-transition-happening-act-at-risk>
Ged Kearney, president of the ACTU, said the transition away from fossil fuels 
in the power sector was inevitable. “We’re not experts in climate change, but 
what’s obvious to the ACTU is they are going to close.They already 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/24/port-augusta-busting-a-gut-to-reinvent-itself-as-a-solar-city-when-coal-fired-power-is-switched-off>
 are closingaround us 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/03/hazelwood-coal-power-station-to-close-with-loss-of-800-jobs>
.”

The move comes days after the announcement of the closure of Australia’s 
dirtiest power station, Hazelwood in Victoria, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/03/hazelwood-coal-power-station-to-close-with-loss-of-800-jobs>
with federal minister for environment and energy Josh Frydenberg attacking 
Labor and the Greens for attempting to plan the closure of coal around the 
country.
Josh Frydenberg (@JoshFrydenberg) 
Closing Hazelwood was ALP plan all along. In 2011 @LilyDAmbrosioMP 
<https://twitter.com/LilyDAmbrosioMP> said it was 'disgraceful' it remained 
operating.https://t.co/DLfLMFinKJ <https://t.co/DLfLMFinKJ>
 <https://twitter.com/JoshFrydenberg/status/794761244540424192> November 5, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/JoshFrydenberg/status/794761244540424192> Josh 
Frydenberg (@JoshFrydenberg) 
Labor-Green coalition back on! Voting together to 'encourage' closure of coal. 
At what cost to energy security?pic.twitter.com/eoyjyYjEGL 
<https://t.co/eoyjyYjEGL>
 <https://twitter.com/JoshFrydenberg/status/795086298679689216> November 6, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/JoshFrydenberg/status/795086298679689216> 
“I think there’s a lot of resistance to planning for this in Canberra,” said 
Kearney. “Our framework very squarely places responsibility on the federal 
government to come up with a national plan for the sake of the workers in this 
industry. They’re constantly whining and complaining when the states do have 
plans but they’re not doing anything themselves.”

The ACTU discussion paper, titled “Sharing the challenges and opportunities of 
a clean energy economy”, acknowledged Australia’s current emission cuts planned 
for 2030 would need to be strengthened in order to meet commitments made in 
Paris to keep global warming “well below” 2C.

The paper said “it is widely agreed that Australia will need to move towards 
net zero by 2050 if we are to play our part in global efforts to limit the 
impact of global warming”.

“Australian unions recognise that the transition of coal-fired power stations 
has been identified as crucial to achieving emissions reduction targets,” it 
said.

Hazelwood's closure was inevitable. So where was the transition plan? | Gay 
Alcorn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/04/hazelwoods-closure-was-inevitable-so-where-was-the-transition-plan>
The paper argues that while the country needs to ensure the transition 
happens, the costs of that transition should not fall predominantly on the 
shoulders of workers on those industries, but rather be equitably shared across 
society.

“The priority of any closures has to be the workers and the communities and 
the small businesses that rely on the flow-on effects from the stations.”

Kelly O’Shanassy from the Australian Conservation Foundation welcomed the 
ACTU’s paper. “The writing is on the wall that coal jobs are on the way out and 
there is really no future there. The unions are seeing that clearly and want to 
make sure workers and communities that rely on those jobs are looked after.

“For too long governments have wanted to ignore the transition and that’s made 
it worse. This change is happening and we need leadership.”

In order to manage a “just transition” effectively, the ACTU argued for a new 
statutory authority that would oversee:

 * the closure of Australia’s coal-fired power stations 
 * an industry-wide multi-employer pooling and redeployment scheme for 
retrenched workers 
 * A labour adjustment package that would support workers finding new jobs 
with job services, retraining, financial and personal support, and travel 
subsidies and relocation assistance 
The ACTU said the body should also carefully study what new industries would 
best be located in what regions, and support those industries growing in areas 
affected by the closure of coal-related industries.

The paper pointed out that the number of jobs in the clean energy sector was 
projected to reach 24 million by 2030. The US renewable energy sector had been 
growing quickly, the paper said, while Australian renewable jobs had declined. 
“This decline must be reversed,” the paper said.

Since most coal-related industries were located close together, the paper 
called for investment in coal-mining regions.

It cited research saying $88bn had been spent on adjustment packages following 
the closure of industries between 2000 and 2012. But it argued it was done in 
an ad hoc way, which needed to be better coordinated as the country transitions 
to clean energy.

The paper argues the transition should be funded by ending fossil fuel 
subsidies, introducing a carbon price, and from federal and state budgets.

The intervention from the ACTU marks a powerful coalition between the 
environment movement and the union movement that have traditionally been at 
odds.

Kearney said it had been a “long journey”.

What will fill the hole left by coal?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/29/what-will-fill-the-hole-left-by-coal>
“Most people in the environment sector now realise that the union movement has 
never been opposed to dealing with climate change but our concerns were about 
looking after workers. It was a difference that we didn’t just sit down and 
talk through. Now there’s a great deal of understanding on both sides.”


On Monday 17 prominent Australians, spearheaded by the Australian Conservation 
Foundation presented Frydenberg with a“clean energy blueprint”.  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/07/quentin-bryce-in-high-powered-group-calling-for-coal-power-to-be-phased-out>
It urged the Turnbull government to extend and expand the national renewable 
energy target and create a market mechanism to govern an orderly phase-out of 
coal-fired power in Australia. That blueprint also called for a just transition.

Both moves come ahead of the government’s’ review of its Direct Action policy 
in 2017, as well as areview into the national energy market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/07/chief-scientist-to-lead-review-into-australias-energy-security>
 led by the chief scientist, Alan Finkel.

The Finkel review followed a political battle between the Turnbull government 
and state governments,with Turnbull launching a rhetorical assault 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/29/jay-weatherill-accuses-barnaby-joyce-of-pushing-anti-windfarm-agenda-over-blackouts>
 on state-based renewable energy targetsafter a statewide power blackout in 
South Australia in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/28/south-australia-braces-for-storm-that-could-be-most-severe-in-50-years>
.
 