
D is for Dennis and other Sentimental Blokes

Even Australia's funniest contemporary poets find it difficult to scratch a 
living. The hilarious and much-awarded Alan Wearne 
<http://cordite.org.au/poetry/antiheroes/alan-wearne-ballade-for-alan-gould/> 
composes verse around an academic day-job, the wry John Forbes 
<http://www.poetrylibrary.edu.au/poets/forbes-john> spent much of his working 
life as a furniture removalist. But while CJ Dennis, like his contemporary 
Banjo Paterson <http://www.wallisandmatilda.com.au/banjo-paterson-poems.shtml>, 
began his working life as an office clerk, by the age of 30 he was a comic 
verse superstar.

Known to friends as Clarry, and The Best of Six when first published at the 
height of his professional success, Clarence Michael James Stanislaus Dennis’s 
satires of Australian class and masculinity shifted in their tens of thousands. 
His 1915 comic verse novelThe Songs of a Sentimental Bloke 
<http://textpublishing.com.au/books-and-authors/book/the-songs-of-a-sentimental-bloke/>
 charts the romance of larrikin Bill with Doreen, who works in a pickle 
factory. The story’s comic victory is to render Bill's passion no less ardent 
for being expressed in a phonetic, rhyming Australian vernacular – ascending to 
Shakespearean intent, if not articulation, when Bill and Doreen attend a 
performance of Romeo and Juliet.

Fair Juli-et, she gives 'er boy the tip.
Sez she: "Don't sling that crowd o' mine no lip;
An' if you run agin a Capulet,
Jist do a get."
'E swears 'e's done wiv lash; 'e'll chuck it clean
(Same as I done when I first met Doreen.)

So popular was The Songs of a Sentimental Bloke – which has sold more than 
300,000 copies according to publisher Text – that Australian filmmaker Raymond 
Longford produced a silent movie adaptation 
<https://archive.org/details/Sentimental_bloke>, for which Dennis received 
£1,000, half the production budget. Itsintertitles 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intertitle>were taken directly from the original 
verse, and while Americans failed to understand a word of it (it had to be 
translated), the film was a hit both in Australia and other markets. Dennis 
died Australia's most prosperous poet – it is unclear whether naming one of 
Australia's more lucrative poetry prizes 
<http://melbournepoetsunion.wordpress.com/tag/cj-dennis-poetry-competition/> 
after the man is a joke made for today's poets, or at their expense.

D is for Dusty and Dolce
 Slim Dusty's The Pub with No Beer 
While the name of Irish-born North Queenslander Dan Sheahan may not be 
familiar, his own comic contribution to Australian poetry made country singer 
Slim Dusty a household name thanks to his 1957 rendition of Sheahan's "The Pub 
With No Beer" <http://www.thepubwithnobeer.com.au/the-lyrics.html> – the first 
Australian single to ever reach number one. Adapted into song by Gordon 
Parsons, Dusty told the tragedy of a town facing emotional and spiritual 
collapse after a beer delivery truck failed to show, with a tender, ironic 
masculinity that sent the single triple-platinum. The comic ballads of folk 
Australia enjoyed another domestic and international chart victory in the 1980 
release ofJoe Dolce's "Shadup Your Face" 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sFacWGBJ_cs&feature=kp>, which he recorded in 
Melbourne. That Dolce was actually American and its famous refrain quoted from 
his Italian grandmother resonated with Australians who believed that the song 
spoke to a post-second world war migrant experience of world-weary parental 
optimism. Parental optimism in the Badham household was not so high when, after 
the 600th replaying of the catchy tune, the decision to purchase five-year old 
Vanessa a playback tape recorder was reconsidered with some degree of 
existential despair.

D is for D-Generation
 The first episode of the D-Generation from 1986 
Likely to spur several individual entries from their number as a group, the 
D-Generation <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_D-Generation> consisted of 
talented and organised Melbourne University students whose work in university 
revues became so legendary in Melbourne that local teenagers would wag school 
just to watch them rehearse. Having won the attention of the ABC, who provided 
Kris Noble to direct and produce them, the team of Rob Sitch, Santo Cilauro, 
Marg Downey, Michael Veitch, Magda Szubanski, John Harrison and Tom Gleisner 
wrote themselves into television sketch comedy history over two series for the 
ABC in 1986-87, eventually joined by Jane Turner, Tony Martin, Mick Molloy and 
Jason Stephens

With the encouragement and resources of the public broadcaster to train and 
support them, these young people grew into the makers of projects including TV 
shows The Late Show, Frontline, The Hollow Men, Kath and Kim and A River 
Somewhere for the ABC, the Fast Forward and Full Frontal teams on commercial 
television, the Martin/Molloy radio show, the films The Castle and The Dish and 
numerous other entertainment projects across all media. That so much could 
result from allowing Santo Cilauro to model a toupee made from pubic hair is a 
powerfully eloquent vindication of the necessity for autonomous Australian 
public broadcasting.
 