
Every week on planet Earth, new podcasts are born. They emerge fully prepared 
for listeners’ ears anywhere in the world. But let’s face it: the podcasts 
Australians tend to hear about are mostly American, right?


That isn’t entirely surprising. The American voice is ubiquitous across film, 
TV and nearly every other form of English-language media that Australians 
regularly encounter. Yet aural media has played – and continues to play – an 
essential part in the daily routine of so many Australians at every stage of 
life, in the city and the country – and especially on the long, ruminative 
drives between them. The lure of a disembodied voice or conversation is a 
nostalgic or connective one.


Australian radio and podcasting culture is known for its dry humour, rich 
soundscapes and circuitous storytelling. For those who have a hankering for 
something local, here are our current favourites.


'We need a moratorium on all coalmines': Naomi Klein in conversation – Behind 
the Lines podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/audio/2016/nov/10/we-need-a-moratorium-on-all-coalmines-naomi-klein-in-conversation-behind-the-lines-podcast>
The Real Thing <http://www.abc.net.au/radionational/programs/realthing/>

The Real Thing is a lively, dynamic podcast that’s a few stories into its 
first season. Its purview is distinctively Australian stories – “in search of 
the real Australia” – which is a broad definition for what’s turning out to be 
quite an idiosyncratic approach. Its layered and conversational style echoes 
the rapid cuts of Radiolab, sometimes jumping quickly between multiple voices 
to keep a story moving forward. But you’ll also hear great sound design, a 
lighthearted take on documentary, and the fast, self-deprecating and sometimes 
brash humour that’s often absent from podcast playlists.


Gateway episode: Backyard Lion Safari 
<http://www.abc.net.au/radionational/programs/realthing/lion-escape-bullen-african-lion-safari-warragamba/7677760>


In a sentence: Energetic documentary storytelling with a bold and distinctly 
Australian flavour.

For fans of: Radiolab, Third Ear

True Stories <http://www.sbs.com.au/programs/true-stories>

It’s worth digging through the entire back catalogue of this series, with each 
season exploring a different theme. From high-school survival tales to the 
untold stories of multicultural Australia, True Stories features some of 
Australia’s best emerging and established storytellers (with gorgeous original 
music and sound design to boot).


Season three is a departure from preceding seasons: a five-part investigation 
into the murders of gay South Australian men over the past several decades (as 
reported on from many angles as part of SBS’s Deep Water project). Told by 
award-winning Australian investigative journalist and writer Mark Whittaker, 
each episode follows Mark’s investigation, and interviews with the victims’ 
families, police and legal professionals. It’s respectful and superbly crafted 
audio storytelling from a deft production team.


Gateway episode: Rex, the beat, and the bashing 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/programs/true-stories/podcast/season-3/episode-1/rex-beat-bashing>


In a sentence: True stories that offer artful and insightful glimpses into 
Australia’s diverse society.

For fans of: Bowraville, Snap Judgment, Love+Radio

AWAYE! <http://www.abc.net.au/radionational/programs/awaye/>

In AWAYE!, Daniel Browning reports on Aboriginal arts and culture from across 
the continent – as well as highlighting great radio from Indigenous 
broadcasters around the world. It’s a consistently interesting show that 
sometimes strays from its core subjects to bring focus to issues such as 
constitutional recognition, prison, geography and history … which of course 
bear no uncertain influence on creative work.


You’ll learn a lot about modern Indigenous Australian writing, art and media 
from this podcast, which is brimming with imaginative vibrancy, political 
urgency and wide global influences and effects.


One of our faves: The Word Up series 
<http://www.abc.net.au/radionational/programs/awaye/features/word-up/>


In a sentence: An indispensable entry point to the deep and varied Aboriginal 
arts and culture scene.

For fans of: RN Books and Arts, CBC Unreserved

All the Best <http://allthebestradio.com/>

All the Best is a weekly podcast and community radio show that tells stories 
using short-form documentary, personal narrative, interviews and fiction. Since 
starting out in 2010, the show has nurtured some of Australia’s best young 
radiomakers – with an impressive number subsequently producing excellent work 
in other podcasts, projects and radio jobs around the world.


The show is put together by producers orbiting community radio stations in 
Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane, and one of the things we love is that it’s so 
welcoming and encouraging of people who’ve never made radio before – supporting 
them with one-on-one editorial guidance, feedback, opportunities and exposure. 
The raw experimentation of newer producers, mixed with the experience of 
stalwart contributors, makes for a great weekly snapshot of Australian life – 
from the whimsical to the deadly serious.


Gateway episode: Grapes of Ridicule 
<http://allthebestradio.com/our-picks/1514-grapes-of-ridicule/>


In a sentence: Everyday Australia told through small, imaginative pieces from 
a broad palette of radio upstarts.

For fans of: This American Life, Earshot

Radiolab's Jad Abumrad on podcasting's uncertain future: 'Supply is 
outstripping demand'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/16/radiolabs-jad-abumrad-on-podcastings-uncertain-future-supply-is-outstripping-demand>
Not by Accident <http://notbyaccident.net/>

Not By Accident is a documentary podcast series about becoming a single mother 
by choice.


Over several years of recording – pretty astonishing on its own – Sophie 
Harper documents the intimate details of her not-so-conventional journey to 
becoming a parent. As a narrator, Sophie’s tone is quiet and personal. At 
times, it feels like you’re sitting on her couch hearing her tell her story. At 
others, she’s right in your ear.

Through audio diaries, conversations with friends and family, and 
fly-on-the-wall recordings, Harper describes her changing body, career, 
childbirth, and the enormous love that having her child has unlocked.


Gateway episode: Insemination Story 
<http://notbyaccident.net/episode-1-insemination-story/>


In a sentence: The process of becoming a single mother by choice – documented 
in intimate audio detail.

For fans of: Strangers, First Day Back, How to be a Girl

SleepTalker <http://sleeptalkerpodcast.com/>


SleepTalker is a podcast ‘about sleep, dreams, nightmares and what happens in 
your head after dark.’ Really, though, it’s as much about the things that frame 
the experience of sleep – the compromises we make with those we sleep beside, 
the anxieties, disorders and distractions that keep us from a good night’s 
rest, or the ways in which we work with the experiences we have while asleep – 
and how they affect our waking lives.


Mostly, episodes are presented as edited single-voice stories stripped of the 
interviewer’s voice – with subtle sound design and music in the mix, too – but 
there’s a compelling sense of variation between (and sometimes within) its 
dozen-odd episodes to date.


Gateway episode: Compromise <http://sleeptalkerpodcast.com/7-compromise/>


In a sentence: Immersive, hypnotic stories about sleep and what happens around 
(and inside) it.

For fans of: Here Be Monsters, Love+Radio

Soundproof <http://www.abc.net.au/radionational/programs/soundproof/>

Trump's victory and James Patterson on race and 18C – Australian politics live 
podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/audio/2016/nov/11/trumps-victory-and-james-patterson-on-race-and-18c-australian-politics-live-podcast>
Recently cancelled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/16/radio-national-to-lose-eight-staff-as-abc-cuts-several-programs-from-2017-schedule>
 Soundproof opens up an hour-long space for, well, art. From sounded features 
to deeply weird experiments, in a podcast boom dominated by narration and 
journalistic approaches to storytelling, Soundproof is a rarity that takes 
listeners in a completely different direction. (Fact: it’s also one of the only 
podcasts in which you might actually hear a boom.)

Through long- and short-form creative audio, and with the appearance of many 
notable experimental musicians alongside sound and radio artists, writers and 
documentarians, Soundproof engages the imagination with work that mashes 
language, music and pure sound into something unique and expansive. Give it 
time to sink in: its best work generously rewards deep listening with 
transporting experiences. Headphones are an absolute must.


Gateway episode: Moving Homes 
<http://www.abc.net.au/radionational/programs/soundproof/moving-homes/7218294>


In a sentence: The most adventurous, mesmerising listening experience you’ll 
find.

For fans of: Sound Matters, The World According to Sound, Between the Ears

• The Wheeler Centre recently announced the Australian Audio Guide  
<http://australianaudioguide.com/>in collaboration with Audiocraft
 