
G is for Gadsby, Smithton’s finest

The town of Smithton <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smithton,_Tasmania>, in the 
remote northwest of Tasmania, is notable for four things. It processes meat, 
produces French fries, supplied Australia’sfirst female representative 
<http://adb.anu.edu.au/biography/lyons-dame-enid-muriel-14392> to federal 
parliament ... and it’s the hometown of comedian Hannah Gadsby.

As a regular on weekly ABC television talk show Adam Hills Tonight 
<http://www.abc.net.au/tv/adamhillsIGST/about/default.htm>, Gadsby’s sidekick 
role <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pGRsQtL9Rx4> to “comedy’s nice guy” Hills 
belies an impressive comedy profile in her own right. Since winning the 
door-opening Triple J Raw Comedy award in 2006, Gadsby’s star has travelled 
very far from little Smithton. Her solo shows are reliably sold out atcomedy 
festivals <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7IPIM3saWGI>, and she’s a popular 
guest of panel shows including Spicks and Specks, Good News Week and Agony 
Aunts.

Notoriously accident-prone (amongst many misadventures, she was once 
hospitalised for slipping on chicken fat), her tales of random mishaps inform 
much of her material, as do anecdotes about her eccentric mother. The title of 
Gadsby’s 2009 show Kiss Me Quick, I’m Full of Jubes is taken from the 
expression employed by her mother to announce her suspicions that someone is 
gay; with signature gentle drollery, Gadsby's show made fun of how the comedian 
herselfcame out to her mother <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o-pEOrihBEs> as 
a lesbian.

Gadsby's self-deprecating humour <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bhsj6kFSQiM> 
has won her many fans. And it's powered by a raw comic honesty that's enabled 
her to create shows like The Cliff Young Shuffle; the narrative of this show 
tracked Gadsby's adventures on a 300km walk across England in which she forgot 
to bring her antidepressants.

Perhaps the greatest achievement of the comedian so far, however, is not her 
many awards, popularity, commitment tocharity work 
<http://melbourne.jollypeople.com/in-stitches-for-kids/5923/#more-5923> or 
personal comic bravery – it’s that in possession of an actual art history 
degree from ANU, Gadsby has managed to pursue her undergraduate interests at a 
professional level; she's guest presented ABC’s Artscape and regularly hosted 
art tours for theNational Gallery of Victoria 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0hFh_Gcs93A>. That’s one Hecs debt that’s 
certainly paying itself off.

G is for Gillies

The Australian Labor party government of Bob Hawke shifted its gears from 
electorally difficult social democratic principles to the trendy neoliberal 
politics of “economic rationalism” in the mid-1980s. What seems extraordinary 
in the current epoch is that no less than the ABC afforded itself a crack team 
of satirists to publicly scrutinize the immense economic and social changes 
taking place.

The Gillies Report 
<http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/68731/Geoffrey-Blainey>, produced by 
the ABC for two brilliant seasons in 1984-85, with sequels The Gillies Republic 
(1986) and Gillies and Company (1992), assembled some of the country’s best 
performance and political writing talent in a show that centred around the 
detailed and hilarious caricatures of politicians, played by revered stage 
actor Max Gillies. With a team that included the infamousJohn Clarke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/04/australian-comedy-a-z-c-is-for-cooke-and-clarke>
, political journalist turned comic Wendy Harmer, Philip Scott, Geoff Kelso, 
Peter Moon and the notoriously unpredictable cartoonistPatrick Cook 
<http://www.abc.net.au/tv/enoughrope/transcripts/s1178313.htm>, The Gillies 
Report mocked both Australian politics and political reportage through sketches 
that satirised not only the figures of political debate, butthe debate 
framework itself <http://aso.gov.au/titles/tv/gillies-report-episode-4/clip2/>. 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvrZy8ornRxQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvrZy8ornRxQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvrZy8ornRxQ&media=>
 Max Gillies spoofs former PM Bob Hawke. 
With showpieces that included a policy debate between Hawke and then 
opposition leader Andrew Peacock, both played by Gillies, no side of politics 
was spared brazen ridicule, and Gillies and the writers displayed a particular 
talent for exposing and holding to account the Australian business and cultural 
elite. Not historianGeoffrey Blainey 
<http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/68731/Geoffrey-Blainey>, media mogul 
Kerry Packer 
<http://www.theage.com.au/articles/2005/12/27/1135445572500.html?page=fullpage#contentSwap1>
, Carlton football club presidentJohn Elliott 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Elliott_%28businessman%29> nor conservative 
commentatorGerard Henderson <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gerard_Henderson> 
escaped Gillies' mighty knife.

The show was something of a stake in the ground for true political autonomy 
struck by the ABC, whose history was previously one of“political timidity” 
<http://w3.unisa.edu.au/cil/csaa/files/Bye.pdf>. The network had infamously 
cancelled sitcom Our Man in Canberra just before broadcast in 1972, due to 
apparent concerns it would breach the section of the then Broadcasting and 
Television Act prohibiting the dramatisation of any political matter current 
during the past five years. Broadcasting The Gillies Report was therefore 
something of a public unshackling; Patrick Cook himself announced at its season 
launch that while the ABC had developed such series in the past, it was a 
relief to see a show make it to air without executives “pooing themselves” over 
possible political fallout.

Runners up: Kym Gyngell 
<http://aso.gov.au/titles/tv/the-comedy-company-s1-ep11/clip2/>, character 
comedian and creator of loveable bogan Col’n Carpenter;Elliot Goblet 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EoVhOLvh9kc>, professional wet blanket … and 
thatNorman Gunston <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T47Ivf4pxaM> guy, formerly 
of Wollongong and late ofAunty Jack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/jan/09/australian-comedy-a-to-z-a-is-for-anderson-aunty-and-acropolis>
, celebrity interviewer.
 