
C is for Cooke


“We need something that will cheer up anyone who has “the uglies”. “Something 
to reassure all certifiably gorgeous girls and women that they are not Space 
Porkers from Hell.”

So begins possibly the world’s greatest self-help book, Real Gorgeous by Kaz 
Cooke <http://kazcooke.com.au/>, given to me by my friend Shannon in 1996, not 
long after it was first published. Very young, very awkward and notoriously 
uncomfortable in my own skin, Shannon presented the book as a wordless gesture 
of reassurance that I was not, as I desperately feared, an actual Space Porker.

Cooke’s manual of body and beauty had me convinced within a chapter, tears 
streaming down my face with laughter, that the problem was not with me. With a 
background in journalism, beginning atMelbourne newspaper the Age 
<http://www.theage.com.au/>, Cooke had done stints on the glossies and was a 
well-known cartoonist when her distaste for the beauty and fashion industries 
inspired her search for a book to dispel mythologies about the female body 
perpetuated by them.


But as she explains in Real Gorgeous, “I couldn’t find such a book, so I had 
to write one.” Also illustrated by Cooke, the surreal and colourful humour that 
had given life to her cartoon heroineHermoine the Modern Girl 
<http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=VWYiF3xLUGY> struck a powerful chord with young 
female readers. They finally got a chance to laugh along as she ridiculed 
fat-shamers, opportunistic plastic surgeons and the kind of beauty industry 
spokespeople who say things like “facelift bandages may become a fashion trend” 
without irony. Her suggestion that Jacques Clarins “go and have a lie down now” 
still brings tears to my eyes.


As well as making cartoons, writing and broadcasting, Cooke’s time as a frock 
commentator for a glossy weekly is not forgotten easily. She followed Real 
Gorgeous with similar comedy-meets-self-help publications, famously exposing 
the reality of pregnancy in the unsubtle and profoundly usefulUp the Duff 
<http://www.penguin.com.au/uptheduff/>. A 2002 effort, Living with Crazy 
Buttocks, won a Bookseller/Diagram prize for oddest title of the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/dec/10/news.awardsandprizes>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSJm5XU83ieA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSJm5XU83ieA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSJm5XU83ieA&media=>
C is for Clarke


Originally from New Zealand, it was satirist John Clarke 
<http://www.abc.net.au/rn/legacy/features/pod/poets/clarke.htm>’s <> good 
fortune to create in his slow-witted character Fred Dagg, father of seven sons 
all called Trev, the kind of mockable New Zealander that Australian audiences 
could really warm to. Relocating himself – and Dagg – to Australia in the late 
1970s, Clarke found Dagg an audience on youth radio Triple J and an eventual 
home at ABC television when his talent for mixing sharp political satire with 
deadpan comedy was realised on massively influential 1980s political sketch 
show,The Gillies Report <http://aso.gov.au/titles/series/gillies-report/>. 

By 1989, Clarke perfected a two-man act with the similarly deadpan Bryan Dawe  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=niYk9amsvx8>which became a weekly feature of 
Channel Nine’s TV news tabloid,A Current Affair <http://aca.ninemsn.com.au/>. 
From week to week, Clarke appeared in exactly the same po-faced persona, 
declared himself to be a political leader or figurehead, and would deliver to 
“interviewer” Dawe an increasingly surreal and ridiculous set of answers on 
topical questions of the day. How anti-authoritarian Clarke ended up at Nine – 
Kerry Packer’s then fiefdom – is perhaps explained by a story of Packer 
summoning Australia’s best comedy writers to a recruitment meeting, where he 
offered both generous development opportunities and thundering criticism of the 
Gillies Report. Legend has it that Clarke wordlessly tore the ABC pages from 
his resumé and ate them in front of the mogul. 

Clarke’s relationship with Nine continued until 1997, and their routine 
relocated to the ABC’s 7:30 Report. As of 2013 the weekly interview sketch is 
now Clarke & Dawe and a three-minute ABC show of itself.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmmTfAstUjOk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmmTfAstUjOk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmmTfAstUjOk&media=>
Clarke brought this unique comic persona with him as one of the 
writer-performers of the razor-sharp Olympics mockumentary series,The Games 
<http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=Dh0MNIFezME>. Created for the ABC with Dawe and 
Kath and Kim’s Gina Riley to satirise the organisation of the 2000 Sydney 
Olympics, Clarke later accused the BBC series Twenty Twelve, a comedy based on 
London’s preparation for the Games, of copying his idea –though the BBC 
strongly denied it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/mar/16/bbc-olympics-comedy-twenty-twelve>
.

Maintaining an extensive career as an actor and writer, Clarke’s contributions 
to Australian culture beyond comedy are many – but of all the skills he has 
demonstrated to audiences in his adopted home, perhaps none surpass the example 
he provides in the 1991 cult movie Death in Brunswick of just how to be the 
kind of mate who’d really, truly help you to bury a body.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE9JXrJ-y5tA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE9JXrJ-y5tA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE9JXrJ-y5tA&media=> 