
First, the housing stuff. The most unnerving move is the one everyone was 
hoping for - even Boris Johnson. Chancellor George Osborne has said councils 
will be allowed to increase their borrowing capacity in order to finance the 
building of more homes. Butaccording to London Councils 
<http://www.londoncouncils.gov.uk/news/current/pressdetail.htm?pk=1718>, which 
represents the capital's local authorities, he's gone nowhere near far enough 
and the "many strings attached" will prevent the boroughs properly addressing 
the housing crisis.

The biggest string is that a successful bid in the competitive process 
involved will partly depend on councils selling off "vacant high-value social 
housing" it already owns, along with throwing in public land and working in 
partnership with housing associations. Few seem impressed.

Red Brick has dismissed the move 
<http://redbrickblog.wordpress.com/2013/12/05/small-beer-for-council-housing/> 
as "small beer" in terms of the number of homes it would produce and pointed 
out the danger that it will "encourage ever more dubious schemes like the 
notoriousEarls Court Project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/earls-court-project>," which intends to 
knock down good quality occupied homes in an expensive area for the benefit of 
private developers.

The Chartered Institute of Housing warns 
<http://www.cih.org/news-article/display/vpathDCR/templatedata/cih/news-article/data/CIH_reaction_to_the_Autumn_Statement#.UqC4ysCd9dk.twitter>
 that "there is a risk that any gains could be offset by the requirement to 
sell high-value social housing and the expansion of Right To Buy." AtInside 
Housing 
<http://www.InsideHousing.co.uk/home/blogs/as2013-live-blog/6529811.blog>, 
Jules Birch observes that no definition of "high value" is provided, but that 
the inspiration for this idea is plainly Policy Exchange's argument for 
flogging heaps the stuff its calls "expensive" when it becomes vacant in order 
to build more in poor areas.

It's one thing for a cash-strapped borough committed to building social 
housing to sell the odd valuable property with no tenants living there in order 
to fund a larger number of new ones on its own patch. Whatever Osborne has in 
mind looks suspiciously like something else entirely. Instead of being the good 
newsLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> Councils desired, his 
"borrow to build" proposal looks a little ominous.

They are much happier over another piece of news, separate from the autumn 
statement 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/263575/Autumn_Statement_2013.pdf>
, that local housing allowance levels in about half of the capitalare to be 
raised by 4% 
<http://www.londoncouncils.gov.uk/news/current/pressdetail.htm?pk=1715> instead 
of just 1% as everywhere else - a hard won recognition of London's particular 
affordability crisis which will result in a larger percentage of private rental 
properties being available to people who need help making ends meet.

Another housing measure in the autumn statement that has been rumoured for 
some time addresses foreign ownership of homes - a very live issue in London 
generating much media blah-blah of late. Osborne will raise capital gains tax on
foreign owners of second homes 
<http://www.insidehousing.co.uk/finance/as2013-foreign-property-investors-to-pay-capital-gains-tax/6529830.article>
, though not until 2015. This has been seen as recognition of bursting bubble 
fears. But will it make much difference? Not according tothe expert at Savills 
<http://www.savills.co.uk/research_articles/141718/171568-0>.

There's some London-centred infrastructure investment set out. The detail is 
in a separatenational infrastructure plan 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/263159/national_infrastructure_plan_2013.pdf>
. It includes a guarantee to enable the mayor toborrow £1bn 
<http://www.out-law.com/en/articles/2012/december/osborne-announces-1bn-government-guarantee-for-northern-line-extension/>
 towards the Northern Line extension into Nine Elms and a commitment to 
"supporting" plans - already reported - for a higher education and cultural 
quarter on the Olympic Park involving University College London and the 
Victoria and Albert Museum.

City Hall is very excited about this and, on the face of it, could have a 
point. It seems to confirm that there will beless housing on the park 
<http://www.InsideHousing.co.uk//6529498.article> than had been previously 
planned, though the hope is that the new hub would encourage more in the wider 
neighbourhood. This islisted on page 10 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/263159/national_infrastructure_plan_2013.pdf>
 as is a £30m contribution towards the construction ofThomas Heatherwick's 
garden bridge 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/london/george-osborne-gives-30million-and-his-seal-of-approval-to-londons-garden-bridge-8982692.html>
 across the Thames between Temple and the Southbank, complete with trees.

The final cost of the bridge has been put at £150m. The infrastructure plan 
says the government's money will "supplement funding from Transport for London" 
along with "private donations" although according tothe commissioner's report 
<http://www.tfl.gov.uk/assets/downloads/corporate/Board-20130925-Part-1-Item05-Commissioners-Report-September-2013.pdf>
 to the TfL board in September the "mayoral decision" on the matter was as 
follows:

The bridge is proceeding on the basis that its construction and maintenance 
costs would be funded by third parties and our contribution is limited to 
enabling costs associated with securing the necessary consents and approvals. 
Full third party funding is not yet in place, but there is significant interest 
and discussions are continuing. TfL has no budget to build or maintain the 
bridge.

Confused? Me too. I wonder if anyone else is. After all, there seems to have 
been some confusion behind Johnson's hike of the cost of London Travelcards by 
an average of 4.1% in his 2014 fares package, announced on Tuesday. He 
explained then that this had to be the case because Travelcard prices are tied 
to those of National Rail season tickets, and those would be going up by 4.1%.

Except that, well, the chancellor said today that they'd actually be going up 
by only 3.1%, in line with inflation. Now the mayor is asking Osborne for an 
extra £100m to bring the prices paid by London commuters into line with the 
rest of the country. Howred is his face 
<http://www.itv.com/news/london/2013-12-05/osborne-trumps-boris-travel-plans/>? 
Is it with embarrassment or rage?
 