
The organisers of a growing movement to reverse the decision to ditch 
anthropology as an A-level subject are seeking the support of Prince Charles, 
who studied the discipline in the late 1960s.

An online petition railing against the move has already received more than 
2,000 signatures and it is understood that the Royal Anthropological Institute 
has sent a letter to the prince seeking his support. The institute is awaiting 
a response, but is already collecting names of MPs from all parties who are 
willing to stand up in protest. It is understood that Andrew Smith, a former 
Labour education minister, has written to the education secretary, Nicky 
Morgan, calling for the decision to be reversed.

The AQA exam board announced its decision to discontinue the subject after 
exam boards had been invited to review whether to continue offering some of the 
less popular A-levels as part ofMichael Gove’s drive for greater rigour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/aug/11/labour-overturn-gove-a-level-reforms>
 when he was education secretary. Academics in the field have reacted with 
dismay and claim the subject has never been more important at a time of 
troubling intolerance in society. Prince Charles chose to take a first-year 
course in archaeology and anthropology when he arrived at Trinity College, 
Cambridge, in 1967, although he changed to history in the following academic 
year.

Professor André Singer, president of the Royal Anthropological Institute of 
Great Britain and Ireland, whose recent documentaryNight Will Fall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2014/sep/02/night-will-fall-trailer-documentary>
 chronicled the making of a British government programme about the discovery of 
the Nazi concentration camps in 1945, said: “At a time when we are facing an 
unprecedented rise in instances of prejudice, intolerance, racism and 
antisemitism, it is extraordinary and to my mind outrageous that the one course 
structured for schools, and just beginning to be enthusiastically taken up 
across the country, that tackles these issues and helps give children an 
understanding of their social relevance should be axed for bureaucratic (market 
and cost) reasons.It took years of dedicated explanation and pressure on the 
education authorities by a team at the RAI to get acceptance of the importance 
of this course and have it instated in the school’s curriculum, and then with a 
stroke of the pen, and without consultation, to drop it without considering its 
importance for future generations feels like an episode of cultural barbarism. 
I hope the AQA will reconsider their decision.”

Last year Gove announced reforms to GCSE and A-levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels>, promising more rigorous 
content in core subjects, including maths, English, history, geography and the 
three sciences. The national regulator, Ofqual (Office of Qualifications and 
Examinations Regulation), then issued a consultation document suggesting that 
exam boards might wish to review their range of A-level offerings, and “only 
propose subjects where there is new demand, or where the existing and/or 
potential future market is large enough”.

This month the AQA exam board told schools and colleges that carry 
anthropology as an A-level that the 2014-2015 cohort would be the last. 
According to the figures for 2013-14, 610 students are taking AS-level 
anthropology and 222 the full A-level. Further students started to study it in 
2014, but up-to-date figures are not available.

In an open letter published in the Observer, Hilary Callan, former director at 
the Royal Anthropological Institute, said that the A-level had not been given 
time to bed in. Callan said: “Last week the awarding body responsible for the 
anthropology A-level, AQA, announced that it is to be discontinued. The reasons 
given are largely those of market and costs. While examination boards have to 
balance their books, the decision to discontinue the anthropology A-level is 
both short-sighted and premature … On Sunday 1 February, the secretary of state 
for education, Nicky Morgan, commented on theAndrew Marr Show that ‘British 
values’ are about ‘tolerance and understanding of different ethnic backgrounds, 
traditions and religions’. At no time has this understanding based on sound 
knowledge been more needed in our own political culture, nationally and 
globally. To silence the key contribution of anthropology to promoting it is 
perverse on any view.”

An AQA spokesperson said: “We started offering anthropology at A-level in 
September 2010 … Sadly, despite our best efforts and valued support from the 
Royal Anthropological Institute, takeup has been much lower than we’d hoped, 
with numbers only growing very slightly from a tiny base.

“It’s very difficult for us to recruit experienced senior examiners for it 
and, with only 222 students taking an exam last year, to set appropriate grade 
boundaries.”

THE PIONEERS

Claude Lévi-Strauss (1908-2009)

One of France’s foremost thinkers, he showed that patterns of structures, 
including behaviour and thought, are universal to all societies, and rejected 
the concept of primitive and modern minds, arguing that all men have the same 
intellectual potential.

Franz Boas 

(1858-1942) 

He argued against the notion of western civilisation’s superiority with his 
theory of relativism and gave his discipline its scientific methodology.

Margaret Mead 

(1901-78)

Mead’s observations of Samoan children, and the ease with which they entered 
adulthood, drew her to the conclusion that teenage angst and stress had more to 
do with external factors than with anything that was happening internally.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F08%2Fanthropology-a-level-axed-cultural-barbarism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F6%2F1423250664432%2Fff161dd4-33f3-46eb-a1af-36d61d6fb1ca-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Axing%20anthropology%20A-level%20is%20%E2%80%98cultural%20barbarism%E2%80%99%2C%20say%20experts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F08%2Fanthropology-a-level-axed-cultural-barbarism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Axing%20anthropology%20A-level%20is%20%E2%80%98cultural%20barbarism%E2%80%99%2C%20say%20experts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F08%2Fanthropology-a-level-axed-cultural-barbarism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F6%2F1423250664432%2Fff161dd4-33f3-46eb-a1af-36d61d6fb1ca-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Education secretary Nicky Morgan has stressed the importance of understanding 
ethnic backgrounds. Photograph: Facundo Arrizabalaga/EPA  