
12.26pm: 
There's still much confusion about exactly what the court has ruled.

According to Indian TV, it decided to divide the site three ways, with Hindus 
and Muslims communities gaining the right to a third each of the site.

The information has not been confirmed and its unclear what group would 
control the remaining third. The ruling isdue to be published in full here 
<http://rjbm.nic.in/>, later today.

The demolition of the 16th century mosque by Hindu mobs in 1992 triggered some 
of India's worst riots 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/sep/28/ayodhya-mosque-india-guardian-report>
 that killed about 2,000 people.

More than 200,000 police have been deployed across India  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/sep/30/ayodhya-verdict-india-security-braced>
to guard against any communal violence.

Hindus want to build a temple on the site. Muslims want the mosque rebuilt 
after it was demolished in 1992.

Whatever the verdict it is almost certain to be challenged in the supreme 
court and a final decision could take years.

12.42pm: 
More confusion, now AP is saying that Hindus will get a two-thirds stake, and 
Muslims one third.

It cited Ravi Shankar Prasad, a lawyer for one of the parties in the suit. He 
said the Muslim community would get one third and two Hindu groups would split 
the remainder.

As expected a lawyer for the Muslim community says he will appeal. Zaffaryab 
Jilani said the verdict was "a step forward" but he would appeal to the supreme 
court.

12.50pm: 
The  judgments have been published online <http://rjbm.nic.in/>. The "brief" 
summary runs to 24 pages.

12.54pm: 
This seems to be the key passage from ruling of SU Khan, one of the judges 
involved:

All the three sets of parties, i.e. Muslims, Hindus and Nirmohi Akhara are 
declared joint title holders of the property/ premises in dispute.

12.57pm: 
Our Delhi correspondent, Jason Burke, has this instant take on the ruling.

Three Indian judges ruled that the disputed religious site in Ayodhya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayodhya>, claimed by both Muslims and 
Hindus, should be shared by both communities.

In one of the longest awaited and most controversial judgment in the nation's 
history, the Lucknow bench of the Allahabad high court decided against the 
claim by Muslim community representatives in the northern city that they should 
be allowed to rebuild a 16th century mosque, demolished by a mob of Hindu 
extremists in 1992.

The site of the mosque would be split between two Hindu groups and one Muslim 
group, they said.

But the 2,000 page judgment ordered that the status quo at the religious 
compound in Ayodhya at the centre of the dispute - currently under state 
control - would be maintained for three months.

Lawyers representing the Muslim claimants said they were "partly disappointed" 
and that they would appeal the decision to the supreme court.

Chaotic scenes accompanied the release of the judgment after lawyers for Hindu 
groups left the court before it was published as planned on a website. They 
held an impromptu press conference claiming victory by quoting parts of the 
judgment.

1.08pm: 
The international Hindu organisation, Viśva Hindu Parishad, has welcomed the 
verdict <http://www.ptinews.com/news/996468_VHP-welcomes-Ayodhya-verdict>
according to the Press Trust of India.

"We welcome the judgment. The faith of one billion Hindus that Lord Ram was 
born here has been endorsed by the judiciary", VHP international general 
secretary Pravin Togadia told PTI.

He said the judgment would now pave the way for construction of Ram temple at 
the disputed site.

1.19pm: 
Jason Burke gauges reaction and explains some of the initial confusion 
surrounding the verdict.

Immediate reaction here muted. In part due to the complexity of the issue and 
the judgment. The decision was meant to be released on a website and handed to 
the media.

Instead there were chaotic scenes as lawyers for the Hindu side left the court 
and
held a largely inaudible impromptu press conference.

So far, everyone is just trying to work out exactly what this all means. 
Statements are expected from major political parties, including the Hindu 
nationalists, the Bharatiya Janata Party, very much involved in the destruction 
of the mosque back in 1992 and in building the issue of the temple into a major 
cause, in the next hour or so. All are likely to call for calm.

Zaffaryab Jilani, one of the lawyers for the Muslim community's 
representatives, has stuck to a conciliatory line. Certainly there's no sign of 
any inflammatory rhetoric or immediate outburst of anger from anyone.

But the threat comes from some small incident somewhere spiralling out of 
control. With 200,000 troops, police and paramilitaries deployed, authorities 
should be able to move fast enough to stop that happening.

1.25pm: 
Mohan Bhagwat, head of the Hindu nationalist group Rashtriya Swayamsevak 
Sangh, said the verdict should not be seen as victory for any group.

But he is quoted in the Hindu claiming the judgment paves the way for the 
construction of a Hindu Ram temple.

"The judgment is not a win or loss for anybody. We invite everybody, including 
Muslims, to help build the temple," 
<http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/article804632.ece> he said.

1.31pm: 
Police have arrested more than 10,000 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/sep/30/ayodhya-verdict-hindus-muslims-india?>
 people to prevent them from inciting violence, according to Jason's full 
report on the verdict.

1.39pm: 
Some Muslims have welcomed the judgment, according to Reuters.

"The judgment can begin a process of reconciliation," Kamal Farooqi, a member 
of the AllIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> Muslim Personal Law 
Board, told the agency.

1.46pm: 
Hindu groups are also planning an appeal to the supreme court, according to 
Jason Burke.

2.00pm: 
Here's a summary of events so far.

• A court in India has ruled that Ayodhya, the holy site of a demolished 
mosque in India should be divided between Hindus and Muslims. The Lucknow court 
ruled by a majority of two to one in favour of giving two thirds of the land to 
Hindus - one third each to two Hindu groups - and one third to Muslims.
• Initial reaction from both Muslim and Hindu leaders was conciliatory. But 
both sides in the dispute have said they will appeal.
• There is still widespread fear that the ruling will spark violence. Police 
have arrested more than 10,000 people to prevent them from inciting violence, 
while another 100,000 had to sign affidavits saying they would not cause 
trouble after the verdict, officials said.

2.39pm: 
This is Mark Tran taking over from Matt who has finished for the day. More 
reaction is coming in from politicians and leaders of religious groups. This is 
the latest from Jason Burke, who writes:

The reaction is all relatively conciliatory but an underlying theme to many of 
the statements from the Hindu nationalists is that the judgment will now allow 
them to construct a temple on the site of the former mosque - a long-standing 
demand. It is unclear - as experts go through the judgment carefully - if that 
is the case or not but is likely to be a cause for further controversy. Some 
commentators are praising the judgment as laying the ground for better 
relations between religious communities in India. One element that is fairly 
clear is that the judges themselves were divided on many key points.

The actual ruling says: "it is further declared that the portion below the 
central dome where at present the idol is kept in a makeshift temple will be 
allotted to Hindus in final decree."

2.55pm: 
The Times of India is reporting that prime minister Manmohan Singh will meet 
senior officials 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/PM-meets-sr-ministers-after-Ayodhya-verdict/articleshow/6659238.cms>
 to discuss the implications of the Ayodhya verdict. The law and order 
situation will be also reviewed, a senior official told the paper.
Top officials from the BJP, the Hindu nationalist party, will be holding their 
own meeting to discuss what to do next.

3.08pm: 
The Guardian's Derek Brown covered the violence that broke out across India 
when Hindu extremists razed the Babri mosque in 1992. Hisarticles make 
fascinating reading 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/sep/28/ayodhya-mosque-india-guardian-report>
. The BBC has thisq&a on the background 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-south-asia-11435240> to the dispute.

3.17pm: 
Jason Burke spoke of the divisions among the three judges. You can find more 
about them in thispiece from Manorama online 
<http://www.manoramaonline.com/cgi-bin/MMOnline.dll/portal/ep/contentView.do?contentType=EDITORIAL&channelId=-1073753405&programId=1080132917&contentId=7987061&tabId=1>
.

Justice Dharam Veer Sharma is the one who gave a dissenting verdict and 
refrained from signing the Sep 17 order issued by the special bench turning 
down the plea for postponement of the final verdict slated for September 24. In 
his view, parties involved in the case should have been given the freedom to 
try and work out an amicable settlement.

3.43pm: 
This is what Bloomberg, the financial wire, is reporting 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2010-09-30/india-court-divides-ayodhya-land-among-hindu-groups-muslims-lawyers-say.html>
:

Analysts said the issue that helped propel the BJP to power in 1998 may no 
longer have the power to spark widespread unrest. "The dispute has lost its 
intensity," said Javeed Alam, chairman of the Indian Council of Social Science 
Research, in New Delhi. "People want this dispute to be buried."

Meanwhile, Jason Burke reports that L K Advani, a veteran BJP leader, is also 
taking the line that the Ram temple at Ayodhya can now be built.

3.56pm: 
This is how Reuters is reporting the verdict.

Muslims did appear the biggest losers. But Muslim organisations were measured 
in their response, careful not to inflame public tensions in a country where 
they account for only 13% of the 1.2 billion plus population. There were no 
immediate reports of violence after the ruling. "It was a very sensible 
judgment and the court has tried to balance the parties," said Anil Verma, a 
political analyst. "Apportioning one-third to the Muslims means they have not 
completely lost."

4.06pm: 
We are wrapping things up here. Many thanks for all your comments.
 