
Is it the end of the saga? After a battle of almost 125 years, a high court in 
India has passed judgment in the suit "The Sunni Central Board of Waqfs UP 
Lucknow & Others Versus Gopal Singh Visharad and Others 
<http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/politics/nation/Ayodhya-verdict-Disputed-land-to-be-divided-into-3-parts/articleshow/6658856.cms>
", filed in 1989. The first suit in this matter was filed in 1885. In this 
latest judgment, the three-judge special bench of the Allahabad high court 
declared that the title suit filed by the Sunni Waqf Board had been dismissed. 
Two of the three judges – Justices Sudhir Agarwal and DV Sharma – concurred in 
the judgment, while Justice SU Khan differed with the majority view.

The gist of the historic judgment 
<http://elegalix2.allahabadhighcourt.in/elegalix/DisplayAyodhyaBenchLandingPage.do>
 is that the disputed site – on which stood the Babri mosque destroyed by a 
rampaging Hindu crowd in 1992 – is, indeed, the birthplace of Lord Rama, the 
Hindu god-king who is the hero in the Indian epicRamayana 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ramayana>. The majority opinion is that the 
mosque was constructed byBabur <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Babur>, the Muslim 
conqueror who laid the foundation for theMughal dynasty 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mughal_Empire> of India. But, they said, the 
mosque was built against the tenets of Islam and therefore could not "have the 
character of a mosque". More importantly, they said the "mosque" was 
constructed on the site of an older Hindu structure that was demolished. The 
judges based this on the evidence provided by the archaeological survey of 
India.

It is hoped the Allahabad high court judgment will put an end to the 
machinations of those who have for decades sought to impede the potential for 
compromise. The court has decreed that the contested site be divided and 
distributed among the three contending parties.

A quick summary of the history of the legal battle is in order. Hindu groups, 
led by the Vishwa Hindu Parishad (World Hindu Council), submitted evidence in 
1990 to the All India Babri Masjid Action Committee (AIBMAC), set up on behalf 
of the Indian Muslim groups laying claim to the Babri mosque site, in support 
of the Hindu contention that it was their holy site. It asked for negotiations 
that would enable both parties – Hindus and Muslims – to arrive at a 
compromise. The AIBMAC experts ignored it. This intransigence and political 
gamesmanship led to theterrible events of 6 December 1992 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/december/6/newsid_3712000/3712777.stm>
 when the mosque was destroyed by a rampaging mob who were goaded on by leaders 
of the Hindu political/religious groups behind the movement to reacquire the 
disputed site to construct a temple for Lord Rama.

The destruction of the Babri mosque led to the publication of numerous books 
and commentaries worldwide, mostly critical of the Hindu groups. Some 
commentators doubted the sources for the claim that there stood a temple at the 
spot the Babri mosque was constructed. The argument was that many of the 
sources, showing evidence for the temple, were British, and it was a British 
ploy to divide Hindus and Muslims. Leftist historians challenged the 
historicity of Rama, while other historians provided evidence that showed 
Ayodhya must have been an important centre since at least the time ofSkanda 
Gupta <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Skandagupta>, about 1,500 years ago.

They also provided evidence, from Muslim sources, that the temple that stood in
Ayodhya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayodhya> was razed 500 years ago and 
a mosque constructed over it.

But the razing of the mosque had certain consequences: it was no longer a 
rallying point for Hindu votaries, and the destruction was used by Muslims as 
evidence of Hindu hatred. Every year, on the anniversary, there were shouting 
matches in the Indian parliament to enable politicians to grandstand and curry 
favour with their voters, and to establish their "secular" credentials.

The modern story of Ayodhya is emblematic of Indian democracy – which is 
messier than most other democracies – butIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> is a much more complex and larger 
country than most, struggling with contentious history, millennia old. Thus, it 
is commendable that on the day the high court gave its verdict, schools, 
offices and markets remained open in the state of Uttar Pradesh, home to the 
small town of Ayodhya. Alas, the saga may not end here, as the Muslim 
plaintiffs want to appeal to the Indian supreme court. We will have to wait and 
see.
 