
A nation divided. Two factions at war over foreigners. One side claims to tell 
it like it is. The other cries racism. Neither can agree.Brexit Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>? Well, yes, but also 
Birmingham in April 1968.

That was when the Conservative MP for Wolverhampton South West forced 
immigration on to the political agenda. His name was Enoch Powell and what he 
called hisBirmingham speech <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ix_7p1qczXs> would 
prove even more incendiary than he’d hoped. Reacting to Labour’sRace Relations 
Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/from-the-archive-blog/2015/dec/08/race-relations-act-50-years-ago-1965-uk>
, Powell argued that allowing mass immigration from the Commonwealth was 
“literally mad” and prophesied doom in the language of the Roman poetVirgil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/virgil>: “Like the Roman, I seem to see the 
River Tiber foaming with much blood.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fenoch-powell-rivers-of-blood-play-what-shadows-ian-mcdiarmid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31d835c0332c1966d7f4e183e7103ef92398c9ad%2F225_186_2775_1665%2F2775.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Back%20to%20the%20rivers%20of%20blood%3A%20Enoch%20Powell%20returns%20to%20a%20divided%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fenoch-powell-rivers-of-blood-play-what-shadows-ian-mcdiarmid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Back%20to%20the%20rivers%20of%20blood%3A%20Enoch%20Powell%20returns%20to%20a%20divided%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fenoch-powell-rivers-of-blood-play-what-shadows-ian-mcdiarmid%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31d835c0332c1966d7f4e183e7103ef92398c9ad%2F225_186_2775_1665%2F2775.jpg>
 ‘I have to do him justice’ … Ian McDiarmid and Phaldut Sharma in What Shadows 
at Birmingham Rep. Photograph: Ellie Kurttz 
Nearly 50 years on, the “Rivers of Blood” speech is still enflaming emotions 
and making headlines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/28/labour-can-win-immigration-enoch-powell-rachel-reeves>
. That’s why, a short walk up the road from the city’s former Midland hotel, 
where the speech was made, actorIan McDiarmid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/jun/22/on-my-radar-ian-mcdiarmid-matt-smith-american-psycho-utopia-star-wars>
 is looking shifty. “I was rather hoping I might be stopped and searched,” the 
actor jokes after passing some police officers on his way into Birmingham Rep, 
“because my bag is full of material about Enoch Powell.”

McDiarmid's instinct is not to excuse Powell's racism, but see him as 
infuriated by a reluctance to discuss immigration

It sounds an unlikely cache of documents for this trim 72-year-old to be 
carrying, but he has good cause. The man known to legions of Star Wars fans as 
theEmperor Palpatine 
<http://www.starwars.com/databank/emperor-palpatine-darth-sidious> is now 
playing Powell in Chris Hannan’s play What Shadows. He’s even grown a 
silver-grey moustache for the occasion.

How does he feel about getting his tongue around Powell’s divisive language? 
The answer, from an actor who has played such polarising characters asGalileo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/feb/13/life-of-galileo-review>, Denis 
Thatcher and Satan, is typically magnanimous. “I have to do him justice. Chris 
has written a rounded character, so I’ve just got to get it right.”

When pressed, his instinct is not to excuse Powell’s racism but to see him as 
a politician infuriated by the reluctance of either the Conservatives or Labour 
to discuss immigration in public. That, I suggest, sounds like an actor who 
will identify with a character at any cost.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fenoch-powell-rivers-of-blood-play-what-shadows-ian-mcdiarmid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78c79d9a83c1240fd8eb0b4f8a52eab165cade1b%2F0_0_3200_2041%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Back%20to%20the%20rivers%20of%20blood%3A%20Enoch%20Powell%20returns%20to%20a%20divided%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fenoch-powell-rivers-of-blood-play-what-shadows-ian-mcdiarmid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Back%20to%20the%20rivers%20of%20blood%3A%20Enoch%20Powell%20returns%20to%20a%20divided%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fenoch-powell-rivers-of-blood-play-what-shadows-ian-mcdiarmid%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78c79d9a83c1240fd8eb0b4f8a52eab165cade1b%2F0_0_3200_2041%2F3200.jpg>
 ‘Heights of rhetorical fury’ … Enoch Powell. Photograph: Express 
Newspapers/Getty Images 
“Absolutely,” he says. “That’s always more interesting. He’s packed with 
contradictions. He started off as an atheist and ended up as a high Anglican. 
He was a supporter of what we would call gay rights. He was against capital 
punishment. He was a rational man par excellence. He worshipped Greek 
philosophy. He was also a deeply emotional man and a romantic. You’d see him 
moved to heights of rhetorical fury but he also cried a lot in private. That’s 
a gift for an actor to play.”

Yes, but Powell was also prepared to quote one of his constituents as saying: 
“In this country in 15 or 20 years time the black man will have the whip hand 
over the white man.” Conservative leader Edward Heath said the speech was 
“racialist in tone and liable to exacerbate racial tensions” and sacked him as 
a member of the shadow cabinet. How does it feel to be echoing such sentiments?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fenoch-powell-rivers-of-blood-play-what-shadows-ian-mcdiarmid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F08373195e63f6d81a49a13432c9800d1e5ccb260%2F0_591_2000_2409%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Back%20to%20the%20rivers%20of%20blood%3A%20Enoch%20Powell%20returns%20to%20a%20divided%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fenoch-powell-rivers-of-blood-play-what-shadows-ian-mcdiarmid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Back%20to%20the%20rivers%20of%20blood%3A%20Enoch%20Powell%20returns%20to%20a%20divided%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fenoch-powell-rivers-of-blood-play-what-shadows-ian-mcdiarmid%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F08373195e63f6d81a49a13432c9800d1e5ccb260%2F0_591_2000_2409%2F2000.jpg>
 ‘Like everybody else I thought, “Oh, come on, this is incitement”’ … Ian 
McDiarmid as Enoch Powell. Photograph: Ellie Kurttz 
“Like everybody else, I thought, ‘Oh, come on, this is incitement,’” McDiarmid 
says about the speech. “Now I know a bit more about him, it’s more complicated. 
This play addresses the ambiguity of human nature – and that’s what theatre 
does best.”

For Hannan, too, the intention was not to sow further conflict in a city 
already split down the middle by Brexit. Birmingham had one of the most tightly 
contested votes in the UK, with50.4% opting to leave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ng-interactive/2016/jun/23/eu-referendum-live-results-and-analysis>
. Instead, he wanted to push the discussion about race and identity beyond the 
polarised arguments that have led to our current impasse. “People are going to 
turn up who admire Enoch and people who loathe him from the depths of their 
boots,” says the playwright, who redrafted the script in the light of the 
referendum. “I imagined an audience of liberals and conservatives. It’s asking 
both those groups to move beyond.”

Under the direction of Roxana Silbert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/apr/18/roxana-silbert-director>, the 
play jumps to 1992 when Hannan imagines Rose (played by Rebecca Scroggs), one 
of the children referred to by Powell as “piccaninnies”, returning to confront 
the MP, now 80 and suffering from Parkinson’s disease. Early in rehearsals, 
Scroggs tweeted a picture of her Powell-related reading list and asked: “Is 
conversation possible with those we are sworn to hate?”

It’s a question that echoes the opening lines of the play: “How to talk to 
people we hate? How to speak across the anger that divides us?” Such entrenched 
positions remind Hannan of his formative years growing up inGlasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/glasgow> on the Catholic side of Scotland’s 
sectarian divide. “One can criticise Enoch Powell, but what one can’t do is say 
he needs to stay in some intellectual gulag,” he says. “Our fellow citizens 
need to be addressed and that speech needs to be addressed.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fenoch-powell-rivers-of-blood-play-what-shadows-ian-mcdiarmid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb87e79e7ecfed69aab3b27f0456f3cbdb8b02c1%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Back%20to%20the%20rivers%20of%20blood%3A%20Enoch%20Powell%20returns%20to%20a%20divided%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fenoch-powell-rivers-of-blood-play-what-shadows-ian-mcdiarmid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Back%20to%20the%20rivers%20of%20blood%3A%20Enoch%20Powell%20returns%20to%20a%20divided%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fenoch-powell-rivers-of-blood-play-what-shadows-ian-mcdiarmid%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb87e79e7ecfed69aab3b27f0456f3cbdb8b02c1%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 ‘Is conversation possible with those we are sworn to hate?’ … Rebecca Scroggs 
and Brid Brennan. Photograph: Ellie Kurttz 
What’s extraordinary about Powell is that, nearly 50 years after his notorious 
speech, his name still has an emotive power. To escape the sense of history 
repeating itself, What Shadows is less about conflict than conflict resolution. 
“We’re trying to detoxify the conversation,” says Hannan. “So in a way it would 
be misleading to say the play is about Enoch Powell. It’s about us, our 
identity, our conflicted conversation with each other.”

 * What Shadows is at Birmingham Rep until 12 November 
<https://www.birmingham-rep.co.uk/whats-on/what-shadows.html>. Box office: 
0121-236 4455.  