
Number of cot deaths in England and Wales falls to lowest on record
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/11/number-of-cot-deaths-england-wales-lowest-on-record-ons>
Parenting manuals have a lot to answer for. They brought useful advice and 
reassurance, true. But along with those came an epidemic that killed tens of 
thousands of babies.Sudden infant death syndrome – Sids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/sudden-infant-death-syndrome> – is always 
a tragedy, but it is no longer commonplace. It became an epidemic between 1970 
and 1991, and, at its peak, babies in some of the world’s richest countries 
were dying at the rate of one in every 250 live births each year. The rate in 
the last year for which figures were available in England and Wales only, 2013, 
is one in every 3,000.

The Back to Sleep campaign, launched in 1991, changed the advice on sleeping 
position from front to back, and has had a public health benefit comparable to 
such breakthroughs as the moment Victorian epidemiologist John Snowtook the 
handle off the Soho water pump in 1854 <http://www.choleraandthethames.co.uk> 
and stopped a cholera outbreak in its tracks.

At the centre of the Sids revolution was Bristol doctor Peter Fleming. He is 
now semi-retired, but is currently exploring a link between subtle features of 
the newborn hearing test and arousal mechanisms that might answer the grievous 
unsolved riddle of why Sids happens.

In 1978 Fleming, who had qualified in Bristol, returned from a job at the 
Toronto children’s hospital in Canada with funding from the US National 
Institutes ofHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> that enabled 
him to set up his own respiratory lab. He wanted to look in particular at the 
relationship between breathing and temperature control in infants.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Fback-to-sleep-sudden-infant-death-syndrome-cot-death-peter-fleming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa921a09d07f12da6dc9726947e937dc6d92cdcbb%2F0_248_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Back%20to%20sleep%3A%20the%20doctor%20who%20helped%20stem%20a%20cot%20death%20epidemic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Fback-to-sleep-sudden-infant-death-syndrome-cot-death-peter-fleming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Back%20to%20sleep%3A%20the%20doctor%20who%20helped%20stem%20a%20cot%20death%20epidemic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Fback-to-sleep-sudden-infant-death-syndrome-cot-death-peter-fleming%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa921a09d07f12da6dc9726947e937dc6d92cdcbb%2F0_248_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 Prof Peter Fleming, whose research in the 1980s was crucial to the reduction 
of Sids death rates. Photograph: Martin Godwin for the Guardian 
Fleming is both very clever – he has a PhD in nonlinear mathematical 
modelling, AKA chaos theory – and very humane. When he found that Bristol 
offered no counselling or support for families whose baby had died 
unexpectedly, he began to offer it himself. He saw the families in the 
emergency department and later in their homes and told them what was known – 
and how much was unknown – about what was then still widely called cot death.

“Lots of people still thought that the parents must be at fault in some way if 
their baby had died. They were made to feel very guilty. I wanted to get 
support, and information, to these families.”

The progress in public understanding is reflected in the change of 
terminology. When it was called cot death it was considered primarily a social 
problem, a parental failure that still carried a hint of the most unnatural of 
crimes, infanticide. When it became sudden infant death syndrome (or sudden 
unexplained/unexpected infant death syndrome, SUID), it became a medical 
problem that was capable of scientific resolution.

The Guardian view on a public health triumph: the numbers say it all | 
Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/11/the-guardian-view-on-a-public-health-triumph-the-numbers-say-it-all>
Early in the 1970s, a US congressional committee called it “one of the last 
great unresolved childhood catastrophes” and announced federal funding. 
Meanwhile, bereaved parents were organising too. In 1971 the Foundation for the 
Study of Infant Deaths was set up in the UK by a grandmother determined to 
explain her grandson’s death. (It recently rebranded itself asThe Lullaby Trust 
<http://www.lullabytrust.org.uk/history-of-the-charity>, because it believed 
its previous name was too austere and off-putting.) A decade later there was an 
international federation of similar organisations. In 1984, Fleming, working 
closely with the trust, set up the Avon infant mortality programme.

“I didn’t look at the sleeping position. But in 1987, with two colleagues, I 
started a temperature and infection study, and we did include the sleeping 
position, because scientists in the Netherlands and Australia had no data but 
they did have a lot of careful observation that made them think it was 
important.” Far from starting his studyin equipoise 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clinical_equipoise>, with a mind open to every 
possibility, Fleming only considered the sleeping position question in order to 
exclude it.

There were no immediately definitive results. “It was incremental. Very few 
things are ever black and white. It is rarely clear-cut. It is about changing 
the risk,” Fleming says. This is why the maths matters. “You have to tryto 
understand complexity 
<http://www.ted.com/talks/eric_berlow_how_complexity_leads_to_simplicity?language=en>
. You have to see whether a small change can make a difference.”

It helped that, like many of the Bristol families whose experiences were 
central to Fleming’s research, he came from a working-class family. He grew up 
in Medway in Kent, where his father worked in the naval dockyard and his mother 
in the office of a local factory.

For his study, Fleming and his team talked to the bereaved families as soon as 
possible after the death, to gather information about the baby and the family, 
what they normally did, what might have been different – all the variables that 
might have influenced the outcome. He promised the families that they would 
know the results of his research before it was published: “It’s really 
important that the people involved feel they own the work. It is a 
collaborative effort. I want to work with people, not instruct them.”

GPs, midwives and health visitors were all involved. If a GP got a call about 
a dead or an unresponsive baby, their next call would be to Fleming. “I spent a 
lot of time with just-bereaved families in council houses. It didn’t bother me, 
because I was not inclined to see them as different from myself.”

Over the next two years, he and his team gathered data from 70 bereaved 
families, and from another 140 families whose babies had been born very close 
to the time of a Sids baby. The control group were identified by asking the 
health visitor for the details of the two babies next on their list. They were 
“the babies next door”. “There was 99% collaboration from the families,” 
Fleming said. “People were very, very positive about wanting to do something.”

My brother died from a cot death before I was born. Yet I still miss him | 
Giles Fraser
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2013/apr/26/brother-died-cot-death-giles-fraser>
The team was confident that their population-based study, with a control group 
drawn from the same population, at the same time, was as close as possible to 
achieving the holy grail of true comparability. Yet despite their confidence in 
the robustness of their data, presenting the preliminary results at the first 
ever meeting of theInternational Society for the Prevention and Investigation 
of Perinatal and Infant Deaths <http:> in March 1989 was a nerve-racking 
moment. Fleming’s findings were received by his knowledgeable audience with 
incredulity. “They could not accept that something so simple could be so 
important,” he says.

It was like being asked to believe two impossible things before breakfast. 
Here was a non-medical intervention that could, for no clear reason, stop 
babies dying of a syndrome that was also unexplained. But Fleming believed it 
himself. And when he went back to do a bigger study in Bristol, he found that 
health professionals who already knew of his findings were advising all new 
mothers to put their babies on their back to sleep.

Understandably, bereaved families whose babies died after Fleming’s first 
study believe his results should have been publicised at once. But “Nice [the 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence] 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/the-national-institute-for-health-and-care-excellence-nice>
 would have laughed at my research. They want things done properly – randomised 
control trials and all that sort of thing. It wasn’t enough to convince 
scientific colleagues, and it certainly wouldn’t meet the standards for any 
public health campaign,” he says.

Fleming published his paper in the British Medical Journal and went back to do 
more research. Soon, a New Zealand study [pdf download 
<https://www.hqsc.govt.nz/assets/CYMRC/NEMR/SIDS-prevention-Mitchell-Blair-NZMJ-2012.pdf>
] produced similar findings. The quest now was for evidence with which to argue 
for a new public health campaign. Unable to conduct a study with a bigger 
sample in Bristol because newborns were no longer being put to sleep on their 
fronts as a result of his first findings, instead Fleming found himself 
conducting a self-initiated, population-wide observational study of newborn 
babies sleeping on their backs. As his first study predicted, the number of 
Sids deaths fell from around one a week to less than one a month, and then to 
just three a year. While he was in the midst of the long process of getting 
this study published in the Lancet, another family’s tragedy tipped the whole 
project into the headlines.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Fback-to-sleep-sudden-infant-death-syndrome-cot-death-peter-fleming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77c84cb84c5c9d1e5e1a689fe7b0418178c65408%2F173_850_2393_2989%2F2393.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Back%20to%20sleep%3A%20the%20doctor%20who%20helped%20stem%20a%20cot%20death%20epidemic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Fback-to-sleep-sudden-infant-death-syndrome-cot-death-peter-fleming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Back%20to%20sleep%3A%20the%20doctor%20who%20helped%20stem%20a%20cot%20death%20epidemic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Fback-to-sleep-sudden-infant-death-syndrome-cot-death-peter-fleming%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77c84cb84c5c9d1e5e1a689fe7b0418178c65408%2F173_850_2393_2989%2F2393.jpg>
 Anne Diamond, whose four-month-old son died in 1991. She spearheaded the Back 
to Sleep campaign, which led to Sids deaths falling dramatically. Photograph: 
Karen Robinson for the Observer 
In July 1991, Sebastian, the four-month-old son of Anne Diamond – then a 
household name with a daily TV show –died in his cot 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-2026392/Anne-Diamond-recalls-awful-day-lost-son-cot-death.html>
. Diamond’s response was to use all her fame and journalistic experience to 
investigate what people knew about why it had happened. When she met Fleming, 
and learned of the findings in the Avon and New Zealand studies, she marched on 
the Department of Health.

She galvanised the health secretary, Viriginia Bottomley, into accepting the 
need for a strong public health message. In December 1991 the Back to Sleep 
campaign was launched. Sids deaths in the UK fell instantly, and with 
astonishing speed. In 1989 there were 1,545 Sids deaths. Now there are barely 
200 a year.

The Sids epidemic can be dated from the time it first appeared on death 
certificates in 1970, until the public health campaign in 1991. In Britain 
alone, it probably cost 10,000 lives. It is still hard to explain how it 
happened. The first recorded advice to put babies to sleep on their front is 
from 1943. Dr Spock changed his advice to recommend front sleeping between the 
first and second editions ofhis famous handbook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2013/dec/02/parenting-childcare-books-babies-children>
 in 1955.

Some studies associate the syndrome with the rise of the parenting expert, 
others with the industrialisation of baby care that turned it into a round of 
bottle-feeding and rigid routines. Others point to the fading respect for 
culture and experience. The only medical evidence for the benefit of front 
sleeping came from studies of very premature babies who are still put face 
down; but even they are never now sent home until they can breathe well enough 
to prosper on their backs. It was a tragic lesson in the danger of taking a 
small, sick subset of a population and extrapolating a public health message 
for well babies.

The architectural writer Gillian Darley 
<http://www.gilliandarley.com/writing-2/john-soane-an-accidental-romantic/> 
lost her son Joseph when he was 11 weeks old, during a midday sleep on a cold, 
murky day in early April nearly 30 years ago. “I was visiting a friend. He was 
in his moses basket. I don’t remember being told what to do, it was just what 
everyone did,” she says. “It was received wisdom. The underlying thing is – 
like those terrible stories of children who disappear on their gap year and 
whose bodies are never found – the lack of closure. It’s not a constant 
presence, but if it was possible to say what was the trigger, it would take a 
whole load off my subconscious.”

Understanding that trigger is no closer. But the risk factors are now well 
understood: maternal smoking and co-sleeping. No one questions the former. 
Co-sleeping, however, has become the subject of intense controversy, not least 
because warnings of the dangers of taking babies into their parents’ beds has 
led some mothers to choose instead to nurse babies on sofas, where accidents 
such as suffocation are more likely. Fleming believes the direct risk from 
co-sleeping is very small, but the Lullaby Trust takes the view that, like 
advertising, public health cannot do complexity, and so continues to warn 
against co-sleeping.

Sharing bed with baby in first year may raise risk of sudden infant death
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jul/03/sudden-infant-death-syndrome-avoid-sharing-bed-nice>
Sids was once a curse that struck randomly across classes. Now it hits in 
wildly disproportionate numbers the poorest, least-educated families. More than 
70% of deaths now occur in poor households, and often to young mothers.

Francine Bates, Lullaby’s chief executive, says that justifies sticking to one 
clear, simple message: don’t smoke, don’t co-sleep.

“It’s fundamentally wrong and preventable that it’s poor babies who are dying 
now,” she says. “It’s unacceptable. We’ve still got a job of work to do. Behind 
the statistics, there are still hundreds of babies, and hundreds of devastated 
families.”
 