
Ron Howard had a theory about why the US sitcom Happy Days was such a hit. The 
Oscar-winning director, who played Richie Cunningham in the show, argued that 
central to its appeal was that it was set in the 1950s, before Vietnam, drugs 
and hippies, when teenagers were civil to their elders. Happy Days – which ran 
from 1974 to 1984 – was,he told me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jan/22/richard-nixon-watergate>, a 
return to lost innocence before Watergate. It put the 50s back into the 70s and 
made people happier.

The new film adaptation of Arthur Ransome’s novel Swallows and Amazons, 
starring Rafe Spall, Kelly Macdonald and Andrew Scott, has a similar nostalgic 
function. It takes us back to 1935, a time before multicultural Britain, 
swinging London, gay marriages, gender fluidity, online avatars andgoggles for 
conker contests <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-29519601>.

Swallows and Amazons review – sails on merrily, despite spy ballast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/24/swallows-and-amazons-review-kelly-macdonald-rafe-spall-arthur-ransome>
It’s set in an era before the Sodom and Gomorrah of onesies and flip-flops, 
when there were only two kinds of nightwear – winceyette nighties and 
winceyette pyjamas – and there was never any question of you wearing either if 
you went to the shops.

Most importantly, director Philippa Lowthorpe and writer Andrea Gibb take us 
back to the time when the Great Outdoors was a place for wholesome prepubescent 
rampaging rather than one so overrun with stabbings, abductions and drug scores 
not to mention health and safety infractions, that today’s fearful parents have 
decided for the most part to keep their little twerps indoors. Better our 
Vitamin D-deprived kids are under lock and key, safely eviscerating aliens 
during PS4 Doom marathons.

At the press screening for Swallows and Amazons, Gibb said her adaptation 
sought to address our anxieties over helicopter parenting. That certainly is 
what gives Ransome’s story relevance to our anxious, nostalgic society. We have 
apparently raised – as the father of the four sibling heroes ofSwallows and 
Amazons <https://www.theguardian.com/film/swallows-and-amazons> would say – a 
generation of duffers.

At the start, the four Walker children are heading off for a Lake District 
holiday with their mother, while their father is away with the Royal Navy. The 
removal of the patriarch is a recurring plot device in nostalgic children’s 
literature that involves urban kids finding themselves giddily adrift in rural 
England. Think of Edith Nesbit’s The Railway Children (in which the Edwardian 
paterfamilias is falsely imprisoned as a spy) or, more recently, Michelle 
Magorian’s Goodnight Mister Tom (in which a second world war evacuee finds a 
surrogate father in a grumpy village widower). Both were made into stirringly 
nostalgic films set in a simpler, gentler England.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fbackwards-to-the-future-how-britains-nostalgia-industry-is-thriving%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00bfd79053fef1b19c25489bd08dcc5715186440%2F0_30_2328_1397%2F2328.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Backwards%20to%20the%20future%3A%20how%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20nostalgia%20industry%20is%20thriving&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fbackwards-to-the-future-how-britains-nostalgia-industry-is-thriving%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Backwards%20to%20the%20future%3A%20how%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20nostalgia%20industry%20is%20thriving&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fbackwards-to-the-future-how-britains-nostalgia-industry-is-thriving%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00bfd79053fef1b19c25489bd08dcc5715186440%2F0_30_2328_1397%2F2328.jpg>
 Nostalgia-fest … Harry Potter. Photograph: PA 
Perhaps, if you believe the premise of such books and their adaptations, only 
when parents are away can children play. Even Harry Potter, though an orphan, 
comes to imaginative life the further the Hogwarts Express races him away from 
the quotidian dullness of his muggle family. And how striking it is that the 
Hogwarts Express is a lovely old steam train rather than a grisly Pendolino. 
For all that JK Rowling’s franchise starts in the early 1990s, its charmed 
world time travels back to an earlier Britain of retro locos and school gowns.

In Swallows and Amazons, the Walker siblings, once installed in their lakeside 
rental owned by a couple of satisfyingly lo-fi rustics called the Jacksons, 
demand that they be allowed to sail across the deepest lake in England and camp 
out on the island in the middle. Kelly Macdonald’s Mrs Walker agonises over the 
risks of death by burning and drowning such autonomy would entail, but 
eventually agrees. “I don’t want them frightened of the world,” she says. “If 
life was always early to bed, we’d never learn ’owt,” counsels Jessica Hynes’s 
Mrs Jackson.

And so the Walker siblings set off on theirawfully big adventure, one that 
would have present-day health and safety ideologues crying into their 
risk-averse muesli. Will they survive? Are canvas plimsols and knitted 
sleeveless sweaters really what one should wear for an excursion in Cumbria? Go 
see the film and find out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fbackwards-to-the-future-how-britains-nostalgia-industry-is-thriving%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48f8763c171eea2f00cb219dddc84499c3ea0d30%2F0_2_2835_1701%2F2835.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Backwards%20to%20the%20future%3A%20how%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20nostalgia%20industry%20is%20thriving&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fbackwards-to-the-future-how-britains-nostalgia-industry-is-thriving%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Backwards%20to%20the%20future%3A%20how%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20nostalgia%20industry%20is%20thriving&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fbackwards-to-the-future-how-britains-nostalgia-industry-is-thriving%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48f8763c171eea2f00cb219dddc84499c3ea0d30%2F0_2_2835_1701%2F2835.jpg>
 Social order … Downton Abbey. Photograph: ITV 
Swallows and Amazons could be seen as part of a reactionary nostalgic 
industry, part of the Downtonising tendency. To Downtonise the past is to rid a 
book or film or TV drama of the things that some in the audience might dislike 
about the present – black people, uppity proles, uppity Poles, women who don’t 
know their place, kids who have exchanged their right to graze their knees 
outdoors for the right to contract carpal tunnel syndrome indoors.

The tendency to reverse backwards into the future is a particularly British 
phenomenon. “Fifty years from now,”said John Major in 1993 
<http://www.johnmajor.co.uk/page1086.html>, “Britain will still be the country 
of long shadows on county grounds, warm beer, invincible green suburbs, dog 
lovers and pools fillers and – as George Orwell said – ‘old maids bicycling to 
holy communion through the morning mist’ and if we get our way – Shakespeare 
still read even in school.” Wouldn’t you like to live there? Me neither.

Conservatives have regularly used an apparently gilded past age as an alibi 
for rubbishing the present. It is the basis of one of our most successful 
export industries. In 1981, for instance, Jeremy Irons narrated the lyrical 
introduction toCharles Sturridge’s ITV adaptation of Brideshead Revisited 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/aug/30/your-next-box-set-brideshead-revisited>
:“Oxford in those days was still a city of aquatint. When the chestnut was in 
flower and the bells rang out high and clear over the gables and cupolas, she 
exhaled the soft airs of centuries of youth.” 
<https://youtu.be/k1S3LBDT3vk?t=7m52s>

Evelyn Waugh’s 1945 novel already dripped with nostalgia for a pre-war England 
and its allied oleaginous underlings (think Sebastian Flyte’s ever-so-’umble 
barber). Sturridge effectively put that nostalgia to work in Thatcher’s 
Britain. Just as Waugh’s novel, behind its lament for lost innocence, expressed 
posh contempt for upstart prole scum, so its TV adaptation was handily 
broadcast at a time when it could serve the reactionaryagenda of a Conservative 
government that spent the 80s destroying the organised working classes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fbackwards-to-the-future-how-britains-nostalgia-industry-is-thriving%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c3e09a43a0a1a304b8184b726c3044a316b57b5%2F0_117_4200_2520%2F4200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Backwards%20to%20the%20future%3A%20how%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20nostalgia%20industry%20is%20thriving&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fbackwards-to-the-future-how-britains-nostalgia-industry-is-thriving%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Backwards%20to%20the%20future%3A%20how%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20nostalgia%20industry%20is%20thriving&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fbackwards-to-the-future-how-britains-nostalgia-industry-is-thriving%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c3e09a43a0a1a304b8184b726c3044a316b57b5%2F0_117_4200_2520%2F4200.jpg>
 Class Waugh … Brideshead Revisited. Photograph: ITV/REX/Shutterstock 
Thirty years later, Downton Abbey similarly aided a later Tory government with 
its depiction of Edwardian England as one in which the lower orders knew their 
place and were contented with their lot. It fitted into the reactionary Keep 
Calm and Carry On ethos that has permeated austerity Britain from 2008 onwards, 
urging political quietism on those suffering most from George Osborne’s public 
expenditure cuts. No wonder the Tories gave that Downton creator and inveterate 
snob Julian Fellowes a knighthood. Kirstie Allsopp should have been made a 
dame, too, for her craft programme which, so far as I understood it, had the 
subtext: crochet your way out of recession like they did in the 1930s, whiney 
proles.

But British period drama doesn’t always have a reactionary agenda. It is 
striking that Lowthorpe worked as a director onCall the Midwife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/jan/26/call-the-midwife>
, the BBC series set in London’s East End in the late 1950s and early 1960s 
based on Jennifer Worth’s memoirs. Since 2012, it has been broadcast in the 
Sunday-evening vintage slot. With its sweet midwives in cardies and starched 
uniforms, it fits into that slot perfectly and courts the Downton demographic 
perfectly. But,as Radio Times’ Alison Graham argued 
<http://www.radiotimes.com/news/2013-02-24/call-the-midwife-is-the-torchbearer-of-feminism-on-television>
, it should “take its place as the torchbearer of feminism on television”, 
since it has dealt with domestic abuse, illegal abortion, rape, the pill, women 
enslaved by dull marriages, poverty and big families. “I believe the series 
should be shown to teenage girls in schools across the country,” argued Graham.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fbackwards-to-the-future-how-britains-nostalgia-industry-is-thriving%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc8378c8af5c193fead3d22efd6e4312f52d4610%2F0_0_4284_2570%2F4284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Backwards%20to%20the%20future%3A%20how%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20nostalgia%20industry%20is%20thriving&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fbackwards-to-the-future-how-britains-nostalgia-industry-is-thriving%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Backwards%20to%20the%20future%3A%20how%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20nostalgia%20industry%20is%20thriving&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fbackwards-to-the-future-how-britains-nostalgia-industry-is-thriving%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc8378c8af5c193fead3d22efd6e4312f52d4610%2F0_0_4284_2570%2F4284.jpg>
 Feminist … Call the Midwife Photograph: BBC/Neal Street Productions 
Swallows and Amazons, similarly, comes on cosy and nostalgic, but then 
wrongfoots us. Lowthorpe and Gibb’s adaptation cunningly punches up the 
subversive storyline of the Amazons. Lowthorpe rightly points out that the 
proto-feminist girl gang are startlingly modern (and apparently in keeping with 
Ransome’s counter-zeitgeisty views on women). “They are definitely not your 
archetypal 1930s girl, and for that they are wonderful,” says Lowthorpe. 
“They’re like warriors, and they are funny and brave and up to no good.”

Otherwise, though, the film helps make the past seem, not a foreign country, 
but a better realm than the rubbish one we have inflicted on our enfeebled 
offspring. It chimes with recent rose-tinted eulogies to childhood of simpler 
times, capturedin the following viral email 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/feb/26/catherine-bennett-50s-nostalgia>
: “Congratulations to all my friends who were born in the 1940s, 50s and 60s…. 
We ate white bread and real butter; drank cows’ milk and soft drinks with 
sugar; but we weren’t overweight because... we were always outside playing!” 
The corollary? Modern life is rubbish.

It’s an abiding theme. In her memoir of a growing up in suburban Ruislip in 
the 1950s,Michele Hanson wrote 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2104579/The-magic-1950s-suburbia-socks-darned-baths-shared-kids-roamed-wild.html>
: “So what did ‘play’ mean back then? There was barely any telly, no mobiles, 
iPhones or iPlayers, no internet, computer games, PlayStations and no pop 
stars. We had only the simplest of equipment: jacks, marbles, skipping-ropes, 
bats, balls and bicycles. Most of the time, my friends and I made our own games 
up: making perfume from rose petals, brewing ginger beer, holding snail races, 
picking blackberries, making dens in the woods.”

The conviction that the past was better speaks to our current anxieties. If 
Philippa Lowthorpe and Andrea Gibb are looking for another book to adapt for a 
film corrective to modern life, they should tryRobin Stevens’s cunning series 
of novels Murder Most Unladylike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/jul/13/murder-most-unladylike-robin-stevens>
, set in a boarding school in 1935, about two girls who run a detective agency. 
“Bother,” says Hazel in Murder Most Unladylike at one point. “Daisy, my 
pullover’s in the gym.” Bother? Pullovers? Is there any thing more vexing than 
misplacing one’s knitwear? Not in this corner of Downtonshire there isn’t.

Stevens’s genius is to produce a mash-up of English fiction from the 1930s, 
40s and 50s, borrowing the boarding-school setting (from Enid Blyton’s St Clare 
novels no doubt) and erasing the unpalatable bits (PG Wodehouse’s occasional 
racist stereotyping, say, or Blyton’s insistence in the Famous Five mysteries 
that Anne is a wannabe housewife to Dick and Julian, or Waugh’s posh-boy wail 
against the rise of the common man).

But like Lowthorpe and Gibb’s retread of Swallows and Amazons, Stevens wants 
to have her twee and subvert it. Her heroines Daisy and Hazel are 
proto-feminists like the Amazons, girls out of time gently challenging the 
patriarchy. What’s more, instead of dramatising the past as a means of going 
back to a time in Britain before immigration, Stevens time-travels to right a 
racist wrong. The book’s narrator is Hazel Wong, the daughter of a Hong Kong 
businessman, who yearns to become the Chinese Sherlock Holmes. In a lovely 
scene in First Class Murder, nasty Little Englanders travelling on the Orient 
Express assume that Mr Wong must be a servant. He, marvellously, and with great 
dignity, exposes their racist assumptions.

One reason Stevens’s books are so successful is because, while part of a 
lucrativeBritish nostalgia industry, they aren’t really about depicting the 
past authentically but about recreating it to escape a present we don’t like 
much. Her books teem with polite girls in boaters, white ankle-socks and 
sensible plaits – the whole sartorial panoply of a bygone age.

It’s hard to read them, or watch the new film of Swallows and Amazons, without 
thinking how much kinder, better-dressed, and simpler the world was in 1935. 
Why can’t we have those times back? Because they never happened. And Happy Days 
didn’t exist until we invented them.

• Swallows and Amazons is released in the UK on 19 August
 