
A fresh wave of strikes will hit Britain in the final week before Christmas, 
with 1,500 check-in staff and baggage handlers at 18 airports preparing to walk 
out and rail operatorSouthern <https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> 
warning of severe disruption when conductors do the same.

British Airways <https://www.theguardian.com/business/britishairways> cabin 
crew based at Heathrow airport announced on Friday that they are to strike on 
Christmas Day and Boxing Day in a dispute over pay and conditions.

The action, backed by the Unite union, could involve up to 4,500 staff on 
“mixed fleet” contracts who joined the airline since 2010.

Virgin Atlantic <https://www.theguardian.com/business/virginatlantic> pilots 
voted to take industrial action short of a strike in a row over union 
recognition, and will work “strictly to contract” from 23 December. That news 
came after the announcement earlier this week that Post Office workers would 
stage five days of strikes in the run-up to Christmas.

Southern rail

Southern saw the complete cancellation of its train services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/16/drivers-strike-halts-all-southern-rail-services-for-third-day>
 on Friday, for the third day in a week. About 300,000 passengers were affected 
when Southern cancelled all its 2,242 weekday services.

Drivers' strike halts all Southern rail services for third day
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/16/drivers-strike-halts-all-southern-rail-services-for-third-day>
An overtime ban in place by drivers in the Aslef union will compound the 
effects of a two-day strike on Southern services by RMT conductors starting on 
Monday.

Prospects of an imminent resolution of the rail dispute appeared remote after 
talks between Southern’s parent company, Govia Thameslink Railway, and Aslef 
collapsed on Thursday.

Airport staff

On Friday 23 December and Christmas Eve, members of Unite employed by 
Swissport will walk out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/16/airport-staff-strike-christmas-flights-stansted-luton-gatwick-ba>
 at Aberdeen, Belfast, Birmingham, Bournemouth, Bristol, Cardiff, Doncaster, 
East Midlands, Edinburgh, Gatwick, Glasgow, Heathrow, Leeds/Bradford, Luton, 
Manchester, Newcastle, Southampton and Stansted airports.

Unite national officer Oliver Richardson called on the company to “engage in 
constructive talks”. Airport representatives have said they are putting 
contingency plans in place.

British Airways

Members of the same union voted to strike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/14/british-airways-strike-pay-heathrow-christmas-ba>
 over what have been described as “poverty pay” levels. They say staff members 
employed in the last six years are on lower pay and conditions than existing 
crew. BA has accused the union of “creating uncertainty for our customers”.

Virgin Atlantic

Virgin Atlantic pilots to take industrial action over union recognition
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/16/virgin-atlantic-pilots-industrial-action-ppu-union>
Pilots at the airline who are members of the Professional Pilots’ Union (PPU) 
will work to rule 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/16/virgin-atlantic-pilots-industrial-action-ppu-union>
 after they voted to take industrial action short of a strike. The action will 
see a removal of “pilot goodwill”, with pilots who are members of the PPU 
working strictly to their contracts.

Virgin Atlantic said it values its pilots “enormously” and expected its 
“flying programme to remain unaffected”.

Post Office

A five-day strike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/12/post-office-workers-to-stage-five-days-of-strikes-next-week>
, including on Christmas Eve, threatens to cause disruption for those wanting 
to send gifts and cards. The Communications Workers Union blamed a long-running 
dispute over jobs, pensions and branch closures.

The union blamed the “intransigence” of the Post Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/post-office>, while the company said it 
was “extremely disappointed” and had believed talks were due to resume this 
week.

A Royal Mail spokesperson said: “Royal Mail will be operating as normal next 
week when the CWU union says its members in the Post Office will take 
industrial action. We expect there to be little or no impact on the services we 
provide to our customers.

“There is no change in the Royal Mail guidance on last posting dates.”
 