
When I was a young gun I adored the original version of Do They Know It’s 
Christmas? <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bjQzJAKxTrE> I would sing along to 
every word, adopting each celebrity voice in turn.

I took particular pride in aping Bono’s awkward shoulder dancing which looked 
like he was desperately attempting to muscle Sting out of the frame while 
belting out the “Well, tonight thank God it’s them, instead of you” part.

I coveted George Michael’s bouffant hairstyle, assuming its yellow straw 
colour was the result of a home dye experiment involving lemon juice gone 
wrong, because that is exactly what had happened to mine.

At the time I was a child and impressed that this glamorously ragtag bunch of 
pop stars were raising money for a cause in a country I knew little about. 
Naively, I was unaware of the inevitable criticism that trails every charity 
song or celebrity driven charity venture.

Now, dear Bob Geldof is back to have a third crack at the same song 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/10/band-aid-30-do-they-know-its-christmas-bob-geldof-ebola>
 with a new team of pop stars (Ed Sheeran, Ellie Goulding, One Direction and, 
yes, Bono, among them) and this time to raise money to fight Ebola. Cue the 
usual negativity from the peanut gallery about money from these charities not 
landing in the right hands, celebrities and their egomaniacal behaviour, and 
the old faithful argument that these public figures would be better to donate 
from their private bank accounts without broadcasting their philanthropic ways 
to the world.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F10%2Fbob-geldof-remake-band-aid-single-ebola-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F11%2F10%2F1415643741192%2FSir-Bob-Geldoff-Briefing--010.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bob%20Geldof%20to%20remake%20Band%20Aid%20single%20for%20Ebola%20fight%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F10%2Fbob-geldof-remake-band-aid-single-ebola-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bob%20Geldof%20to%20remake%20Band%20Aid%20single%20for%20Ebola%20fight%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F10%2Fbob-geldof-remake-band-aid-single-ebola-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F11%2F10%2F1415643741192%2FSir-Bob-Geldoff-Briefing--010.jpg>
The cynicism is understandable. Since the first iteration of Do They Know It’s 
Christmas came out in the 80s, the celeb charity thing has developed a slight 
whiff about it. Inevitably, I moved on from an adoring pre-teen to an adult 
with grave doubts about the true motivation of these public declarations of 
concern.

I’ve laughed at the jokes about the likes of Bono 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/bono> receiving tax breaks while 
simultaneously saving the world. It’s become increasingly easy to believe that 
their mission might be more about assuaging their own guilt or their efforts 
made to raise their profile or enhance the latest publicity campaign around a 
new record.

While the desire to help obviously comes from a genuine place, it doesn’t help 
pop’s own causes when they put on ridiculously bedazzled sunglasses and clothes 
that are uncomfortably fashionable, uncrossing their Louboutin-shod feet to wax 
lyrical about the injustices of the world.

But, I admit, I’ve softened of late. It might be in reaction to the cries from 
those in charge of the public purse that helping others is a luxury we can no 
longer afford. I know I can’t redirect public funds towards the charities I 
would wish to, so if buying a Christmas single sends money in the direction of 
a cause I’d like to support, I will. If I can’t afford it, no one’s pressuring 
me to cough up, either. It seems miserly to have a go.


Getting a message from a pop star about how to spend our hard-earned coin is 
not ideal, I admit, what with their private jets, personal assistants and 
luxury lifestyles. But Geldof doesn’t deserve the ragging his idea has received 
these past few days.

An unlikely gaggle of pop stars singing a well-worn cheesy ballad in the hopes 
they can help is not as catastrophic as pundits are making out. And besides, 
what are the rest of us doing about it?
 