
Simon Danczuk, the suspended Labour MP ordered to repay £11,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/18/simon-danczuk-labour-agrees-repay-expenses>
 in expenses, has come under fire by Bangladesh’s government for interfering in 
its “internal affairs” after he flew to Dhaka and called for sanctions to be 
imposed on the south Asian nation.

Danczuk, who flew to the Bangladeshi capital on Friday, addressed tens of 
thousands of supporters of the oppositionBangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh> National party – telling them 
that since taking power, the current government had created a “culture of fear” 
with a “break down in human rights ... and political opponents disappearing”.

Speaking of the ties between Britain and Bangladesh, Danczuk called on British 
ministers to say “ the relationship has … soured. Sanctions should be applied 
if there is not a return to true democracy”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV789II12a_U&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV789II12a_U>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV789II12a_U&media=>
 Simon Danczuk speaks at Bangladesh National party conference. 
British ministers have not broken off relations despite political violence 
scarring the country – and regularly visit Bangladesh. The UK remains the 
largest bilateral donor to Bangladesh, sending about £180m a year.

A spokesman for the Bangladeshi high commission in London said the MP allied 
himself with the opposition, including extremist groups, to “interfere” in 
democratic politics.

“Talking about Bangladesh’s internal politics is interference in the internal 
affairs of the country,” he said. “Bangladesh has a flourishing democracy and 
the next elections are set for 2019.

“Danczuk’s comments are similar to the one of the opposition parties 
Bangladesh Nationalist party, which is allied to the Jamaat-e-Islami party – 
which has been described as a ‘criminal organisation’ and has been identified 
to have links to all radical ... terrorist groups.”

Danczuk’s call for sanctions to be applied to Bangladesh echoes the call by 
Tarique Rahman, the opposition’s leading politician and scion of a political 
dynasty who lives in exile in London. He faces a number of charges in 
Bangladesh, including one of money laundering, all of which he denies.

Wikileaks reported that the US embassy in Dhaka had recommended a ban on entry 
for Rahman in 2008 into the US because of “egregious political corruption that 
has had a serious adverse effect on US national interests”.

Danczuk told the crowds: “Let me start by saying Tarique Rahman is very well 
and in very good spirits. I met with him recently and there is no doubt he is 
looking forward to returning shortly”.

Danczuk was suspended in December by the Labour party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/16/simon-danczuk-threatens-legal-action-over-labour-suspension>
 after newspaper allegations about that he exchanged explicit messages with a 
17-year-old girl. He is currently the subject of a police investigationafter 
allegations of rape were made against him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/12/simon-danczuk-interviewed-under-caution-over-allegation>
.

Danczuk, vice chair of the all-party parliamentary group on Bangladesh, has 
long courted the Bangladeshi vote in Rochdale, telling community leaders before 
the general election the poll was important “because we need to retain people 
in parliament who will speak up for the people of Bangladesh... That’s why this 
is an important general election”.

When contacted by the Guardian, Danczuk said that there was nothing wrong with 
meeting Tarique Rahman because the government had allowed “him to stay here”.

“It’s not interference,” he said. “I did say that sanctions should be 
considered because of what has happened in Bangladesh. Numerous reports show 
the breakdown in human rights. The British government needs to pressurise 
Bangladesh into reason.”

A Foreign Office spokesperson said: “The UK urges all Bangladesh’s political 
parties to work together to strengthen democratic and political accountability. 
Bangladesh is an important partner for the UK and we continue to support its 
people in their aspiration for a more stable, prosperous and democratic future.”
 