
A senior Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> policymaker has 
issued a scathing attack on two of the mainstays of high street banking, 
free-if-in-credit current accounts and teaser rates offered to entice new 
customers.

Martin Taylor, who sits on the Bank’s financial policy committee, also hit out 
at bankers’ pay, saying it was one of the issues that had led to a lack of 
public trust in the banking industry.

He said free banking – a concept introduced by Midland Bank 30 years ago – had 
led to the “mother of mis-selling” scandalsas banks grappled to maintain the 
concept of free banking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/dec/27/fee-free-bank-accounts-help-financially-excluded>
 at a time when interest rates had plunged from a peak of 17%.

“The contortions the industry has put itself through to maintain this 
over-riding of the price mechanism have been very damaging, not only to the 
most vulnerable consumers who through penalty charges subsidise the better-off 
(they used to be known, revealingly, as ‘delinquents’), but also, I believe, to 
banking in general,” Taylor saidin a speech in London 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2016/speech910.pdf>
.

Teaser rates, which were offered to lure people in before the 2007 crisis, had 
left mortgage customers “marooned on the standard variable rate and unable to 
refinance”.

“The habit of giving what are effectively disloyalty discounts has turned into 
a cynical and corrosive negative-sum game,” he said.

On the subject of bankers’ pay – he was chief executive of Barclays until 1998 
– Taylor said it had always been high relative to other sectors. “It appears to 
be easier to fire people than to pay them less; it may even be easier to go out 
of business altogether.”

He said banking was in a tundra – a cold, treeless landscape. “We are in 
Siberia, where many people feel bankers belong, so perhaps there is hidden 
treasure under the permafrost.”

Almost nine years on from the financial crisis, Taylor said banks had been 
slow to redesign their business models and their behaviour. He was a member of 
the independent commission on banking – chaired by Sir John Vickers – which
called for ringfences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/sep/12/vickers-report-banks-given-until-2019>
 to be erected between high street banks and riskier investment banking 
operations.

“Bankers are human – I know, I used to be one – and generally do not relish 
being detested,” he said. “I’d settle for having public-spirit bankers,” he 
said, referring to David Rockefeller, who used to tell every recruit at Chase 
Manhattan that banking was all about character. “And it is. The rot set in, I 
suppose, when people decided it was about what they curiously called talent. A 
banker with character but moderate talent can go a long way; a talented banker 
without character is a public menace,” he said.
 