
The Bank of England deputy governor Andrew Bailey has said its first priority 
in theevent of a Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/14/brexit-what-would-happen-if-britain-left-eu-european-union-referendum-uk>
 vote is to keep financial markets stable and manage the impact on the British 
economy.

Speaking at a Treasury committee hearing on the economic costs and benefits of 
the UK’s EU membership, Bailey said: “The first set of issues that I think 
would arise would be contingency planning around financial markets and broader 
macroeconomic fallout from the decision.”

Brexit 'would trigger economic and financial shock' for UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/25/brexit-would-trigger-economic-financial-shock-for-uk>
Questions over the consequences of a vote to leave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/25/brexit-would-trigger-economic-financial-shock-for-uk>
 the EU turned to the example of Norway, which is outside the bloc but a member 
of the single market. Bailey said aNorwegian-style outcome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/16/eu-exit-norway-option-costs-thinktank>
 would mean copying EU law “but we wouldn’t really be involved in the process 
of creating it”. The other possibility, he said, would be at the other end of 
the spectrum, with a “more freestanding” UK that has bilateral arrangements 
with the EU.

Pressed by the committee chair, Andrew Tyrie, on whether the Bank is looking 
at the contingency planning of major financial institutions such as HSBC and 
Barclays, Bailey said there had been signs of investment activity around the 
strength of the pound. “Since Christmas, there have been quite marked changes 
in the pricing of sterling options,” he said. “We obviously then go back to 
institutions and question what their exposure to this is.”

But this is one of several factors the Bank is monitoring, Bailey said, 
arguing that “oil prices and emerging markets are in some ways much bigger 
issues”.

UK better inside EU, says GlaxoSmithKline chief
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/03/britain-better-inside-eu-says-glaxosmithkline-andrew-witty>
Bailey said proposals backed by David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/15/cameron-to-demand-eu-treaty-reform>
 to make it harder for eurozone countries to impose rules on Britain’s 
financial sector needed fleshing out. The offer safeguards to limit the ability 
of eurozone members to impose regulation on the City of London, the EU’s 
biggest banking centre, as part of reforms designed to dissuade Britons from 
voting to leave the bloc.

“These are the right words. Let’s now flesh them out,” Bailey said, referring 
to proposals which will be discussed at a summit of EU leaders in two weeks’ 
time. “The devil is in the detail. We have a vision as to how it could work. It 
does not mean it’s as cemented in as it should be.”

In theory, the new framework would make it easier to change poorly thought-out 
rules such as thesolvency II regulations 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/pra/pages/solvency2/default.aspx> for insurers, 
Bailey said.

Britain’s referendum on staying in the EU is expected to take place in June.
 