
Overdraft fees and an easier system of moving personal and small business 
accounts are expected to be at the centre of measures intended to bolster 
competition in the banking sector.

After a two-year investigation into the banking sector, the measures to be 
published on Tuesday will focus on how customers can switch accounts away from 
the high street “big four”. Lloyds Banking Group,Royal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup>, Barclays and 
HSBC hold more than 70% of the current account and small business sectors that 
generate £14bn of revenue for the industry a year.

The inquiry, first announced in July 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/18/banking-sector-review-watchdog-finance-competition>
 at a time when Labour was promising to create new banks, has been conducted by 
the Competition and Markets Authority. In its provisional findings, the 
watchdog backed off from creating new banks and instead focused on switching – 
although some challenger banks have complained that it is hard to compare 
“free” accounts, as charges for going into the red are unclear.

Banking sector faces wide-ranging review by finance watchdog
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/18/banking-sector-review-watchdog-finance-competition>
One idea is to allow customers to force banks to publish their maximum charges 
for unauthorised overdrafts.

Consumer bodies have complained the provisional remedies did not go far 
enough, while manufacturers are calling on the CMA to foster more competition 
among high street banks. The manufacturers’ organisation, the EEF, says 
companies need more confidence to approach banks for loans to fuel growth in 
the wake of the Brexit vote.

The EEF’s call came as it published the findings of a survey of manufacturers 
– conducted in February – which found companies are shunning bank loans, with 
55% holding more cash than in the past.

This would leave them exposed if banks adopt charges for holding deposits in 
the event of negative interest rates –a situation highlighted after Royal Bank 
of Scotland and its NatWest arm wrote to small businesses to warn them it might 
charge to hold deposits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/natwest-paves-way-for-introduction-of-negative-interest-rates>
. RBS, however, has insisted it has no intention of doing so.

The problems RBS has had in carving out the Williams & Glyn branches – 
mandated by the EU to create a new competitor bank – illustrates the problems 
with creating new banks. Last week,the bank abandoned plans to float the 
Williams & Glyn branch network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/05/rbs-blames-2bn-half-year-loss-on-string-of-legal-challenges>
, after a long-running process that has already cost £1.5bn.

The supply of credit to business has been closely monitored since the 2008 
crisis, when lending dried up.

The EEF’s survey found that eight in 10 (85% of) manufacturers were confident 
of securing finance for a new business opportunity. But while 35% said they 
were more likely to use external finance than they were two years ago 65% 
disagreed.

NatWest paves way for introduction of negative interest rates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/natwest-paves-way-for-introduction-of-negative-interest-rates>
Lee Hopley, EEF’s chief economist, said this was a “persistent hangover from 
the credit crunch, where trust and confidence in the banks stalled and never 
quite recovered”.

“But with the Brexit vote dampening investment intentions and adding to 
uncertainty, this pre-existing condition could now become further aggravated, 
posing a risk. This makes the CMA’s package of reforms even more important,” 
she said. “The CMA cannot prevent a fall in investment intentions, but it can 
help to strengthen supply dynamics in the market and resolve some of these 
long-term issues by providing swift and firm remedies that pack enough punch to 
stop the rot.”

The banks are insisting that the supply of credit is no longer a problem; when 
theBank of England’s governor, Mark Carney, announced the cut in interest rates 
to 0.25% on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>
 he made clear that banks should be ready to lend to viable businesses.

One of the recommendations made by the CMA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/17/overdrafts-costs-to-fall-as-part-of-overhaul-of-uk-banks-cma>
 targeted at small businesses is a £5m challenger prize for financial 
technology companies to create ways for small businesses to move accounts. The 
project, funded by the banks, will be overseen by the innovation charity Nesta 
and should be completed in mid-2018.

Some of the provisional remedies were “a step in the right direction”, the EFF 
said. But it suggested banks should specialise along sector lines and develop 
more specialist products.
 