
The Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> has been forced 
cut by £10,000 the amount of a saver’s money that would be protected if a bank 
went bust, because of the slump in the euro over the past five years.

The guarantee will now cover £75,000 per account rather than £85,000 – a move 
that may surprise savers and was described as bonkers by one expert.

The Bank has to reduce the cover to bring the UK into line with the rest of 
the EU, which has set a threshold of saver protection at €100,000 That measure 
was introduced after the 2008 banking crisis to prevent savers moving their 
money across borders to chase the highest level of protection.

The £85,000 limit was set in 2010 and has to be reviewed every five years to 
keep it in line with the EU’s stipulation. Changes in the value of the euro 
since then mean the Bank has to alter the conversion rate used to translate 
euros into pounds at the Financial Services Compensation Scheme (FSCS).

Andrew Tyrie, the Conservative MP who chairs the Treasury select committee, 
said it was absurd that the 16% fall in the euro was having an impact on the 
protection provided to UK savers. He said he would write to the chancellor, 
George Osborne, to urge him to raise the matter with his EU counterparts.

“He may need to be robust – this won’t matter a scrap to the eurozone. 
Something will clearly have to be done,” said Tyrie.

Danny Cox, chartered financial planner at Hargreaves Lansdown, said: “This is 
absolutely bonkers. Savers are already suffering rock bottom interest rates, 
and now to add insult to injury the safety of that cash is being undermined”.

Bank of England proposes savings protection limit of £1m
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/oct/06/savings-limit-1m-pounds-bank-of-england>
The Treasury is maintaining the £85,000 figure until the end of the year. The 
Bank has also launched a consultation to try to tackle the consequences for 
individuals locked in to long-term savings products with the aim of allowing 
savers to move the £10,000 that will no longer be covered without having to pay 
a fee.

About 3% of the population have savings above the £85,000 threshold.

As well as individuals and smaller companies already covered, larger companies 
will also now have the first £75,000 in the bank covered by the scheme. Changes 
are also being made so savings of up to £1m will becovered for six months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/oct/06/savings-limit-1m-pounds-bank-of-england>
 where money has been temporarily deposited, for instance from a house sale or 
insurance claim.

The FSCS exists to protect customers of banks, building societies and credit 
unions that collapse. Thenear-collapse of Northern Rock 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/business/2012/aug/07/credit-crunch-boom-bust-timeline>
 in 2007 forced policymakers to take action on deposit protection. At the time, 
the Labour government moved toguarantee 100% of £35,000 of savings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2007/oct/01/politics.money>, replacing a 
tiered system of protection. It was increased to £50,000 during the 2008 
banking crisis and £85,000 at the end of 2010.
 