
The Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> is pushing ahead 
with plans for transitional arrangements after Brexit negotiations in an 
attempt to protect financial institutions from a cliff edge deal that could 
undermine their stability.

Governor Mark Carney <https://www.theguardian.com/business/mark-carney> has 
met senior figures in the City to stress the need for a smooth path out of the 
European Union that maintains its stature and strong links with the continent.

The meetings followed his submissions to the Treasury select committee that 
outlined his view thatbanks and other financial institutions would need to be 
given time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/27/bank-of-england-announce-stress-tests-uk-banks-fpc-fsr>
 to put new rules in place after a deal had been struck with Brussels.

Bank of England to reveal stress test results for UK's biggest banks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/27/bank-of-england-announce-stress-tests-uk-banks-fpc-fsr>
The Confederation of British Industry and the British Bankers Association have 
lobbied No 10 and No 11 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/20/cbi-brexit-lengthy-transition-period>
 to impress on the prime minister and chancellor that transition arrangements 
would be needed or firms could face a barrage of new tariffs and trading 
relationships.

Banks are concerned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/22/leading-banks-set-to-pull-out-of-brexit-uk>
 “passporting” agreements that allow transactions to flow across border 
uninterrupted could be scrapped or modified as part of the Brexit negotiations, 
denying them easy access to customers inside the single market.

Brexit supporters cast Carney as a member of an elite that will campaign 
behind the scenes by placing administrative roadblocks in the way of a quick 
exit.

But Threadneedle Street has emphasised that it respects the result of the 
referendum vote and merely wants to protect a vital sector of the economy from 
unnecessary harm after article 50 talks.

Carney was facing criticism for spending almost £100,000 of taxpayers’ money 
on the Bank of England’s annual summer party, just weeks after the Brexit vote.

The governor and about 2,500 Bank staff, policymakers and their families 
attended its annual summer sports day, at a cost of £99,035 to the public purse.


The Bank insisted it “carefully budgeted” for the Governors’ Day get-together 
on 10 July at its sports ground in Roehampton, south-westLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, according to a freedom of information 
request by the Press Association.

The TaxPayers’ Alliance branded the party a “huge slap in the face to all 
those who have struggled under the Bank of England’s policies”.

The campaign group’s chief executive, John O’Connell, said: “Not only have 
savers had very little to celebrate over the last eight years because of rock 
bottom interest rates, but many will rightly be angry that staff are then 
spending huge sums of money on lavish parties for themselves.”

The Bank said: “Governors’ Day] is a long-held tradition that is open to all 
employees – including members of the monetary policy committee – including 
their families, with the aim of recognising their hard work and dedication.”


It added: “The annual event is an important one for all Bank employees and the 
Bank strongly believes that this carefully budgeted event is worthwhile.”

 