
Mission accomplished? Assessing the capital health of the UK’s banks is a 
neverending task, of course, but Mark Carney, governor of the Bank of England,
seems pleased with the current state of affairs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/01/bank-stress-tests-rbs-and-standard-chartered-weakest-in-crash-scenario>
. “UK banks are now significantly more resilient than before the global 
financial crisis,” he declared. Lending to the real economy could continue even 
if severe stresses materialise. The UK banking system is “within sight” of the 
optimal level of capital.

The big seven lenders passed their stress tests, though it was a narrow squeak 
for Royal Bank of Scotland and Standard Chartered. None will have to raise more 
capital as a result of the tests. Even a hike in the new countercyclical 
capital buffer, designed to ensure credit keeps flowing when economic storms 
arrive, “will not, in itself, change the overall capital requirements for UK 
banks”.

Stress tests: Bank of England flags up buy-to-let concerns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/01/bank-stress-tests-rbs-and-standard-chartered-weakest-in-crash-scenario>
But the best bit, from the banks’ point of view, was Carney’s clear message 
that fresh capital demands were not on the agenda: “All should be clear, there 
is no new wave of capital regulation coming,” he said. “Our objective has never 
been to raise capital without limit. Or by stealth.” Thus the share prices of 
most banks rose strongly.

It is indeed excellent news that the governor is so confident. Even on 
much-debated risks, such as the surge in buy-to-let lending in the UK, 
Threadneedle Street seems relatively relaxed. The Prudential Regulation 
Authority unit will examine the buy-to-let market but no curbs on lending were 
announced on Tuesday.

Here’s the nagging doubt: in the aftermath of the 2007-09 crisis, regulators 
seemed determined to set banks’ capital thresholds far higher than is now 
deemed acceptable. The UK’s Vickers commission and the international Basel 
committee spoke of core equity ratios of 18%. In the event, the Bank has 
settled on 11%.

Carney, to be fair, gave a full explanation. First, capital is better designed 
these days – bondholders in the biggest banks can be forced to take pain in a 
crisis, for example. Second, “forward-looking” regulators are making better 
judgments on risks. Third, those countercyclical buffers can be flexed up and 
down as conditions require.

The arguments all sound plausible, but 18% to 11% is a mighty leap downwards. 
Perhaps it was necessary to avoid “the stability of the graveyard”, meaning 
banks so over-capitalised that they take too few risks. But perhaps more 
alarmingly, today’s central bankers just have complete faith in their ability 
to spot dangers.
 