
The Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> is concerned that 
the buy-to-let mortgage market and the economic slowdown in China could pose a 
threat to the UK’s banking system.

Policymakers are scrutinising the booming buy-to-let sector for any moves by 
lenders to make it easier for would-be landlords to obtain loans. They are also 
concerned that a rapid fall in house prices could force landlords to sell their 
properties, exacerbating the decline.

The Bank said the “downside risks” to stability have increased since July and 
pointed to the market volatility sparked by gyrations on China’s stock market 
in August, highlighting so-calledChinese Black Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/24/black-monday-chinese-stock-market-loses-all-gains-since-start-of-year>
 when the FTSE 100 index of leading stocks lost more than £60bn. It is 
commissioning analysis on such contagion and impact of computer trading 
strategies.

In its quarterly update 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/news/2015/022.aspx> on 
potential risks to the financial markets, the bank said it was not taking any 
immediate action to cool the buy-to-let market, where the mortgages are usually 
riskier interest-only loans. But it said it was looking at whether the 
buy-to-let boom could magnify falls and rises in house prices.

The Bank published data showing that buy-to-let mortgage lending has increased 
by more than 40% since the 2008 banking crisis, while owner-occupied lending 
has increased by 2% over the same period.

Has the buy-to-let gravy train gone off the rails?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/blog/2015/jul/11/buy-to-let-landlords-george-osborne-tenants>
“Buy-to-let mortgage lending has the potential to amplify the housing and 
credit cycles, though the extent of the amplification is hard to judge because 
the market has only recently grown to significant levels. Any increase in 
buy-to-let activity in an upswing could add further pressure to house prices,” 
thefinancial policy committe (FPC) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2014/aug/12/financial-policy-committee-boom-and-bust>
 said. “Buy-to-let investors may further exacerbate a downturn if they expect 
rental incomes to fall below their interest payments, and consequently add to 
selling pressure.”

The FPC said there was evidence that 40% of buy-to-let investors would respond 
to a fall in their rental income below their interest payments by selling their 
property.

Set up by the coalition government, the FPC was created in response to the 
banking crisis and designed to spot potential threats to financial stability. 
It first said it wasmonitoring the buy-to-let sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/01/buy-to-let-boom-jeopardise-financial-stability-bank-england-house-prices>
 in July, when it also outlined concerns about the level of household debt.

In its latest update, the Bank said the rapid growth of buy to let backed its 
call for the government to give it powers to intervene in the market – just as 
it can with residential mortgages. A consultation is scheduled to take place 
this year.

It said: “The FPC is alert to the rapid growth of the market and potential 
developments in underwriting standards. As the market continues to grow, 
particularly if driven by loosening of underwriting standards, the sector could 
pose risks to broader financial stability, both through credit risk to banks 
and the amplification of movements in the housing market. Intensified 
competition among lenders could lead to loosening underwriting standards in 
future.”


The FPC also conducted an annual review of the impact of help to buy on the 
sector –announced in March 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/mar/20/budget-2013-osborne-offers-homebuyers-help-to-buy>
 and helping buyers with deposit of just 5% of their property. It concluded 
that “the scheme does not pose material risks to financial stability”.

It also looks at global risks and in its latest analysis it pointed to the 
potential lessons from 24 August –Chinese Black Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/24/black-monday-chinese-stock-market-loses-all-gains-since-start-of-year>
 – when there were more than 1,000 temporary suspensions on individual equities 
on the New York Stock Exchange. The FPC has commissioned analysis from the 
Financial Conduct Authority of the way contagion spreads between markets.


“The committee is alert to the possibility that future heightened volatility 
and reductions in market depth could have more widespread and persistent 
effects, including on the provision of credit to the real economy,” the FPC 
said.

Interest rates must rise 'relatively soon', says Bank of England's Martin Weale
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/13/interest-rates-rise-bank-of-england>
In July, the FPC had been concerned about the precarious position of Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/01/greece-poses-risk-to-uk-financial-system-bank-of-england-eurozone-crisis>
 but concluded that the risk had abated. “However, other downside risks to UK 
financial stability stemming from the global environment, and to which the 
United Kingdom as a global financial centre is exposed, have increased. These 
risks come from both China and emerging market economies more broadly,” it said.

The outcome of bank stress tests will be announced in December and will look 
at their ability to withstand global risks and the impact or scale of future 
fines for misconduct. “The scale of future misconduct and redress costs for the 
UK banking sector is highly uncertain and banks should hold sufficient 
resources to pay these costs without affecting their ability to continue to 
lend to the real economy. The committee will review potential future costs as 
part of the 2015 stress test of the UK banking system,” the FPC said.
 