
The Bank of England has hit back at attacks by Theresa May  
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/theresa-may-speech-signals-economic-quantitative-easing-a7346536.html>
andLord William Hague  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/18/william-hague-attacks-bank-of-england-over-ultra-low-interest-rates>
on its money creation programme by pointing to the beneficial impact on the 
economy of the quantitative easing (QE) announced in itsemergency post-Brexit 
stimulus. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>

A paper co-authored by Andy Haldane 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/research/Documents/workingpapers/2016/swp624.pdf>
, Threadneedle Street’s chief economist, said there was evidence the surprise 
announcement of additional bond buying had reduced long-term borrowing costs 
for the government and business, raised share prices and boosted exports 
through a lower exchange rate for the pound.

QE has come under scrutiny in recent weeks as a result of comments by the 
prime minister in her Conservative conference speech about the bad “side 
effects” of the policy and Hague’s assertion that a scheme introduced in 
emergency conditions in 2009 had become “unpopular and counter-productive.”

The Bank said its analysis of QE – both in the UK and in other parts of the 
world – had yielded three key results.

First, the purchase of assets by central banks had a “significant” impact when 
they were explicitly used as a tool of monetary policy. Second, the impact 
varied over time and depended on how the economy and the financial markets were 
faring. Finally, the impact of QE had strong cross-border effects, with 
evidence that the actions of the US Federal Reserve had an influence on the UK 
economy as large as that on the American economy.

The Bank said the comprehensive package announced by its monetary policy 
committee on 4 August to dampen the shock of the EU referendum result provided 
a “clean case study of the impact QE might have on financial markets and the 
various asset market channels in operation.

“The effects on the yield curve, equity prices, corporate bond spreads and the 
exchange rate were all large and significant, consistent with a material 
loosening of credit conditions.”

 