
The Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> deputy governor, 
Ben Broadbent, has said the whole country should be grateful that Mark Carney 
is staying on as governor until 2019.

Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, Broadbent also said the pound could 
rebound if the economy continued to surprise on the positive side.

Carney ended speculation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/30/mark-carney-may-announce-decision-to-quit-thursday-bank-of-england>
 about his future earlier this week byagreeing to stay on 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/31/mark-carney-extra-year-bank-of-england-governor>
 untilBrexit  <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>negotiations 
with the EU have ended in 2019. This means he will serve an extra year, but 
that is still two years short of a full eight-year term.

Broadbent said: “I’m extremely happy that the current governor is staying. I 
think the whole country should be grateful that he is.”

When asked whether he would like to be the Bank’s next governor – Paddy Power 
is offering odds of 7-4 on this happening – Broadbent, a former Goldman Sachs 
economist, said: “He [Carney] is staying on another almost three years. That is 
far too far away for me to think about what I’m going to be doing then ... I 
haven’t even thought about it.”

His comments came the day after the central bank lifted its growth forecasts 
and warned households to expect a sharp rise in inflation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/03/bank-of-england-rate-cuts-2017-growth-forecast-inflation>
 next year as the weak pound pushes up the cost of imports. It hinted that 
further interest rate cuts were unlikely because the economy has held up better 
than expected since the referendum, with consumer spending particularly strong.

Broadbent said: “It is apparent that financial markets have taken one view and 
implicitly so far at least households so far have taken another. We don’t know 
who is more right because we don’t yet know how this process [Brexit] will 
unfold.

“Presumably at some point there will be something of a reconciliation and if 
it turns out better than financial markets are currently expecting for the 
economy over the longer run then you’d expect to see the currency bounce back.”


He rejected criticism from the Brexit camp that the Bank was out of touch with 
the real economy. “It’s always the case that we have to revise our view as news 
comes in,” he said. “We widened our fan charts [growth and inflation 
predictions] in August following the result of the referendum precisely because 
of the more uncertain environment we are now confronted with.”

The Bank has come under heavy criticism recently, including from the prime 
minister, who at the Conservative party conference criticised the “bad side 
effects” of ultra-low interest rates and the Bank’s money creation programme.

Broadbent responded: “We live in a democracy. People can comment on the way 
all our policies are conducted. It is our job to be open and transparent about 
what we do. For our part we’re just focused on our job. We have a remit given 
to us by parliament and we look at all the economic evidence and as economists 
regarding that remit we take the best possible decision we can at any point in 
time.”
 