
For six years now, my partner and I have been the proud – nay smug – owners of 
a small flat in trendy north London. It’s brilliant, owning a flat. I’d 
recommend it. Would own again.

So how did I accomplish this incredible feat, I hear you ask. Did I work hard 
and save harder? Do I have a secret life as an investment banker? Am I just 
better than other people?

Well, no. I was lucky enough to have family help. Without that, even in the 
slightly less bubblicious housing market of 2009, buying our first home would 
have been a hell of a lot harder.

In accepting this help, I’ve since realised, we were part of a thrilling new 
social trend. In 2009, according to theCouncil of Mortgage Lenders 
<https://www.cml.org.uk/industry-data/>, only around 30% of first-time buyers 
were clawing their way on to the ladder without some kind of family assistance.

That number has since improved somewhat: by 2014 it was up to 48%, thanks 
partly to schemes such asHelp to Buy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/help-to-buy-scheme>. Even so, more than half 
the nation’s first-time buyers are able to buy at all only because of help from 
their families. This strikes me as a pretty rotten state of affairs.

Banks being banks, one of them has found a way to profit from all this. As of 
this week, Barclays is offering a mortgage to homebuyers who don’t have a 
deposit – the first100% mortgage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/04/barclays-100-per-cent-mortgage-how-much-does-it-really-help-homebuyers>
 on offer since the heady days of 2008. The bank is also increasing the amount 
it iswilling to lend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/04/barclays-offers-0-percent-deposit-mortgage-to-home-buyers>
, at least for buyers earning more than £50,000, from a multiple of 4.4 times 
income to one of 5.5.

This looks, at first glance, like a sign that the subprime madness that did so 
much to create the financial crisis has returned (not least because it’s a new 
version of a previous scheme, in which buyers still needed to bring a 5% 
deposit to the table). But it hasn’t, or at least not entirely. Because there’s 
a catch.

Barclays 100% mortgage: how much does it really help homebuyers?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/04/barclays-100-per-cent-mortgage-how-much-does-it-really-help-homebuyers>
The homebuyers themselves may not need a deposit – but a “helper”, which 
generally means their parents, must put cash worth 10% of the purchase price 
into aBarclays savings account 
<http://www.barclays.co.uk/mortgages/family-springboard-mortgage> linked to the 
mortgage. Three years later, providing the mortgage payments are up to date, 
they’ll get it back, with interest.

In other words, the buyers’ parents are still temporarily providing a deposit. 
It’s just that the bank gets to hold on to it.Barclays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> gets new mortgage customers, the 
buyers get a new home, and their parents get a decent slug of interest on some 
money that, being relatively rich, they probably weren’t doing anything with 
anyway. Everybody wins.

Except, of course, they don’t. For one thing, even though a deposit is still 
sort of there, the return of the 100% mortgage remains worrying. Barclays is 
clearly confident that, in no time at all, there’ll be enough equity in the 
property for the parents to have their money back. This deal is effectively a 
bet on prices rising 10% or more in the next three years.

If you can’t get on the housing ladder, the whole thing is a bit Alien vs. 
Predator: whoever wins, you lose. Either Barclays is making a good bet, and 
house prices are going to get further out of reach. Or it’s making a bad bet, 
and, well, that ended brilliantly well for everyone the last time round, didn’t 
it?

More to the point, though, deals of this kind will formalise the divide that 
already exists in the housing market. If your parents have cash, or credit, and 
are willing to help, then great. Barclays is on hand to help you out. If not, 
thanks to another influx of buyers, prices are about to rise even further. For 
whoever has, to him will be given. Them’s the breaks. Sorry.

Still, if you do have rich and generous parents with spare cash sitting 
around, this sounds like a pretty sweet deal. It’s great, owning a flat. What 
could possibly go wrong?
 