
Now that we’ve calmed down after Kanye’s tanty over Beck winning best album at 
the Grammys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/feb/09/kanye-west-beck-grammy-win-disrespectful-to-inspiration-beyonce>
, I think we can safely agree that although Kanye might have some valid points, 
until he holds his own personal awards ceremony he is not in a position to 
decide who gets what gong. End of.

All this kerfuffle has distracted us from something else that happens each 
year at the Grammys: the relentless and constant age-shaming ofMadonna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/madonna>. It’s become some sort of sport.

Grammys 2015: Madonna's bum eclipses Rihanna's 'toilet doll' dress on red 
carpet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/feb/09/grammys-2015-madonnas-butt-eclipses-rihannas-toilet-doll-dress-red-carpet>
Madge turned up to the ceremony in her usual garb, ie something tight, 
excruciatingly short and topped off witha pair of unwearable shoes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/feb/09/grammy-awards-2015-best-quotes>
. No real surprises there. Although I did enjoy the Napoleon-slash-Spanish 
matador vibe of her whole ensemble. She flounced about in her now de rigueur 
corsetrywith boobs proudly on show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/09/boobs-massive-cleavage-red-carpet-baftas-julianne-moore>
, legs encased in saucy fishnets. On first glance, most people thought “Nice 
hat” and went back to their lives.

Then she flashed her backside. At the paparazzi. Who deserve it just as much 
as that degrading manicam box into which celebs are forced to shove their hands 
to have their cuticles filmed up close. Moon them both, I say.

Of course, Madonna’s rear wasn’t encased in a comfortable pair of sensible 
control-top cottontail undies like most women of most ages would wear. Her 
backside was bare, encased only by some sort of sporty jock strap that worked 
as a cheek hammock (where can I get one? The lift was extraordinary). Glorious 
Madge. Glorious 50-something-year-old Madge. Who refuses to put it away.

Cue the naysayers on socials saying Madonna should act her age. These normally 
rational people, who clearly all now hold a university degree in sitting on 
their own backsides and having opinions of 140 characters or less, were deeply 
concerned that Madge really needs a friend right now who’ll be honest and tell 
her the truth about her clothing choices. Others worried for her children. Some 
stated that she has more arse than class.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fbare-arsed-bold-glorious-madonna-light-years-away-from-acting-her-age%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F12%2F1423703045986%2F6bb1953a-e2d4-43b3-8bdb-cac14884383e-1149x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bare-arsed%2C%20bold%2C%20glorious%20Madonna%20%E2%80%93%20light%20years%20away%20from%20acting%20her%20age&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fbare-arsed-bold-glorious-madonna-light-years-away-from-acting-her-age%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bare-arsed%2C%20bold%2C%20glorious%20Madonna%20%E2%80%93%20light%20years%20away%20from%20acting%20her%20age&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fbare-arsed-bold-glorious-madonna-light-years-away-from-acting-her-age%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F12%2F1423703045986%2F6bb1953a-e2d4-43b3-8bdb-cac14884383e-1149x2040.jpeg>
 Taylor Swift arrives at the Grammys. Photograph: Michael Nelson/EPA 
To think an older person wearing revealing clothes can still get folk in a 
lather, yet when Taylor Swift at the age of 25 turns up dressing like a 
45-year-old movie star no one bats an eye! And that is so sad. Why should 
anyone be told to act their age when it comes to getting dressed? And as an 
aside, what on earth does acting your age really mean in this context? I assume 
the answer is covering it all up. And as Tay would say: shake it off.

Grammy awards 2015 best quotes: Prince, Madonna, Obama and more
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/feb/09/grammy-awards-2015-best-quotes>
I attended a product launch years ago that was hosted by an octogenarian 
artist who has a history of pulling practical jokes and pranks. Once her speech 
was done she then proceeded to pour the champagne all over the place, including 
on herself, then hoik her skirt up to flash her undies too. It was both 
shocking and joyful.

This moment always serves as a reminder that I wasn’t used to people over a 
certain age enjoying themselves, their bodies, and just generally mucking about 
with societal norms. It also showed me what a terrible bunch of conservatives 
we’ve become. Self-expression is not only for the young.

Telling Madonna what you think she can and can’t wear at her age has a hint of 
the Kanyes about it. And if we all agree that Yeezus doesn’t have that right to 
tell someone else who deserves to win, nor do we have the right to tell someone 
over a certain vintage to dress their age. Isn’t it the same?

 * This article was amended on 12 February 2015. Taylor Swift is 25, not 22 as 
originally stated. This has been corrected.
 