
When visiting Barking and Dagenham it is possible for Londoners from different 
parts of town to imagine that they have slipped back in time. That’s partly 
about architecture, because this piece of the eastern suburb mosaic, slotted 
between Newham, Redbridge, Essex-minded Havering and the north side of the 
Thames, is still so visually synonymous with the 30,000 homes of the famous 
Becontree estate, a huge public housing development, conceived, in the words of
Municipal Dreams 
<https://municipaldreams.wordpress.com/2013/01/08/the-becontree-estate-built-in-england-where-the-most-revolutionary-social-changes-can-take-place-and-people-in-general-do-not-realise-that-they-have-occurred/>
, “in the brief, post-Great War coupling of hope and fear. Homes fit for heroes 
and the concern that those very heroes might succumb to Bolshevism in 1919”.

It’s also about accents: the London style of speech cemented in national 
sentiment by apples, pears and the spirit of the Blitz, but now getting scarce 
in Shoreditch, still greets the ear pretty often round here, including in the 
Town Hall. And then there’s attitude, which is where Barking and Dagenham can 
be misunderstood. I asked council leaderDarren Rodwell 
<http://moderngov.barking-dagenham.gov.uk/mgUserInfo.aspx?UID=1743> if he 
thinks the borough has an image problem. “Absolutely,” he says. “It’s that 
we’re white racists who work at Fords. But that is snobbery. The reality is, 
we’ve got one of the best communities in London – if not the best.”

Another, and indisputable, part of Barking and Dagenham’s reality is that, 
contrary to any impression of its being suspended in some by-passed London 
yesterday, it is going through truly profound change and has been for at least 
as long as the local authority has existed.

“For most of the life of the borough the council has had to cope with the 
consequences of de-industrialisation,” writes Tony Travers in his indispensable
London’s Boroughs at 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/dec/06/book-review-londons-boroughs-at-50-by-tony-travers>
. He describes the need to re-train the local workforce and attract new sources 
of employment as “a continuous challenge” in an area with a long tradition of 
young people leaving school early and going straight into jobs of a type that 
used to be on their own doorsteps but aren’t any more.

For 70 years the giant Ford production plant Rodwell referred to was 
Dagenham’s employment core and community anchor. It cranked out its first 
vehicles in 1931, a few years before the completion of the great Becontree “new 
town”, and grew into a vast production line of motor-Americana whose legendary 
livery loomed above the A13.

In 2002, all but a small bit of it closed. In the meantime, Barking and 
Dagenham’s population had altered greatly. And during this century its shifts 
have been, to use the council’s word, “unprecedented 
<http://moderngov.barking-dagenham.gov.uk/documents/s66226/20130116%20Final%20Draft%20Community%20Strategy.pdf>
”. According to the 2011 census it rose by 22,000 during the preceding ten 
years, an increase of 13.4%. It grew radically younger during that period too 
and more ethnically mixed than it had ever been. Human turnover has been huge.

All of this has required adjustments, stirred anxieties and presented an 
electoral opportunity to the British National Party, which it seized bywinning 
eleven seats <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/shared/bsp/hi/vote2006/locals/html/ab.stm>
 in the borough elections of 2006. Labour stayed in control, as it has ever 
since 1964. But it was stung into mounting a sustained counter attack, which 
saw Margaret Hodge hold her Barking parliamentary seat in 2010,crushing BNP 
leader Nick Griffin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/may/14/general-election-2010-fall-bnp>
 in the process. The BNP presence on the council was ended at theborough 
elections <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/shared/election2010/council/html/3892.stm> 
held on the same day. They haven’t made a comeback. Rodwell, though, seems well 
alive to why some of the borough’s residents made them briefly strong.

“We’ve got a 12th century church, a 14th century pub and a 17th century 
vicarage,” he said, driving me through theDagenham Village conservation area 
<https://www.lbbd.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/Dagenham-Village-Conservation-Area-Map.pdf>
. “They decimated it in the 1960s and 1970s.” He pointed out of the window: 
“That was my nan’s place, there.” Further on, we reached an industrial site 
where theMay and Baker pharmaceutical company 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/May_%26_Baker> used to be. “Great people who 
worked there,” Rodwell remarked. “If it hadn’t been for them we wouldn’t have 
had Winston Churchill.” That’s because the drug that did wonders for his 
bacterial pneumonia in 1942 wasinvented there 
<http://www.bshs.org.uk/travel-guide/may-and-baker-sanofi-aventis-dagenham-east-london>
. Moving on, Rodwell, took us past a health and fitness club (“When it was 
built, this was theSterling machine gun factory 
<http://www.barkinganddagenhampost.co.uk/news/heritage/sterling_guns_became_the_stars_of_wars_1_573371>
”) and then we were in the heart of Barking , served byBobby Moore Way 
<https://www.streetcheck.co.uk/postcode/ig117hw> (no commentary required).

There was a purpose behind highlighting these landmarks of history. “I can’t 
say to people that we can keep the streets the same as they were when I was 
growing up,” said Rodwell, 46. “And nor do I want to. There were some good bits 
about it and some not so good bits. When I was a lad growing up here we didn’t 
have 137 different cultures. We have today. Now, some of that is good. Some of 
that, people will say, is not so good. Some people are concerned by it. If they 
are people who don’t want to move along with that change in society, then we 
can only support them the best we can. We can’t make them want to change and I 
understand the anxiety. But, actually, a hundred years ago, none of this was 
here.”

By “this” Rodwell meant, well, nearly everything standing in the area today, 
including a great deal of the council housing that went up in the decades after 
the Becontree was completed, especially that constructed after World War II. He 
isn’t sentimental about it. “As I see it, people deserve better than this,” he 
remarked of one cluster of homes put together in the years whenMoore 
<https://www.westhamtillidie.com/posts/2016/02/23/tribute-to-bobby-moore> was 
at his footballing peak. Of the council housing in general constructed during 
that era, when Labour and Conservative national governments competed to get the 
most built, he says: “It was good for its time. It was good for the working 
classes that came out of the slums of London and for the immigrants that came 
over from Ireland or Eastern Europe, which we had a lot of.”

But now: “Historically, the problem with the borough is we’ve only had one 
type of housing, which was for one type of community. We were the subservient 
workforce of Fords and other industries.” This, Rodwell believes, militated 
against openness and ambition. “You didn’t have to be educated, and you didn’t 
have to aspire to want to do better. It was all laid on a plate for you. That’s 
a safe place to be - when you’re being told what to do, when to go on holiday, 
how to live your life. You’re cradled. Well, we’re not in that world any more. 
And after eight decades, in my opinion, it led to theBNP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/bnp>.”

Before becoming a councillor, Rodwell had worked for the charity DABD 
<http://www.dabd.org.uk/about-us> as an adviser and advocate for benefits 
claimants. Hebecame Barking and Dagenham leader 
<http://www.barkinganddagenhampost.co.uk/news/labour_elects_cllr_darren_rodwell_as_new_barking_and_dagenham_council_leader_1_3619627>
 in May 2014. It was just after the council elections of that year in which 
Labour repeated its clean sweep of 2010, dashing the hopes of Ukip, by then 
seen as its main challenger, even though the borough would become one ofjust 
five out of 32 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/politics/london-eu-referendum-results-the-five-london-boroughs-which-bucked-the-trend-and-backed-brexit-a3279836.html>
 where voters wanted to leave the EU. Rodwell told hislocal paper 
<http://www.barkinganddagenhampost.co.uk/news/new_council_leader_darren_rodwell_speaks_about_vision_for_barking_and_dagenham_1_3624141>
 he would promote “social responsibility” in the borough and make “community” 
his main focus. He also pledged to do all he could to combat the effects of 
government cuts, labelling the Conservative-Liberal Democrat coalition the 
“worst disaster”. There is a stress on education too. Coventry University is to
set up a campus 
<http://www.coventry.ac.uk/primary-news/coventry-university-announces-plans-for-a-second-campus-in-london/>
 in Dagenham Civic Centre next year and offercourses 
<https://www.lbbd.gov.uk/news/modern-university-year-set-move-dagenham-civic-centre/>
 in accountancy, engineering, policing, It and more.

The Rodwell recipe is a distinctive combination of protective innovation and a 
desire to foster change from within, articulated as an independent, 
working-class philosophy. “I don’t class myself as a politician,” he said. “I 
class myself as a community champion. The job of the council is to facilitate 
where the community wants to go, and then to get the investment in, whether it 
be public or private. As long as I do that, as long as I get that right, I 
don’t need any posh people with letters after their names and bank balances to 
prove it telling me how I or the rest of the community should live our lives. 
It’s really, really simple.”

Rodwell’s housing policies demonstrate his beliefs and approach. Last year, 
Barking and Dagenhambecame a private sector landlord 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/sep/16/london-council-sets-up-as-private-landlord>
 by buying a block of newly-built flats and creating its own company,Barking 
and Dagenham Reside <https://www.affordablelettings.london/content/AboutUs>, to 
manage them. Some of the properties are for social rent, others are for people 
who will never qualify for it but can’t afford to buy and are priced at 80% of 
local market rates. Rodwell deputySaima Ashraf 
<http://moderngov.barking-dagenham.gov.uk/mgUserInfo.aspx?UID=1720>, who is 
also the council’s cabinet member for community leadership and engagement, 
called it “a win-win for our council, taxpayers, residents and Generation 
Rent”. Conservative London Assembly member Andrew Boff, a local resident, 
praised it as “fantastic”. Rodwell says the council’s private rented homes 
begin at levels affordable to people on the London Living Wage: “On £19,000 a 
year you can get a one-bedroom flat.”

The next big innovation, introduced earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/30/london-council-launches-right-to-invest-for-low-income-tenants>
, bestowed on traditional secure council tenants a “right to invest”. It 
enables them to convert to shared ownership by purchasing between 25% and 70% 
of the home they live in. The mechanism gives people who cannot afford to 
exercise their right to buy a financial stake in their homes without the 
council losing its stock. It was also designed to protect tenants against the 
government’s planned “pay-to-stay” policy, now dropped, which would have 
entailed tenants with incomes above a certain level having their rents raised. 
If occupants want to sell their share of their home, the council will get first 
refusal.

Rodwell says he has “no problem with people wanting to better their 
lifestyles, but it shouldn’t be done the way it’s being done at the moment - at 
a cost to the wider community”. In contrast to Right to Buy, he sees “right to 
invest” as another means of nurturing aspiration and community stability at the 
same time. It’s an aspect of his desire to increase tenure mix, of which he is 
an uncomplicated advocate. Barking and Dagenham has high levels of social 
housing, a category whose definition in Rodwell’s mind includes buy-to-let 
properties where other councils place people from their waiting lists. For him, 
this adds to the weight of sustaining neighbourhoods containing a lot of people 
on low incomes. “That’s two-thirds of the borough,” Rodwell says. “When you’ve 
got 70% on some form of benefit, you’ve got to get greater diversity. Without 
it, you get seen as a dumping ground of London. That’s not good for the 
residents here, or those who are placed here. We need to support people here 
that want to progress. You’ve got to make sure of is that we can still build 
homes for the aspirational working class.”

There’s also that legacy of poorly-built post-war housing to keep on dealing 
with. After collecting me from Dagenham East station Rodwell took me to 
Dagenham’s nearby Leys estate, where he was shown around by people from 
developerMulalley <http://www.mulalley.co.uk/news2014/2014_02_theleys.htm>. It 
was not the Leys built in the 1960s. In 2009, the council received apetition 
from its residents <http://moderngov.barking-dagenham.gov.uk/mgAi.aspx?ID=29602>
, asking for delayed improvement work under Labour’s Decent Homes programme to 
be carried out. The council lacked the cash and decided to redevelop.

In March 2013, bulldozers moved in. Phase one of the work is now complete. Of 
the 89 new homes, 19 are for market sale and the other 70 for affordable rent, 
half at 50% of local market rents, half at 65%. Phase two will produce another 
69 homes, all for rent at much the same split. They are tenure blind and 
renters on the old estate are entitled to return. It’s anotherReside project 
<https://www.affordablelettings.london/content/Developments/TheLeys>. Rodwell 
is pleased with the quality of the work: “I look at it really, really simple. 
Regeneration today should be the heritage of tomorrow. The Becontree estate was 
built in 12 years. We will soon celebrate its hundredth year. Why? Because it 
was good quality housing with the infrastructure required to make a community. 
And it’s made a very good community.”

At first, you couldn’t get a house on the Becontree unless you had a job. 
Today’s contemptuous stereotypes of council house tenants could not have taken 
hold in those days. I asked Rodwell if he regards his promotion of mixed tenure 
as a way of restoring a mixture of residents on estates that Barking and 
Dagenham has largely lost. “Agreed. Yes. Exactly that,” he replied. “What you 
want is what you’ve just seen at the Leys. There will be a complete mix of 
people who are hard-working Barking and Dagenham Londoners, who have pride in 
the job they do, but who will never have the same amount of money as people who 
can afford to buy. Why should they have anything less?”

At the Town Hall, Rodwell is happy to be photographed beside the portrait of 
the Queen that hangs on his office wall. Five years ago, he accepted her 
invitation toattend her garden party 
<http://www.barkinganddagenhampost.co.uk/news/politics/barking_councillor_to_meet_the_queen_1_953124>
 in recognition of his charity work. Last year, the monarchvisited the borough 
<http://www.theenquirer.co.uk/royal-special-queen-visits-barking-and-dagenham-to-celebrate-50-years/>
 as part of its 50th anniversary celebrations and was entertained by the 
legendaryDagenham Girl Pipers 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dagenham_Girl_Pipers> and Iqra Zaman, a 
16-year-old self-taught pianist. Rodwell doesn’t mind who knows of his 
affection for the chief royal or the nation’s great arts institutions and 
cultural sites. He wants access to these to be free for UK citizens, but not 
for tourists, welcome though they are: “Make ‘em pay.”

He outlined another part of his vision for his borough’s evolution - 
encouraging local arts and culture. “For 80 years, high art was a Saturday 
night down the working men’s club,” he said. “But we have to be individuals. We 
have to stretch the mindset of what we can achieve and where we can go. People 
in Barking and Dagenham deserve what you get in Westminster. They deserve it 
because they’ve worked for it. There are people here who’ve wanted to express 
themselves for so long, but they were not allowed to because we had a 
conformist community.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVo-9OCFXB18&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVo-9OCFXB18>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVo-9OCFXB18&media=>
 Barking and Dagenham Council promotional video for its arts and culture 
policies. 
Local planning policy seeks to provide low cost ground floor spaces and 
work-live units for local artists and their small businesses. “We can adapt 
those for artists, micro-breweries, that sort of stuff,” Rodwell said. There 
are grander ambitions too. A year ago, the council spent £12m buying land on a 
local industrial site to pursue his aim of getting a film studio built there. 
The area has provided locations for big budget film and TV productions in 
recent years. Rodwell senses an opportunity. “Investors know we’re an ambitious 
council determined to realise the benefits of the creative industries for our 
economy and residents,” hetold the Barking and Dagenham Post 
<http://www.barkinganddagenhampost.co.uk/news/council_spends_12m_buying_up_land_for_dagenham_film_studio_site_1_4804887>
. London mayor Sadiq Khan joined him for a photo-op. Hedropped by again 
<http://www.barkinganddagenhampost.co.uk/news/business/sadiq_khan_dagenham_will_be_known_for_films_not_ford_s_1_4725979>
 in October: “In the 20th century Dagenham was known for Fords. In the 
21st-century I think it can be known for film,” he said.

It seemed only right and proper to pull his leg: next thing he knew, I said, 
his “aspirational working class” Barking and Dagenham would be over-run with 
bicycling Guardian readers craving fancy coffee and organic veg; gentrification 
is already re-making Plaistow and Manor Park; the tide will crash upon 
Rodwell’s shores soon enough and neighbourhoods will go to the dogs.

“I have no problem with those people coming into the borough,” Rodwell 
replied, “as long as I can sit next to them reading the Mirror.” He points out 
that artists and small-scale brewers would be nothing new in the territory: 
“This was a Saxon space of innovation. I want to bring that ambition back.” 
Organic veg needn’t be out of place either: “We’ve got more allotments than any 
other London council. We’ve got a community growing space. So all this yuppie 
gentrification is actually, if you really want, going back in time to what the 
working class used to do. You’d have a hundred foot garden, split it up into 
three: a third for the animal, a third for the allotment and a third for the 
kids. That’s a very working class land use.”

What matters, he explained, is that “the people already here get the same 
opportunities to develop themselves instead of being priced out. We as a 
council are doing our utmost to make sure that doesn’t happen. Those live-work 
spaces, there will be a lower and an upper income stream for them. So once 
you’re established you won’t need that space any more and it can be passed on 
to the next aspirational working-class person.”

Rodwell’s distinction between gentrification, a transforming affluence from 
without, and aspiration, a transforming force from within, seems to capture his 
approach to the challenges of dealing with change that are faced be so many 
London boroughs in different ways. “What I want to see istrue aspiration,” he 
says. “Because actually it’s the working class that normally, in the past, has 
given London its vibrancy. If you look at the arts, if you look at culture, if 
you look at music, architecture, any of it, it’s normally come from them.”

Earlier, we’d visited Barking Riverside <http://barkingriverside.co.uk/>, a 
vast stretch of Thames-side ex-industrial land that will eventually be home to 
10,000 households (and the subject of separate article before too long). For 
now, the small part that’sbeen completed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/aug/17/no-cafe-pub-doctor-londons-most-isolated-suburb-barking-riverside>
 is a bit of a lost village, waiting to be found by long-awaited public 
transport links. But it is, nonetheless, part of the future of London as it 
pulses and grows and its centre of gravity shifts further east. Across the 
wide, grey river, in Bexley and Greenwich you can see the newThamesmead 
<http://www.peabody.org.uk/thamesmead/about-thamesmead> too taking shape 
<http://www.peabody.org.uk/news-views/2016/oct/green-light-given-for-over-1,500-new-homes-for-thamesmead>
. East London is entering its latest stage of unending transition. There will 
be good change and bad change and all sorts that fall somewhere between. Darren 
Rodwell is but one among the many who will help to define the forms it takes. 
He knows what he wants. He also knows what he wants to avoid.

“You imagine a house with local government as its foundations. Local government
 <https://www.theguardian.com/society/localgovernment> has been eroded for 
decades and when you erode the foundations, the pillars start to shake. Now, 
what are the four pillars? The first pillar is housing. The second pillar is 
education. The third pillar is the welfare state and the fourth pillar is the 
NHS. Let’s look at those four pillars.

Housing <https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing>? We built what we could 
and we built a lot of it for everyone and that was really important. You know, 
they went through a world war. The second thing was a right to a good 
education, up to university. Well, we’ve nearly privatised our education. 
That’s a disgrace. Thirdly, the welfare state. No one should ever starve in 
this country. How can it be right that we went from one food bank here to 12 in 
a matter of five years? That’s not good policy. That’s very bad policy. And the 
last one is the NHS. Well, do we have to talk about how that’s on its knees? So 
the foundations are eroded, the four pillars are shaking, and then we wonder 
why the roof of Europe falls in.

“I want a society where if Mrs Jones hasn’t collected her milk for a few days, 
a neighbour will know that Mrs Jones hasn’t collected her milk. What an 
indictment of our society when a local authority doesn’t know Mrs Jones hasn’t 
collected her milk, the neighbours don’t know Mrs Jones hasn’t collected her 
milk and her family that lives wherever they live hasn’t noticed either. That’s 
a really sad indictment of 21st century Britain.” 

This article was updated on 6 December 2016 to include the council’s plans for 
building a film studio.
 