
Barratt Homes predicted continuing demand for its houses as it announced 
soaring first-half profits, fuelled by a shortage of homes and the government’s 
help-to-buy scheme.

Pre-tax profits at Britain’s biggest housebuilder rose 40% to £295m in the six 
months to the end of December as revenues rose 19% to £1.88bn. The dividend was 
increased by 25% to 6p a share.

Barratt said completed sales rose 9.4% in the first half to 7,626 – the 
highest for eight years – and that it had made a strong start to the second 
half. Almost a third of sales were made under the government’s help-to-buy 
programme, which underwrites a portion of a purchaser’s mortgage for a newly 
built home.

Help-to-buy loan scheme nets Treasury £213m in paper profit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/feb/15/help-to-buy-loan-scheme-nets-treasury-213m-in-paper-profit>
David Thomas, Barratt’s chief executive, said: “When you look at the overall 
backdrop for the market it is largely positive. There is a huge focus for the 
government on increasing housing numbers. There is consumer demand for the 
product and we are confident that the mortgage market [supported] by help to 
buy is very attractive for our customers.”

The government is trying to encourage private housebuilders such as Barratt to 
build more homes to deal witha housing crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/09/housing-crisis-tenants-shelter-private-rent>
 caused by decades of supply failing to meet the demands of a growing 
population.

Shortage of supply lies behind soaring house prices, particularly in London, 
andfears are growing that the market is heading for a crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/oct/29/london-house-prices-most-overvalued-world-ubs>
 afteroverseas buyers snapped up property for investment or speculation purposes
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/14/60000-london-flats-back-onto-market--estate-agent-cluttons>
.

Barratt’s shares, down 10% this year, were little changed at 563p.

Thomas said London was an important part of Barratt’s business, accounting for 
about 2,000 of 17,000 properties it expects to build this year. He added that 
about three-quarters of its London properties were priced at, or below, the 
£600,000 limit for help to buy. Last year Barratt sold 25 properties in central 
London for £2m or less but the average price of a Barratt London home is 
£480,000.

“We are not suggesting £480,000 is low cost but we are saying it is a product 
for people who live in London and it’s less about overseas or investor buyers 
at the high end of the market,” he said.

The government recently extended help to buy until 2021 and introduced it for 
buyers in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/12/london-help-to-buy-scheme-launch-in-february>
. Some critics have said the move will simply push up prices in the capital, 
making houses less affordable.

Thomas said: “Help to buy is giving you a stimulus on the demand side, which 
is needed if you don’t have full mortgage availability. On the supply side, the 
government is very focused on freeing up the planning system. A backdrop which 
says help to buy will be there for five years gives people confidence to build.”
 