
Government initiatives to help first-time buyers such as the extension of help 
to buy and the new starter homes scheme are fuelling optimism atBarratt 
Developments <https://www.theguardian.com/business/barrattdevelopments>, 
Britain’s biggest housebuilder, and its smaller rival Galliford Try.

Barratt built and sold 7,626 properties in the six months to 31 December, up 
9.4% from a year ago, and expects to sell 16,750 homes over the year. The 
average selling price increased by 10.8% to £254,000.

Help to buy 
<https://www.gov.uk/affordable-home-ownership-schemes/help-to-buy-equity-loans>
, which has been extended until 2021, accounts for about a third of completions 
at Barratt and the other big housebuilders, giving the industry a major boost 
over the past three years. The FTSE 100 firm welcomed the recent increase in 
the government’s equity loan to 40% in London, as well as thestarter homes 
scheme <http://www.barratthomes.co.uk/new-homes/london/why-us/starter-homes/>, 
which is aimed at providing 200,000 homes for first-time buyers by 2020.

The government-backed schemes have made Barratt confident about the future. 
Its chief executive, David Thomas, said: “Overall, market conditions are good 
and we remain confident in our outlook for the full year as we continue to 
execute our strategies.

He said help to buy was “absolutely central to what we are doing”, but also 
highlighted “tangible improvements to land release and planning”.

Galliford Try <https://www.theguardian.com/business/gallifordtry>, the FTSE 
250-listed housebuilder, which owns Linden Homes, said it built 1,603 homes in 
the past six months, up 4.6% from a year ago. Its order book increased to 
£3.7bn from £3.2bn a year ago “in an improving market”.

The industry has been held back by a shortage of skilled tradespeople, which 
has sent wages for bricklayers and plumbers rocketing. Barratt expects build 
costs – covering labour and materials – to rise by 3-4% over the full year.

Thomas said: “The skills shortage is the number one challenge for 
housebuilders. At any given point in time we are employing about 16,000 
subcontractors.”

He said training apprentices takes time – City & Guilds courses that include 
on-site work placements last two to three years – and that the influx of 
foreign construction workers has mainly been a London phenomenon.

The pick-up in housebuilding since the slump five years ago has not been 
enough to combat Britain’s growing housing crisis, and theindustry has been 
criticised for hoarding land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/30/revealed-housebuilders-sitting-on-450000-plots-of-undeveloped-land>
. Figures from the Local Government Association showed last week that nearly 
half a million new homes in England and Waleshave not been built 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/07/number-of-unbuilt-homes-with-planning-permission-hits-record-levels-lga-says>
 despite having planning permission.

Thomas defended Barratt’s record, saying it had only three to three and half 
years’ supply of land, while the average land bank length among the biggest 
housebuilders was five years. “We absolutely don’t sit on land – we have one of 
the shortest land banks in the industry.”
 