
Mykki Blanco: ‘I didn’t want to be a rapper. I wanted to be Yoko Ono’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/15/mykki-blanco-i-didnt-want-to-be-a-rapper-i-wanted-to-be-yoko-ono>
Madonna’s BDSM bedroom antics in Justify My Love 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Np_Y740aReI>. Freddie Mercury in drag as a 
housewife forI Want To Break Free <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f4Mc-NYPHaQ>
. Too-hot-for-BBC leather daddies inFrankie Goes To Hollywood’s Relax 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mCpz3LAjxek>. Pop music has long been a place 
for subverting sexual norms, not least in videos. But for queer artists in 
2016, it feels as if this medium of expression could be under threat.

The most recent setback to queer visuals was for Loner by rapper Mykki Blanco. 
Last week, the video wastemporarily removed from YouTube 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/columns/hip-hop/7597332/mykki-blanco-loner-video-youtube-removal>
, with Blanco suggesting on Twitter that his art was being “policed and 
demeaned”. Despite the video being a co-production with adult site PornHub, the 
only threat to YouTube’s nudity and sexual content guidelines looks to be the 
fairly innocuous presence of a man’s bulge.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIbPWe24jQ9A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIbPWe24jQ9A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIbPWe24jQ9A&media=>
If you or I stripped to the music of Sigur Rós, we'd be arrested
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/lostinshowbiz/2012/jun/21/stripped-music-sigur-ros-arrested>
Potentially offensive content is brought to YouTube’s attention by users via a 
video’s “flag” button. Loner was taken down and soon reinstated with a +18 age 
restriction. But Blanco believes the damage is done: “It sends a clear 
homophobic message that the fact that my video displays unapologetic queer 
imagery means it’s slapped with an ‘age restriction’, while other cis, overly 
sexualised heteronormative work – mainly videos that objectify women – are 
universally ‘age appropriate’ and therefore OK.”

Of course, heteronormative videos have age restrictions, too, such as Sigur 
Rós’s Fjögur Píanó, which features a full-frontal Shia LaBeouf. But it’s 
certainly hard to ignore that some raunchy content is unrestricted while some 
isn’t. Nicki Minaj twerked past censors in a thong for the Anaconda video; 
Fergie’s MILF $ depicted the singer in a bathtub in lingerie. Yet a teaser for 
Seattle queer artist Perfume Genius’s last album, featuring two men cradling 
each other lovingly, was pulled from YouTube (though you can now watch similar 
scenes in his Hood video without constraints).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGNb4FBawH_U&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGNb4FBawH_U>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGNb4FBawH_U&media=>
There are, however, glimmers of hope: Years & Years’ Desire recent video 
featured a gay kiss, as did Shura’s Touch. Neither fell foul of censors. Their 
chaste visuals show that sexuality can be expressed in many ways. And yet it’s 
important that a wider range of representations of queer sexuality reach 
eyeballs, young and old.

“The subversive elements are [in videos] to change the way people see 
themselves in the world,” says Matt Lambert, who has made videos for LGBT 
musicians such as Years & Years. “That’s what subculture is; that’s what pop 
culture can be.”

Blanco agrees and questions why queer culture has so far to catch up. “The 
fact that we’re having such a political conversation over a campy video like 
Loner, which is as sexual as an evening at aRingling Brothers Circus 
<https://www.ringling.com/>, is sad,” Blanco says. “That video is a celebration 
of kitsch, in many ways turning the pop aesthetic on its head, empowering the 
LGBTQ [community] through its flamboyance.”

Streaming sites might think that age restrictions are helpful, but acceptance 
won’t change if some queer art is deemed illicit. Blanco himself vows to make 
bulgier, queerer visuals in future. “We combat this by saying: ‘Fuck you, we 
will not be silenced,’” he says, “[and] demanding our art not be treated as 
‘less than’. We will get there.”
 