
Spoiler warning: contains details from episodes one to seven of Hostages 


There are many things that puzzle me about Hostages, the Israeli import 
hurtling towards a close on BBC4. But mainly the astonishing complexity of all 
its characters’ diaries. This is a kidnap drama in which both those held and 
those holding them are really too busy with other things to be shut up in a 
house. I’ve spent more time at home on an ordinary weekend than the kidnapped 
Danons and their armed visitors have done in this ridiculous siege.

Which is not to say that Hostages is not enjoyable. It’s just entirely 
implausible. The set up is a smart one: Dr Yael Danon, a brilliant surgeon, is 
selected to perform a largely routine operation on the prime minister. But, 
relaxing at her Jerusalem home the evening before the surgery, Yael, her 
husband Eyal and their two kids, Assaf and Noa, 15 and 17 respectively, find 
themselves staring down the (silenced) barrels of kidnappers’ guns. The price 
of the family’s survival? Yael must dip her scalpel in poison when she 
operates, thus ensuring the prime minister’s death.

How does one fill the remaining five or so hours of drama? By a quite 
extraordinary set of events that included, in last Saturday’s triple-bill, 
head-hostage-taker Adam having to pop out to attend his own leaving party. 
Admittedly, it was a surprise party. But still! In any case, the timing was 
lucky because Yael also had to pop out in order to track down exactly who had 
kidnapped her – that would be Adam – and poke around his house, while still 
officially his captive.

And that’s not even the maddest bit of Hostages. So far, the security man, the 
gardener, a couple of coppers and a soldier have all turned up at the house and 
not managed to raise the alarm. (Admittedly, the security man was paid not to, 
but that’s still quite a lot of callers.) The family have hada secret phone and 
not organised their own rescue. And the hostage-takers have been basically 
going bananas: plotting against each other, going and blowing up shipping 
containers, quickly going and signing for a body at the morgue, 
hiding/finding/hacking each others’ USB drives, having a quick shag, 
contracting out a bit of video intelligence, and chatting up their charges. If 
an essential element of a kidnap drama is the tension created by everybody 
being in a room together for a long time, then Hostages didn’t get that memo.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F13%2Fbbc4s-hostages-is-completely-ludicrous-but-still-totally-gripping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F13%2F1426244589733%2Fd39173eb-364f-4a48-bb74-3a390fc80f12-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=BBC4's%20Hostages%20is%20completely%20ludicrous%20%20%E2%80%93%20but%20still%20totally%20gripping&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F13%2Fbbc4s-hostages-is-completely-ludicrous-but-still-totally-gripping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=BBC4%27s%20Hostages%20is%20completely%20ludicrous%20%20%E2%80%93%20but%20still%20totally%20gripping&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F13%2Fbbc4s-hostages-is-completely-ludicrous-but-still-totally-gripping%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F13%2F1426244589733%2Fd39173eb-364f-4a48-bb74-3a390fc80f12-1020x612.jpeg>
 Time to operate? Hostages. Photograph: BBC/Yetzira Ivrit 
Essentially then, the show is crackers. But I’ve really enjoyed the 
performances here – the kids, in particular, have been excellent, and it would 
be remiss not to mentionAyelet Zurer <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ayelet_Zurer>
 as calm, resourceful Yael, forced to improvise to save her kids and her 
conscience, struggling to do the right thing when every choice has terrible 
consequences. The end of episode seven, which culminated in her realisation 
that husband Eyal had been involved in the kidnapping, was properly gripping 
television. The idea that her husband would put her or the children through 
such an ordeal – even going so far as to move the spare key to prevent his kids 
escaping – in order to cover up his financial errors was both shocking and an 
excellent twist.

What should happen now is this: Noa will call the prime minister’s security 
man, and a clattering squadron of special ops police will come and sort out Mr 
Grumpy, with his sore leg, and his associates. But given that we have another 
three episodes to go, I wouldn’t bet on it being straightforward. In fact, I’d 
be disappointed if that turned out to be the case. I’m hoping everyone has to 
go out to some kind of formal dinner for the evening, then pick up some 
shopping or pay off some loan sharks, before heading back to the house to 
squabble about why some of the team have much better balaclavas than others.

Importantly, there’s still the “Why” to discuss. Why is Adam, personally 
thanked for his work by the prime minister, leading a plot to kill him? Why is 
he keeping a video that shows a rape in an Israeli embassy 30 years ago? (And 
wouldn’t a thumb-drive have been more sensible storage?) How does his wife fit 
into this story (I’m guessing something to do with the above). And what’s the 
deal with Ella, and why do I suspect she is pulling all the strings without 
Adam knowing?

I didn’t see the American remake of Hostages, starring Toni Colette, so I have 
no answers yet. (And please, respect the fact that other readers may be in the 
same boat in the comments below.) All I know is this: if any of the family or 
the kidnappers spend more than 10 minutes in the house across these final 
episodes – excepting the injured or dead – this won’t be the wonderfully 
ludicrous show I took it for.

• Hostages continues BBC4, 9pm Saturday. Catch up on iPlayer 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episodes/b03xzz1v>
 