
British television has long struggled to compete with the vast, moneyed 
productions of its US competitors. But this Sunday at theEmmys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/emmys> – the prestigious US TV awards 
– there will be a British contender in every main category.

The John le Carré adaptation The Night Manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/14/emmy-nominations-the-night-manager-bbc-luther-sherlock>
,Luther <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/luther>, Sherlock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/02/sherlocks-back-and-its-fast-fun-flashy-fantastic>
,War and Peace <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/war-and-peace>, 
Downton Abbey andCatastrophe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/12/catastrophe-commissioned-for-two-more-seasons-sharon-horgan-rob-delaney>
 have all put British drama on the US TV map over the past year, and have been 
rewarded with a string of nominations.

Emmys 2016: the full list of nominees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/14/emmys-2016-the-full-list-of-nominees-game-of-thrones>
It will be a particularly important night for the BBC, which picked up 22 
nominations across four critically acclaimed dramas that have been broadcast in 
the US. The Night Manager, Luther, Sherlock and War and Peace have all been 
triumphs for the corporation and validated their large production budgets. 
After it lost its most popular show,The Great British Bake Off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/14/will-channel-4-be-a-move-too-far-for-great-british-bake-off>
, to Channel 4 this week,Emmys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/14/emmys-2016-the-full-list-of-nominees-game-of-thrones>
 success would provide the BBC with a much-needed boost.


Tom Hiddleston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/24/tom-hiddleston-i-am-fascinated-by-private-vulnerability-the-night-manager>
,Idris Elba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/07/next-james-bond-tom-hardy-tom-hiddleston-idris-elba>
 and Benedict Cumberbatch are all up for best actor, and both Hugh Laurie and 
Olivia Coleman were nominated for their roles in The Night Manager. The Channel 
4 comedy Catastrophe is nominated in the writing category and ITV’sDownton Abbey
 <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/downton-abbey>, beloved by 
Americans, was granted a last hurrah for its final season with 10 nominations.

Simon Cornwell, producer of The Night Manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-night-manager>, said that 
reaching a global audience had been a constant consideration while making the 
show, and that it was reflective of the more ambitious climate that had 
recently gripped British drama commissioning.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fbbc-emmys-dramas-22-nominations-night-manager-luther-sherlock-war-peace-catastrophe-downton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6721ad9ae00c4fef5b133fe88edac61608b2d310%2F0_211_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=BBC%20set%20for%20big%20night%20at%20Emmys%20as%20four%20dramas%20vie%20for%2022%20nominations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fbbc-emmys-dramas-22-nominations-night-manager-luther-sherlock-war-peace-catastrophe-downton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=BBC%20set%20for%20big%20night%20at%20Emmys%20as%20four%20dramas%20vie%20for%2022%20nominations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fbbc-emmys-dramas-22-nominations-night-manager-luther-sherlock-war-peace-catastrophe-downton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6721ad9ae00c4fef5b133fe88edac61608b2d310%2F0_211_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
 Tom Hiddleston, who has been nominated for the best actor Emmy, in The Night 
Manager. Photograph: BBC/The Ink Factory/Des Willie 
“I think there was a time a few years ago where US TV was some way ahead of 
most UK drama in terms of creative ambition as well as scale,” said Cornwell. 
“But I think now you are very much seeing a renaissance in British drama. 
Generally, there is huge international demand for very high quality television 
and in the UK we are very well placed to step up and compete.”

The Night Manager was a co-production between the BBC and the US channel AMC, 
which enabled the show to be made with a much larger budget than BBC dramas 
would usually enjoy. Cornwell said there was much more of an appetite for such 
collaborations, which enabled British commissioners to be increasingly more 
ambitious with the scale of original drama.

The British domination of this year’s Emmy lists follows on from last year when
the BBC’s The Honourable Woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-honourable-woman> and its 
adaptation ofWolf Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/30/bbc-wolf-hall-bafta-tv-award-nominations-idris-elba>
 picked up numerous Emmy nominations. They, too, starred big-name actors 
recognisable to US audiences, Maggie Gyllenhaal andDamian Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/may/08/damian-lewis-henry-viii-bbc-mantel-wolf-hall-bring-up-bodies>
, and their success on both sides of the Atlantic paved the way for the BBC and 
other British broadcasters to continue to invest in original drama over the 
past year.

British crimewave hits America as edgy dramas make cult TV
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/27/uk-tv-crime-drama-us-america>
Ben Preston, editor of the Radio Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/aug/30/ben-preston-radio-times-interview>
, said while British television had always been able to compete with the US in 
terms of writing and directing, its recent ability to drew in A-list talent was 
a key factor in British TV’s “drama renaissance”.

“It shows we absolutely can compete, and are competing, really well. We’ve 
always known that our TV industry has got fantastic craft skills – sharp 
scripted, beautifully shot, beautifully costumed programmes – but what Luther,
Sherlock <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/sherlock> and The Night 
Manager have is star power, too. So for an American eye, it’s putting Hollywood 
names with British television and that takes it to a new level. And that shows 
what a force we are.”

“The Night Manager, Luther <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/luther> 
and Sherlock bring a slightly different perspective to drama than Americans are 
used to,” Preston said. “They are beyond the familiar, which gives them a 
cutting edge, makes them intriguing and is why American audiences are enjoying 
them so much.”

Jen Chaney, a TV columnist for the US magazine Vulture, said US interest in 
British drama had peaked in the past few years.

She said: “I do think more Americans are embracing and being exposed to 
British television, and I think there are two reasons why: the increase in 
accessibility to such programmes and, to a lesser extent, the popularity of
Downton Abbey <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/downton-abbey>.

“Downton Abbey was such a phenomenon that I do think it made some people start 
thinking about British television and eager to dive more deeply into it.”

Chaney said the calibre of talent in the nominated British shows spoke to a 
wider trend in television on both sides of the Atlantic, where television was 
no longer seen as a step down for actors. The presence of Hiddleston, Elba and 
Cumberbatch, she said, “catches the eyes of Emmy voters and makes them more 
likely to take notice”.
 