
It has become one of the few feelgood moments of 2016, a weekly instalment of 
delight that has attracted more than 12 million viewers every week.


As Planet Earth II <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p02544td> draws to its 
conclusion on Sunday, the producer of the spectacular wildlife series has 
hinted that the BBC could return with a third instalment – though it won’t be 
any time soon.

Mike Gunton told the Guardian that the broadcaster would be “crazy to count 
out” making Planet Earth III in future, given the enormous popularity of the 
programme.

However, he added, “we would also be crazy to say it will be here in three 
years’ time or even five years’ time”. Gunton, who is also creative director of 
the BBC’s natural history unit, said one of the reasons for the series’ success 
is that “it does feel the right length of time to revisit the original 
conceit”, a decade after the original Planet Earth was screened in 2006.

BBC bosses have been thrilled by the huge audiences watching the programme, 
which is narrated bySir David Attenborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/david-attenborough>, on Sunday 
evenings on BBC1 and via iPlayer. More than 2 million of the 12 million total 
weekly UK audience are in the prized 16-34 age range, meaning the programme has 
attracted more young adult viewers than The X Factor.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fbbc-planet-earth-iii-producer-david-attenborough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81f109cd8f0cc0aa4b3811e4e921360882df638f%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=BBC%20could%20make%20Planet%20Earth%20III%2C%20says%20producer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fbbc-planet-earth-iii-producer-david-attenborough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=BBC%20could%20make%20Planet%20Earth%20III%2C%20says%20producer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fbbc-planet-earth-iii-producer-david-attenborough%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81f109cd8f0cc0aa4b3811e4e921360882df638f%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 A desert lion hunts a giraffe in Planet Earth II. Photograph: Screen Grab/BBC 
It has also been an enormous hit internationally, where it has already been 
screened in several countries and sold to air in many more. In China, only a 
few days after launching on an online service, the first two episodes and their 
accompanying trailers had been viewed 61m times on the digital platform 
Tencent, while a short clip from the first episode, featuringhatchling iguanas 
being chased by racer snakes in the Galapagos islands 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B3OjfK0t1XM>, has attracted 84m views on the 
Chinese social site Weibo alone.

In the US, where the series will be broadcast next year, the clip was featured 
by the comedian Ellen deGeneres 
<http://people.com/tv/ellen-degeneres-tearfully-shares-message-hope-following-election/>
 as a message of hope following the presidential election: “That little baby 
iguana got away, and we’re going to do that,” she told viewers of her eponymous 
show. “If you feel there are snakes coming at you from every direction … No 
matter what your snake is, there is hope for your little iguana.”

Gunton said he was “slightly scratching [his] head” to explain the series’ 
success, though Attenborough’s involvement – “he’s above a national treasure, 
he’s almost deified now” – was obviously central to it. “The stars have 
obviously aligned in a very unusual way. Obviously I would like to hope it’s 
the quality of the programmes, but I also think this is a kind of moment. You 
get a sense from talking to people that they have been worried about the world, 
and this is an opportunity to see some of the wonders of the world and perhaps 
take their minds off that.”

One key factor was the sheer resources dedicated to the project, with six 
producers each given more than three years to work on a single hour of 
television. Projects on this scale “just take that long”, said Gunton. “Part of 
it is the sheer logistical necessity of getting people from A to B. If you are 
going to spend a month or six weeks filming in Siberia, and then you have to 
get to Namibia, it physically takes you a long time.

“Also, it takes an enormous amount of time to research it. You can’t just go 
and look on Wikipedia. Often the stuff we film has not been published, it’s 
stuff we hear about through word of mouth. So it’s a huge amount of resources, 
but it’s the only way it can be done.”

He described Sunday night’s final episode, which for the first time in a 
landmark BBC series focuses on cities as a wildlife habitat, as “one of the 
most fantastic and thought-provoking films we’ve done for years”. Though the 
landscapes of New York City, Mumbai and Singapore are familiar, the episode 
contains some of the most remarkable footage of the series, includinga 
nocturnal hunt by urban leopards <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p04jpp81> 
while nonchalant teenagers amble by, and an astonishing sequence from a town in 
southern France featuring pigeons being hunted by giant Wels catfish – a river 
bottom-dwelling fish that has adapted only within the last decade to stalk and 
seize pigeons from shallow riverbanks.

Fredi Devas, the producer of the cities episode, said it had been incredibly 
difficult to track down stories for the episode, because in many cases urban 
wildlife had barely been studied by researchers. “The other thing about cities 
is they change so fast,” he said. A promising lead about a bear that had 
learned to push wheelie bins into a quiet, unlit car park before scavenging 
from them had to be abandoned after the restaurant it was raiding put clamps on 
the bin – “and it was suddenly all over. So you have to be very reactive.”

The episode has a powerful conservation message, and includes moving footage 
of hatching turtles, confused by electric lights, making their way not to the 
nearby sea but on to roads and into drains where they perish in their hundreds. 
“It would be naive to make a film about urban wildlife that only said, ‘Isn’t 
this a great new habitat for wildlife?’, because for so many animals it has 
created so much suffering,” said Devas.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fso-you-think-you-know-david-attenborough-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20you%20think%20you%20know%20David%20Attenborough%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fso-you-think-you-know-david-attenborough-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So%20you%20think%20you%20know%20David%20Attenborough%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Fso-you-think-you-know-david-attenborough-video&media=>
So you think you know David Attenborough? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/video/2016/may/08/so-you-think-you-know-david-attenborough-video>
All other cherished creatures aside, there is one rare beast that is 
particularly precious to the BBC, namely the now 90-year-old Attenborough. 
Gunton acknowledged that natural history programming would inevitably change 
when Attenborough finally opted to pack up his safari hat, but cautioned 
against making assumptions about when that would be. He recalled his first 
departmental meeting after joining the natural history unit in 1987, when “the 
head of department said: ‘So, first on the agenda: a replacement forDavid 
Attenborough <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/david-attenborough>. We 
need to think about who is going to take over his mantle.’

“That was almost 30 years ago. And if you had any unit meeting today you would 
probably ask the same question, and you would probably also have the same 
answer. Which is that you can’t [replace him], and it’s almost pointless trying 
to.

“We love working with him and I think he loves working with us, and we want 
that to last as long as possible. When he decides he doesn’t want to do it any 
more, we will have to rethink how we make these programmes – because you can’t 
replace him.”
 