

Aidan Turner will return in a third series of Poldark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/poldark>, the BBC has confirmed.


The period drama remake was one of the most talked-about programmes of 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/dec/31/poldark-aidan-turner-topless-scything-voted-top-tv-moment-2015-bbc-radio-times>
 in which the topic of topless scything became an unlikely national obsession.

Its 10-part second series, adapted by Debbie Horsfield from the novels by 
Winston Graham, will air onBBC1 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc1> later 
this year.

BBC1’s Poldark to keep his shirt on in second series
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/15/bbc1s-poldark-keep-shirt-on-second-series-aidan-turner>
The third series commission, announced on Wednesday, means its new incarnation 
will come close to matching the number of episodes of the 29-strong original 
run in 1975.

Executive producer Elizabeth Kilgarriff said: “Series two promises to take the 
audience on another fantastic rollercoaster ride and we’re thrilled to know 
that the story won’t end there.

“It’s a testament to Debbie’s brilliant storytelling and the passion of the 
Mammoth team that Poldark will be returning for a third series with yet more 
twists and turns for these much loved characters.”

Turner stars as Ross Poldark alongside Eleanor Tomlinson as his wife Demelza 
in the drama which peaked with more than 9 million viewers in BBC1’s Sunday 
night drama slot last year.

Damien Timmer, managing director of its producer, Mammoth Screen, said: 
“Poldark is a passion project for all of us, and it’s with real excitement that 
we prepare for both the launch of series two and our return to Cornwall to 
shoot series three.

“Winston Graham and Debbie Horsfield’s extraordinary flair for storytelling 
means the saga of Ross, his friends and enemies will go to even more thrilling 
places.”

New additions to the cast for the second series include former Midsomer 
Murders star John Nettles, who will play one of the county’s wealthiest 
landowners, as well as Gabriella Wilde (Endless Love) and W1A’s Hugh Skinner.

However, fans hoping for more scenes of Turner scything away with his top off 
are likely to be in for a disappointment after programme makers said the 
eponymous hero would keep his shirt on 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/15/bbc1s-poldark-keep-shirt-on-second-series-aidan-turner>
 in the next series.

 