
BBC Trust chair Rona Fairhead <https://www.theguardian.com/media/rona-fairhead>
 has said BBC director general Tony Hall gave her “specific assurance” about 
bullying at the corporation following claims that former Top Gear presenter 
Chris Evans was “out of control”.


Evans stood down from Top Gear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/top-gear> on Monday amid falling 
ratings and unrelenting newspaper criticism after he took over from Jeremy 
Clarkson on the BBC2 motoring show.

Chris Evans quits BBC Top Gear after just one series
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/04/chris-evans-quits-bbc-top-gear-after-one-series>
Evans has described the allegations about his behaviour as “nonsensical, 
facile and fictitious”.

Fairhead, appearing before MPs on the House of Commons culture, media and 
sport select committee on Wednesday 
<http://www.parliamentlive.tv/Event/Index/39036842-b633-40c5-a168-5ce4dab1ff88>
, was asked about Evans and whether the matter had been discussed by the trust.

“There were allegations about bullying at the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>. Obviously it’s an operational matter 
but I have regular discussions with the DG,” she said.

“He assured me, he gave me specific assurance [there was] no unprofessional 
behaviour, he was satisfied with that.

“As far as any other allegations it would be inappropriate for me to talk 
about a member of staff.”

The trust chair, who will go on to be the first chair of the BBC’s new unitary 
board when it comes into effect in the new year, assured MPs that she was 
“absolutely clear the processes are in place” to deal with such allegations.


She said there was “absolute clarity” that the BBC was a place where “people 
can feel free to raise their hand and it gets properly looked at”.

Evans struggled with a barrage of newspaper stories alleging poor behaviour, 
most recently one alleging sexual harassment in the 1990s.

The presenter could be questioned by officers from London’s Metropolitan police
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/04/bbc-chris-evans-police-questioning-radio-2-sex-assault-allegations>
 in the next few days. Evans has denied the claims and previously said the 
reports were a “witch-hunt” and that allegations of bullying were ridiculous.

Speaking before the launch of the new series of Top Gear in May, Evans said he 
was at the centre of a “perfect storm” of tabloid criticism.


Chris Evans says tabloid Top Gear criticism was ‘perfect storm’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/25/chris-evans-says-perfect-storm-of-top-gear-criticism-facile-and-fictitious>
“Some of – almost all – of the observations from certain aspects of the press 
have been so nonsensical and so facile and fictitious,” he said. “All the 
people they were talking about in lots of the stories know the truth.”
 