
The BBC has learned lessons from its £100m Digital Media Initiative fiasco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/media-blog/2014/feb/03/bbc-digital-media-initiative-failed-mark-thompson>
 but there remains a risk of confusion and lack of transparency over some of 
its most high-risk projects, an influential committee of MPs has said.


The House of Commons public accounts committee said on Friday that the BBC had 
“strengthened its oversight” of projects costing hundreds of millions of pounds 
but warned there was “more work for theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> to do”.

In particular, it said it was “not convinced the BBC has a sufficiently robust 
process” for identifying high-risk projects, and there “remains a risk of 
confusion about who is accountable for the delivery of critical projects”.

It also said the BBC was “not always sufficiently clear, early enough, about 
what it expects its individual projects do deliver” and added there should be 
“greater transparency when problems occur”.

BBC's new EastEnders set delayed until 2020
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/10/bbcs-new-eastenders-set-delayed-until-2020>
The findings echo a report by the National Audit Office in May which said the 
BBC had improved oversight of its portfolio of critical projects following the 
“serious shortcomings” of DMI but said there were still issues that needed to 
be addressed.

It revealed that the BBC’s hopes of dragging EastEnders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/eastenders> out of the 1980s with a 
new set for the BBC1 soap costing at least £15m had been delayed by more than 
two years.

It was one of three of the BBC’s most strategically important and high-risk 
projects to have been delayed by two years or more.

The delays were revealed in a National Audit Office (NAO) report on eight BBC 
projects costing a total of £885m that are estimated to generate savings of 
£1.9bn. The figures do not include the new EastEnders set because contracts are 
subject to ongoing negotiations.

Expected to be completed by August 2018, the new EastEnders facility will not 
now not be completed until October 2020. The main set will be ready by May 2019.

BBC director general Tony Hall and Anne Bulford, recently appointed the BBC’s 
deputy director general,appeared before MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/25/bbc-tony-hall-nao-scrutiny-editorial-freedom-board>
 on the public accounts commitee in May.

A BBC spokesman said: “We’re glad the committee recognises the significant 
progress we have made and there’s more we continue to do.

“Our critical projects are delivering real benefits for the licence fee payer 
by making significant savings, such as through better use of our property, and 
delivering important new services like the more personal BBC millions are 
benefitting from online.”
 