
The BBC is to make a six-part adaptation of Les Misérables with the team 
behind War and Peace, including producerHarvey Weinstein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/harvey-weinstein> and screenwriter Andrew 
Davies.


The new six-hour drama will be based on the 19th century classic novel by 
Victor Hugo <https://www.theguardian.com/books/victor-hugo>, rather than the 
award-winning musical, and will air on BBC1.

Weinstein described Les Misérables as “one of the greatest novels of all time” 
with “contemporary relevance to what’s going on in the world today.”

Andrew Davies: my Les Misérables will be nothing like 'shoddy farrago' musical
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/27/andrew-davies-my-les-miserables-will-be-nothing-like-shoddy-farrago-musical>
Davies, who adapted the original version of House of Cards for BBC1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/observer/comment/story/0,6903,796622,00.html> and 
was an executive producer on its Netflix remake, said: “Les Misérables is a 
huge iconic title. Most of us are familiar with the musical version which only 
offers a fragmentary outline of its story.


“I am thrilled to have the opportunity of doing real justice to Victor Hugo at 
last by adapting his masterpiece in a six-hour version for theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>, with the same team who made War and 
Peace.”


Announcing the new adaptation on Thursday, the BBC said the story of former 
convict Jean Valjean and police officer Javert’s cat-and-mouse relationship, 
against the epic backdrop of France at a time of civil unrest, had a “striking 
intensity and relevance to us today”.

Charlotte Moore, director of BBC content, said: “Andrew Davies’ extraordinary 
skill for adaptation will bring the world famous Les Misérables into powerful 
focus for a modern audience with a multi-layered re-telling of Victor Hugo’s 
masterpiece.


“BBC1 viewers can expect the same quality and scale from the team behind War 
and Peace in this epic tale of redemption and the healing power of love.”

The series will be made by BBC Studios and independent producer Lookout Point, 
in association with WeinsteinTelevision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television>.

The three partners previously worked together on Davies’ adaptation of Leo 
Tolstoy’s War and Peace, which aired on BBC1 earlier this year.

Clive James: how did the BBC’s War And Peace measure up?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/13/clive-james-bbc-war-and-peace-measure-up>
Weinstein said: “Victor Hugo’s Les Misérables is one of the greatest novels of 
all time – and while the musical is one of my favorites this will be completely 
different.

“An intense and serious drama that will find contemporary relevance to what’s 
going on in the world today. I’m thrilled to be reunited with Faith Penhale and 
Simon Vaughan, my partners from War and Peace, with Charlotte Moore from the 
BBC, and of course, with Andrew Davies who wrote War and Peace.

“I think the BBC and Weinstein Television collaboration are a new paradigm in 
the telling of classics – they’re modern and yet respectful. And, with the 
exception of James Bond, nobody does it better than Andrew Davies.”

BBC Worldwide will distribute the series with Weinstein Television 
distributing in the US and China.
 