
Twitter’s new chief executive, Jack Dorsey, must hope that none of the 336 
peopleabout to be let go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/13/twitter-job-losses-global-restructuring-plan-jack-dorsey>
 by the struggling company are as valuable as John Bauer.

In 2002, Bauer was a programmer at Google who tweaked some code and turned the 
company it into a cash-generating machine. The tweak allowed key words typed 
into the search engine to appear in bold when they flashed up in adverts, 
alongside the search results. It more than quadrupled the number of times 
people clicked on the ads, and ensured Google’s financial future.

Noting Bauer’s success, Dorsey could certainly use a simple software 
alteration that would suddenly turn the social network profitable. But it is 
the software engineers – normally the most venerated at any Silicon Valley 
company – who are being hit hardest in Dorsey’s layoffs: almost all of the cuts 
from the 4,100 strong workforce are coming from its “product and engineering” 
division, rather than in marketing or sales.

“We feel strongly that engineering will move much faster with a smaller and 
nimbler team, while remaining the biggest percentage of our workforce,” Dorsey 
told employees in an email. Almost at the same time as cutting staff,Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> rolled out its “Moments” 
service that aims to collect tweets and links about noteworthy news events, and 
is considering tweets where links and names aren’t included in its 
140-character limit.

But culling engineering jobs is a shocking act in a field where poaching is 
commonplace, such is the intense competition for staff. Ego-pumped rivals try 
hard to dismiss any loss they suffer to a competitor. Or in the case of Elon 
Musk, founder of the electric vehicle maker Tesla, a rival such as Apple is 
downgraded to jumped-up rival. “They have hired people we’ve fired,” Musk said 
recently about Apple havingpoached a number of 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/09/elon-musk-apple-graveyard-fired-tesla-staff>
 key members of his staff. “We always jokingly call Apple the ‘Tesla 
graveyard’. If you don’t make it at Tesla, you go work at Apple.

It is no accident that Musk sounds like a football manager cutting loose 
disappointing players via transfer deals. Top programmers are now the Premier 
League footballers of the computing world. And the reach of the computing world 
is extending everywhere, from phones to cars to buildings, which fosters demand 
for software programmers.

Like footballers, top programmers are getting used to being mollycoddled: 
according to jobs site Glassdoor, which tracks salaries, a software engineer 
starting at Twitter, Facebook, Apple or Google could expect to be paid at least 
$127,000 (£82,000) annually, with medical insurance, free canteen food and 
holidays thrown in, as well as share options that could boost their income by 
50%. For senior software engineers, the starting figure can be $153,000 
(£98,000), which pushes beyond $250,000 (£161,000) after cash and stock 
bonuses. By contrast, salaries at Microsoft and Amazon, further up the coast in 
near Seattle, begin at around $100,000 (£64,000).

Despite the high pay levels, however, only the very best make a significant 
difference to a company’s performance. Studies fromas far back as 1968 
<http://www.construx.com/10x_Software_Development/Productivity_Variations_Among_Software_Developers_and_Teams__The_Origin_of_10x>
 have found that the best programmers produce code that runs up to 10 times 
faster than an alternative offered by an average yet experienced programmer.

Sometimes, according to Steve McConnell of Construx Software, one person can 
make all the difference. When he was at Boeing in the mid-1980s, he says, a 
critical project with 80 coders was near to missing its deadline. According to 
company lore, “they moved most of the 80 people off that project and brought in 
one guy who finished all the coding and delivered the software on time,” he 
says.

But another interpretation of the Twitter cuts is that they they represent a 
peak for programmer power. If Silicon Valley is heading for a crashas 
valuations for companies like Snapchat soar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/12/snapchat-worth-15bn-after-alibaba-invesment>
, then there will be consequences for its star employees. After the dot-com 
bust in 2000, the market for programmers cratered; many left the area 
altogether.

There is no danger of a repeat, insists Michael Solomon, managing partner at 
10X Management in New York, a talent agency for top programmers. “We’re looking 
at a shortage that’s projected into the future as a growing, growing problem,” 
he says.

“Just yesterday we had a call with a significantly growing startup that was 
looking for us to bring in seven people because they just can’t fill the gaps. 
Twitter might be changing its focus, but there’s no glut.”

Solomon says that the problem is compounded because there’s still no easy way 
to identify one of those “10x” programmers, other than rigorously looking at 
work they’ve done. “It’s like building a house,” he says. “Some people make it 
beautiful - but it’s a year late. Some finish on time – but it doesn’t hold up. 
I would like there to be a magic test. But there isn’t.”

That points to Dorsey’s problem – and opportunity: if he keeps the right 
people, Twitter might improve much faster than it has for years and all with 
just a few lines of code. Provided Twitter’s equivalent of John Bauer is not on 
the redundancy list.
 