
The announcement of the government’s Help to Save initiative 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/14/budget-2016-labour-attacks-governments-help-to-save-scheme>
 as part of Wednesday’sbudget  <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/budget>will be 
of little comfort to those people living pay cheque to pay cheque – an 
increasingly significant proportion of the population.

Almost half of UK adults have less than £500 set aside for emergencies. The 
Tories hope to combat this by rewarding employees on in-work benefits who are 
able to put aside £50 a month with a top-up of up to £1,200 after four years.

However, as Labour has pointed out, low wages and cuts to benefits tend to 
make saving for the future quite difficult. Take comfort, though, in the 
knowledge that your inability to save money is probably your own fault.

We can stop this renewed attack on disabled people | Owen Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/17/disabled-people-government-vulnerable-budget-labour>
For instance: anyone of my age who is trying to save for a deposit will be 
familiar with the portrayal of our generation as spendthrifts. Arecent article 
in the Financial Times 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/94e97eee-ce9a-11e5-831d-09f7778e7377.html#axzz435wOJm69>
 entitled “why millennials go on holiday rather than saving for a pension” sums 
up this perception of people in their 20s and 30s as shallow and profligate. 
“Although their financial prognosis is poor, the millennials are a very 
powerful consumer group,” it said. “The concept of saving seems so futile, they 
spend freely, insisting on a #yolo lifestyle (translation for oldies — you only 
live once) despite their restricted means.”

This naturally provoked widespread ire from those younger people spending up 
to two-thirds of their incomes on preposterously high rents. Once you factor in 
high living costs and student loan repayments, then you’re lucky if you have 
enough left for a cocktail at the end of the month. But wait, big spender – you 
weren’t actually thinking about having that cocktail, were you? Because the 
moment you do, some busybody will almost certainly come along and point out 
that that’s £7 that could be in your ISA, you squanderer.

The implication is that unless you’re sitting on a bare, stained mattress in 
an unheated hovel and knitting yourself a hair shirt, you have no right to 
whinge about the wealth gap.

Such beady-eyed interest in the spending habits of others is a personal sore 
point, as I was pulled up by several readers last week for an articleI wrote 
about generational injustice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/12/millennial-baby-boomer-trade-places-stab-envy>
. My crimes? Taking a taxi and attending a party, expenses amounting to less 
than £20, which, granted, when I was on welfare would have been a huge sum, but 
which are now affordable in small doses.

But never mind the rampant social inequalities at work in our country as a 
result of the buy-to-let boom, rising property prices, and the unfair 
concentration of wealth at the top – if I never get on the property ladder, it 
is probably down to my own improvidence.

These days, you’re at risk of this particular brand of supercilious financial 
monitoring regardless of your economic situation. I was once told that, despite 
growing up on benefits, we had not been “that poor” because we had a car 
(actually a Motability vehicle provided by the government for my disabled 
brother). All you need to hear is one mention of “flatscreen TVs” to know this 
unhelpful genre of interference is a class issue too.

It’s as though all working-class people need to do in order to drag their 
families out of poverty is to restrain themselves from entering a hire-purchase 
agreement on a telly.

It’s not helped by our media output, what with poverty porn such as Benefits 
Britain <http://www.channel5.com/show/benefits-britain-life-on-the-dole>, The 
Big Benefits Handout 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/tv/news/the-big-benefits-handout-producers-say-tv-show-that-gives-unemployed-people-26000-lump-sum-is-not-a6849811.html>
,Benefits Street <http://www.channel4.com/programmes/benefits-street>, and 
Benefits by the Sea <http://www.channel5.com/show/benefits-by-the-sea-jaywick> 
reinforcing the “scrounger” narrative, and rightwing newspapers 
disproportionately highlighting cases of benefit fraud. The left would do well 
to admit that such people exist – anyone who has lived in a poor area has seen 
“problem families” who spend their lives on the dole.

That’s the genius of the narrative – it takes what some of us know to be true 
and multiplies it to stigmatise whole demographics and to maximise social 
divisions.

It’s a depressing state of affairs that is in part down to a culture of 
conspicuous consumption amplified by social media. If it has become the norm to 
flaunt one’s spending, then it has also become the norm to comment on the 
finances of others. There no longer seems to be much faith that the majority of 
those who say they are struggling really are doing their best to keep their 
heads above water, even with the occasional treat – whether that be a packet of 
fags, a telly or a night out – to make life not just bearable but a little bit 
nice.

As part of this “something for nothing” narrative, the status of disabled 
people is being transformed in the cultural mindset to that of “undeserving 
poor” – a group who just need to pull their socks up. The government is 
succeeding in its quest to make being skint a sign of a lack of personal 
responsibility: you have not done enough; you are parasitic, flawed, a drain on 
society. A failure.

If it has become the norm to flaunt one’s spending then it has also become the 
norm to comment on the finances of others

Such attitudes have unpleasant consequences that go far beyond a newspaper 
columnist being told off for having a jar. Earlier this month Matthew Brinton, 
a rough sleeper, was dragged through thepages of the Daily Mail 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/unitedkingdom/comments/49nlix/how_the_daily_mail_bought_hatred_to_my_home_town/>
 for allegedly owning a “£50,000 Audi TT”, a claim that was examined in more 
depth only when a local took to Reddit to debunk it. Thebacklash after the 
article 
<http://www.cornishguardian.co.uk/fear-life-says-Newquay-beggar-Matthew-Brinton/story-28874321-detail/story.html>
 saw a vulnerable, mentally ill homeless man with a drug problem receive death 
threats.

In November, I went up to Manchester to cover the homelessness crisis there, 
and volunteers told me that they were frequently berated by the public for 
handing out food. Recordings of disabilityhate crime rose 41% in one year 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/hate-crime-against-disabled-people-rises-41-per-cent-in-one-year-a6713546.html>
. A small survey by theDisability Hate Crime Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/22/combat-disability-hate-crime-understand-people-commit>
 conducted last year found that 11 out of 60 comments said attackers mentioned 
“benefits” or “scrounging”, and I have no doubt that number will rise as the 
skewed reporting continues.

Perhaps it’s worth thinking about that before concluding that someone’s 
spending habits warrant the benefit of a stranger’s interfering commentary. 
Because rather than having a sense of entitlement, most people are good and 
just want what’s best for their families.

Can those who criticise not ask themselves, next time someone less well off 
expresses despair about their situation, how much courage – especially in this 
climate – it took for them to say out loud that they cannot afford to save, to 
eat, or even to live. And is it really, honestly, such a challenge to believe 
them?
 