
As a neurosurgeon at Johns Hopkins in Baltimore, Carson was an admired and 
most admirable figure but, despite his avuncular manner, as a political figure 
he’s a demagogue at least as reprehensible as the more obviously buffoonish
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. His anti-Muslim 
remarks on Sunday were a particularly striking example of why he is unqualified 
to be president of the United States.

Ben Carson says no Muslim should ever become US president
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/20/ben-carson-no-muslim-us-president-trump-obama>
On Meet the Press, Carson was asked about the controversy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/19/donald-trump-obama-muslim-rally-question>
 ignited byTrump’s refusal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/18/trump-fails-to-correct-questioner-who-calls-obama-muslim-and-not-even-american>
 to challenge or correct a questioner who claimed that “[w]e have a problem in 
this country. It’s called Muslims. We know our current president is one.” 
Carson apparently decided that, like Trump, it was neither politically 
expedient nor in keeping with his personal philosophy to stand up for religious 
freedoms and   instead asserted 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/meet-the-press/ben-carson-does-not-believe-muslim-should-be-president-n430431>
 that he “would not advocate that we put a Muslim in charge of this nation” and 
that Islam was not consistent with the US constitution. 

Carson’s attempt to wrap his bigotry in the constitution suggests that, like 
the subject ofthe classic Onion story 
<http://www.theonion.com/article/area-man-passionate-defender-of-what-he-imagines-c-2849>
, he’s a passionate defender of what he believes the constitution to be.  The 
real constitution mandates that “No religious Test shall ever be required as a 
Qualification to any Office or public Trust under the United States”, and also 
protects the free exercise of religion while prohibiting the establishment of 
religion. Carson’s religious litmus test is in fact contrary to both the letter 
and the spirit of the constitution and the secular state it sought to establish.


This isn’t the first time that Carson has expressed the view that some 
religious minorities cannot  be really “American”.  Defending the Kentucky 
county clerk Kim Davis, who wasrecently held in contempt of court 
<http://theweek.com/articles/576273/no-kim-davis-wasnt-standing-principle> and 
jailed in defense of the sacred principle of getting paid while not going your 
job, Carsonclaimed 
<http://www.salon.com/2015/09/09/megyn_kelly_trips_up_patently_unprepared_ben_carson_with_softball_question_about_kim_davis_and_slippery_slopes/>
 that Congress should protect public officials who refuse to serve gays and 
lesbians because the United States is a “Judeo-Christian nation” – despite the 
myriad citizens of this nation who neither practice Judaism or Christianity nor 
come from families that did.


Ben Carson's anti-Muslim comments: what have the other candidates said?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/21/ben-carson-anti-muslim-comment-other-candidates>
It’s pretty hard to claim that you’re standing up for Kim Davis’s lawbreaking 
on the grounds of “religious freedom” while arguing that an entire class of 
people should be excluded from political office on the basis of their faith. 
But defenses of Davis are obviously just an attempt to protect those with 
prejudice against gays and lesbians from the consequences of that prejudice, 
not to protect their “religious freedom”. Nothing makes that clearer than the 
extent to which the Republican base responds to the anti-Muslim bigotry 
expressed by carnival barkers like Carson and Trump.  


Attempting to square their attempts to legalize religious persecution with 
their constitutional duties, some Republican public officials have argued that 
Muslims are not really entitled to religious freedom because Islam is a 
political philosophy, not a religion.  “Islam is not even a religion”Oklahoma 
state representative John Bennett 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/09/22/oklahoma-john-bennett-islam_n_5863084.html>
 said: “It’s a social political system that uses a deity to advance its agenda 
of global conquest.” Jody Hice, a Republican member of the House of 
Representatives from Georgia,has written 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/06/23/jody-hice-islam_n_5523166.html> that 
Islam is “is a complete geo-political structure and, as such, does not deserve 
First Amendment protection.”


These arguments are self-evidently silly.  As the legal scholar and writer 
Eugene Volokh observed 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/volokh-conspiracy/wp/2014/09/22/islam-is-not-even-a-religion-it-is-a-social-political-system-that-uses-a-deity-to-advance-its-agenda-of-global-conquest/>
, under this logic “much of Christianity would have not even been a religion 
for much of its history.”  And the idea that Islam isn’t really a religion is 
particularly rich coming from people who find, by remarkable coincidence, that 
the Biblehappens to mandate everything 
<http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/2009/12/give-em-enough-rope-2> in the most 
recent platform of the Texas Republican Party.


But what’s worrisome is that this open bigotry has been politically profitable 
to the aspirants to the Republican throne. Two notably unqualified candidates 
have ridden this kind of rhetoric  – in Trump’s case, combined with 
consistently hateful remarks about Latinos – to the top of the polls. (Carson, 
though he has been hovering around the top of the Republican primary polls, 
appears to be fading 
<http://www.cnn.com/2015/09/20/politics/carly-fiorina-donald-trump-republican-2016-poll/index.html>
 behind failed CEO and senatorial candidate Carly Fiorina).

Neither Trump nor Carson will likely be the eventual Republican nominee. But 
whoever is the nominee will have to appeal to some of these voters  and, as 
casual anti-Muslim bigotrymoves closer to the Republican mainstream 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2015/09/how-conservatives-explain-away-islamophobia.html>
, the political consequences for our secular democracy could be serious indeed. 
 
 