 Everyone in Egypt knows, the folk tale of the village girl who became a 
prostitute and was decapitated by her brother as a righteous punishment for 
bringing shame upon her family. It is a dramatic story of wounded male honour 
vindicated, and as universally familiar as Cinderella is here. Like Cinderella, 
it accurately reveals the way women are perceived and treated in the society 
from whose collective imagination it sprang.
"Feminising" fairy tales is always treated as a great joke in Britain. 
Certainly however insulting the assumptions behind it, there are worse fates 
than being snatched from the scullery by a prince with a glass slipper - being 
decapitated for prostitution for one. But when Laila Abou Saif adapted the 
Egyptian story for a production in her small Cairo theatre, it went down rather 
well. She made the avenging brother into a paranoiac and the sister a simple 
girl betrayed by a rich man she loved.

"Audiences came out agreeing that it was the seducer who should have been 
killed. I am afraid no one went so far as to suggest that the brother deserved 
punishment, but it was progress in a sense," she said.

As a scholar, a writer, a teacher and a director of both plays and films, Ms 
Abou Saif has set herself the task of living and working as an independent 
woman and a feminist in an Islamic society.

Even in Egypt where women have been freer for longer than almost anywhere in 
the Arab world, it has not been easy personally or professlonally. She has paid 
for her success and her freedom in slurs on her moral character and in the loss 
of the theatre she created.

She was in London last week to work on an ATV film investigation of the case 
of the Saudi Arabian princess who was put to death two years ago for adultery. 
The film, provisionally called Death of a Princess and scheduled for 
transmission in the spring, seeks to unravel the complicated background to the 
event which horrified Western newspaper readers when it eventually came to 
light, six months after it happened. It has been a huge undertaking for the 
producer/director, Antony Thomas, and promises to take us rather further than 
any account so far towards understanding the religious and cultural realities 
involved.

It is a very important, very honest thing this film is trying to do, to 
articulate and analyse the conflicting pressures on women in an Islamic society 
and the effect of exposure to outside influences," Laila Abou Saif says. In the 
film she appears as an actor, but her interest in it goes far beyond that of a 
performer, Saudia Arabia is not Egypt, but in a sense at least the princess's 
story is also Laila's own and that of other Arab women.

At the age of 38, she lives alone in Cairo - an uncommon, scandalous 
condition. "I am single, and I am free. I don't conform, Our society is tribal 
whether in the city or not, the family is everything and a woman living alone 
is highly controversial. As a woman director I have to be aggressive, which is 
a pity but a fact."

She is the eldest child of a doctor and university teacher who made his way 
out of poverty by means of scholarships. "He wanted a boy and what a 
disappointment - I was not a boy! From then on I wanted to prove that I was as 
good." At 17 she was betrothed to someone she did not know (her mother fixed it 
up) and found she was expected to leave university after one year to get 
married.

"My future father-in-law came and told me he had no objection to me finishing 
my education! It angered me a lot. Anyway, I kept my betrothed waiting for 
years, eventually married him, but it only lasted a year. Then it took me five 
years to get a divorce. I learned quickly that the way to independence was 
economic."

She got degrees at the American University in Cairo, and the University of 
Chicago, a PhD at Illinois, taught acting and drama in both Egypt and the 
United States and over the last 15 years has directed and acted in numerous 
plays and a couple of films as well as lecturing and writing articles, theatre 
notices and a book on the development of Egyptian comedy. She now teaches 
acting at the Egyptian Academy of Dramatic Art.

But even economic independence is not liberation, certainly not in a society 
where the conduct or women is still largely governed by Islamic religious laws. 
Laila Abou Sauf herself is a Coptic Christian, but it makes no difference.

"Islam is not just a religious phenomenon, it is also a cultural one." she, 
says. "But why should the Sharia, the religious code, be applied to women when 
it is not applied to commerce or other aspects of secular life? It is unfair. 
The great challenge is to secularise.

"Islam is really no more repressive of women than Christianity or Judaism, in 
he sense that they are all patriarchal religions. I don't think that the spirit 
of the Koran is repressive at all. In its day it was revolutionary when it came 
to women - restricting unlimited polygamy to four wives at a time, for example. 
Don't forget Mohammed himself was married to an independent business woman. But 
the spirit has been interpreted by men.

Laila rejoices in the revolution that overthrew the Shah but is deeply opposed 
to the direction in which the Ayatollah Khomeini is taking it in respect of the 
women. Last month, she was the only Arab woman in a delegation of 18 Western 
feminists which visited Iran. At an audience with the reputedly "liberal" 
Ayatollah Taleghani, a senior religious leader who has since died, she and the 
other women veiled from head to foot, had to sit on the floor while the 
Ayatollah sat above them on a couch.

"I am an Egyptian woman and l have never done that before," she said.

She reacted furiously to a question about how it was that many Iranian women, 
who had been educated in the west, were now apparently embracing the dismal 
chador and the other interdictions which Iran's mullahs were enunciating in the 
new revolutionary order.

"How can a woman imagine that another woman would welcome segregation and 
discrimination?" she demanded. "What is more, it is ridiculous to assume that 
it is only exposure to Western culture that makes a woman strive for liberation.

"My grandmother, a simple village woman, from the South of Egypt, fought for 
her liberation years and years ago when she asked for her coffee to be brought 
in at the some time as her husband's. In that context, that was a revolutionary 
demand and she did not learn that in the West. Suddenly, something breaks in 
you, spontaneously. You want to be free, to be a person, a woman, wherever you 
are."

Iran makes her all the angrier since, she says, it is giving the world the 
wrong idea about what Arab women may strive for.

When she came home from Iran she openly criticised Khomeini and was savagely 
attacked for it. She has just won a libel suit against the magazine October 
which attempted to smear her through allusions to her personal life.

"There is a growing fundamentalism all through the the Islamic world and Iran 
is reinforcing it though waves too are coming from Libya and Saudi Arabia," she 
said.

"It would be easy to cop out and go and live permanently in the West, but it 
is not enough. We must change the laws which mistreat us. My students make me 
very hopeful because work has given them a certain, a certain independence. 
There are feminist groups in Egypt: there is a lot of change underground; all 
we need to do now is to mobilise it."

Â· This article was republished as part of a special edition marking 50 Years 
of the Guardian women's page <https://www.theguardian.com/women/50years>.
 