
Bernie Sanders <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bernie-sanders> charges 
head-first into a hotel room in midtown Manhattan, a man with no time to waste. 
This is not the campaign-era Bernie, the Bernie of memes and ice-cream flavours 
and jokey, Feel The Bern fun. All that has been swept away and replaced with 
something harder, more urgent, a sense that, with Clinton vanquished, cometh 
the hour, cometh the man, so that even to call him Bernie at this point feels 
wrong. In this guise, Senator Sanders, an outsider throughout the campaign, 
shows himself to be a politician of 40 years’ standing, with a desire to fight 
politics with politics and no tolerance for weeping, kvetching or the need for 
catharsis. The only noticeable hangover of his formerly whimsical style is his 
habit of saying everything twice. Sanders makes “Yup, yup” sound like the 
gravest assessment in the world.

Spike Lee <https://www.theguardian.com/film/spikelee>, on the other hand, is 
emotional. He campaigned for Sanders and wants a hug from him, reassurance that 
things will be OK and an acknowledgment that the world has gone mad, appeals 
towards which the senator shows some understanding and also undisguised 
irritation. The two men occupy different positions on the same side, one 
representing the political opposition to Trump, the other the cultural 
opposition. Lee wants direction from Sanders on how that opposition might work, 
but he also wants recognition that conciliation with Trump, the politician’s 
instinct, is not at the expense of core values.
Carousel 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/conversations/embed.html> 
In this, they differ. Lee, like so many of us, might be said to have the 
luxury of total opposition, of total rejection of Trump and vilification of his 
supporters. Sanders, somewhat surprisingly given his reputation as 
uncompromising, takes a more strategic line even than colleagues such as Harry 
Reid, the senate minority leader, who earlier this month issueda strong 
repudiation of Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/11/democrats-harry-reid-elizabeth-warren-donald-trump>
 when he described him as “a sexual predator who lost the popular vote and 
fuelled his campaign with bigotry and hate”.

Sanders condemns those aspects of Trump, but is reluctant to characterise 
millions of white, working-class voters as racists, through what I suspect is 
political pragmatism and deep sentiment, given his own background is white 
working class. Lee is not so ready to give Trump voters the benefit of the 
doubt. It is a fascinating exchange.

Bernie Sanders Hey, Spike, how are you?

Spike Lee I feel terrible, Senator.

BS I understand that. I understand that.

SL I want to thank you, though. Because what you did is great. And reading 
this stuff that’s coming out – the revelations about Wasserman [Debbie 
Wasserman Schultz, former chair of the Democratic National Committee, who 
during the campaignleaked emails shown to be biased against Sanders in favour 
of Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/24/clinton-campaign-blames-russia-wikileaks-sanders-dnc-emails>
] and Donna Brazile [interim DNC chair, who gave Clinton a heads-up on 
questions in advance of a CNN debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/31/donna-brazile-hillary-clinton-debate-question-podesta-emails-cnn>
], whom I know. Cheating goes both ways, huh? [Laughs.]

BS Well, you know. We took on the entire establishment and that’s what 
happens. But we have some enormously difficult times now. We gotta go forward, 
and I look forward to working with you to make that happen.

All this started the day a black man became president of the United States

SL Well, anything I can do to help. But look at these [Trump] appointees – 
who’s this guy,Bannon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/stephen-bannon-reince-priebus-donald-trump-white-house-staff>
? Brannon?

BS Bannon.

SL Whoooo!

BS He’s going to be policy adviser or something.

SL Hahahahahahahahaha!

BS Yup.

SL You know what Malcolm X <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/malcolm-x> 
said? It was a famous quote that got him into trouble, but that comes to mind. 
He said, “Chickens come home to roost.” And it seems to me, all this stuff 
today was a reaction to day one, when Obama put his right hand on Lincoln’s 
bible. I think things started on the day a black man became president of the 
United States. This all happened eight years ago.

BS Well, I think, Spike, that’s part of it. I don’t think it’s the whole 
thing, though.

SL But I think it’s a large part of it.

BS Well, I think a number of people who voted for Obama once, or twice, voted 
for Trump. And I think the issue is that there are millions of people in this 
country who voted for Trump but do not accept… I’m not going to deny for a 
second that there’s a lot of racism and xenophobia and sexism out there; there 
certainly is. But there are a whole lot of other people who are just really, 
really hurting. They’re working two or three jobs, they’re worried about their 
kids, they can’t afford to send them to childcare or to college. And Trump 
comes along and says, “I’m a champion of the working class.” And he’s a good 
showman and a good entertainer, and people believed him.

But our job now, it seems to me, is in three areas. Number one: to fight him 
tooth and nail in any movement toward racism, xenophobia, sexism, trying to 
divide our country up. And number two: if he is at all sincere – and we will 
see if he is – in developing programmes to create jobs and raise wages, I think 
we should work with him. But I’ll tell you what also concerns me, not just for 
this country but the planet, is this guy thinks that climate change is a hoax. 
Well, let me tell you, it ain’t a hoax. Climate change is real, and if we don’t 
transform our energy system, the planet we leave for our kids and grandchildren 
may not be a pretty place.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fbernie-sanders-spike-lee-conversation-donald-trump-us-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ea7fe3ad2221a7dd73431b11de05906806957e2%2F186_0_2287_1536%2F2287.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bernie%20Sanders%20meets%20Spike%20Lee%3A%20%E2%80%98Where%20do%20we%20go%3F%20Where%20is%20the%20hope%3F%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fbernie-sanders-spike-lee-conversation-donald-trump-us-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bernie%20Sanders%20meets%20Spike%20Lee%3A%20%E2%80%98Where%20do%20we%20go%3F%20Where%20is%20the%20hope%3F%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fbernie-sanders-spike-lee-conversation-donald-trump-us-politics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ea7fe3ad2221a7dd73431b11de05906806957e2%2F186_0_2287_1536%2F2287.jpg>
 Lee: ‘Were you ever offered the vice presidency? Would you have taken it?’ 
Sanders: ‘No, and probably.’ Photograph: Christopher Lane for the Guardian 
SL What also is troublesome, which I’ve tossed and turned over at night: the 
man has the nuclear codes.

BS Yup, yup.

SL [Laughs incredulously.] The man has the nuclear codes.

BS I agree.

SL Excuse me, if I may, sir; you know I love sports. I’ve seen it too many 
times, when a team thinks they’ve got it all won, just wrapped up, and you see 
players go down the sideline and start celebrating, and then they reach the 
goal line and fumble. The Clintons – and I’m not asking you for a comment; this 
is my opinion – thought they had itwon. And what do the great coaches always 
say? Keep playing until there is no time on the clock! And it seems to me the 
Clintons were celebrating before the day was up.

BS [Mirthlessly.] Ha.

SL It was not Hillary Clinton’s birthright to be president of the United 
States of America! And Trump, he played it like he was going to keep going at 
this until the whistle blows, until time has run out.

BS Right. You’re right. Now, no one can deny that Trump was holding three or 
four rallies a day, he was running all over this country, working 20 hours a 
day. And that’s the truth. But I think that speaks to, Spike, something that 
goes beyond Hillary Clinton. It really goes to the very nature of the 
Democratic party.

SL The DNC!

BS That’s right. And it calls for the transformation of the Democratic party, 
and making it clear it’s going to be a party that brings together blacks and 
whites and Latinos and women and gays, and everyone else. But it’s also going 
to be a party…

SL Would you say that it’s a shambles, now, Senator – the DNC?

BS Yes. Yes. And I am supporting…

SL There’s a whole lot of finger-pointing going on.

BS Yes. I think we need a house-cleaning. I think the DNC needs an entirely 
new direction. I think it needs leadership, and I think it needs to be very 
clear about the fact that it stands with working families and is prepared to 
take on the billionaire class and Wall Street, and corporate America, and the 
drug companies and the insurance companies. People are hurting. And we need a 
programme that stands with working families and brings people together.

SL Were you ever offered the VP position, sir?

BS No. Absolutely not.

SL Would you have taken it?

BS Er. Probably, yes. But that’s again looking through the rear-view mirror.

SL I mean, we’re all looking upon the debris and trying to say, excuse my 
language, what the f? I mean, when I woke up that morning, the world is 
different. It’s a different world.

BS It is a very different world. And it’s a very frightening world. 
[Brusquely.] But we gotta get beyond that.

SL The man has the nuclear codes.

BS Yup.

SL Let me ask you another question. How can you tell another country that 
they’ve got to pay for a wall? Or fences? How does that work?

BS Well, Spike, I think what you are going to find is that a lot of the 
hyperbole, a lot of the rhetoric that Mr Trump used in his campaign, ends up 
not being terribly relevant to the real world.

SL So you think his voters are not going to hold him to the outrageous stuff 
he said he’d do?

BS Well, I think in some ways they may not. I think what we’ve got to do is 
hold him accountable for the statements he made about raising wages and 
creating jobs, and I think we gotta fight him tooth and nail on the outrageous…

You and I woke up that morning very disturbed and upset. Our job is to use 
that anger to stop Trump’s worst policies

SL But how do we do that if they [the Republicans] have the House and the 
Senate? How do we do that?

BS Well, we do it because it turns out that, on every major issue facing the 
American people, our view is the popular view, the view supported by the 
American people, and Mr Trump’s is not. For example: we are going to work hard 
to raise the minimum wage to a living wage. The vast majority of Democrats and, 
actually, Republicans believe in that. We’re going to fight to rebuild the 
infrastructure and create millions of jobs, making public colleges and 
universities tuition-free, dealing with student debt, childcare – all of these 
issues have the support of the American people. We have got to put him on the 
defensive, and that speaks to a need whereyou can play a great role – you and 
other people who know how to do media – which is to bring people together 
around the progressive agenda.

SL All right, but doesn’t the president of the United States appoint the 
Supreme Court justices?

BS Oh, he sure does. All right, look. That’s the reality, Spike; you’re 
talking about reality. Yes, he’s going to be the president. That’s the fact. 
Our job is to determine what we can do in opposition to him. That’s where we 
are right now. And we have to be very, very smart about that.

SL We’re going to need your leadership, sir.

BS Well, Spike, here’s the story, to the degree that my leadership means 
anything. It means we bring people together. You know what? The vast majority 
of the American people do not think thatRoe v Wade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/roe-v-wade> should be ended. Our job is to 
make it clear that if he goes forward in that direction, there is a price to 
pay. What politics is about is this: you may hold a point of view, but if I can 
rally massive opposition to your point of view, you may rethink that point of 
view. That’s where we’re at. I do not think the American people want to 
overturn Roe v Wade. I do not think that the American people want to be 
deporting millions of people. I don’t think the American people want to stop 
Muslim people coming into this country. But I do think the American people want 
an economic agenda that works for working people, not just billionaires. So the 
way you defeat or slow down your opponents is that you bring people together, 
and you show that he is on the wrong side of history. That’s the best we can do.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fbernie-sanders-spike-lee-conversation-donald-trump-us-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88ff1f788deeca10916e549da46ff1a370d191d0%2F136_0_2006_1536%2F2006.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bernie%20Sanders%20meets%20Spike%20Lee%3A%20%E2%80%98Where%20do%20we%20go%3F%20Where%20is%20the%20hope%3F%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fbernie-sanders-spike-lee-conversation-donald-trump-us-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bernie%20Sanders%20meets%20Spike%20Lee%3A%20%E2%80%98Where%20do%20we%20go%3F%20Where%20is%20the%20hope%3F%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fbernie-sanders-spike-lee-conversation-donald-trump-us-politics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88ff1f788deeca10916e549da46ff1a370d191d0%2F136_0_2006_1536%2F2006.jpg>
 Lee: ‘Haven’t there been studies that show you would have defeated Trump?’ 
Sanders: ‘Yes. Several.’ Photograph: Christopher Lane for the Guardian 
SL What are your comments, Senator, on the uprising we’ve seen across the 
United States after the results?

BS Well, as you just indicated, you and I woke up that morning very disturbed 
and upset, and people are taking to the streets to express their disappointment 
and their anger. Our job is to convert that anger into a constructive effort to 
stop Trump’s worst policies and to force him to do something that’s relevant to 
the American people.

SL Haven’t there been several studies done that show you would have defeated 
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>?

BS Yes. There have been several polls that suggested that.

SL [Long silence.] Hmmm. This is a rhetorical question, but I just want 
readers to understand this, very clearly. Where do we go? Where is the hope?

BS OK, here is where the hope is. The hope is to understand that the 
Democratic party has stumbled very significantly in the last number of decades. 
It’s not just this election, Spike, as disastrous as it has been. It is the 
fact that the Republican party controls the Senate, controls the US House, 
controls something like two-thirds of the governor seats in this country, and 
that the Democrats have lost over 900 state legislature seats in the last eight 
years. What that tells me is that the Democratic party has got to very 
fundamentally rethink who it is and where it goes. It has to shed the current 
situation where it’s a party of the liberal elite, a party of wealthy people 
who give substantial sums – we can use that money, that’s fine, but it must 
reidentify itself as a party of working people. Whether you’re black, white, 
Latino, there are millions of people today who are working longer hours for 
lower wages, and they’re seeing almost all new income and wealth going to the 
top 1%. The Democratic party has got to say we are on the side of the 99%. Our 
party is not about having fancy fundraisers, it’s about going into union halls, 
veterans’ halls, farm communities, the inner cities. It has to bring people 
together around the progressive agenda and make government work for all of us 
and not the 1%. That’s why I’m supportingKeith Ellison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/keith-ellison> [as prospective chair of 
the DNC].

SL Who?

BS Keith Ellison. Of Minnesota.

SL Oh, yes. He’s the Muslim brother, right?

BS Yes. He’s a very good guy, and he’s the co-chair of the house progressive 
caucus. Very progressive guy. And I think Keith understands that the future of 
the Democratic party is a grassroots party. So I’m going to be supporting him 
and shaking up the Democratic party.

SL Let me ask you another question. The coalition that Obama got, that put him 
in office – did the Clinton campaign think it would automatically win [those 
people] without having to work? I don’t understand it. Because I did not feel 
the energy there was for Obama – even for you – for Hillary Clinton. I respect 
the woman, but the enthusiasm wasn’t there.

BS I think nobody would argue with you on that. What we have seen is that in 
2008 Obama ran a historical campaign where the turnout was extraordinarily 
high: enthusiasm in the minority community, strong support in the white working 
class, and that carried over in 2012. But in 2016, what we saw – I think your 
point is quite right – it would be hard to suggest that the people of this 
country were enthusiastic about the Clinton campaign. There was not the energy 
we have seen in the Obama campaign, and what ended up happening was voter 
turnout was low. She won the black community overwhelmingly, but turnout was 
low. She lost a lot of white, working-class people. That’s just the fact.

SL I’m still trying to figure something out.

BS How she lost white women?

SL Yeah.

BS I’ll tell you how. A, Hillary Clinton got more popular votes than Donald 
Trump. Let’s not forget that. B, Every poll I saw showed Donald Trump was 
enormously unpopular. C, A lot of people who voted for Donald Trump did not 
vote for his racist statements, his statements on immigration, on women. They 
didn’t support that. But what Trump tapped into is a lot of economic angst and 
anger and frustration.

SL You think people can separate the racist and sexist comments he made from 
his policies?

BS Yes. I think what they are saying is, “I need a job, my kid needs to go to 
college, Mr Trump is promising that. I think he will probably not carry through 
on his racist, sexist policies. Let’s vote for the economic issues.” That’s 
what I think happened. So you had a lot of white, working-class women who did 
not appreciate his sexist remarks, but who do want to see an improvement in the 
economy.

I gotta run now, Spike, but let’s get together in the not too distant future.

• Our Revolution: A Future To Believe In by Bernie Sanders (Profile Books, 
£14.99) is out now. To order a copy for £12.29, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/our-revolution.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
.Chi-Raq <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt4594834/>, directed by Spike Lee, is in 
cinemas 2nd December. This conversation has been condensed as part of the 
editing process.
 