
Black Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/19/black-friday-shoppers-guide-best-deals>
 is almost upon us, or rather it’s already upon us: many retailers launched 
their annual sales on Tuesday or even earlier. After playing it down last year 
– after some violence the year before – everybody is now seeking tospread it out
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/11/amazon-to-spread-black-friday-sales-over-two-weeks>
, hoping to maximise profits while minimising chaos. Morrisons is advertising a
Black Five Days 
<https://www.thedrinksbusiness.com/2016/11/morrisons-leads-black-friday-booze/>.
Renault’s Black Friday 
<http://www.am-online.com/news/market-insight/2016/11/16/renault-launches-black-friday-retail-promotion>
 – if you’re thinking of just getting everybody cars for Christmas – lasts 
until the end of the month.

It’s odd how the Friday part remains central to this extended period of 
price-slashing.Black Friday <https://www.theguardian.com/business/black-friday> 
is, as everybody knows, a US import with no comparable significance in the UK. 
The day after Thanksgiving Thursday is traditionally when Americans find 
themselves at a dangerous loose end: they’re not at work, and they’ve had just 
about enough of the company of relatives. On Friday you either go shopping or 
go home.

Fatigued Black Friday delivery drivers 'could pose road safety risk'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/20/road-safety-risk-tired-black-friday-delivery-drivers-health-and-safety-executive>
When I was growing up in Connecticut it was called Black Friday because the 
traffic was so terrible that people warned one another not to venture out. 
Before the late 1980s no retailer would have used the term, with all its 
negative associations, to advertise a sale. Apparently there were some early 
attempts to rechristen it Big Friday, but the old name stuck, and rightly so: 
the traffic only got worse. It’s not a tradition we Americans would have wished 
on anyone else.

Now that the British version spreads across a week or more, you could really 
pick any day as its focus. Unfortunately, all the other Black Days are taken, 
most of them more than once. Black Tuesday commemorates the stock market crash 
of October 29, 1929. Black Monday refers to the day before, but also to another 
crash, in October 1987.Black Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/sep/13/black-wednesday-bad-day-conservatives>
 has been assigned to Britain’s departure from the European exchange rate 
mechanism in 1992.

You might just as well pick another colour, but that would be missing the 
point. The name Black Friday perfectly captures the heedless, bushfire rapacity 
of the event. It still retains a little of its original definition, alongside 
the perverse positive spin. And there’s that final layer of context: the irony 
of lost irony. In America, Black Friday means something. It’s not good, but 
it’s something.

The fuzzy end of free speech
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblack-friday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79d543e02762a265208968523055ee72389a32ea%2F0_89_1224_734%2F1224.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beware%2C%20Black%20Friday%20is%20spreading%20%7C%20Tim%20Dowling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblack-friday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beware%2C%20Black%20Friday%20is%20spreading%20%7C%20Tim%20Dowling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fblack-friday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79d543e02762a265208968523055ee72389a32ea%2F0_89_1224_734%2F1224.jpg>
 Gigi Hadid does her Melania Trump impression Photograph: Stewart 
Cook/Rex/Shutterstock 
These are challenging times for Daily Mail readers, with so few certainties to 
peddle. On one pagea story 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3958076/School-CANCELS-talk-journalist-linked-Donald-Trump-receiving-advise-UK-Government-s-counter-extremism-unit.html>
 about “alt-right” irritant Milos Yiannopoulisnot being allowed to speak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/21/milo-yiannopoulos-talk-at-kent-school-cancelled-over-security-concerns>
 at his old grammar (the school’s decision, although the Department for 
Education’s counter-extremism unit got involved) is headlined “CENSORED!”On 
another 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-3955744/Gigi-Hadid-savaged-social-media-American-Music-Awards.html>
, a presenter’s not-very-good impression of Melania Trump is labelled 
potentially racist.

I’ll grant you things do get morally fuzzy up at the hate speech end of free 
speech. Whose side do you take? The former pupil unable to regale sixth-formers 
with the kind of talk that got him no-platformed from Twitter? Or the 
privileged supermodel who violates the safe space that televised awards 
ceremonies have traditionally provided? It gives me no pleasure to admit there 
are no right answers.

Idiot-proofing our schools

To blur the lines further, the model-presenter in question, Gigi Hadid, 
apologised, while Yiannopoulis wrote, “Perhaps if I’d called my talk, ‘MUSLIMS 
ARE AWESOME!’ the [National Union of Teachers] NUT and the Department of 
Education would have been cool with me speaking.”

Freedom of expression is vital but messy. We shouldn’t allow the cast of some 
no-account smash hit Broadway musical to bang on about inalienable rights when 
the vice-president-elect is in the audience – that’s just rude. But we can’t 
let our schools institute some kind of blanket no-idiots policy when it comes 
to guest speakers. They’d never get anyone.
 