
Erica Baker likes poker. So did many of the engineers she spent 10 years 
working with atGoogle <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google>, in the 
California headquarters of one of the world’s most valuable technology 
companies. When she was eventually invited to a poker night with other 
engineers, the group of white, male colleagues fell silent as she walked into 
the room. “That did not feel good,” she says. “I get that it’s comfortable to 
be around people like you, but it’s also pretty important to be around people 
who are not like you – it helps one grow as a human being. That was the point 
where I started to get fed up with Google.”

Around the same time, in late November 2014, Baker joined a local Black Lives 
Matter <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/black-lives-matter-movement> 
protest after the shooting of a black teenager by a white police officer. When 
she posted a photo toTwitter <https://mobile.twitter.com/ericajoy?lang=en-gb>, 
Stewart Butterfield <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stewart_Butterfield>, the 
co-founder ofSlack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/nov/03/why-slack-is-worth-1bn-work-chat-app>
, a new chat tool for use at work, sent her a message: “Stay safe.” She says, 
“I just thought, ‘Holy crap – that’s a tech CEO!’ ” She left Google to join 
Slack as an engineer in May 2015.

'Everyone could know what I was doing': the millennials not using social media
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/01/millennials-not-on-social-media-twitter-facebook-instagram>
Silicon Valley <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/silicon-valley> has 
developed plenty of folklore around tech CEOs; like Page, they tend to start 
out in a garage, drop out of college, and within a few years metamorphose from 
boychild prodigy to omnipotent genius.

Butterfield’s story is a little different. He was born on a hippy commune in 
Canada and christened Dharma Butterfield. He studied philosophy at Cambridge 
University and, after various design and product development roles, 
accidentally came up with the photo-sharing siteFlickr <https://www.flickr.com/>
 while trying to build a game. (Slack came up in the same way, a side project 
of a game called Glitch.)

Slack <https://slack.com> is part of a wave of technologies trying to change 
the way we communicate, enabling continuous, fluid, more natural conversations 
to replace restrictive and time-consuming emails. Already, more than 2.3 
million people use it every day, sending 1.5bn messages every month. Despite 
being just two years old, Slack is already valued at $2.8bn, a figure that 
makes itthe fastest-growing business-to-business company in history 
<http://www.techinsider.io/fastest-companies-to-reach-a-2-billion-valuation-2015-5>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fslack-butterfield-emoji-chat-nasa-harvard-silicon-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d6c0faab7bd2f4154f96013269f7a2c91081739%2F644_2309_2330_1397%2F2330.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyond%20email%3A%20could%20startup%20Slack%20change%20the%20way%20you%20work%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fslack-butterfield-emoji-chat-nasa-harvard-silicon-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyond%20email%3A%20could%20startup%20Slack%20change%20the%20way%20you%20work%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fslack-butterfield-emoji-chat-nasa-harvard-silicon-valley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d6c0faab7bd2f4154f96013269f7a2c91081739%2F644_2309_2330_1397%2F2330.jpg>
 ‘It’s important to be around people who are not like you,’ says engineer Erica 
Baker. ‘It helps one grow as a human being.’ Photograph: Winni Wintermeyer for 
the Guardian 
Cut the formality 

When I meet Butterfield, wearily hunched over a meeting room desk, he swears 
he’ll never attempt to design another game. The California sun is pouring into 
Slack’s spacious, quiet office, the odd emoji balloon hovering above the desks.

Perhaps unusually for a CEO, Butterfield doesn’t think a business should be 
all about making money: “People don’t work for money. It’s a way of 
establishing the health of the machine, of diagnosing how the machine is 
performing, but it’s not necessarily the goal. They get a lot of purpose and 
identity from work, yet most people are unhappy there. They feel work isn’t 
taking advantage of everything they have to offer, that they are more 
resourceful, intelligent, creative or capable. The formality of how people 
speak to each other is a constraint, so their job doesn’t let them be their 
whole self.”

Email is hierarchical, it's great for political maneuvering, but how often is 
there deep collaboration and sharing?
Dr Leah Reich 
Slack is sometimes described as an email killer, which might be as much an 
ardent prayer as anything else.Research by the Radicati Group 
<http://www.radicati.com/wp/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/Email-Statistics-Report-2015-2019-Executive-Summary.pdf>
 estimated that nearly 2.6 billion people used email worldwide as of 2015, each 
sending and receiving an average of 122 emails a day at work alone. Email is 
frequently cited as a major drain on productivity; Slack claims its users 
report receiving 48.6% less internal email after they start using the tool.

Dr Leah Reich <http://www.leahreich.com>, a sociologist and Slack’s user 
researcher, argues that email represents an older generation of workers and an 
outmoded way of communicating: “Email is hierarchical and compartmentalized, 
and great for political maneuvering.” Blind copying, or the bcc, is an example 
of that: your boss could be silently copied into an email chain. Email allows 
the sender to choose who to send information to, and who to exclude. It is also 
loaded with letter-writing conventions, expectations that we must reply and 
include a formal greeting. We should cut that formality and replace it with 
fast exchanges of ideas, Reich says. “How often is there deep collaboration and 
sharing on email? That weird overlapping feeling of ideas and iteration and 
design thinking? That’s still new to a lot of people. It’s radical 
collaboration, a different way of working and thinking.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fslack-butterfield-emoji-chat-nasa-harvard-silicon-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d952fa0cd7b38fa725c9d7497981a0d354b2d1a%2F0_1548_3900_2344%2F3900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyond%20email%3A%20could%20startup%20Slack%20change%20the%20way%20you%20work%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fslack-butterfield-emoji-chat-nasa-harvard-silicon-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyond%20email%3A%20could%20startup%20Slack%20change%20the%20way%20you%20work%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fslack-butterfield-emoji-chat-nasa-harvard-silicon-valley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d952fa0cd7b38fa725c9d7497981a0d354b2d1a%2F0_1548_3900_2344%2F3900.jpg>
 ‘The formality of how people speak to each other is a constraint, so their job 
doesn’t let them be their whole self,’ says Slack CEO Stewart Butterfield. 
Photograph: Winni Wintermeyer for the Guardian 
Reich has been using online chat since 1992, when she inhabited some fairly 
niche chat rooms on the east coast dedicated to raves. She argues that the 
workforce today includes a generation who are used to less hierarchical 
communication and very good at chat. “They are simply not entrenched in email 
the same way we are,” she says. “Companies realize they need to have the tools 
people are used to using.”

Facebook Messenger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/apr/10/facebook-messenger-app-removing-chat>
, Google Chat,WhatsApp <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/whatsapp> and 
many other messaging applications have changed the way we communicate; WhatsApp 
alone has 1 billion monthly users.Research in 2014 by Pew 
<http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/08/06/teens-technology-and-friendships/> found 
that 49% of teens used texting as their primary way of talking to their closest 
friend, compared with 20% on social media and only 13% by phone. Texting and 
chat messaging may once have been the domain of the young, but those teenagers 
are growing up – and companies want to look progressive to attract young 
talent. Slack aims to create a new norm for how we communicate at work: a 
ubiquitous, informal chat that feels like an extension of the reflexive 
personalities we construct on our social media accounts; all that is seeping 
into work now, too.

People get a lot of purpose and identity from work, yet most people are 
unhappy there
Stewart Butterfield 
Slack is nothing like conventional work software; it is bright, fast and 
stuffed with emojis. Most users receive an invite from someone else at work to 
join a “team”, and once they have Slack’s app on their desktop or mobile, 
they’ll see channels dedicated to different topics, private channels for 
invited groups, and direct messages. There is typically one main channel that 
acts like a common room, and offshoots for groups or projects. Slack’s own 
corporate team has 1,064 channels for its 356 staff, including the novelty 
channels #happyplace for pictures of cute animals, #theoldgodsandthenew for 
Game Of Thrones and TV chat, and #socks for pictures of the day’s footwear. 
Users can also send files and emojis, and add any of the 280 tools that can be 
plugged into Slack, including proofreading, to-do lists, calendars and Skype; 
you can even order an Uber through a chat message.


Ardent users praise Slack’s warmth and humor, credited largely to editorial 
director Anna Pickard 
<https://twitter.com/annapickard?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
, a former Guardian journalist who has used her master’s degree in dramaturgy 
to “specialize in giving things a voice”. From its marketing and advertising to 
error messages, Slack has a gentle, accessible humor that isn’t topical or 
ingratiating, and doesn’t use in-jokes. One error message reads: “We’ve seen 
this problem clear up with a restart of your browser, a solution which we 
suggest to you now only with great regret and self-loathing.”

Breaking the boys’ club 

The technology is gaining popularity largely because curious, tech-inclined 
people start using it, and convince their bosses to pay for an upgrade the 
whole firm can use. This bottom-up strategy looks risky on paper, but is 
working beyond anyone’s expectations. Clients now include the Wall Street 
Journal, Samsung, Harvard and Nasa’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fslack-butterfield-emoji-chat-nasa-harvard-silicon-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80c953f7a6582f4f039e0bac35f9f6fa578470ea%2F446_1349_2849_3886%2F2849.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyond%20email%3A%20could%20startup%20Slack%20change%20the%20way%20you%20work%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fslack-butterfield-emoji-chat-nasa-harvard-silicon-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyond%20email%3A%20could%20startup%20Slack%20change%20the%20way%20you%20work%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fslack-butterfield-emoji-chat-nasa-harvard-silicon-valley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80c953f7a6582f4f039e0bac35f9f6fa578470ea%2F446_1349_2849_3886%2F2849.jpg>
 Sociologist Dr Leah Reich thinks we should cut the formality of email and 
replace it with fast exchanges of ideas. Photograph: Winni Wintermeyer for the 
Guardian 
Despite being founded by four white men, Slack has defied Silicon Valley’s 
self-reinforcing recruitment patterns to create probably the most diverse 
company in tech’s top tier. It feels like a company run by grownups; there is 
no ping pong at its San Francisco HQ, and its brand of conscientious, 
thoughtful culture has attracted staff such as Erica Baker.

Baker is very active in promoting diversity; she requested that Slack remove 
the requirement of 10 years’ experience from job specs because it has been 
proven to deter women from applying, and pushed for the inclusion of emojis 
with different skin tones. Baker has been working in technical roles for 15 
years, and now advises the Bay Area’sHack the Hood <http://www.hackthehood.org/>
 project on helping kids from low-income families work towards jobs in 
technology, and is a mentor forBlack Girls Code <http://www.blackgirlscode.com/>
.

Butterfield is well known in the tech industry for being a charismatic CEO, 
but less well known for being propelled by a team of formidable women.Anne Toth 
<https://mobile.twitter.com/clean_freak?lang=en-gb>, head of Slack’s people and 
policy, was the first person in Silicon Valley to be employed to work on the 
complex legal and policy issues around privacy back in 1996 atYahoo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/yahoo>. She met Butterfield in 2005, 
when Yahoo boughtFlickr <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/flickr>. He now 
says he regrets selling, his eyes rolling when he talks about Yahoo’s corporate 
culture, in his view rife with executives consumed by power battles. He stayed 
running Flickr until July 2008 and then spent eight months on a break; his 
LinkedIn profile of the time says “Unemployed person – the great outdoors”. 
Many Slack staff have similar stories of enduring unhappy or unfulfilling work 
environments, but Toth says they have shaped how they wanted the company to 
grow: “We want to build the kind of company we want to work at. To show that 
you can break a mould and be successful.”

When she joined, Toth encouraged the executive team to make a plan about 
company values, which might seem like the kind of nauseating marketing exercise 
no one takes any notice of, but which Slack has done with great sincerity. 
“When you walk into a company and see words such as ‘excellence’ and 
‘integrity’ on the wall, it doesn’t feel authentic,” Toth says. “We didn’t want 
it to feel like marketing.” Slack was recruiting rapidly and needed to define a 
sensibility that, until then, had been “osmotically transmitted” from the 
personality of the founders; they came up with craftsmanship, courtesy, 
playfulness, thriving, solidarity and empathy. Those ideals inform how 
management makes decisions every day, from prioritizing broken code 
(craftsmanship) to making sure everyone leaves work on time (thriving).

Rather than reinforce the idea engineers look like Mark Zuckerberg, we 
introduce powerful women who happen to be black
Anne Toth 
As Slack’s senior staff recruited, they wanted to challenge any unconscious 
bias, Toth explains. “Some people think you make better products if you have a 
more diverse workforce, some think you get better business results with a more 
diverse workforce, and some think it is more a matter of social justice, that 
it is our obligation. Rather than reinforce the notion that an engineer looks 
likeMark Zuckerberg <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mark-zuckerberg>, 
we can introduce four powerful women who happen to be black. It changes the 
idea of what an engineer looks like.”

The company’s latest diversity report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/04/slack-diversity-report-silicon-valley>
 showed that 43.1% of the staff are female, 43% of senior management are 
female, 13% of staff identify as LGBT and 7.8% of staff in engineering roles 
identify as black. It’s not designed to be self-congratulatory, they say, 
because these numbers still don’t reflect the real world, but it is a 
significant improvement on the biggest tech companies: Google, Facebook and 
Twitter all report that 1% of engineers are black.

I, narcissist – vanity, social media, and the human condition
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/17/i-narcissist-vanity-social-media-and-the-human-condition>
Slack may be small – less than 1% of the number of employees of Google – but 
its slightly older, more experienced management team is instinctively 
challenging recruitment processes they know haven’t worked.Merci Grace 
<https://twitter.com/merci?lang=en>, Slack’s group product manager for growth, 
recently worked alongside an external recruiter who asked which three colleges 
she should recruit from. “I had to explain that we don’t do that, because all 
you are doing is pulling people out of a funnel of privilege. We want people 
who are kind and empathetic and smart.” Grace is one of many senior Slackers 
with an arts degree, and started her own games company. She felt ground down by 
the implicitly masculine culture, she says; one hiring manager said he hadn’t 
given a job to a woman because he wanted “an alpha dog”. Along with many others 
on the staff (Slack typically hires people in their early 30s rather than their 
20s), Grace has been through the phase of working 18-hour days and sleeping 
under the desk, and come out the other side. Yet the pervasive culture of 
working extreme hours persists. “Just because your ass is on a seat doesn’t 
mean you’re working. If you’re brain dead after 6pm, go home. You can work like 
that for only so long.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fslack-butterfield-emoji-chat-nasa-harvard-silicon-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8beff44fe259c5e0344bf90cf0727accdb55486e%2F0_364_5400_3240%2F5400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyond%20email%3A%20could%20startup%20Slack%20change%20the%20way%20you%20work%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fslack-butterfield-emoji-chat-nasa-harvard-silicon-valley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyond%20email%3A%20could%20startup%20Slack%20change%20the%20way%20you%20work%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fslack-butterfield-emoji-chat-nasa-harvard-silicon-valley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8beff44fe259c5e0344bf90cf0727accdb55486e%2F0_364_5400_3240%2F5400.jpg>
 ‘When people come here, we expect them to have a life,’ says Anne Toth, 
Slack’s head of people and policy. ‘We hired someone from Facebook and he 
couldn’t believe that the place emptied out at 6pm.’ Photograph: Winni 
Wintermeyer for the Guardian 
Part of that process of recruiting has been gently to pick at the valley’s 
culture of machismo. There are no “rock star” developers or “ninjas” at Slack. 
They do not “crush it”, and they do not call everyone “guys”, because not 
everyone is a guy – they prefer the term “sibs”, as in siblings. Ali Rayl, 
Slack’s director of customer experience, points out that Slack’s “work hard and 
go home” culture is also better for women. “It allows them to say, ‘I can do 
this job. I can emulate the founders in the way I work and not get punished for 
it. And I can take care of my family.’ When people come here, we expect them to 
have a life. We hired someone from Facebook and he couldn’t believe that the 
place emptied out at 6pm.”

What comes next?

Slack is high on the giddy enthusiasm of Silicon Valley investors and early 
adopting techies. But everyone is painfully aware that this is a very young 
company in a very aggressive industry, and things could all change. Many of the 
staff are unusually candid in describing this intense pressure; Rayl says it’s 
a “constant low-grade terror that I might screw something up”; Butterfield 
tells staff it will never get better than this. Slack is the flavor of 2016, 
but could it become more than that?

We have a system that encourages people to think of themselves as soloists… 
that success requires someone’s failure
Margaret Heffernan 
Anil Dash <http://anildash.com/about.html>, a writer and entrepreneur who has 
followed Slack since it began, says one of its biggest challenges will be 
navigating the “ordinary dysfunction” of large companies. Having used Slack to 
co-ordinate projects with 20 different companies, Dash observes that companies 
in crisis typically use more private messages and less open discussion. Rather 
than shape the way we communicate, technology reflects our existing 
insecurities and behavior. The more confident workers feel, the more happy they 
are to engage in discussion and collaboration out in the open.

Entrepreneur and author Margaret Heffernan 
<http://www.mheffernan.com/index2.php> questions whether software could ever 
solve what is fundamentally a human problem. “We have an education system that 
encourages people to think of themselves as soloists – their success actually 
requires someone else’s failure.” These soloists create friction and 
competitiveness, she says, which often takes precedence over collaboration.

Slack needs buy-in from corporate America if it is to succeed, and while 
Silicon Valley has always been hugely influential in working culture, from 
open-plan offices and standing desks to free perks and bonding sessions, is the 
business world really ready to upgrade its social skills? Isn’t radical 
collaboration one step too far?

Erica Baker doesn’t think so. I ask her what she might tell her nieces about 
her work in 50 years’ time. “I’d say your auntie helped change an industry. And 
that she doesn’t have to work any more,” she says, with the confidence of a 
woman who senses a public offering over the horizon. “Well, we’re the 
fastest-growing enterprise company in the world, so there’s a good chance. 
That’s just honest.”👌🏽
 