
The BBC’s slick adaptation of John le Carré’s thriller The Night Manager has 
swept the Emmys, earningTom Hiddleston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tom-hiddleston> his first nomination for his 
portrayal of the ruthless Jonathan Pine.

The six-part series, adapted by David Farr and brought into the world of 
modern warfare, was showered with 12 nominations, including best limited 
series. Hiddleston picked up a nomination for best actor in a limited series, 
pitting him against fellow BritsIdris Elba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/idris-elba> for Luther 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/luther> and Benedict Cumberbatch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/benedict-cumberbatch> for Sherlock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/sherlock>.

2016 Emmys: the snubs, shocks and the show set to sweep the board
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/14/emmys-snubs-nominees-winner-predictions>
To prepare for the role, Hiddleston, 34, spent his nights shadowing the night 
manager of the five-star Rosewood Hotel in London.Hugh Laurie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/hugh-laurie> and Olivia Colman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/olivia-colman> picked up supporting 
actor nominations for their roles as heartless arms dealer Richard Roper and 
incorruptible intelligence agent Angela Burr who pursues him relentlessly.

The show’s Emmys success matches its critical reception; it was described by 
the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/27/the-night-manager-finale-recap-an-explosively-oedipal-climax>
 as “the BBC’s glossiest, smartest, most indecently entertaining Sunday night 
drama in ages”.


The Emmy nominations proved an overall triumph for the BBC which received 22 
different nominees. As well asThe Night Manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-night-manager>, shows such as 
Luther, which has long been a favourite at the awards with eight previous 
nominations under its belt, Sherlock and War and Peace ensured that British 
television held its own at the esteemed American television awards.

The Sherlock Christmas special – The Abominable Bride 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/dec/30/sherlock-holmes-abominable-bride-bbc-series-victorian-episode-new-year>
 – and Luther will go head to head in the outstanding television movie category.

ITV’s Downton Abbey <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/downton-abbey>, 
beloved by Brits and Americans, was granted a last hurrah for its final season, 
with 10 nominations including best drama and best supporting actress forMaggie 
Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/maggie-smith>. 

Overall, this year’s Emmy nominations proved that Game of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones> still dominates the 
TV landscape, even after six series, picking up 23 nominations – just one short 
of the record 24 nominations it received last year.

Newer additions to the nominee roster this year included the gripping 
dramatisation of the OJ Simpson trial,The People v OJ Simpson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/the-people-v-oj-simpson-episode-by-episode>
 which received 22 nominations. Cuba Gooding Jr, who played OJ, and Sarah 
Paulson, who played prosecutor Marcia Clark, are among the nominees from the 
series, which is the first since ER in 1995 to take more than 20 nominations in 
its first season.

After Viola Davis <https://www.theguardian.com/film/viola-davis> became the 
first black woman to win a best actress Emmy last year, and made a stirring 
speech about the lack of opportunity for black actors on television, this 
year’s nominations were a showcase for diversity. Three of the nominees for 
best actor – Courtney B Vance, Elba and Gooding Jr – are black; and Black-ish, 
a celebrated American sitcom about an African American family, received its 
first Emmy nomination. Overall, 18 actors from ethnic minorities received 
nominations across 16 acting categories.

Spy drama The Americans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-americans>, which stars Welsh 
actorMatthew Rhys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/aug/31/matthew-rhys-favourite-tv>
 as a Russian spy living undercover in the US, picked up nominations in all the 
major categories including outstanding drama series, best actor for Rhys, best 
actress for Keri Russell and best writing for the final episode in the season.


Beyoncé, never one to be left out of any awards ceremony, picked up four 
nominations for her visual albumLemonade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/29/beyonce-lemonade-jay-z-explainer>
.

 