
Cynics used to say the most important employees at pharmaceutical companies 
were not the scientists, developing novel medicines, but the lawyers, the folk 
defending the drug patents in court. These days, it seems, the top dogs are tax 
advisers.

Irish-domiciled Shire’s $32bn (£22bn) takeover of haematology specialist 
Baxalta of the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/11/shire-clinches-32bn-takeover-of-baxalta>
 will go ahead on rejigged terms because “additional tax due diligence” has 
revealed that the transaction won’t trigger a thumping great liability.

Flemming Ornskov, Shire’s chief executive, didn’t provide details of the 
relevant advice but clearly thinks he is on solid ground when he says the 
cash-plus-shares offer won’t undo the tax-free status of Baxalta’s spin-off 
from former parent Baxter, a deal completed only last year. Instead, the 
combined group can look forward to paying tax at Shire’s Irish rate of 16%-17%, 
much better than Baxalta’s current 23%.

Whatever Shire’s tax advisers say, the deal will be viewed by many in 
Washington as further evidence of the pharmaceutical industry’s obsession with 
minimising US tax payments.Only six weeks ago Pfizer, the giant firm that is 
American as apple pie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2015/nov/23/pfizers-injection-botox-cosmetic-damage>
, said it would move its headquarters to Dublin after agreeing a “merger” with 
Allergan, the Botox firm that is cosmetically Irish.

Given US politicians’ alarm over evaporating tax revenues, you can understand 
why Ornskov was anxious to play up the “strategic” merits of his Baxalta 
purchase – the group will become the biggest developer of treatments for rare 
diseases, or ailments affecting small numbers of patients. He calculates that 
combo will have annual revenues of $20bn by 2020, with two-thirds in rare 
diseases. The benefits of being a rare-disease specialist are supposedly 
twofold: competition tends to be weaker and the prices of the drugs 
correspondingly higher.

Pfizer's injection of Botox may cause more than cosmetic damage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2015/nov/23/pfizers-injection-botox-cosmetic-damage>
Will the latter advantage really last for ever, though? In the current 
climate, one doubts it. Big-pharma executives are braced for a backlash from 
the Pfizer/Allergan proposal, regardless of who is the next US president, and 
can guess the form it will take –demands for lower drug prices to compensate 
for lower tax receipts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2015/nov/23/pfizers-injection-botox-cosmetic-damage>
.

Rare-disease specialists, one suspects, will be in eye of that storm since 
their products command the highest prices. Already there is a lively parallel 
debate among policy-makers about the morality of skewing finite healthcare 
budgets so heavily towards medicines that improve the lives of relatively few 
people.

Shire presented its purchase as a “diversification” but it hardly looks a case 
of spreading risk. The company will be even more concentrated in a rare-disease 
field that may already be over-hyped. No wonder Baxalta’s board and 
shareholders insisted that 40% of the takeover price – or almost $13bn – must 
be in cash, rather than zero asShire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/shire> had originally proposed.

Shire’s shares fell 8% to their lowest price for a year, and one can 
understand why: this deal is a high-debt gamble that drug prices will remain 
high.

Help to buy – too helpful for some

“We mustn’t let this turn into a permanent scheme,” said Lord King, former 
governor of the Bank of England, in 2013 when chancellor George Osborne 
unleashed help to buy, then just a mortgage-guarantee scheme, on the UK. At the 
time, the Treasury was happy to sign up to the idea that help to buy was a 
temporary measure to invigorate the housing market. The scheme was meant to be 
limited to three years.


And now? Help to buy was last year extended until 2021 and now even reaches 
into top-up payments for those saving via ISAs for a deposit on a new home. To 
see how far help to buy has infiltrated the housing market, look at the 
financial results from the big housebuilders.Taylor Wimpey says 30% of its 
sales are supported by help to buy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/11/taylor-wimpey-discount-homes-first-time-buyers>
; Persimmon cited 45% last week.

Maybe, in a half a decade’s time, the subsidies will cease, but it’s not the 
way to bet. There is always a political excuse, especially at the Tory end of 
Westminster, for not upsetting the housing market. Step by step, the UK is 
walking into a situation where the government underwrites billions of pounds of 
mortgage debt. Familiarity with help to buy has made it seem like a normal 
state of affairs. It’s not.

Sainsbury’s needs hard figures

If Mike Coupe at Sainsbury’s is serious about his pursuit of Home Retail Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/05/sainsburys-1bn-bid-home-retail-argos-homebase-rejected>
, the owner of the Argos and Homebase chains, he would be well advised to drop 
a few hints into this week’s trading update that he won’t do a deal at any 
price. As things stand, Home Retail’s investors are imagining their company 
could fetch 200p-a-share, or £1.6bn, even though the stock stood at 100p a week 
ago. That’s their view, but Sainsbury’s can’t think of going that high.


The addition of Argos is supposed to be about “accelerating” Sainsbury’s 
expansion into non-food lines and online retailing. We’ll reserve judgment 
until Coupe has had the opportunity to put hard figures on cost savings. But, 
if it were to pay £1.6bn, Sainsbury’s wouldn’t so much be accelerating as 
setting out from the wrong county.
 