
Estimates suggest that by the year 2020 India will have more than 600 million 
citizens online - twice as many as the United States. Ahead of the inauguralBig 
Tent Activate Summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2013/mar/05/guardian-google-activate-india-delhi>
 next week, Activate curator Robin Hough speaks to Google India head Rajan 
Anandan on the need for improved broadband infrastrucure, greater foreign 
direct investment in business and how the Internet is an "economic force 
multiplier" in India.

One of the sessions at the Big Tent Activate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate> Summit will focus on the 
need to transform India's information infrastructure - where do you think this 
transformation needs to happen in order for India to have a fit for purpose 
information infrastructure?

India is already the third largest internet user market in the world with 150 
million Indians connected to the web, so there's a large internet user market 
already. But only 12% of the entire population are connected today. So what is 
required to get the next 300 million and 500 million Indians online? The issue 
is one of connectivity - India lacks broadband. Of the 150 million Indians 
online we only have 10 million households with broadband connectivity and even 
that is a very generous definition of broadband. And on the mobile side we have 
100 million mobile connected users but less than 10 million are connected on 
3G. So the crying need of the country is really broadband infrastructure.

Another session on the agenda will focus on the role of technology for good, 
and how the internet can be used to tackle some of the most pressing political, 
economic and social problems facing India. How do you see the internet's role 
and impact in addressing said issues?

The most important area to start with is the economy. The GDP growth rate in 
India has essentially halved over the last three years, from over 9% to around 
4.5%, and what we have to do is figure out how to get the growth back to 7% or 
8% plus. What's clear is that the Internet can play a very central role in 
accelerating our GDP growth.A study that McKinnsey has done 
<http://www.mckinsey.com/client_service/high_tech/latest_thinking/impact_of_the_internet_on_aspiring_countries>
 suggests that the Internet today accounts for about 1.8% of GDP growth in 
India. If we can get this right and build out the right Internet infrastructure 
to enable growth in businesses, then the Internet could account for as much as 
5% of GDP growth by 2020. The Internet acts as an economic force multiplier and 
this aspect is the single most important way in which the Internet can impact 
India as a whole.

Then when you actually look at other aspects of India, at the social problems 
that we have, there are a large set of opportunities in areas like education 
and healthcare, and the Internet offers a great way to help solve some of these 
problems. India simply cannot produce enough high quality teachers to be able 
to educate at world class levels the 300 million plus students that we have. 
But if we leverage the internet as a platform and get distance learning right 
we can significantly improve the quality of education that we can deliver to 
remote parts of India.

Similarly on healthcare we are never going to have enough hospitals or doctors 
for us to take affordable healthcare to the very last village. If we can get 
the internet infrastructure scaled out to the very last village, then remote 
healthcare becomes a reality.

In terms of politics, the Internet is without question the best medium to 
engage in a one-to-one or one-to-many dialogue with citizens around the 
country. Today you have a medium that enables different political parties and 
politicians to directly engage with 150 million Indians at this point. If you 
look at young India which historically has not posted the number of voters we 
would like, this next election provides a great opportunity for all the 
political parties to leverage the internet to mobilise young India to go out 
there and vote and take an interest in politics.

It's predicted that by 2020 India will have more than 600 million people 
online - what does a connected society of that size and scale look like? Where 
are the opportunities and what are the challenges?

There are 600 million people in Western Europe today, so you're talking about 
all of Western Europe being connected but it being in one country. With 600 
million connected people in India, the Internet will be twice the size of the 
number of users in the United States. You can imagine the kind of new business 
opportunities that this would create. India will have many billion dollar 
Internet and mobile Internet companies that are going to get built because of 
this very large domestic user base, and with that scale of connectivity, 
everything that we do, from day to day citizen services to education to 
healthcare right through to how we interact with friends and family across 
cities and regions will change. So imagine an internet economy that is twice 
the size of the US and that is what India will be by the year 2020 and I think 
it's just mind-boggling what will happen when we get there.

Where is web-based innovation coming from within India? Are the established 
players leading the way or has the Internet, as you could argue it has 
elsewhere, enabled bottom up innovation from SMEs, start ups and entrepreneurs?

What's very interesting about India is it has the best of both worlds. On the 
one hand it is a level playing field where any global company can actually 
compete on the same set of rules in India. But on the other hand most of the 
companies that are leaders in their space in India are Indian companies and 
that goes to show the amazing capabilities of Indian entrepreneurs. For 
example, the largest player in the jobs space isInfo Edge 
<http://www.infoedge.in/>, with over 65% market share in the online job space, 
a market capitalisation of close to $1bn and by far the market leader in the 
job space. While several of the global brands have been in India for more than 
a decade in some instances, the number one player remains an Indian company. 
The other space that's interesting is online travel. So the top three players 
are all Indian companies -MakeMyTrip <http://www.makemytrip.com/> is number 
one, number two isYatra <http://www.yatra.com/?redirect=no&origin=UK>, and 
ClearTrip <http://www.cleartrip.com/> is number three. So what we're seeing 
here is as this very large domestic user base continues to grow very, very 
rapidly it's creating these unprecedented opportunities for Indian 
entrepreneurs to build companies. And we're seeing these companies come from 
both seasoned entrepreneurs as well as very young founders - the founders of 
the online bus ticketing serviceredBus <http://www.redbus.in/> are all of 26-27 
years old - and you're finding with this ecommerce boom that's happening right 
now - whether it'sFlipKart <http://www.flipkart.com/>, whether it's Myntra 
<http://www.myntra.com/> - these are all founders below the age of 30. On the 
other hand there are companies that are being built by executives who are 
leaving their day jobs to go out and actually build companies but the great 
thing we are seeing about India is that market leading internet businesses 
across many many verticals are being built by Indian entrepreneurs.

What is the investment landscape like in India for digital entrepreneurs? How 
is it evolving?

It is evolving. It is still early days but what we do have is, if you look at 
the world's top ten venture capital funds, seven of them are in India. 
Companies like Secoa and Tiger are the most aggressive investors around the 
world and they come from India. To give you one sector that caught a lot of 
investment - ecommerce. Over a period of 24 months, $700m of investment has 
gone into about 50 ecommerce companies. This year we think over another 
$1billion will go into this vertical from venture capital companies. That being 
said, if you're going to have an Internet economy that is going to generate 
several hundred billion dollars of revenue, then clearly we need to have many 
billions more of investment. So today it's early but we do have some of the big 
brand names who are here who are writing big cheques. That being said, the 
country is going to need a lot more capital and it's important to have a stable 
investment regime and stable tax laws to encourage more foreign direct 
investment to come into this sector.

Is India open for business? What do international partners looking to work in 
India and with Indian companies have to consider when engaging with the 
territory?

India is absolutely open to business. It is the third largest internet market 
in the world and in a period of three years or so it will be twice as large as 
the US so it's not only open to business but I think people who want to own 
media need to get here pretty quickly. The good thing is India has been very, 
very open to foreign investment and very open to partnering with multinational 
companies from the US, from Europe, from Japan and Korea etc for a long period 
now so I think what's important is to get here and then figure out whether your 
companies wants to build from scratch, whether they want to partner, whether 
they want to do joint ventures and so on. The good news is India is a very open 
and has a very open-for-business mindset and Indian companies and Indian 
entrepreneurs are very open to, and experienced in, doing business around the 
world. In that sense it's a reasonably easy place to do business.

And finally, what are you most looking forward to at the Big Tent Activate 
Summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2013/mar/05/guardian-google-activate-india-delhi>
 on the 21st?

I'm excited about every single session. I think we have a blockbuster agenda 
and I think every single one of the sessions we're going to have is going to be 
massively interesting.

Get more articles like this sent direct to your inbox by signing up for free 
membership <http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/media-network/start.php> 
to theGuardian Media Network <http://theguardian.com/media-network> – this 
content is brought to you byGuardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. 
 