
International press trade organisations find hope in the rising circulations 
<http://www.newsandtech.com/dateline/article_73849450-3d7a-11e2-abea-0019bb2963f4.html>
 of newspapers in India and other developing nations, declaring that print is 
alive and healthy after all.

As if the internet were not there, too.

Yes, print circulations are rising as literacy and economies and thus middle 
classes grow. But it would be foolish to think that the impact of the internet 
is not universal. Wise Indian publishers and editors I've met know that well.

But the internet of the West is not necessarily the internet of developing 
nations or of tomorrow. That internet is, of course, mobile.

Mobile devices will bring the net its next three billion users. Mobile is also 
how youth in the West are online. APew survey 
<http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2013/Teens-and-Tech.aspx> just released said 
that a quarter of America teens use mobile as their essentially their only path 
to the net. They, too, are post-computer.

So if we want to see how we will connect to the net tomorrow, we would be wise 
to look to India, China, and especially net-crazed Brazil as well as South 
Korea. Now we have heard this before, as American prognosticators predicted we 
would all eventually act like mobile-mad Japan, texting novels on our numeric 
keypads. That didn't happen because desktops and then laptops, not WAP phones, 
took America and Europe online.

But now there is a commonality of platform or at least a shared confusion 
about it. In every nation we are getting online through a dazzling choice of 
device sizes with 3-, 4-, 5-, 7-, 8-, 10-, 11-, 13-, and 15-inch screens. Where 
is the line that separates mobile from not?

Does it matter? Perhaps not. Rather than thinking about how we as editors and 
publishers and broadcasters feed our one-size-fits-all content through smaller 
or larger screens, we should realize that mobile is actually a means of 
changing our relationship with the public, from serving them as a mass to 
serving them as individuals.

That may sound like an impossibly daunting task in a nation such as India, 
where the scale is unthinkably large in the eyes of ever-smaller Western media. 
How can a company serve millions and tens of millions of people knowing them as 
people?

Facebook does it, serving more than a billion people with a staff the size of 
a single metropolitan newspaper, which today may serve a few hundred thousand. 
Google does it by giving us services that enable it to learn more about us and 
thus serve each of us with greater relevance and value. That is why Google is 
in the phone business. Android and its apps are signal generators about us, 
telling Google who we are, where we're going, where we've been, what we want....

I'm not suggesting that publishers should go into the phone business, but they 
can use this ever-more-ubiquitous technology to reset their relationship with 
the people we now know as unique users without names.

One example: More than a decade ago, I tried to push the idea that people with 
their mobile phones could provide the best live traffic data to each other. The 
media and traffic-information companies I spoke with rolled their eyes: "This 
isn't what we do", they said. Today, it exists in services such asWaze 
<http://www.waze.com/>, a mobile platform that gathers and shares current 
traffic data from tens of millions of drivers.

If publishers had attempted to provide such a service using available 
technology, they would have learned valuable signals about users -- namely, 
where they live and work -- and would have been able to use that to serve each 
user with relevant content. They also would have learned how to create 
platforms that enable members of the public to share what they know with each 
other, creating tremendous value at very low cost. Instead, it's Google Now 
that knows where I live and work and tells me each day how long it will take me 
to get from one to the other, serving me recommendations and ads for 
restaurants at either end.

If newspaper trade organizations find hope in the rising circulation in India 
and the rest of BRIC, I find hope instead in the mobile usage that allows 
innovators there to leapfrog the big-screen thinking around me and reimagine 
what news and information platforms can be. I come to India hoping for 
inspiration.

Get more articles like this sent direct to your inbox by signing up for free 
membership <http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/media-network/start.php> 
to theGuardian Media Network <http://guardian.co.uk/media-network> â€“ this 
content is brought to you byGuardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. 
 