
In 2012 India crossed the historical threshold of 100 million internet users, 
a figure projected to grow to some 300 million by 2015 and 600 million by 2020. 
This will make India the biggest open internet access market in the world.

As it emerges as a true powerhouse of the global economy, an immense wealth of 
digital innovation echoes out of the region. But as with other countries 
experiencing such rapid growth and expansion, there are political, economic and 
social challenges that an internet enabled Indian society must address.

With a view to providing a platform to examine the influence of the web in 
shaping India's future,the Guardian <> and Google 
<https://www.google.co.uk/intl/en/about/> have joined forces with the 
Delhi-based global consultancyMediaGuru <http://www.mediaguru.in/en/> to run a 
Big Tent Activate Summit at the Taj Palace in New Delhi, India on 21st March 
2013.

The inaugural Summit represents a unique marriage of three multinational media 
brands and two powerhouse international events series;Google's Big Tent series 
<http://big-tent.appspot.com/en/> and the Guardian's Activate Summits 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/activate>, both of which focus on the role the 
internet has to play in shaping global society in the 21st century.

Google executive chairman Eric Schmidt 
<http://www.google.com/about/company/facts/management/> and Guardian 
editor-in-chiefAlan Rusbridger 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/alanrusbridger>, who spoke together on stage 
at Activate 2010 in London 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/video/2010/jul/02/eric-schmidt-google-alan-rusbridger-activate>
, will reprise their keynote roles at the invite only event in New Delhi in 
front of an international and domestic audience of around 300 delegates.

There will also be addresses by Stephanie Cutter 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stephanie_Cutter>, political consultant and 
deputy campaign manager for Obama's 2012 presidential reelection campaign, 
computer scientistUmar Saif <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Umar_Saif>, American 
journalistJeff Jarvis <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jeff_Jarvis>, Shashi Tharoor
 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shashi_Tharoor>, Indian minister of state for 
human resource development andKapil Sibal 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kapil_Sibal>, Indian minister of state for IT and 
communications among other leading Indian and international speakers.

Get more articles like this sent direct to your inbox by signing up for free 
membership to theGuardian Media Network <https://register.guardian.co.uk/media/>
 â€“ this content is brought to you by Guardian Professional.
 