 The stage and television director, Bill Hays, who has died in France aged 67, 
was one of the brightest, most versatile and certainly most cavalier of the 
generation to emerge in the 1960s and 70s. Indeed, on closer examination he was 
much more of a renaissance man than even his closest friends and associates, 
myself included, realised.
A miner's son, he was born in the pit village of Wingate, County Durham, 
before his family moved to Nuneaton, Warwickshire, in the early years of the 
second world war, when his father got work in a local factory. His first major 
encounter with show business was as a student at the Royal Ballet school - a 
Billy Elliott before his time - and he appeared as a mouse in the British 
premiere of Cinderella with Moira Shearer in 1948.

He grew too tall to remain a dancer, but was apparently the right size and 
shape to play rugby union for England schools, a sporting prowess which did him 
no harm during national service. He was fast-tracked through the ranks, and was 
mentioned in dispatches following action in Aden.

After art school in Birmingham, early adventures with Living Theatre in 
Leicester and with Warwickshire cricket club - he was coached by the great Eric 
Hollies in the art of leg-spin bowling - Bill was trawled into television in 
1964, when the launch of BBC2 necessitated a rapid recruitment and training 
programme for directors. Again, he zoomed through the ranks, and his early 
credits included Z Cars (then transmitted live) and countless single plays. He 
somehow juggled his television commitments with theatre work, and it was after 
the last night of his 1967 production of Brendan Behan's The Hostage, at the 
Jesmond Playhouse, Newcastle upon Tyne, that the idea of a north-east 
equivalent of Behan's exuberant masterpiece was born.

Bill organised a meeting of pitman-turned-writer Sid Chaplin, songwriter Alex 
Glasgow and myself - all native sons of County Durham - in Sid's front room, 
and together we made the musical Close the Coalhouse Door, which opened 
triumphantly in Newcastle in April 1968. Later that year, it reached London's 
West End, where it played to rave reviews and minute audiences at the Fortune 
Theatre - or "the graveyard of champions", as we christened it.

Partly on the back of this, Bill was appointed artistic director of the Leeds 
Playhouse, when it opened in 1970, and he asked Alex and me to write the 
opening show. We delivered a slab of in-your-face agitprop called Simon Says, 
which remains the major catastrophe on my CV - "like spending a couple of hours 
in a refrigerated meat warehouse", I later reported. I still remember the names 
of the four people who liked it.

Characteristically, Bill remained totally loyal and unrepentant. He saw it as 
his duty to take risks, and if they ended in tears before bedtime and angry 
letters in the local paper, that proved he was doing his job properly. It was 
almost as if he liked it better that way.

To be sure, his period at the Playhouse had its triumphs - from Pirandello to 
Osborne to Barry Collins - along with a redemptive revival of Coalhouse Door, 
embracing the then Conservative prime minister Edward Heath and the three-day 
week; I even did some rewrites by candlelight during a power cut. But in 1972, 
Bill, a man never totally at ease with anything resembling a committee, left 
the Playhouse to return to the freelance world, where he belonged.

His range of skills - visual, musical and dramatic - are reflected in his 
television credits: severely edited highlights included the play Orde Wingate 
(1976), for which he created a desert in the studio, The Gondoliers (1972), 
Rumpole of the Bailey (1978), Oresteia (1979), Quartermaine's Terms (1987) and 
A Month in the Country (1984). In Rock Follies (1977), he achieved some of the 
most spectacular visual effects ever produced in a television studio: 
"Basically, we just twiddled all the knobs to see what would happen. God knows 
whether they'll ever work again."

Gregarious, charming and irritatingly handsome, Bill had an attitude to work 
characteristic of the period; rehearsals started early but were carefully 
planned to harmonise with licensing hours. This was not, however, an approach 
that sat easily with the management strategies that invaded the television 
industry of the 1990s, and although he directed episodes of soaps, 
disenchantment set in. Thus, in 1995, Bill and his second wife, Catherine 
Schell, moved to France and converted Maison Valentin, a broken-down auberge in 
the Auvergne - first spotted when he was directing episodes of the second world 
war series Wish Me Luck - into a splendid bed-and-breakfast.

It is an idyllic spot, set in woodland where wild mushrooms grow and, 
naturally, handy for the vineyards. Bill and Catherine played host to a 
steadily growing number of loyal and loving visitors, until his health problems 
began to limit his role. But the spirit endured, and even when physically 
incapacitated he continued to send his drawings, generally of snails getting up 
to mischief, to friends around the world.

He will be remembered by a vast extended family of actors, writers, designers 
and musicians as a man with energy to burn and possibly too many talents for 
our specialist times - a renaissance man who maybe deserved a better 
renaissance than the one that turned up in the 1980s and 90s.

Â· He is survived by Catherine, and by his children Daniel and Joanna, and 
their mother, Jill. William 'Bill' Hays, theatre and television director, born 
March 15 1938; died March 2 2006
 