
Retailers have rung up another record Black Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/black-friday>, but high streets remained 
calm as shoppers opted to hunt for bargains on mobile phones and computers.

The association for online retailers, IMRG, estimated that £1.27bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/24/britons-expected-to-spend-13bn-on-black-friday-bargains>
 was spent on Friday, up 16% on last year. It will be the busiest day in a week 
of promotions expected to deliver online retail sales of £6.77bn in the seven 
days to Monday 28 November.

In the six years since Black Friday first arrived in the UK, the action has 
shifted away from high street stores. Widely reported scuffles in stores in 
2014 and the increasing ease of scanning for the best deals via the internet 
have encouraged bargain hunters to shop on the web.

Tesco opened hundreds of its largest stores at 5am and put on extra security 
guards and crowd barriers. Sainsbury’s, Debenhams, John Lewis and Currys PC 
World also opened stores early, but there were few queues.

At Tesco Extra in Streatham, south London, there were only 11 people in the 
queue when the supermarket opened at 5am – barely outnumbering the security 
guards.

Some of those queuing had been there since 4.30am and were surprised how few 
people had turned up compared with last year. One shopper, who bought two TVs, 
said: “This is quiet, very calm. Last year at Sainsbury’s it was crazy. I 
thought it would be a real rabble again.” The supermarket’s top selling items 
included HD TVs, FIFA 17 video games, iPad minis and Google Chromecast devices.

Sainsbury’s in Harringay, north London, was equally quiet and it was about 
5.50am before even a small queue gathered outside. One shopper said: “People 
don’t want to come out because of the fighting. They are doing it all online.”

John Lewis <https://www.theguardian.com/business/johnlewis>, which racked up 
the biggest sales week in its 150-year history around Black Friday last year, 
said overnight sales through its website were ahead of expectations with five 
orders placed every second. The department store joined a wave of major 
retailers reporting double digit surges in online sales from midnight through 
to lunchtime.

The Argos chief executive, John Rogers, said there had been 500,000 visits to 
its website in the first hour of online trading between midnight and 1pm – up 
50% on last year. The company said 80% of its online sales came via mobile 
phones and its top sellers included iPads, games consoles, Dyson vacuum 
cleaners and Beats headphones.

Currys PC World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/24/britons-expected-to-spend-13bn-on-black-friday-bargains>
 said more than 500,000 shoppers had visited its website before 6am with orders 
up 40% on 2015. Over the day it racked up 13% more visits than last year as 
shoppers snapped up 241% more fitness monitors and 60% more drones. Paul 
Martin, UK head of retail at advisory firm KPMG said: “This has been a pretty 
big event for the online channel, but in the physical environment it seems to 
have run out of steam.”

Digital agency Salmon said that between midnight and 9am 75% of shopper 
traffic came via mobile devices and 57% over the day as a whole. It also 
flagged a spike in the number of overseas shoppers as the weaker pound enhanced 
the deals on offer in euro or dollar terms.


Nationwide said its shoppers carried out over 2.4m transactions between 
midnight and 17.30, 31% more than on a normal Friday and 13% up on last Black 
Friday. Its account holders spent over £115m, up 38% on a normal Friday.








 