
What Is Not Yours Is Not Yours by Helen Oyeyemi

It’s hard to believe, but What Is Not Yours Is Not Yours is Helen Oyeyemi’s 
sixth book and she is still only 31. The collection features nine stories 
linked by the theme of keys, doors and unlocking, with many of the same 
storytelling devices from her previous books: magic, fantasy, surrealism, 
modern-day fairytales with real-world characters, haplessly dropped into the 
absurd. Presence is the story of a married couple, a grief counselor and a 
psychologist, who find that they’ve hallucinated the entire existence of their 
son. In ‘Sorry’ Won’t Sweeten Her Tea, the character Anton finds himself 
helping to raise his boyfriend’s two daughters, yet also fish-sitting for a 
traveling friend, which is to say that even the most grounded of stories here 
have some element of the peculiar. Oyeyemi’s imagination is impressive and 
vast: this is not your unhappy-wife-contemplating-divorce-for-300-pages kind of 
book. Her ability to conceive her stories on such a grand scale is what makes 
her work so magnetic, sucking the reader into any number of netherworlds. 
Perhaps it’s this ability to consume and be consumed that keeps Oyeyemi 
constantly, and prolifically, at work.KM

Black History Month: the best movies to watch in February
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/05/black-history-month-best-movies-to-watch-february>
Gorilla, My Love by Toni Cade Bambara

A prominent figure during the black arts movement, Toni Cade Bambara was an 
extraordinary thinker, womanist, editor and fiction writer. In her debut 
collection of stories, 1972’s Gorilla, My Love, she introduced us to a series 
of young black girls, all resonating with voice. Bright-minded and spunky, 
their first-person narratives wonderfully capture the sound of black speech. 
The title story takes place at a movie theater, where Hazel has gone to see a 
film called Gorilla, My Love with her older brother and his friend Hunca Bubba, 
with whom she is secretly, hopelessly in love. That feeling – the agony of 
being too young to hang, and the belief you might never get to grow up – is a 
recurring theme. Elsewhere, Bambara’s characters yearn in that same, sweet way, 
like the girl in Happy Birthday who goes around chatting up her neighbors in 
hopes they’ll suddenly remember what day it is. Bambara captures her characters 
and their environments with a film-maker’s touch and a mother’s empathy. She’s 
wise enough to have learned that everyone grows up, and to remember a time when 
she hadn’t.KM

From #BlackLivesMatter to Black Liberation by Keeanga-Yahmahtta Taylor

Keeanga-Yahmatta Taylor’s has not written the average rushed first-wave book 
on a social movement. Taylor, a professor of African American studies at 
Princeton, is the rare academic writer whosesense of humor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/13/student-activism-university-of-missouri-racism-universities-colleges>
 is as sharp as her scholarship. She’s written a sweeping yet concise history 
not just of the Black Lives Matter movement, but of the past seven years under 
the first black president and of how the 20th century led to our current state 
of woke uprising. It’s full of gems of historical insight (“Black revolutionary 
Stokely Carmichael and social scientist Charles Hamilton coined the phrase 
‘institutional racism’ – anticipating the coming turn toward colorblindness and 
the idea that racism was only present if the intention was undeniable”) and it 
fearlessly tackles what black liberation looks like when it happens in a 
black-governed city 40 miles from a black-occupied White House. (“If the murder 
of Mike Brown and the rebellion in Ferguson were reminiscent of the old Jim 
Crow, then the murder of Freddie Gray and the Baltimore uprising symbolize the 
new Black political elite.”)ST
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fblack-history-month-reading-list-best-books-february-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72327bfd40730500dd1b5df31c071839851cd7d5%2F0_163_4928_2956%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Black%20History%20Month%20reading%20list%3A%20the%20best%20books%20this%20February&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fblack-history-month-reading-list-best-books-february-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Black%20History%20Month%20reading%20list%3A%20the%20best%20books%20this%20February&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fblack-history-month-reading-list-best-books-february-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72327bfd40730500dd1b5df31c071839851cd7d5%2F0_163_4928_2956%2F4928.jpg>
 Members of the Overpass Light Brigade stage a protest during a Republican 
debate in Milwaukee. Photograph: Abe Van Dyke/Demotix/Corbis 
Not Straight, Not White: Black Gay Men from the March on Washington to the 
Aids Crisis by Kevin Mumford

Kevin Mumford, who brilliantly dissected queerness and miscegenation in 
Interzones: Black/White Sex Districts in Chicago and New York in the Early 
Twentieth Century 
<http://www.amazon.com/Interzones-Districts-Chicago-Twentieth-Century/dp/0231104936>
, returns with the equally genius Not Straight, Not White. “Black gay lives 
matter,” he writes, but queer history has avoided “important racial questions: 
about the role of racial representations [and] the changing construction of 
masculinity [and] the struggles to reconcile gay desire with religious faith”. 
Meanwhile, “the field of African American history has flourished over the past 
25 years, and yet here again much of the scholarship seems to have overlooked 
the contributions of black gay men”. He beautifully sketches out the lives of 
those who made DeRay McKesson’s prominence possible: who organized the March on 
Washington (Bayard Rustin), who appeared as the first openly gay black man on 
film (Jason Holliday), and who gave his life to the struggle even when Aids 
took him too soon (Joseph Beam). He also writes how Lorraine Hansberry’s 
“passionate female relationships appear to have freed her imagination across 
and through differences while the traditional Left continued to restrict such a 
vision”. Mumford’s book and scholarship are indispensable for those who reject 
the erasure of black queerness in American civil rights history.ST

Bulletproof Diva: Tales of Race, Sex, and Hair by Lisa Jones

By the time Bulletproof Diva by Lisa Jones was published in 1994, two years 
after I graduated from college, it seemed that I had finally figured out how to 
embody my own black identity as a biracial woman raised by white parents. That 
said, the path was long and arduous, and oftentimes very lonely. I sought 
solace in the work of black women writers, among them Audre Lorde, Toni 
Morrison, Toni Cade Bambara and Maya Angelou – so much so that my own first 
book, I Know What the Red Clay Looks Like, would center their voices as the 
impetus for a culture of black female singularity. But when I discovered Jones, 
who was then a columnist for the Village Voice, I felt reflected and known, 
validated, in a way I never had before. In Bulletproof Diva, a collection of 
essays, most of which were culled, at least in part, from her Voice column 
(Skin Trade), Jones, who is the daughter of white feminist author Hettie Jones 
and the late radical black poet Amari Baraka (formerly Leroi Jones), writes 
saliently about gender, race, political activism and hair. Observant, 
thoughtful and self-aware, she succeeds in offering up very personal, equally 
prescient stories about identity as a biracial, black-identifying woman without 
intoning any sort of resentment or snark.RC

The Beautiful Things That Heaven Bears by Dinaw Mengestu

The Beautiful Things That Heaven Bears by Dinaw Mengestu is a wickedly 
gorgeous novel that tells the story of African immigrant Sepha Stephanos, who 
fled the Ethiopian revolution after seeing his father beaten nearly to death by 
soldiers. Sepha moves to a predominantly black neighborhood in Washington DC, 
where he runs a grocery store that makes little money, and attracts a few 
schoolkids during the daytime and mostly prostitutes and drunks at night. He is 
lonely and misses his family back in Addis Ababa, but is often buoyed by the 
support of his friends, two fellow immigrants – a Congolese waiter and a Kenyan 
engineer – who are vivacious, wry and loyal. Gentrification in Sepha’s 
neighborhood brings a white woman named Judith, and her young biracial 
daughter, Naomi, who move into a neglected house nextdoor to his grocery store 
and, in the process of renovating, the three become friends. Though his 
relationship with Judith only dances around a potentially romantic involvement, 
Sepha falls hard for their friendship, as well as the company of her daughter, 
who joins him most days after school to read The Brothers Karamazov together. 
Mengestu writes through Sepha’s eyes, during one such reading session with 
Naomi: “Every time I looked at her I became aware of just how seemingly perfect 
this time was. I thought about how years from now I would remember this with a 
crushing, heartbreaking nostalgia, because of course I knew even then that I 
would eventually find myself standing here alone.”RC
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fblack-history-month-reading-list-best-books-february-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc81b7cf609938e8587b1c4f9998167926500cff%2F17_9_2352_1411%2F2352.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Black%20History%20Month%20reading%20list%3A%20the%20best%20books%20this%20February&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fblack-history-month-reading-list-best-books-february-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Black%20History%20Month%20reading%20list%3A%20the%20best%20books%20this%20February&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fblack-history-month-reading-list-best-books-february-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc81b7cf609938e8587b1c4f9998167926500cff%2F17_9_2352_1411%2F2352.jpg>
 Octavia Butler poses for a photograph near some of her novels at University 
Book Store in Seattle. Photograph: Joshua Trujillo/AP 
Kindred by Octavia Butler

Butler’s novels as a body of work are equal parts visionary and philosophical 
to help us understand systems of oppression beyond a realistic rendering of the 
world we know. In Butler’s science fiction through a black lens, story isn’t 
sacrificed to didacticism. Butler means for us to experience the lives of 
heroes and villains to understand things we cannot, to try to reach a kind of 
equity in existence. In Kindred, Butler imagines the unthinkable: Dana, a 
modern California woman of the 20th century, is transported back to the 19th 
century meeting her white (slaveowner) and black ancestors and in the process, 
witnesses vulgar realities of plantation life. There is no explanation of how 
she is summoned back in time but this peculiar phenomenon begins on her 26th 
birthday, weeks before the 200th anniversary of the signing of the Declaration 
of Independence. Butler challenges the reader to live history as moments of 
humanity and love turn quickly to brutal rape and violence. The story is 
haunting, brutal yet brilliant in that it asks the reader to confront harsh 
truths about family and American identity, the legacy of slavery as well as the 
fact of slavery in shaping the American society.SMc

At The Dark End of The Street by Danielle L McGuire

The dominant narrative of the forces that shaped the civil rights movement 
often centers on violence and indignities experienced that are specific to 
black men. As black men were being lynched, falsely accused of raping white 
women, southern black women were under siege at the hands of white men. McGuire 
delves into the background of NAACP investigator Rosa Parks, who in 1944 
interviewed Recy Taylor – who was raped in a small town outside Montgomery, 
Alabama. She introduces the reader to a militant and shrewd Rosa Parks, 
upending the image of a meek, old woman in spontaneous protest. McGuire 
foregrounds stories of physical and sexual violence endured by black women in 
the Jim Crow south and their resistance efforts. Black women’s experiences of 
abuse from white bus drivers and police officers, and the failure of 
enforcement efforts by local officials to protect black women in cases of 
sexual assault and rape led to black women organizing a grassroots movement 
that would seed the future bus boycotts and protest actions that fueled the 
movement. McGuire orders a difficult history, one where rape of black women is 
a tool of white supremacy for intimidation, power and fear, and also reveals 
another aspect of the black American liberation struggle as organized 
resistance to white male sexual aggression and violence.SMc
 