
The passing of the EDF Energy Cup will not be lamented. Next month's final 
will, like the other three, be an Anglo-Welsh affair after the Blues, who have 
not won a trophy in their six-year existence, succeeded where the Ospreys had 
failed a couple of hours before and they will face Gloucester at Twickenham.

The two sides have already met twice this season, the Blues winning both 
Heineken Cup pool matches, prevailing at Kingsholm despite playing for an hour 
with 14 men after Tom James was sent off. The Welsh region's outside-half, 
Nicky Robinson, will be up against the club he will be joining in the summer 
after eight years at the Arms Park.

It will be a team from the Welsh capital's first appearance at Twickenham 
since the mid-1980s, when Cardiff used to play Harlequins there every October, 
on the weekend the clocks went back. They went forward today, as if signifying 
how the Blues, after years of frustration and failure, have developed into a 
side capable of competing against the best.

That the Blues made hard work of subduing an error-prone Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> was probably due to the 
fact that they had played only two matches in six weeks and were welcoming back 
their Wales players after two months â€“ those at least who were left standing, 
which did not include Martyn Williams and Andy Powell.

The Blues hope the duo will be fit for the Heineken Cup quarter-final against 
Toulouse next month, which will be played a week before the EDF final, and they 
missed them last night as the Saints fought back in a game that should have 
been beyond them by the interval.

The Blues, despite showing signs of rust, were the more cohesive side but the 
normally reliable Ben Blair missed three of his five kicks at goal, ensuring 
that Northampton had a toehold throughout, and the Saints scrambled well 
defensively after having their line punctured frequently by Leigh Halfpenny and 
James, who exploited some aimless kicking.

Blair gave the Blues the lead in the second minute with a 35-yard penalty for 
handling in the ruck and there was a feistiness to the opening, abetted by two 
props in contention for a Lions place, Gethin Jenkins and Euan Murray, packing 
down against each other. The Northampton hooker, Dylan Hartley, was spoken to 
twice by the referee and it was the England forward's error that led to the 
game's opening try on 34 minutes.

Hartley overthrew at a line-out in his own 25 and the ball was claimed on the 
floor by Robin Sowden-Taylor. The Blues moved it quickly from one side to the 
other and the scrum-half, Jason Spice, dummied over from close range to give 
his side an 8-0 interval lead. Northampton's best move had ended when the 
centre, Joe Ansbro, knocked on after James Downey had split the defence, but 
Ansbro scored in the left-hand corner one minute after the restart.

It looked as if the game would drift into extra-time, but Blair finally found 
his range. The EDF tournament itself may be running out of energy, but the 
Blues power on.
 