
It is part of my job description to be offensive. I can, if I wish, make a 
joke hoping that Alex Salmond, now he is at the end of his political life, lays 
20,000 fish eggs and dies. I can make a joke pointing out that David Cameron 
told off Sri Lanka for human rights abuses committed with weapons Britain sold 
it – like Ronald McDonald calling you a fat bastard.

The most I risk from saying such things is alienating a stranger. The same 
cannot be said ofMohammed Asghar 
<http://www.reprieve.org.uk/cases/mohammadasghar/>. He is 70, and suffers from 
paranoid schizophrenia. He was sectioned under the Mental Health Act and 
admitted to a psychiatric hospital in Edinburgh. When they discharged him he 
went to Pakistan, perhaps to escape what he thought were the undue restrictions 
on his liberty. Before he had been there long – four years ago now, in 2010 –he 
was facing a death sentence for blasphemy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/24/briton-death-sentence-pakistan-blasphemy>
.

There is no doubt I have offended many people. No doubt, also, that I have 
blasphemed. I sometimes try to offend as part of my routine – after all, the 
essence of humour, even in a child, is the effort to shock and surprise. I 
don’t advocate offending people purely for the sake of offence, but my own 
excuse is far weaker than Asghar’s: I do it for laughs, he does it because he 
is seriously mentally ill, and cannot help it.

Apparently Asghar claimed to be a prophet sent by God. As his Scottish doctor 
reports 
<http://www.reprieve.org.uk/downloads/2011_06_17_PUB_Affidavit_of_Dr_McLennan_-_certified_by_FCO_and_PHC.pdf>
, if he said that it was definitely his psychosis talking. I cannot believe 
that the overwhelming majority of Muslims in Pakistan, Scotland or anywhere 
else think that he should be executed for this. Yet a small minority of vocal 
people do, and one of them – a police officer at the maximum security prison 
where he was being held – tried to murder Asghar last Thursday. The guard burst 
into his cell with a pistol and shot him in the back. He shot again, but 
missed, before being partially restrained by others. Then, as Asghar was being 
taken to hospital, the guard managed to get a last kick in, crying out that he 
wanted to “kill the blasphemer”.

There has been a recent epidemic of blasphemy charges in Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan>. Forty-eight people have been 
killed before they could get to a trial. Many more are being prosecuted. It is 
difficult for a brave lawyer to defend a client, because if you repeat what the 
person is accused of saying, that is blasphemous too.

If you think I am joking, not long ago a prominent human rights lawyer 
representing an English professor accused of making a blasphemous Facebook post 
was shot dead – after the prosecution lawyers had threatened to kill him in 
front of a judge. A politician who discussed reforming the law on TV is now 
being prosecuted for what he said, and two others were assassinated (one by his 
own security guard, who is now lauded as a hero).

I realise that I am not the brave person who is walking the streets of 
Islamabad with a placard. But we need to stand up with the people who are brave 
enough to take this issue on.

To be critical is not the same as being anti-Islam – rather, it is to advocate 
for a rational, sensible interpretation of the religion.Islam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam> does not allow for the execution of 
the insane; neither does it sanction those who, for their own reasons, take the 
law into their own hands. On the other hand, to fail to stand up for Asghar and 
others like him is to cede the ground to those who think it’s OK to kill 
people who say odd things.

This week Cameron is apparently planning to cede ground to people on the 
fringes of his own party, as he calls for Britain to renege on its obligations 
to the European Convention on Human Rights. Instead of moaning that there are 
too many human rights, Cameron should be focused on the very human plight of 
Mohammed Asghar.

Mohammad Asghar is being assisted by legal charity Reprieve, further 
information on his case can be found at www.reprieve.org.uk 
<http://www.reprieve.org.uk/press/2014_09_29_prime_minister_opportunity_asgha/>
 