
"I chose my degree thinking about the field I wanted to work in, though I also 
wanted to study a subject that I loved. I knew I wanted to work in sustainable 
development because when I was 13 I went to a conference where I heard a polar 
explorer talk. His life had been changed by global warming. I carried on being 
interested throughout school and the summer that I left I went to the World 
Summit on Sustainable Development. It was a pivotal moment for me, to be 
exposed to all these amazing people and their ideas."

Emma says that she is pleased that public opinion is catching up with her 
interest. "I feel really lucky because I seem to have hit it just at the right 
time," she says. "Even at the time I was at the summit it was quite a new idea, 
and these days it's so much more mainstream."

We asked Sue Welland, founder and creative director of the Carbon Neutral 
Company to "mock interview" Emma for an entry-level job. Then we asked her what 
she thought.

Sue says ...

We're the longest established company in climate change and we've been going 
for 10 years. There's been a massive change even in the last nine months in the 
whole industry. It's developing all the time. It's always been very dynamic, 
but it's seismic at the moment. That has had an impact on our recruiting as 
well. We're expanding all the time. We have 35 staff at the moment, and we're 
estimating that will be up to 60 by the end of the year. We get a lot of 
approaches from people who are interested in working for us too. I get about 10 
a week, personally, and the company as a whole probably gets another 20.

We mix passion and professionalism. We're company that aims to do good, but 
we're not a charity and we're looking for an equal mix of commercial instinct 
and an interest in doing the right thing. You can't only be interested in the 
issue of climate change because you have to be able to focus on the business 
element of what we do too. But equally it's true that our staff tend to stay 
with the company for a long time because they're committed and believe in what 
we're doing.

It's such a new industry, we can't look at what other people have done before 
us. I look for people who are confident, energetic, driven, creative, with a 
global perspective and integrity.

In fitting those criteria, Emma was a good culture match for the company. She 
came across as bright, energetic, interested and engaged. She had everything we 
would look for. She has relevant experience on her CV but that isn't 
necessarily what's paramount: it's the skills that are most important.

We were talking to her with a marketing assistant job in mind, but she wasn't 
right for that because it's not where her interests lie. But that doesn't mean 
we would dismiss her: it happens quite often that we'll be talking to someone 
about one job, decide they're not quite right for that, but think they might 
work well somewhere else.

If you have the core skills that we are interested in, a "no" in one area 
might be a "yes" in another and Emma does have all the things we're looking for.

Emma says ...

I think it went really well. I enjoyed it a lot, it was a nice office and it 
was interesting to see how the company works. It was a smaller organisation 
than I expected and I shot myself in the foot a bit because I had been talking 
about how I liked working with lots of people, and then Sue said, "Well, there 
are only 35 of us here." But I think it would be very exciting to work 
somewhere where you can make a difference. I think my experience shows that I'm 
happy to do things where I have to be independent and innovate.

It was great to meet Sue in particular because I admire her as a woman who has 
set up a business. Normally I have been interviewed by men, so it was different 
for me.

I know I can do a good job because I've got a passion for the industry and 
good experience. It's just a question of who gives me a chance to prove it!

Â· If you are an undergraduate or recent graduate in need of a career blind 
date, send your CV tograduate@theguardian.com <mailto:graduate@theguardian.com>
 