
Art made with bodily fluids appears the essence of the weirdly and wonderfully 
new.Artist Rose-Lynn Fisher <http://www.rose-lynnfisher.com/tears.html>, for 
instance, has just made a series of landscape images using what she claims are 
100 varieties of tears – revealing the difference between tears of sorrow and 
tears caused by chopping onions, and many other instances of weeping. Well, if 
you cry easily, you may as well get some art out it, I suppose.

This tearful art joins with outpourings of piss – most famously Andres 
Serrano's Piss Christ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/sep/28/andres-serrano-piss-christ-new-york>
 – and ejaculations of semen likeVito Acconci's Seedbed 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seedbed_%28performance_piece%29> (who masturbated 
for eight hours) in the copious archive of body fluid art. Another artist who 
hasused semen is Antony Gormley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2002/nov/20/art.artsfeatures>, while 
Matthew Barney extrudes all kinds of strange stuff inThe Cremaster Trilogy 
<http://www.cremaster.net/home.htm>, most of it probably synthetic but we can't 
be sure.

Yet the power of bodily fluids is no modern discovery. In ancient Maya art, we 
see depictions ofbloodletting rituals that were central to the Maya religion 
<http://www.britishmuseum.org/explore/highlights/highlight_objects/aoa/y/maya_royal_blood-letting.aspx>
. The art of the Aztecs includes impressivereceptacles for the human blood that 
flowed from mass sacrifices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/sep/17/moctezuma-aztec-ruler-british-museum>
. Thevery first painters <http://www.pechmerle.com/english/introduction.html> 
mixed pigment with their own spit.

No art, however, is fixated quite so vividly on body fluids as that of 
Christian Europe. When artists today use body fluids to express inner states – 
which is what Rose-Lynn Fisher says she's doing: tears are a primal human act 
of communication, she insists – they are drawing on the blood, sweat, pus and 
tears that have been part of Christian art for centuries.

One of the great artistic relics of the middle ages was the Veil of Saint 
Veronica <http://paranormal.about.com/library/weekly/aa060799.htm>, a cloth 
said to be imprinted with the bloodied, weeping face of Christ at his death. It 
was widely depicted by artists who used it asphysical evidence of what Christ 
looked like <http://www.nga.gov/collection/gallery/gg33/gg33-41617-exhibit.html>
.

It has gone but that great medieval fake, the Turin Shroud, survives. Some of 
the marks on it may be bloodstains. Since carbon dating has placed it in the 
medieval period long after the death of Christ, the cunning forgers who created 
this bizarre artwork evidently used actual blood to add to its aura of reality.

In doing so they were only going an inch further than all the painters and 
sculptors who depictedChrist bleeding on the cross 
<http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/47/Mathis_Gothart_Gr%C3%BCnewald_058.jpg>
 and thetears of Mary 
<http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/40/Giotto_-_Scrovegni_-_-36-_-_Lamentation_%28The_Mourning_of_Christ%29.jpg>
.

So Fisher and other artists who use bodily fluids are really part of a drive 
to make art physical and real that is deeply written into the art history of 
the Christian and post-Christian world.

Yet for all this passionate literalism, the most powerful tears in modern art 
are not "real" at all, nor do they look it.Picasso's Weeping Woman 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/picasso-weeping-woman-t05010> in Tate 
Modern, who cries an allegorical river of pain and redemption, proves you don"t 
need to actually cry, masturbate or bleed to be a great artist.
 