
The Cardiff Blues <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cardiffblues> and 
Gloucester are regarded as the biggest underachievers in Wales and England, but 
one of them will rid themselves of that tag at Twickenham next month. Whatever 
the result, it will be a bittersweet moment for the Welsh region's 
outside-half, Nicky Robinson.

The 27-year-old is leaving for Gloucester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby> in the summer, with the 
Wales scrum-half Gareth Cooper moving the other way. Having been with the Blues 
from the region's inception in 2003, which followed the decline of Cardiff from 
inaugural Heineken Cup finalists to a club that made up the numbers in Europe, 
Robinson acknowledges that he is leaving at a time when the team has finally 
made it to the threshold of success.

"Leaving the Blues was a difficult decision to make," said Robinson. "I knew 
the team was moving forward but it was simply that I fancied a different 
experience. Playing in the final against Gloucester would not be a problem for 
me: winning a trophy would be the best way to mark the end of my time in 
Cardiff."

There is a precedent of sorts â€“ the former Wales lock Steve Williams played 
for London Irish in their 2002 Powergen Cup final victory againstNorthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints>, shortly after announcing 
he had signed for the Saints. "Nicky wants to leave us on a high and I know 
that money was not the reason he moved," said the Blues' head coach, David 
Young. "I can't see any problem in picking him for the final."

The Blues have won all 10 matches in the EDF Energy Cup and the Heineken Cup 
this season, a contrast to their indifferent form in the Magners League, and 
they prevailed in a tense encounter on Saturday evening despite having played 
only two matches in seven weeks and those without their Wales internationals, 
during the Six Nations.

"I was concerned we would run out of steam," said Young, who said he hoped the 
injured back-rowers Martyn Williams and Andy Powell would be fit for next 
month's Heineken Cup quarter-final against Toulouse, which is followed a week 
later by the EDF final. "We have come a long way in six years and it has been a 
bumpy ride. We face probably the two biggest games in our history next month 
but we know we are not the finished article."

Northampton have come a long way in a shorter time. A year ago they were 
playing in National League One and despite this loss they still have the chance 
of a passport to next season's Heineken Cup, through the European Challenge Cup.

The Blues held the ascendancy for long periods in a physical contest. The 
Wales wing Leigh Halfpenny was especially menacing but both sides struggled 
with the final pass and composure was lacking on an evening when only two kicks 
at goal, out of eight, were successful. It was a typical semi-final where the 
result counted for everything and for the large contingent of long-suffering 
Blues supporters it meant a return to Twickenham, a ground where, in their 
previous incarnation as Cardiff, their team used to play Harlequins every 
October until the inception of the English league towards the end of the 1980s. 
It was a fixture the Welsh club very rarely lost.

Cardiff Blues Blair; Halfpenny, Shanklin, Roberts, James; N Robinson, Spice; 
Jenkins, G Williams (R Thomas, 66), Filise (Yapp, 71), D Jones (Davies, 59), 
Tito (capt), Molitika, Sowden-Taylor, Rush (Morgan, 80).

Try Spice. Pens Blair 2.

Northampton Foden; Diggin, Ansbro, Downey, Reihana (capt); Myler (Everitt, 
63), Dickson (Dickens, 73); Smith (Tonga'uiha, 50), Hartley, Murray, Fernandez 
Lobbe (Easter, 73), Kruger, Best, Gray (Lawes, 69), Wilson.

Try Ansbro.

Referee G Clancy (Ireland). Attendance 26,774.
 