
It is the day before Bo Burnham's 20th birthday. That's a watershed moment for 
any youngster – but more so for Burnham, the big story of this year's Fringe, 
where he has played sell-out gigs night after night. "I'm glad it's not gonna 
be 'teenage this, teenage that' any more," he says. "Maybe they'll stop calling 
me 'YouTube sensation', too."

Well, they might drop the "YouTube", but "sensation" is here to stay. Burnham, 
a cult comedy star since he was 16, enters adulthood with not just Edinburgh 
but the world at his feet: in the US, he's doing a movie with Judd Apatow, 
maker of Knocked Up. Yet Burnham still has an angsty, contrary sense of 
himself. You can sense this in his show, which has surprised anyone who knew 
Massachusetts-born Burnham only for his YouTube songs, which have been 
downloaded 60m times since he uploaded the first, My Whole Family Thinks I'm 
Gay, from his bedroom in 2006.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FLZoO8LyizLA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FLZoO8LyizLA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FLZoO8LyizLA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
This was written to amuse his brother, but it went viral, and Burnham added to 
it, with ditties about the KKK and the Easter bunny on crack. His wordplay was 
spectacular, but the joke – innocent youth sings monstrous songs – was a crude 
one.

"I was being called a shock comic," says Burnham. "I hated that. It's so cheap 
and stupid." So his live act, while retaining some shocks, is more 
sophisticated. Burnham flits between personae so swiftly you can't keep up. "I 
misdirect the audience," he says, "so they have no idea where they are or who 
they're listening to." Is it the erudite rapper citing poet Robert Frost, or 
the gag-man giving loopy definitions of the word irony ("My grandmother was a 
cancer – and she was actually killed by a giant crab")? Or is the real Burnham 
the pernickety statistician who insists "the average person has one fallopian 
tube"?

"I was trying to think what my show would be like if I was myself in it," he 
says. "I don't think it would be exciting. There are all these political 
satirists who are so serious, deconstructing religion and politics. Or there's 
the guy who's like, 'Everything's warm and made of marshmallow.' These are both 
false honesties – one too angry, one too naive." His solution is to be barely 
honest at all. "I'm honest for maybe two minutes. If a comic is himself, 
there'll be things he can't do – because he has to adhere to that persona. I 
don't have to adhere to anything, so I can literally do anything."

Burnham gave up a place at university to try comedy. "In my first year, I 
wanted to fucking die. I'd be on the road, in South Dakota, looking on Facebook 
at all my friends at parties." What's more, some fellow comics ("never the good 
ones") made it clear they saw YouTube as an illegitimate route to standup. 
"People look at me and go, 'He's only successful because he's got a bunch of 
16-year-old girls at his back who don't understand comedy.' Well they do. In 
any case, no one hates me more than I do, no one's more self-conscious about 
that than I am."

What does he mean? "I don't mind having 16-year-old fans, but I hate just 
having 16-year-old fans. I want more diversity." He's getting it in Edinburgh, 
thanks to rave reviews (if he isn't on today's comedy awards shortlist, there 
will be many raised eyebrows). But that's not making Burnham happy either. 
"Postmodern comedy doesn't work well with very old audiences, because it's 
making fun of the comedy they enjoy," he says. "And if you come to see me 
without expectations, you see a 19-year-old kid assuming confidence without 
justification, which is a weird irony. Whereas, if you see me with good reviews 
in mind, you'll think, 'Look at him wearing his reviews on his sleeve.'"

One response might be to lighten up, to admit to anxiety, to be himself, even. 
But that's not Burnham's way. "I'm not a very relate-able person. For me, that 
would be very false." The multiple personalities – that's as close as we, and 
perhaps he, can get to the realBo Burnham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/bo-burnham>, at least for now.

He returns to a college tour in the US, and his script for an "anti-High 
School Musical", commissioned by Apatow, has been submitted; others are in the 
pipeline. "I have no rush to be famous," he says, however, "or to be in 
movies." So will he stick with live comedy? "Maybe one day I'll grow out of 
this, and be like, 'What am I doing? This is my job? I should, like, lay a 
brick or something.'"

What he won't do, he vows, in a very teenage way, is sell out. "If I feel I 
don't have something valuable to provide," says the man who insists his work 
means nothing, "I won't provide it."
 