
You can prepare for a Bob Geldof <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bob-geldof>
 interview, but you cannot prepare for Bob Geldof himself. Not that he isn’t 
how you imagine: he is, but more so. Taller, louder, funnier, better read, more 
sweary, more informed, more opinionated. More everything. He rarely draws 
breath. He fires off stats about the planet’s resources (“Humans will need 
1,700% of the planet’s resources in 80 years”), and the energy drain that is 
Google (“Every time you search for something on Google, you use as much energy 
as driving a car 65 metres”). He berates the BBC’s Africa coverage (“They only 
want the noble primitive version”), then switches to my career, though we’ve 
met only once before: “Telly’s where the money’s at, Sawyer, get with the 
programme!” If you were to draw a cartoon of us during this interview, I would 
have my hair blown back, as though facing a hurricane.

We are at his record company, in a stupid/trendy meeting room, at a table for 
16, furnished with beverages. Geldof is wearing sunglasses. I ask him if he’s 
going to take them off and he peers over them at me, prodding at his right eye.

“I’m getting a stye,” he says. “And I wanted to be all twinkly for this 
interview, so I went into Boots to get some stuff for styes and they don’t make 
it any more because the new thinking is, the stye will just go on its own!” He 
uses the same tone about this as he does about Google: utter outrage. “They 
said use Optrex, so I left immediately and I went into Superdrug and they said 
the same. Unbelievable. So I put Zovirax [a fairly heavy-duty cold sore 
treatment] on my eye.”

You idiot! I say, and take a look. His eye seems fine, if crumpled. With his 
tufty grey hair and skinny legs, he doesn’t look healthy, but he looks exactly 
as he should: like a hungry mongrel dog. Anyhow, his style is irrelevant. With 
Geldof, it’s all about his personality. When he’s in full flow, which is most 
of the time, the conversation flies past like a speeding truck. You just grab 
on by your fingernails. Oddly, it feels as if Geldof does, too. He slightly 
loses control of things when he’s speaking: bashes his hands on the table, 
swooshes his phone to the floor. He keeps getting up to pour himself a black 
coffee. Every time he does, he can’t remember which of the three jugs contains 
coffee and flails between them. At one point, he pours himself a cup of hot 
water. Without breaking flow, he just spins around and chucks the water into 
the bin, then fills up and continues.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Foct%2F18%2Fbob-geldof-peaches-paula-yates-press-boomtown-rats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F15%2F1413389948961%2F3662e30e-4a23-437d-8e80-e0f5afbe5e8f-1020x818.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bob%20Geldof%3A%20'We%20are%20a%20normal%20family.%20And%20one%20of%20us%20didn't%20make%20it'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Foct%2F18%2Fbob-geldof-peaches-paula-yates-press-boomtown-rats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bob%20Geldof%3A%20%27We%20are%20a%20normal%20family.%20And%20one%20of%20us%20didn%27t%20make%20it%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Foct%2F18%2Fbob-geldof-peaches-paula-yates-press-boomtown-rats%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F15%2F1413389948961%2F3662e30e-4a23-437d-8e80-e0f5afbe5e8f-1020x818.jpeg>
 The Boomtown Rats. Photograph: Harry Goodwin/Rex 
We are here to talk about the Boomtown Rats <http://www.boomtownrats.co.uk/>, 
which some might say is the least interesting thing about Bob Geldof. His life 
in music has long been overshadowed by his other lives, which we will come to: 
his anti-poverty campaigning and, more tragically, his personal life, 
particularly the death of his ex-wife Paula Yates from a heroin overdose in 
2000 and, in April this year, thedeath of his daughter Peaches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/apr/07/peaches-geldof-found-dead-aged-25>
 in similar circumstances.

But the Geldof story began with the Boomtown Rats and last year, for reasons 
of “age, curiosity and cash”, the Rats re-formed. They played at theIsle of 
Wight festival <http://www.isleofwightfestival.com/> and were a triumph, so 
they did a few small dates and released an album of their old tunes. Now, 
they’re about to tour all the places they didn’t get to last year, and release 
another, slightly different album of their old tunes. Some of the band have 
mortgages to pay.

The Boomtown Rats formed in Dún Laoghaire <http://www.dun-laoghaire.com/>, a 
Dublin suburb, in 1975. They were influenced by R&B initially, the storming 
sounds ofDr Feelgood <http://drfeelgood.org/>; but then punk happened, which 
they loved, and they got mixed up in that. Geldof tells a funny story about 
doing a tour of schools withTalking Heads 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/artists/talking-heads> and the Ramones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/ramones> in 1976. Each band tried out as 
headliners, but “no one could follow the Ramones”, so it fell into a natural 
order: Talking Heads, Boomtown Rats, Ramones. All playing to schoolchildren in 
layered hairdos and flares.

Did the kids go mad? “No. They could not get their heads around any of us. 
Especially not Talking Heads. They just stared and stared.”

The Boomtown Rats never fitted properly into punk – punk was too snobbily 
English to accept these young Irishmen in their over-wide trousers – but they 
did very well in the charts. Famously, they knocked John Travolta and Olivia 
Newton-John’sSummer Nights <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vejogCcyRRw> off the 
No 1 slot with Rat Trap (with utter seriousness, the Rats all tore up a picture 
of Travolta in front of the TOTP cameras – ah, the days when pop mattered). 
Their songs were new wave as opposed to punk: overproduced, with uncool piano 
and saxophone. But they were hooky and well constructed, plus their lyrics were
about something. They told stories.

This is another reason why Geldof agreed, last year, to re-form the Rats. He 
feels that a lot of what the songs were about is still relevant now: young 
people without prospects in the UK (Rat Trap 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9wQxn0XeExE>), US kids going mad and shooting 
their classmates (I Don’t Like Mondays 
<http://www.muzu.tv/the-boomtown-rats/i-dont-like-mondays-music-video/208482/>
), Ireland’s paedophilia problem being covered up (Banana Republic 
<http://www.muzu.tv/the-boomtown-rats/banana-republic-music-video/252038/>), 
people’s sense of alienation from those in power (Lookin’ After Number One 
<http://www.muzu.tv/the-boomtown-rats/lookin-after-no-1-music-video/252224/>). 
It wasn’t he who re-formed the band, though: the Isle of Wight festival asked 
if they wanted to play. So the band – four of the original six, two have 
“proper jobs” – met up for a rehearsal, to see what would happen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Foct%2F18%2Fbob-geldof-peaches-paula-yates-press-boomtown-rats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F15%2F1413389436401%2Fcf5f9934-32aa-4436-bdd0-be3d90f6eca4-1020x759.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bob%20Geldof%3A%20'We%20are%20a%20normal%20family.%20And%20one%20of%20us%20didn't%20make%20it'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Foct%2F18%2Fbob-geldof-peaches-paula-yates-press-boomtown-rats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bob%20Geldof%3A%20%27We%20are%20a%20normal%20family.%20And%20one%20of%20us%20didn%27t%20make%20it%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Foct%2F18%2Fbob-geldof-peaches-paula-yates-press-boomtown-rats%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F15%2F1413389436401%2Fcf5f9934-32aa-4436-bdd0-be3d90f6eca4-1020x759.jpeg>
 Geldof in the Boomtown Rats in 1979. Photograph: Fin Costello/Redferns 
“For the first hour we were terrible,” Geldof says. “Someone said ‘Stop’, so 
we had a break. And we went back afterwards, somewhat ruefully, because we 
thought it was over, and something happened.Garry 
<http://www.boomtownrats.co.uk/garry-roberts.html> [Roberts] attacked his 
guitar, and we did Lookin’ After Number One. And we were ferocious.”

He felt fine about playing in front of a crowd, because he’s never stopped 
performing as a solo artist, his career enjoying an uplift with his 
well-regarded last album,How To Compose Popular Songs That Will Sell 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/How_to_Compose_Popular_Songs_That_Will_Sell>. 
Still, the day before the Rats were due to play the Isle of Wight, he went on 
stage with a big German band calledDie Toten Hosen 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Die_Toten_Hosen> (the Dead Trousers), to get the 
feel of performing in front of thousands. Then he helicoptered to the Isle of 
Wight (helicopter borrowed from “a mate”), which kept him in the rock’n’roll 
mood. Also, in order to get into “Bobby Boomtown” character, he got a Brick 
Lane tailor to make him a fake snakeskin suit (as worn on today’s cover). As 
soon as he slithered into that, he was there.

These days, he says, the Rats’ audience is the middle aged and their kids: 
“Thirteen-year-olds who’ve been made to listen to us by their dads.” When I was 
their age, I liked the Boomtown Rats a lot, so I imagine they enjoy it. “Well, 
that sound hasn’t really changed, has it?” he points out. “It’s all pretty 
simple stuff musically, but it’s not about that, it’s about how you play it, 
the aggression, the energy. The racket. And the rackety-ness, how it might fall 
apart at any minute. There’s a lineage for that noise, it’s not hard to 
understand. And, though I say it myself, we’re a bloody great live band.”

Though the Boomtown Rats were big for around five years there was, he says, 
something about being successful that didn’t sit well with him. He wrote about 
it in the Rats songWind Chill Factor (Minus Zero), 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vwuTHR8VyGE> and quotes the lyrics: “It’s one 
of those days when I don’t like myself… I’ll slip beneath these sheets and 
shiver here awhile.” Fame was all he wanted, growing up, but when it came to 
the reality, there were responsibilities he hadn’t expected. Interviews. 
Duties. Record company people telling him he had to write a hit.She’s So Modern 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-ZH2fknRMLE>, which was about TV presenters 
Magenta Devine <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magenta_Devine>, Paula Yates 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paula_Yates>, Mariella Frostrup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/mariellafrostrup> – “these amazing girls 
on the scene” – was constructed in order to satisfy such demands, so he never 
really liked it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Foct%2F18%2Fbob-geldof-peaches-paula-yates-press-boomtown-rats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F15%2F1413389708315%2F217401ec-b9c9-411b-b1ce-6266f894dae3-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bob%20Geldof%3A%20'We%20are%20a%20normal%20family.%20And%20one%20of%20us%20didn't%20make%20it'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Foct%2F18%2Fbob-geldof-peaches-paula-yates-press-boomtown-rats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bob%20Geldof%3A%20%27We%20are%20a%20normal%20family.%20And%20one%20of%20us%20didn%27t%20make%20it%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Foct%2F18%2Fbob-geldof-peaches-paula-yates-press-boomtown-rats%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F15%2F1413389708315%2F217401ec-b9c9-411b-b1ce-6266f894dae3-1020x612.jpeg>
 With Paula backstage at Wembley during the Live Aid concert in 1985. 
Photograph: Dave Hogan/Getty Images 
We talk about singers who successfully negotiate getting older. He loves 
Leonard Cohen <https://www.theguardian.com/music/leonard-cohen> and Loudon 
Wainwright III <https://www.theguardian.com/music/loudon-wainwright-iii>: “I 
can’t believe he doesn’t get more kudos”; he thinks Van Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/van-morrison> can still pull something out 
of his hat,Bob Dylan <https://www.theguardian.com/music/bobdylan> “not any 
more… Though I would never put myself anywhere near any of them, don’t get me 
wrong.” He has a big ego – he’s a lead singer – but is clear-eyed about his 
strengths and weaknesses. Music is his first and longest lasting love, but he 
will never reach the heights of his heroes. Still, he has what none of those 
other songwriters has: another job.

As a consequence of what we might call his extreme fundraising – most 
memorably 1985’sLive Aid <https://www.theguardian.com/music/live-aid> (£150m 
raised) and Live 8 <https://www.theguardian.com/music/live8> in 2005 
(encouraging G8 leaders to double their overseas aid) – Geldof has saved 
thousands of lives. And because of this, he zooms about in the upperest of 
echelons. He refers to important people by one name: not just Bono, but Sergey, 
Larry (Brin <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sergey_Brin> and Page 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Larry_Page>: Google), Gates (Bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/billgates>: Microsoft), Zuckerberg (Mark
 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mark-zuckerberg>: Facebook), Kofi (
Annan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/kofi-annan>). When he’s not making 
music, much of his time is spent hopping around the world making keynote 
speeches. He does this at theSouth By Southwest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sxsw> festival, at international business 
conferences, even at a launch for smart meters. A few years ago, he started a 
private equity company,8 Miles <http://www.8miles.com/>, that invests only in 
African projects, the idea being that the investors make money not in a couple 
of years, but a long time hence. He works withOne 
<http://www.one.org/us/person/bono/>, the foundation set up by Bono that 
campaigns to end poverty and preventable disease, mostly in Africa. He’s 
extremely busy, but that’s how he likes it; he needs a lot going on, and he 
needs to be organising it.

Geldof is all about the big idea: the big move, the historical sweep. He has 
no time for press gossip, for the silliness of Twitter, the constant chirruping 
of modern tech. Recently, he put a ban on morning emails at his highly 
successful TV company,Ten Alps <http://www.tenalps.com/>. Everyone who gets in 
touch gets a message saying that their query will be dealt with after 2pm. (“I 
employ these people to have ideas,” he says. “What’s the point in having a 
company of secretaries?”) His phone is a Nokia 6210: “The AK-47 of mobile 
phones.” He likes it because it gets a signal anywhere and its battery lasts 
for ages. The ringer doesn’t work, which he likes even more. You have to text 
him to say you’re about to call. He has an unshakable focus on and belief in 
what he thinks is important.
 With George Bush and Bono at the 2007 G8 summit. Photograph: Mandel Ngan 
And then there is the drama of his personal life. This has been a constant 
since the late 1970s, mostly because of his and Paula Yates’ relationship: “We 
were like the cheap alternative to Rod and Britt.” It escalated in 1995 when 
Yates left him, after 19 years and three children together, for INXS singer
Michael Hutchence <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michael_Hutchence>. The saga – 
the press hounding, drugs and custody battles – culminated in both Hutchence’s 
and Yates’ death: his from suicide, hers from an accidental overdose of heroin. 
Bob and his family took in their daughter, Tiger Lily, formally adopting her in 
2007.

He has had quite enough tragedy for anyone to handle. And he does handle it, 
though he’s taken to referring to it as the “Geldof thing”, or “this ridiculous 
name”, like it’s a fairytale curse. Still, just last year, he said in an 
interview that he had been happier in the last decade than he ever has been: 
settled with his long-term partnerJeanne Marine 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0547560/>, his career going fine, his daughters, 
Fifi,Peaches <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/peaches-geldof>, Pixie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/pixie-geldof> and Tiger Lily all doing 
well.

But then in April, Peaches, the second eldest of his daughters, was found dead 
at her home in Kent. A charismatic, defiant, clever social butterfly, a writer 
and TV presenter, Peaches seemed to have found happiness when she married and 
became mother to her two sons, Astala and Phaedra. She certainlywiped the floor 
with her opponent <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MHexNsStJAg>Katie Hopkins 
when she appeared on TV a few months before her death, promoting attachment 
parenting. Her sons were both under two when she died; she was only 25. “We are 
beyond pain,” wrote Geldof at the time. “She was the wildest, funniest, 
cleverest, wittiest and the most bonkers of all of us.”

We skirt around Peaches’ death  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/jul/23/peaches-geldof-was-heroin-addict-inquest-told>
for a good half of the interview, but it can’t be avoided. When I ask how he is 
coping, Geldof’s rat-a-tat patter stops.

“It comes and goes,” he says, after a pause. “Plane rides don’t help, because 
you’re on your own. I travel with my mate, who’s my agent, and we play 
Scrabble, but in between choosing the words, you’re left there, with it. So 
usually I try to write or read. Anything. But even then, it will assail you. 
And it is an assault.”

Earlier this year, Geldof appeared on Lorraine 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sopah57XSMY> Kelly’s daytime TV show to talk 
about Peaches. “I did it because of the thousands of people who wrote to me 
after she died. I thought, I’ll just address them directly, to say thank you.” 
He said to Kelly, and he does to me, that he has to hide from the paparazzi 
when he “buckles”, rush down an alley, so they don’t get a shot of him crying.

“Peaches had such an impact, you know,” he says. “I didn’t really understand 
why… I could understand with Paula, because she’d been a figure on television, 
and was very different from what was expected of a girl at that time. And 
didn’t give a toss, and was very bright and beautiful.

“Peaches was super-bright, too. Maybe over-bright, and could wind people up 
the wrong way… I dunno. I got a letter from a New York cab driver who, when he 
heard the news, had to pull over and go and have a beer to steady himself. You 
think, ‘Why is that?’ The people, from 14 up to 28, if you read their letters – 
there’s genuine sorrow. The impact she had on them. The impact of her tiny 
little life.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Foct%2F18%2Fbob-geldof-peaches-paula-yates-press-boomtown-rats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F15%2F1413390175746%2F2e52129c-5283-4594-814e-2ca66a6db383-699x720.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bob%20Geldof%3A%20'We%20are%20a%20normal%20family.%20And%20one%20of%20us%20didn't%20make%20it'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Foct%2F18%2Fbob-geldof-peaches-paula-yates-press-boomtown-rats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bob%20Geldof%3A%20%27We%20are%20a%20normal%20family.%20And%20one%20of%20us%20didn%27t%20make%20it%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Foct%2F18%2Fbob-geldof-peaches-paula-yates-press-boomtown-rats%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F15%2F1413390175746%2F2e52129c-5283-4594-814e-2ca66a6db383-699x720.jpeg>
 With Peaches at London Fashion Week in 2009. Photograph: James Veysey/Camera 
Press 
Geldof only reads the Financial Times, so he didn’t notice the change of tone 
in the press when the inquest revealed that Peaches, like her mother, had died 
of an accidental heroin overdose. (Initially, police said she had died of 
natural causes.)

“I wasn’t at the inquest,” he says, “but obviously, I knew what was going on. 
It doesn’t make any difference to me, the pain and dismay is just as great. 
With addiction, there are some who say that it’s a disease, others that it’s 
voluntary. I think that people are a certain way. The older rock’n’roll guys 
who managed to kick the habit, they become obsessive about health or something, 
there’s part of their nature that is compulsive. I would imagine that it’s 
partially genetic. And if it’s triggered once, then it’s very hard to stop.”

It’s like a switch that’s always on. “Yes, if it’s on, it’s on. Having said 
that, I’m sure there’s a part of you that suspects it’s on, and therefore you 
should steer clear of the triggers.”

He does not have an addictive nature himself. Recently, he got into smoking a 
pipe: Jeanne Marine bought him one and he loved the taste of the tobacco and 
the way the pipe “gave me this unwarranted air of sagacity”. After a while, 
though, he thought he looked like an idiot, “so I just said, ‘Forget it’, and 
gave it up instantly”.

He took cocaine in the Rats’ early days, when they would arrive to do record 
signings in America and nobody would turn up. One of the Rats’ US contingent – 
“likeArtie Fufkin <http://www.imdb.com/character/ch0008529/>” (from Spinal Tap) 
– would rack out lines of coke as an apology. “But I was always too mean to buy 
it,” he says. “Also, ultimately, I didn’t like it. It made me… too wired, too 
nervy. The feel-good lasted a couple of seconds, then I’d be talking to the 
Artie Fufkins, and they’d be saying, ‘This was a disaster, it’s my fault, but 
I’m going to break this record, you made one of the great records of all time.’ 
And I’d agree, going, ‘Yeah!’ And the sane part of you is going, ‘Are you 
listening to yourself? You utter twat!’

“I couldn’t do it before I went to sleep, I couldn’t do it before I went on 
stage, and I’d get cramp, and coke has that dusty taste, and I didn’t want that 
in my nose. I never did anything stronger, though I took heroin once by 
mistake.”

He tells me the story of how he took heroin, which is hilarious, but off the 
record as it involves another singer, who gave him the drugs, then tried to get 
off with Paula while Geldof was indisposed. He does a very funny impression of 
Paula saying, “No, thank you, [insert famous name here], go to bed,” in her 
poshest voice to the suitor. We’re back to the old Geldof, which is something 
of a relief. When he is in pain, that pain fills the room.
 With Paula and their daughters Fifi Trixibelle and Peaches in 1989. 
Photograph: Dennis Stone/Rex 
Fifi, his oldest daughter, wrote a piece recently for the Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-2738631/Fifi-Geldof-reveals-trauma-mental-illness-parents-divorce.html>
 in which she discussed her depression. As it wasn’t in the FT, Geldof found 
out she’d written it only when the publicist Matthew Freud mentioned it, but, 
he says: “If she did write it, I’d be really happy, because I really think she 
has an ability with words. Also, she’s decided to championMind 
<http://www.mind.org.uk/>, to say, ‘Hold on, I can use this stupid surname I 
have and maybe get a focus on this good thing.’”

She wrote that she didn’t talk about her depression with him. “Well, it’s 
clear as day that all of the children were and are affected by our lives,” he 
says. “How do you expect it to be anything other, really? The impact when 
Peaches died was overwhelming. And if it has such an impact on individuals who 
don’t know you, imagine what the impact of these events is internally, in the 
family. If the kids talk to each other about it, that’s really good, because 
they’ve all come from the same perspective. As to talking about it with me 
individually, they are honest and open with me, and at any point, if they 
thought they needed help, then that’s available to them.

“But I can’t really speak for them because they are adult individuals, and I 
don’t want to drag them into anything I do. It gives them a pain in the arse. 
And it gives them a pain in the arse when, you know, each other drags them into 
it. Unfortunately, the Geldofs have played a minor part in the national soap 
opera for a long time.”

And there, I think he’s going to leave it. Except he’s Bob Geldof 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bob-geldof>, so he can’t. He takes a breath, 
almost physically grabs the bit in his teeth again, and off he goes. “You know, 
the children were never, ever, ever given a break, particularly by the Daily 
Mail, who engaged in a lifelong exercise in bullying,” he says. “These tiny 
little girls – never once did they write anything about their courage, their 
strength, their beauty, their abilities. If they went to a teenage party, then 
they were out of control, they were exactly following in their mother’s 
footsteps – and look ather, guess what she was – and this would be posted on 
the school noticeboards… When I tried to occasionally stop it, inevitably it 
would be a freedom of the press issue.

“Whatever people think about us, this is a normal family. Close the door and 
it’s normal. They’re your kids, you’re their parents. It’s still homework, it’s 
still tea time, it’s still that, you know? And it’s having to go to school in 
the morning. But it’s having to go to school where, on more than several 
occasions, there were 40 photographers walking backwards in front of you. There 
are circumstances in my children’s lives that were egregious, obviously. 
Imagine that: that’s the tip of an iceberg, because there’s the public thing, 
too. But they shouldn’t have had to live that part of it, for they were 
children. My kids are admirable people.

“Everyone’s affected, everyone has their own memories and their own narrative, 
and everybody has always tried to do the best they could. One of us didn’t make 
it… And it was very difficult.”

The Boomtown Rats tour 
<http://www.boomtownrats.co.uk/see-the-rats-live-on-tour.html> starts tonight. 
A new hits compilation,So Modern: The Boomtown Rats Collection 
<http://www.boomtownrats.co.uk/>, is out now.
 