
1 The FSA has long been concerned about the brash American investment banker 
having the top job at Barclays. Select committee chairman Andrew Tyrie 
apparently had inside information from the City watchdog that showed it was 
worried about Diamond becoming chief executive back in September 2010, before 
he was appointed. In February the FSA attended aBarclays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> board meeting and reiterated 
concerns about the bank's culture under Diamond.

2 Diamond is not going to walk away without a payoff if he can help it. He was 
asked repeatedly whether he should give up any cash claims – he could be due 
for up to £22m – given that Barclays' reputation has been trashed. Diamond said 
only that it was a matter for the board, and reminded them he had built up a 
successful business over 16 years.

3 Diamond was worryingly out of touch with what was going on inside his own 
organisation.He insists he had no idea that his traders were fiddling Libor, 
even though he was convinced that every other bank was doing it. He insisted he 
knew no details of the traders' misdemeanours until two weeks ago. Although 
there had been numerous reports about the issue, he evidently asked no 
questions.

4 His predecessor, John Varley, has some questions to answer. Diamond 
regularly suggested that communication between regulators, government and the 
bank would have been conducted over his head, when the urbane Varley was chief 
executive.

5 MPs are not the right people to run a wider inquiry into the banking 
industry.So many wasted opportunities, so many rambling questions, so few 
supplementary questions. Compared with the Leveson Inquiry's forensic 
inquisitor Robert Jay, they were rank amateurs.

6 Diamond just loves Barclays bank.

We know because he told us so – over and over again.


 