
Why does BoJack Horseman, titular character of the Netflix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> originals cartoon comedy series, 
have to be a horse? This question plays on my mind every time I watch the show.

In the first series we meet BoJack as he’s hit rock bottom: he’s a depressed 
has-been actor, a self-loathing alcoholic incapable of a real relationship. His 
only comfort in life is watching re-runs of himself in Horsin’ Around, a 
bargain basement 1980s sitcom along the lines of Full House.

BoJack Horseman review: shades of Curb Your Enthusiasm and Daria, but hard to 
love
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/aug/29/bojack-horseman-review-curb-your-enthusiasm-daria-netflix-will-arnett-aaron-paul>
He’s a stereotypical Hollywood wash-up, complete with dadbod and a doomed 
romantic interest in a younger woman. But he’s also a horse.

BoJack sounds exactly like a middle-aged white man. He is voiced by Will 
Arnett, a middle-aged white man. His cultural mores, values and tastes are 
those of a middle-aged white man. The very premise of the show, BoJack’s 
midlife crisis, unfolds more or less as it would if he were a middle-aged white 
man. But, remember, he’s a horse.

This may sound trivial – of course he doesn’t act like a real horse, real 
horses can’t speak – but if being a horse is just the setup for a couple of 
gags centred on tail flicks and neighs, and isn’t really an essential part of 
his character, why not make him a human being?

The creators seemingly feel no need to show how a 50-year-old horse ended up 
having the same life experiences as a white guy, or why the other characters in 
the show interact with him on this basis. It’s an odd conceit, known as the
“male-as-default” 
<http://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/MenAreGenericWomenAreSpecial> 
concept in entertainment.

The Whiteness Project will make you wince. Because white people can be rather 
awful
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/15/whiteness-project-privilege-documentary>
What makes it even more odd is that the creator of the show, Raphael 
Bob-Waksberg, hasshown he understands this trope 
<http://boringoldraphael.tumblr.com/post/107481385794/rewatching-s1-for-like-the-100th-time-at-what>
:

My first gut reaction to the designs was, ‘This feels weird.’ I said to Lisa, 
‘I feel like these characters should be guys.’ She said, ‘Why?’ I thought about 
it for a little bit, realised I didn’t have a good reason, and went back to her 
and said, ‘You’re right, let’s make them ladies.’

I am embarrassed to admit this conversation has happened between Lisa and me 
multiple times, about multiple characters.

He goes on to narrate where this knee-jerk response comes from: an ingrained 
tendency to view femaleness as a moving part that must be consciously dealt 
with during the writing process. On this score,whiteness works in an identical 
way <http://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/WhiteMaleLead>. A white 
character is the default option, from which all other racial identities are 
perceived to deviate.

By making BoJack white in every respect apart from the visual one (he’s a 
horse), the show is able to take all the shortcuts that come with not having to 
consider race a factor in his life. It also functions as a shallow elision of 
race to BoJack’s keenest audience: young and educated pop culture consumers, 
the very people who are most likely to analyse the show in identity-political 
terms.

If he were actually a white guy, rather than a horse, I suspect many more 
elements of the show would be regarded as problematic.

Take this scene 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3riXj4O1sNk&feature=youtu.be&t=45>, in which 
Bojack rants at a group of young, attractive women for, among other things, 
being young and attractive. Modern pop culture criticism doesn’t usually look 
too kindly on this sort of aggression from white male characters.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3riXj4O1sNk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3riXj4O1sNk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3riXj4O1sNk&media=>
But remember, he’s a horse. If he weren’t, we would likely notice that BoJack 
is actually a very well fleshed-out Troubled White Man archetype whose 
destructive behaviour we’re primed to excuse because the show does such a good 
job of portraying him as a complex individual.

To be clear, I don’t believe the show’s creators made BoJack a horse with 
these intentions in mind. Lisa Hanawalt, who designs the characters, has an
oeuvre that contains many anthropomorphised animals 
<http://www.fastcocreate.com/3033285/how-a-funny-horse-obsessed-artist-created-the-look-of-netflixs-first-animated-show>
, as well as humans with animal elements.

But you have to wonder whether a more creative world to go with Hanawalt’s 
animal designs was possible. Because without something a bit deeper to add 
meaning to the novelty of talking animals, BoJack’s horsiness looks like an 
extended of that perennial joke: “why the long face?”
 