
Reviewers of Sebastian Barry's The Temporary Gentleman failed to agree on 
whether its Costa prize-winning author can write. TheDaily Mail's John Harding 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/home/books/article-2590079/Sebastian-Barry-THE-TEMPORARY-GENTLEMAN.html#ixzz2xWtkqYki>
 praised the book's "flawless prose", and his Mail on Sunday counterpartMax 
Davidson agreed that "his prose really sings". Even more enraptured was the 
Sunday Telegraph'sSheena Joughin 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/bookreviews/10726341/The-Temporary-Gentleman-by-Sebastian-Barry-review.html>
: "The poetry of it all is so strong-pulsed that we find ourselves lost in 
language … We are almost as entranced by [the dissolute narrator] 'bad' Jack's 
way with words as he is." However, the Sunday Times'sDavid Grylls harrumphed 
that "there may be good reasons for reading Barry, but his "poetic" prose, 
overblown and portentous, is certainly not among them". In theIndependent, 
James Kidd 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/reviews/the-temporary-gentleman-by-sebastian-barry-book-review-a-novel-of-beauty-and-excess-9203755.htm>
 seemed unable to make up his mind: "Are those incantatory rhythms and plangent 
repetitions lyrical and touching? Or is this pedantic, over-emphatic and 
sentimental? … This is a demanding novel about masculine failure that 
frustrates and beguiles, often in the same meandering sentence." Nor was 
agreement reached on Barry's storytelling. "He guides his readers with the 
surest of hands," purred Davidson, and the New Statesman'sFrances Wilson 
applauded a "bleak and beautiful tale"; but in the Sunday ExpressIon Trewin 
(the director of the Man Booker prize) brutally awarded the two-time Booker 
shortlistee's latest a mere two stars on the grounds that Jack's "life of 
drink, gambling and debt fails to engage".

Reviewing Arianna Huffington's Thrive 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780753555408>
 in the Times,Helen Rumbelow was sardonic: formerly, the author's "twin stars 
were money and power", but an epiphany revealed a vital "third metric – the 
idea of a fulfilled, balanced life", and prompted realisation that "you need to 
be rich, influentialand self-satisfied … All it takes is a bit of meditation, 
more napping, some volunteer work, and the super-successful can truly have it 
all." In the Sunday Times, Jenni Russell opted instead for blunt condemnation: "
Thrive is a well-intentioned book, but a pointless one. Neither personally 
revelatory nor generally insightful, it offers nothing that hasn't been done 
with more intelligence and style by other writers." In theFinancial Times, 
Sarah Gordon 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/dc460dd2-b42c-11e3-a102-00144feabdc0.html#axzz2xeFU9MNT>
disliked the "rather obvious" basic idea, the "sweeping assumptions and dodgy 
data" and the book's touchy-feely "absurdities", but still produced the upbeat, 
if possibly patronising, verdict that, though "simple", the book's message 
"will resonate with many men as well as women". TheIndependent's Yasmin 
Alibhai-Brown 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/reviews/thrive-by-arianna-huffington-book-review-money-power-and-how-to-live-a-happier-life-9219869.html>
 found little to admire in Thrive, but – captivated by Huffington, a "Greek 
goddess [who] always astounds and awes" – ended with "I wish she would choose 
me to be her new best friend".

Charlie Chaplin's rise "makes an enthralling story", wrote Lucy Hughes-Hallett 
in the Sunday Telegraph, and one "perfectly suited" to his latest biographer's 
talents. She found Peter Ackroyd'sCharlie Chaplin 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780701169947>
 "an admirably concise and evocative biography [that] acknowledges Chaplin's 
many human failings, while at the same giving us a vivid sense of what made the 
man a genius". The Sunday Times's John Carey similarly praised "a compact, 
engrossing, intelligent resifting of the available evidence", though conceding 
that it "lays no claim" to originality. Less impressed wasDavid Thomson, who 
wrote in the Times that "it really has little to add on Chaplin that is new", 
and wondered why it evinced much less personal engagement with its subject 
(perhaps because "Ackroyd dislikes him") than its author's life of Dickens.
 