
A dead body – check; an engaging cast of characters – check; and a mystery to 
solve – check. So press “play” and we are box set ready to go. But what happens 
if by episode three the tension has fallen away and all the untied plot strands 
dangle annoyingly? According to one leading British writer, this is now the 
fate of too many television dramas as the demand for fresh entertainment cranks 
up.

Chris Lang <http:// www.chrislang.co.uk>, the creator of ITV’s returning “cold 
case” detective seriesUnforgotten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/unforgotten-episode-recaps>, 
has questioned a commissioning culture that can oblige writers to deliver at 
breakneck speed to feed the beast of box-set production.

In an interview with the Observer, Lang said: “You can definitely spot the 
shows where the writers clearly didn’t quite know where it was going to end. It 
happens particularly in longer shows, with six episodes or more. You can see 
when they had no idea, and then they often leave it hanging, hoping to get a 
second series.”

If you are half good at your job, you should have a vision and absolutely know 
where it is ending
Chris Lang 
Lang, who also scripted Sirens, Torn, Undeniable and A Mother’s Son, is one of 
the British writers who have benefited from the great boom in television drama 
over the last five years. He acknowledges the best shows have high standards, 
but argues no drama series should go into production before the creative team 
has thought their story through.

“Having it sorted in advance is incredibly important,” he said. “We are all 
enjoying this golden age of television drama but you would not believe how many 
shows start preproduction with only two or three scripts ready. The writers are 
still writing as they start filming. To me that is an absolutely insane way to 
work.”

British production companies have realised that hit dramas are vital to their 
survival.Broadcast magazine’s latest annual survey of independent programme 
makers <http://www.broadcastnow.co.uk/indies/the-indie-survey/#> found that 
revenues at the top five companies making drama (Carnival, the maker ofDownton 
Abbey and Whitechapel; Left Bank, the maker of The Crown; Kudos, which makes 
Humans; Bentley, Midsomer Murders; and Neal Street, Call the Midwife) are all 
up more than 30% on last year. Meanwhile, subscription broadcasters such as 
Sky, Netflix and Amazon are investing heavily in drama, alongside the 
traditional terrestrial channels.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fbox-set-tv-binge-culture-chris-lang-unforgotten%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6bb94226404a87bb325c7360bc51a824a7725796%2F39_622_1915_2392%2F1915.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Box-set%20binge%20culture%20%E2%80%98forces%20TV%20channels%20to%20put%20out%20half-baked%20programmes%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fbox-set-tv-binge-culture-chris-lang-unforgotten%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Box-set%20binge%20culture%20%E2%80%98forces%20TV%20channels%20to%20put%20out%20half-baked%20programmes%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fbox-set-tv-binge-culture-chris-lang-unforgotten%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6bb94226404a87bb325c7360bc51a824a7725796%2F39_622_1915_2392%2F1915.jpg>
 ‘It’s the little flourishes in scripts that make them feel truthful’: TV 
dramatist Chris Lang. Photograph: Gus Gregory 
As the golden age of the box set enters its second phase, there are murmurings 
from writers’ rooms in Britain and America. If audiences want hit series that 
will truly entertain them, there must be enough time to create them. Although 
Lang has co-written a new show,Innocent, with thriller novelist MJ Arlidge, he 
usually writes alone. He admires the distinctive tone ofSally Wainwright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/13/sally-wainwright-interview-happy-valley-last-tango-in-halifax>
, creator ofHappy Valley and Last Tango in Halifax, and of the Catastrophe 
co-writer Sharon Horgan. He also enjoys US shows such asThe Affair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/18/the-affair-homeland-american-horror-story-tv-reinvention>
, which stars British actors Ruth Wilson and Dominic West, andDivorce, which is 
also by Horgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/oct/09/sharon-horgan-queen-of-difficult-women>
 and stars Sarah Jessica Parker.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fbox-set-tv-binge-culture-chris-lang-unforgotten%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b0b9229cc28e7ed5a3c6d0e1a76c506a3d9665d%2F0_99_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Box-set%20binge%20culture%20%E2%80%98forces%20TV%20channels%20to%20put%20out%20half-baked%20programmes%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fbox-set-tv-binge-culture-chris-lang-unforgotten%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Box-set%20binge%20culture%20%E2%80%98forces%20TV%20channels%20to%20put%20out%20half-baked%20programmes%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fbox-set-tv-binge-culture-chris-lang-unforgotten%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b0b9229cc28e7ed5a3c6d0e1a76c506a3d9665d%2F0_99_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 Rory Kinnear in Penny Dreadful. Photograph: Jonathan Hession/Showtime 
“It is the little flourishes in these scripts that make them feel real and 
truthful,” Lang said. “And sadly these are the first casualties when time is 
short and the plot has to take precedence.”

Lang said his work is usually complete before production. “Why would you not 
do it like that? You have got 60 or 70 people waiting for you, not including 
the actors, and they need to set up a shooting schedule. If you have it all 
done they can schedule it in blocks, which means you can save money and then 
spend it in the right way, making the show look fantastic.”

His new series of Unforgotten starts on Thursday (9pm, ITV) with the discovery 
of a body in a sealed suitcase in London’s river Lea. The detective duo played 
by Nicola Walker and Sanjeev Bhaskar then have to trace back the story, drawing 
in four apparently unconnected suspects. “If you are half-good at your job, you 
should have a vision and absolutely know where it is ending,” said Lang.

Neal Street’s Dame Pippa Harris agreed that producers prefer a finished script 
so that budgets can be spent wisely. “When we madePenny Dreadful 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/may/17/penny-dreadful-filipa-jodelka-review>
 for Sky, it was a huge advantage that John Logan had written the entire first 
series before we began,” she said. “But ultimately it depends on the writer, 
and some people produce their best work under the pressure of production. I 
remember that when we greenlit Paul Abbott’sState of Play at the BBC, he had 
only written the opening episodes and had no clear outline for where it was 
going. Likewise, Jez Butterworth, who I’ve been working with recently on
Britannia for Sky, has relished the freedom of altering storylines and 
character arcs in later episodes.”

The first great golden age of television was in the 1950s and 60s, when 
limited channel choices meant that a few shows achieved cultural dominance. 
Writers tended to stick to the same shows and with the same on-screen talent. 
Now, with hundreds of scripted television shows on air in a year, it is 
impossible for quality to be widespread. Writers are more often freelancers, 
who must keep several plates spinning.

Notwithstanding his reservations, Lang, who writes at least 10 drafts of each 
of his scripts, emphasises that he is “rejoicing with my fellow writers at how 
ascendant television is. I can’t remember a time when there was so much good 
stuff on.”
 