
In the days since Kenneth Branagh’s Cinderella hit cinemas, discussions of its 
merits have focused on one narrow area: Cinderella’s waist size. The film is a 
live action reboot not just of the fairy tale itself but Disney’s 1950 animated 
version, from the fairy godmother and glass slippers down to star Lily James’ 
teeny-weeny corseted midsection.

Its deeply regressive politics have been covered too, with some reviewers 
assessing it aseven even more conservative 
<http://www.vox.com/2015/3/14/8213087/cinderella-review-disney-remake> than the 
animated original. It’s almost surprising that a movie like this could even be 
made in apost-Frozen world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/21/cinderella-disney-branagh-fails-frozen-role-model-test>
, as Tracey McVeigh wrote in the Guardian – a world where we increasingly 
expect women on-screen, especially in children’s entertainment, to act like 
human beings with preferences, flaws and inner lives.

But more specifically, it’s surprising that this film was made in a world with 
so many re-imagined Disney princesses. The internet is saturated with fan-made 
art, writing and other cultural products based on TV, movies and books, which 
mostly stay confined to their own little corners of the online world. Remixed 
princesses, on the other hand, are everywhere.With beards 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/adamellis/your-favorite-disney-princesses-with-beards#.fpArlvy6L>
, asAvengers 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/ellievhall/disney-princesses-as-avengers-are-appropriately-badass#.amAYEDkZ8>
, inretro clothin 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/ellievhall/gorgeous-retro-disney-princesses#.qoqmaoqRr>
g, asdifferent ethnicities. 
<http://www.boredpanda.com/disney-princess-race-reimagined-lettherebedoodles/>


The desire to reclaim Disney is strong. It makes sense when you consider that 
many people producing this kind of content grew up in the 1980s and 1990s, the 
era in which Disney successfully rebooted its princess franchise. The 
increasing amount of attention paid to identity-political issues like race and 
sexuality in media, The Young People Internet’s insatiable appetite for90s 
nostalgia <http://www.buzzfeed.com/tag/90s_nostalgia>, and the ease with which 
we can now share images combine to produce an ideal habitat for princesses with 
a twist.

The phenomenon of princess remixing has been going for so long that people 
have started to make fun of it: Clickhole produced a satirical set of 
princesses of colourre-rendered as white 
<http://www.clickhole.com/article/5-disney-princesses-reimagined-caucasian-698>
, and Buzzfeed replied with its own list of the damsels aspencils, staplers, 
rubber bands and other office supplies 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/lorynbrantz/disney-princesses-as-office-supplies#.mbyzQ7YWK>
.

Which is to say: the old-fashioned values of the Disney princess franchise 
have been thoroughly taken apart from many, many angles, and the process has 
attracted a huge audience. There is even a set where the princesses arealtered 
to have “realistic waistlines” 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/lorynbrantz/if-disney-princesses-had-realistic-waistlines#.imKKDPNJW>
 rather than waspy hourglass figures, which makes the contrast with Branagh’s 
classic, unrealistic Cinderella silhouette even more pronounced.


Disney’s audience has spoken, and its demands have been comprehensively 
ignored. It’s an odd thing to witness in an age of omnipresent fan culture: a 
film that tries to exempt itself from the dialogue into which creators are now 
supposed to enter with the masses.

Naturally, the film’s female star, Lily James, has attracted most of this 
criticism. She’scalled the controversy over her waist irrelevant 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/newsbeat/31985810>, and she’s not wrong: the point should 
not be her body or decisions. If Branagh and the studio wanted Cinderella to 
have a tiny waist, that’s what she was going to have, regardless of who they 
selected to bring her to life.

Either nobody associated with the film cottoned on to the bad taste it was 
going to leave in people’s mouths, or their commitment to a redundantly 
faithful rehash was so ironclad that they didn’t care. The number of people who 
have made and shared Disney princess remixes is not small, and the motivation 
has always been a desire to challenge the retrograde values that Branagh has 
chosen to regurgitate.

Why alienate the group that has demonstrated a real and ongoing attachment to 
the princess characters? This is Hollywood spitting directly in the faces of 
Tumblr and Buzzfeed enthusiasts, despite the fact that they are the core group 
that would have embraced a Cinderella story adapted to address some of their 
political concerns – just look at the excitement over the advances of Frozen, 
Brave, and The Princess and the Frog.


Cinderella is part of an ongoing dialogue that the entertainment industry must 
now have with its customers, even if it doesn’t want to. The film’s internal 
ideological content represents a turn toward the certainty of fairy tales that 
exist somewhere in the distant and mythical past: royalty, castles, hierarchy, 
romance, rigid gender roles. The way it refuses to engage in or respond to 
contemporary political issues is itself retrograde, and reasserts a traditional 
unidirectional relationship between creators and consumers that no longer 
exists.

Audiences no longer respond to being patronised like this, and at the very 
least the film should have had the sense to poke fun at itself, which it 
doesn’t. It’s played straight down the line, without a trace of humour or 
irony. If not for the modern production techniques it could be straight out of 
the 1950s. Branagh has misunderstood the level at which “retro” 
reinterpretations, like those of Disney’s princesses, are appealing: they are 
supposed to claim, implicitly, the good bits without the bad bits; the fashion 
and vibe without all the nasty bad stuff that existed in the past.
 