
A UK vote to leave the EU would trigger a snap recession, prompt a fall in 
share prices and house prices and knock as much as 2% off GDP, according to 
analysts at the investment bankCredit Suisse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/creditsuisse>.

Wading into the debate over the upcoming referendum, they predict the UK will 
probably vote to stay in the bloc. But were the public to opt for Brexit, the 
consequences would be “drastic and long lasting”, say the analysts.

“If the UK votes to leave the EU, it is likely to entail an immediate and 
simultaneous economic and financial shock for the UK. We can expect a drop in 
business investment, hiring and confidence. A sudden stop of capital flowing 
into the UK could make the large current account deficit difficult to sustain 
and lead to a sharp fall in sterling,” write Sonali Punhani and Neville Hill, 
fixed-income research analysts at the bank.

“In its most extreme that could mean a level drop in GDP of 1% to 2% in the 
short term due to the toxic blend of depressed business confidence, tightening 
financial conditions, higher inflation and falling real incomes. In the medium 
term, we expect it to be negative for UK demand and supply, implying a weaker 
GDP growth path.”

We are perfectly positioned within Europe. Why change it?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/24/perfectly-positioned-in-europe-why-change-it-eu-referendum>
They also predict a Brexit effect on the housing market. In the immediate 
aftermath of a vote to leave, house prices would fall slightly on the back of 
weaker incomes. In the medium term, there would be a drop in housing demand 
because of lower immigration and the UK’s changed status as a financial hub, 
Punhani and Hill say in the 43-page research note, entitled Brexit: Breaking Up 
is Never Easy, or Cheap.

On financial markets, investors would likely demand a considerably higher risk 
premium to hold UK assets, predicts the note, co-written with equity analysts 
at Credit Suisse.

“We think that would mean a sharp fall in sterling and the price of UK assets, 
including equities, real estate and gilts. The fall in currency would raise 
inflation and consequently squeeze real household incomes, depressing consumer 
spending,” they write.


Traders say the prospect of an EU referendum as soon as June and the uncertain 
outcome are already weighing on the pound, which has fallen sharply against 
other big currencies in recent weeks.

Credit Suisse echoed others in financial markets in predicting the referendum 
would be held in June.

David Cameron has promised a vote by the end of 2017, but speculation is 
mounting that No 10 has pencilled in Thursday 23 June as a favourite contender 
for the referendum date. Speaking at the World Economic Forum in Davos last 
week, the prime minister said he still hoped to conclude his EU renegotiation 
at a summit next month, butclaimed he was “not in a hurry” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/21/david-cameron-eu-referendum-europe-migration>
 and would wait if the right deal was not available then.

The International Monetary Fund managing director, Christine Lagarde, warned 
in Davos that fears of a British exit from the EU wereadding to the list of 
concerns causing turbulence on global financial markets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/23/brexit-fears-fuel-market-turmoil-imf-chief-says>
. She called for a swift deal that would ensure the UK could remain in the EU, 
for the good of the European and world economies.

There have been several attempts to put numbers on potential job losses or the 
possible blow to economic output from the UK leaving the EU. But experts 
caution that much would depend on what trade deals could be established by the 
UK outside the EU.

The Credit Suisse analysts predict an immediate blow to the UK from a Brexit 
vote, but concede that the impact in the longer term would depend on what kind 
of relationship the country could negotiate with the bloc. “The exact magnitude 
of the impact is difficult to estimate as it will depend on the status of the 
UK outside theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>,” they 
write.

The impact on jobs also depends on the decisions individual firms take over 
their operations in the UK, experts caution.

Unilever says its 7,500 UK jobs will not suffer in case of Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/24/unilever-says-uk-jobs-wont-suffer-after-brexit>
Unilever <https://www.theguardian.com/business/unilever>, the consumer goods 
group behind Persil and Magnum ice creams, has saidit will not scale back its 
UK operations if Britain votes to leave the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/24/unilever-says-uk-jobs-wont-suffer-after-brexit>
. Paul Polman, the chief executive of the Anglo-Dutch business, told the 
Guardian in an interview that Britain should remain in the EU but that 
Unilever’s UK sites would not be affected by a vote to leave.

His comments echo those of Akio Toyoda, his counterpart at Toyota, who said 
the Japanese carmaker wouldcontinue to produce cars in Derbyshire even if 
Britain left the EU 
<https://www.trade12.com/posts/dailyfundamentalanalysis/2016/1/13/akio-toyoda-guaranteed-toyota-will-not-leave-uk>
.

JP Morgan, however, the biggest bank in the US which employs 19,000 people in 
the UK, hinted it could quit Britain if it pulled out of the EU. The chief 
executive, Jamie Dimon, said last week: “Britain’s been a great home for 
financial companies and [EU membership] has benefited London quite a bit. We’d 
like to stay there, but if we can’t, we can’t.”

Businesses have been positioning themselves ahead of the referendum. US 
investment banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/21/jpmorgan-backs-campaign-to-keep-britain-in-the-eu>
 and the veteranretailer Sir Stuart Rose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/01/stuart-rose-on-the-eu-referendum-the-sooner-we-get-it-done-the-better>
 are among those backing the campaign to stay in the EU,while famed hedge fund 
manager Crispin Odey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/06/why-are-hedge-funds-supporting-brexit>
 and the Phones4u founder, John Caudwell, are backing Brexit.

Former Marks & Spencer boss Rose, chairman of the Britain Stronger in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/09/stuart-rose-will-chair-campaign-to-keep-britain-in-the-eu>
 campaign, was on Monday highlighting ananalysis 
<http://www.strongerin.co.uk/britain_is_stronger_in_europes_single_market> that 
claimed to show EU membership was worth an average of £670,000 in extra trade 
for each business that exports or imports goods within the bloc.

But those campaigning for Britain to leave the EU are flagging a study 
published by the thinktank Civitas 
<http://www.civitas.org.uk/publications/myth-and-paradox-of-the-single-market/> 
that claims the single market has had “no discernible benefit” for UK exports.
 