
A vote for Brexit in next month’s referendum could lead to disharmony across 
the rest of the 28-member bloc, strengthen anti-EU groups and dent other 
European economies, a leading credit ratings agency has warned.

Fitch, which previously warned that Brexit could hurt the UK’s strong credit 
score 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/14/brexit-hurt-uk-credit-score-fitch-ratings-agency>
, reiterated the risk in an update to investors on Monday. It also warned that 
a vote to leave the EU on 23 June could hurt British airlines and trigger 
further failures in the retail sector, but that a weaker pound would bolster 
exporters’ competitiveness.


EU referendum: George Osborne and Ed Balls unite to argue for Remain - 
Politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/may/16/trump-complains-sadiq-khan-has-been-very-nasty-about-him-politics-live>
In a note on the possible repercussions for the rest of the EU, Fitch warned 
that a UK vote to leave would weigh on the economies of other member states and 
increase political risks inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

“Negotiating the terms of the UK’s exit could exhaust the EU’s time and energy 
and open up new fronts of disagreement. Brexit could shift the centre of 
gravity of the EU, making it more dominated by the eurozone core, poorer, more 
protectionist and less economically liberal,” Fitch said.


“If the UK were to thrive outside of the EU, it might encourage other 
countries to follow suit.”

Brexit would reduce EU exports to the UK, although the extent would depend on 
the nature of any UK-EU trade deal and the degree and duration of sterling 
depreciation, Fitch said.


The most exposed countries would be Ireland, Malta, Belgium, the Netherlands, 
Cyprus and Luxembourg, all of whose exports of goods and services to the UK are 
at least 8% of GDP. “The economic impact of Brexit would be lower for the EU 
than for the UK, but would still be palpable,” the agency said.

Fitch said Brexit would reduce the UK’s contribution to the EU budget and 
imply higher costs for other net contributors or lower payouts for net 
recipients. A UK departure could boost anti-EU or other populist political 
parties, it added.

Brexit could also precipitate Scotland leaving the UK, which might intensify 
secessionist pressures in other parts of the EU, such as Catalonia in Spain.

Fitch did not expect a Brexit would prompt “any immediate negative rating 
actions” on other EU countries. “But negative actions would become more likely 
in the medium term if the economic impact were severe or significant political 
risks materialised,” it said.


Fitch, which cut its rating on the UK to a notch below the top AAA level in 
2013, said its base case was that the UK would vote to remain in the EU. But it 
set out four possible scenarios on Monday:

 * A remain scenario 

 * A leave scenario with favourable UK exit terms agreed 

 * A leave scenario with a UK exit from the EU on unfavourable terms and tight 
labour market conditions

 * A leave under either of the previous two scenarios with a subsequent vote 
for Scottish independence

Fitch emphasised that none of the leave scenarios represented its expectations 
in the event of a leave vote and said “the consequences of a ‘leave’ vote could 
take many turns” other than the scenarios it considered.


The remain scenario would be “mildly credit positive” across sectors of the UK 
economy as it would end uncertainty surrounding the EU question for the medium 
term. But the agency added: “EU migration to the UK would remain high and the 
same UK/EU tensions could re-emerge in the longer term.”


In Fitch’s favourable leave scenario, exit and trade agreements would be 
concluded smoothly and swiftly. However, in the unfavourable leave scenario, 
protracted negotiation resulting in unfavourable trade terms for the UK would 
be more negative, it said. A combination of a leave vote with subsequent 
Scottish independence would bring the UK’s ratings under further pressure.

The comments follow a series of warnings last week on the economic impact of 
Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/13/eu-referendum-imf-grim-forecasts-brexit-uk-house-prices>
, including from the Bank of England governor, Mark Carney, who saida leave 
vote could tip the UK into recession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/12/bank-of-england-keeps-interest-rates-on-hold-as-brexit-fears-bite>
.
 