
Welcome to the Guardian’s weekly Brexit briefing, a summary of developments as 
Britain edges towards the EU exit door. If you’d like to receive it as a weekly 
early-morning email, pleasesign up here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/31/eu-referendum-morning-briefing-sign-up>
.

A quick heads-up: the third of our Brexit means … podcasts is now live and you 
can listen to it here. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/audio/2017/jan/16/the-rights-of-eu-citizens-in-the-uk-brexit-podcast>
 This time we delve into the vexed question of EU citizens’ rights in the UK 
after Brexit with the Guardian’s Lisa O’Carroll, Nicolas Hatton ofthe3million 
<http://www.the3million.org.uk/>, immigration lawyer Andrew Tingley and Polish 
journalist Jakub Krupa.

Also, producing the Guardian’s independent, in-depth journalism takes a lot of 
time and money. We do it because we believe our perspective matters – and it 
might well be your perspective, too. If you value our Brexit coverage,become a 
Guardian Supporter 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/supporter?INTCMP=gdnwb_copts_editorial_mem_Brexitbriefing_copy>
 and help make our future more secure. Thank you.

The big picture

Brexit will be hard rather than soft, and clean rather than messy. In other 
words, it’s goodbye to the single market and customs union, and hello to (at 
best) a short, defined “implementation phase”, but certainly not a drawn-out 
transition.

That, at least, was the gist of the briefings coming out of Downing Street and 
the pro-Brexit camp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/15/theresa-may-uk-is-prepared-to-accept-hard-brexit>
 ahead of Theresa May’s big speech on Tuesday, in which she was due to lay out 
her Brexit plan before article 50 is triggered before the end of March.

Government warnings of a possible market reaction to the speech (sterling 
slipped to its lowest since October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/16/sterling-skids-to-three-month-low-on-hard-brexit-concerns>
 even before it was delivered) were seen as confirming the prime minister’s 
likely thrust, as were some uncharacteristically hardline comments from the 
chancellor.
 Philip Hammond. Photograph: Jane Barlow/PA 
Philip Hammond, generally seen as a “soft” Brexiter, used an interview with 
Welt am Sonntag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/15/philip-hammond-suggests-uk-outside-single-market-could-become-tax-haven>
 to issue what amounted to a veiled threat to the EU 27 that if Britain does 
not get a fair trade deal it may turn itself into a low-tax rival:

You can be sure we will do whatever we have to do. The British people are not 
going to lie down and say ‘too bad, we’ve been wounded’. We will change our 
model, and we will come back, and we will be competitively engaged.

Donald Trump’s subsequent words, in an interview with the Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/trumps-first-uk-post-election-interview-brexit-a-great-thing>
, could have been designed to reinforce the message. Brexit, the 
president-elect said, would be “a great thing”, a trade deal between Britain 
and the US could be agreed “very quickly”, and the EU, like Nato, was pretty 
much dead in the water anyway. Happy days.

The view from Europe

In what some will see as heartening news, Michel Barnier, the European 
commission’s chief Brexit negotiator,said he wanted a “special” post-Brexit 
relationship with the City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/13/eu-negotiator-wants-special-deal-over-access-to-city-post-brexit>
 because of its importance to the EU as a financial centre, according to 
unpublished minutes of a meeting with MEPs:

Some very specific work has to be done in this area. There will be a 
special/specific relationship. There will need to be work outside of the 
negotiation box … in order to avoid financial instability.
 Michel Barnier. Photograph: Thierry Monasse/AP 
He subsequently rowed back from what might have been the first hint of a chink 
in the EU’s Brexit armour, tweeting that what he had actually said was that the 
EU would need “special vigilance on financial stability risk”, not a special 
deal to access the City.

Whatever he did or did not say exactly, Barnier’s comments followed remarks in 
a similar vein by the Bank of England governor, Mark Carney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/11/mark-carney-signals-bank-of-england-may-raise-forecast-for-uk-economy>
, who told the Treasury select committee that the City was vital to Europe:

If you rely on a jurisdiction for three-quarters of your hedging activities, 
three-quarters of your foreign exchange activity, half your lending and half 
your securities transactions you should think very carefully about the 
transition.

In an intervention that could prove equally decisive for the final shape of 
Brexit, the Maltese prime minister, Joseph Muscat, confirmed that although it 
may be “quite obvious” that the City could be in line for a transition deal, EU 
law would continue to apply in Britain until the UK formally leaves.

It is not a transition period where British institutions take over, but it is 
a transition period where the European court of justice is still in charge of 
dishing out judgments and points of view.

Germany’s centre-left SPD party, meanwhile, said it would be prepared to 
prioritise “the unity of the EU” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/11/german-centre-left-would-make-eu-unity-a-priority-in-brexit-talks>
 over the country’s short-term economic interests, while the Dutch deputy prime 
minister, Lodewijk Asscher, said the Netherlands wouldblock any EU trade deal 
with the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/14/netherlands-will-block-eu-deal-with-uk-without-tax-avoidance-measures>
 unless it signs up to tough tax avoidance regulations.

Meanwhile, back in Westminster

A much-touted tweak to Labour’s stance on immigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/jeremy-corbyn-uk-is-better-off-out-of-eu-with-managed-migration>
 was due to be the centrepiece of a promised “relaunch” of leader Jeremy 
Corbyn, featuring the message that the party now accepts the need for more 
managed entry to the UK.

In the event, his words were rather drowned out by some slightly mixed 
comments he gave about thepossible need for a maximum wage  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/10/corbyn-proposes-maximum-wage-for-all-government-contractors>
cap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/10/corbyn-proposes-maximum-wage-for-all-government-contractors>
 – and what he did eventually say about immigration was not wholly clear anyway.

Labour was “not wedded to freedom of movement for EU citizens [into the UK] as 
a point of principle”, Corbyn said, before adding helpfully: “I don’t want that 
to be misinterpreted; nor do we rule it out.”

Tristram Hunt, another backbencher, announced his departure, leading to a 
potentially tricky byelection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/15/jeremy-corbyn-says-he-relishes-byelections-as-chance-to-challenge-government>
 in his Stoke on Trent seat.

But away from internal politics, the cross-party select committee on Brexit, 
chaired by Labour’s Hilary Benn,said the government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/14/brexit-committee-demands-transitional-deal-and-parliamentary-vote>
 must seek a transitional arrangement to avoid a “cliff edge” Brexit, and offer 
parliament a vote on the final deal:

We’re not asking the government to give away its red lines or negotiating 
fall-back positions, but we do want clarity on its broad aims given the 
significance and complexity of the negotiating task.

You should also know:

 * Carolyn Fairbairn, director general of the CBI, warned the government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/16/uk-business-leaders-cbi-train-crash-brexit>
 of the risks of a “disorderly crash landing” and the limitations of WTO terms. 
 * Two more Brexit court cases are being launched 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/12/further-brexit-court-cases-to-be-launched-in-dublin-and-london>
 in Dublin and London, adding to the government’s legal woes. 
 * No 10 distanced itself from a proposal by immigration minister Robert 
Goodwill for a £1,000-a-year levy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/11/britain-considering-1000-a-year-levy-for-skilled-eu-workers-robert-goodwill>
 on EU skilled workers. 
 * The FTSE reached new highs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/10/ftse-100-on-course-for-longest-ever-winning-streak>
 on the back of continued sterling weakness. 
 * UK voters back the Conservative party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/15/brexit-poll-conservatives-labour-ukip>
 to negotiate the best Brexit terms by three to one. 
 * Britain is to begin talks with New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/13/uk-to-begin-talks-with-new-zealand-on-post-brexit-trade-deal>
 on a post-Brexit trade deal. 
 * A Dutch woman resident in UK for 30 years was told she may have to leave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/14/dutchwoman-resident-in-uk-for-30-years-may-have-to-leave-after-brexit>
. 
 * Foreign minister Boris Johnson “punched the air like Maradona” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/boris-johnson-brexit-referendum-dominic-cummings>
 after the Brexit vote, said Dominic Cummings, campaign director of Vote Leave. 
 * A bunch of Brexit-inspired novels are set for publication 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/09/vanguard-of-brexit-fiction-set-to-appear-in-2017-mark-billingham>
 in 2017. 
Read these

In the Guardian, Matthew d’Ancona argues that “Brexit is the easy bit” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/16/hard-soft-brexit-theresa-may-speech>
, pointing out that once Britain is out, the relationship with the EU that 
follows – not just trade but in areas like patent protection and policing – 
could take years to define. There’s a model for how May will tackle the task, 
he suggests:

Those who know May well suggest that a precedent is under our very noses. As 
home secretary she opted out of 130 EU crime and policing measures – before 
opting back in to 35, including the European arrest warrant. This, broadly, is 
the model she will try to follow.

Dominic Cummings’ blogpost on how Vote Leave won the referendum 
<https://dominiccummings.wordpress.com/2017/01/09/on-the-referendum-21-branching-histories-of-the-2016-referendum-and-the-frogs-before-the-storm-2/>
 (see above) is very long but enthralling if you’re into that kind of thing, 
full of juicy anecdotes but above all an object lesson in successful 
campaigning:

I found 10-15 highly motivated people who knew what they were doing and 
largely left them to get on with it while stopping people who did not know what 
they were doing interfering with them. We worked out a psychologically 
compelling, simple story, and we applied some simple management principles. It 
is hard to overstate the relative importance in campaigns of message over 
resources.

In the FT (paywall), Janan Ganesh provides the most eloquent exposition yet 
<https://www.ft.com/content/13e9801c-d409-11e6-9341-7393bb2e1b51> of the 
argument that far from being vague, vacillating and indecisive, May knows 
exactly what she wants and has said so all along – it’s just that a lot of 
people didn’t want to hear it:

It is possible to predict, in rough terms, not just the exit deal she will 
sign but the Britain she will try to craft afterwards. Her commitment to the 
slower, more familiar nation of her youth, even at the cost of economic 
dynamism, is clear enough to anyone with the ears to pick it up and the stomach 
to accept it … For the first time in my life, Britain has a prime minister who 
would forgo some economic growth for some social order.

Tweet of the week

David Allen Green: a man who does not mince his words … 
 