
Six weeks ago, the British government unexpectedly turned down the dimmer 
switch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/28/hinkley-point-c-to-go-ahead-after-edf-board-approves-project>
 on the Hinkley Point nuclear power station project. Today it insouciantly
turned the switch right back up again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/15/hinkley-point-c-nuclear-power-station-gets-go-ahead>
. The deal – colossal in terms of its £18bn cost, UK energy needs and relations 
with sovereign investors like China – is still exactly the same in most of its 
essentials as it was in July.

Yet while it now turns out that there will be no U-turn over Hinkley, the 
delay has involved something a bit more substantial than a governmental summer 
screen break. In today’s announcement, the business secretary, Greg Clark, 
highlighted that the go-ahead for Hinkley was subject to two conditions. One is 
that the UK government keeps a golden share in Hinkley and similar projects; 
the other is that ownership of key national assets will be subject to a 
national security test.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fhinkley-point-c-nuclear-power-plant-gets-green-light-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hinkley%20Point%20C%20nuclear%20power%20plant%20gets%20green%20light%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fhinkley-point-c-nuclear-power-plant-gets-green-light-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hinkley%20Point%20C%20nuclear%20power%20plant%20gets%20green%20light%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fhinkley-point-c-nuclear-power-plant-gets-green-light-video&media=>
Hinkley Point C nuclear power plant gets green light 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2016/sep/15/hinkley-point-c-nuclear-power-plant-gets-green-light-video>
These conditions should be seen as more than mere window dressing. True, 
similar conditions are the norm in many other major economies. True also, the 
British government possesses some powers of this kind already. Most people are 
likely to see them as utterly sensible. What is different, however, is the new 
political saliency given to such thinking, which accords to government an 
ineradicable place to act in the national interest. This suggests something 
bigger and deeper is changing in our politics.

The insistence that government needs the power to exercise judicious control 
over the ownership of an industry in the national interest may seem sensible 
and moderate to most people. Yet it also seems revolutionary and radical. It is 
a break from a recent past in which global market forces have routinely been 
treated as the only secure basis for ownership decisions.

Much the same goes for a requirement that a national security consideration be 
given to large infrastructure projects. This too sounds like common sense. Yet 
it needed saying. The UK’s appetite for inward investment is now so large that 
even national security is being increasingly relegated to the margins.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fbrexit-liberalism-post-liberal-age%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fefae2e2d9bd34225b53fe2ad81c4b8dfd2a2706f%2F305_0_2576_3008%2F2576.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%20was%20a%20revolt%20against%20liberalism.%20We%E2%80%99ve%20entered%20a%20new%20political%20era%20%7C%20Martin%20Kettle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fbrexit-liberalism-post-liberal-age%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%20was%20a%20revolt%20against%20liberalism.%20We%E2%80%99ve%20entered%20a%20new%20political%20era%20%7C%20Martin%20Kettle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fbrexit-liberalism-post-liberal-age%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fefae2e2d9bd34225b53fe2ad81c4b8dfd2a2706f%2F305_0_2576_3008%2F2576.jpg>
 The business secretary, Greg Clark, ‘drew a line’ under George Osborne’s wish 
to be open for business - and ‘began to push back’. Photograph: Steve Back / 
Barcroft Images 
The re-examination of Hinkley is actually less important in terms of the 
substance of the deal than for these wider signals. It is one sign among many 
that the economic liberalism of the political right, which has been in such 
ascendancy since the 1980s, no longer eclipses all other considerations, 
including the human cost. Clark didn’t bury George Osborne’s wish to be open 
for business – what a vacuous phrase it is – even in sensitive sectors this 
week. But he drew a line under it and, in a limited way, began to push back.

Not before time, many will say. Not yet enough, lots will add. Both 
observations are right. But we should nevertheless see this moment in our 
history for what it is. At the end of the 20th century, the triumph of 
capitalism and democracy seemed at one stage so complete that an era of global 
economic liberalism appeared to beckon. Today the folly of that delusion has 
been made obvious by the financial crisis and its political consequences.

But it is not just the economic liberalism of the 80s that has hit rough 
water. So too has the socio-cultural liberalism of the 60s, with its belief in 
universal rights and the meaninglessness of difference. That form of liberalism 
has not been able to withstand the challenge of militant Islamism, with its 
denial of any universality except its own dogmas. The impact on liberal 
politics and liberal nation states continues to be immense, visible in Britain 
in everything from Brexit to the rise in state investigatory powers.

Liberalism is a Hydra-headed and extremely resilient creature. There are also 
few words in the political dictionary that mean so many different things in 
different contexts. Most of us consider ourselves liberals in some respects but 
not in others. Adherents of 60s social liberalism are not necessarily adherents 
of 80s economic liberalism, or vice versa. Nor is either liberalism quite as 
absolutist as is sometimes claimed. Most people are somewhere on a spectrum of 
views, whether on social issues or economics.

We should not pronounce the death of liberalism prematurely. Just because it 
is full of contradictions and cannot solve the problems of the age, it does not 
follow that liberalism is ignoble or that it is doomed to collapse – still less 
that there is some self-evidently superior alternative. Most people, at least 
in Britain, still seem prepared to support the liberal democratic order and 
many of the important liberal social and economic ideas on which it rests.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fbrexit-liberalism-post-liberal-age%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F316b197a19b120512f41e0a0fad6c7be03784fa1%2F750_0_3077_3120%2F3077.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%20was%20a%20revolt%20against%20liberalism.%20We%E2%80%99ve%20entered%20a%20new%20political%20era%20%7C%20Martin%20Kettle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fbrexit-liberalism-post-liberal-age%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%20was%20a%20revolt%20against%20liberalism.%20We%E2%80%99ve%20entered%20a%20new%20political%20era%20%7C%20Martin%20Kettle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fbrexit-liberalism-post-liberal-age%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F316b197a19b120512f41e0a0fad6c7be03784fa1%2F750_0_3077_3120%2F3077.jpg>
 Theresa May in Downing Street after becoming prime minister: ‘Her speeches, 
both before and after becoming prime minister, are unified by post-liberal 
thinking.’ Photograph: Kirsty Wigglesworth/AP 
Nevertheless, it is becoming increasingly useful to see ours not as a liberal 
age but as a post-liberal one. There has been a rumbling discussion about 
post-liberalism for some years, triggered not least by concerns about the 
weakening impact of migration on national social democracies. But it is 
striking that this week saw the publication of a book byJohn Milbank and Adrian 
Pabst <http://www.rowmaninternational.com/books/the-politics-of-virtue>, which 
takes post-liberalism as an established reality and as the starting point for 
the examination of a new kind of politics based on a vision of social and 
personal virtue and what the authors dub conservative socialism.

In Britain, the arrival of Theresa May in Downing Street in the wake of the 
Brexit vote is the most striking example of this shift. May is not an economic 
liberal like Margaret Thatcher or a social liberal like David Cameron. In fact, 
liberalism of any kind seems almost a marginal consideration in her thinking 
and her policy making. These are still early days, but May’s speeches, both 
before and after becoming prime minister, are unified by post-liberal thinking.

All of this poses a particular problem to the one party in British politics 
that proudly defines itself as liberal. TheLiberal Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats> have more immediate 
hand-to-mouth concerns as they gather for their conference in Brighton than 
whether liberalism is in terminal eclipse. Nevertheless, in government between 
2010 and 2015, the Lib Dems were the victims both of the crisis of economic 
liberalism, in the shape of austerity, and the crisis of social liberalism, in 
the rise of anti-migrant feeling articulated by Ukip. Liberals need to get real 
as well as feel sorry for themselves.

As Milbank and Pabst stress, liberalism is certainly not inherently bad, but 
it does have defects and inherent problems. Brexit is in part a revolt against 
a set of characteristics of modern liberalism. We have a new political agenda 
that no political party can afford to ignore. Whether we consider ourselves 
liberal or not, we increasingly inhabit post-liberal times.
 