
Worries about the EU referendum, turmoil on financial markets and a faltering 
global recovery have hit confidence among the UK’s services businesses and 
knocked their growth to a three-year low.

A closely watched survey of companies in the UK’s biggest sector, which covers 
hairdressers to insurers, showed business activity and new work both expanded 
at the slowest rate since March 2013.

That mirrored gloomy growth reports earlier on Thursday from services 
companies in China and the eurozone.

The UK survey’s headline measure of activity fell to 52.7 in February, from 
55.6 in January. That was still above the 50 mark that separates growth from 
contraction but well below expectations for a reading of 55.1 in a Reuters poll 
of economists.

In the latest sign that uncertainty about the outcome of June’s EU referendum 
is hitting spending and hiring decisions, employment growth also slumped in 
February, according to the latestMarkit/CIPS UK Services PMI report (pdf) 
<https://www.markiteconomics.com/Survey/PressRelease.mvc/c135cc1d85bd4ce9903e8f8f103b3bc2>
.

UK service companies anxious about year ahead
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/03/uk-service-companies-anxious-market-turmoil-brexit-china>
The survey’s compilers said that taken together with reports from the smaller 
construction andmanufacturing sectors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/01/uk-manufacturing-sector-worst-performance-factories-exports-economy-growth>
 earlier this week, the gloomier service news signalled that UK economic growth 
had slowed to the weakest pace for almost three years. Chris Williamson, the 
chief economist at Markit, said: “Despite rising slightly from January’s 
three-year low, business confidence in the service sector remained at a level 
which has historically presaged an imminent slowing in the economy to near 
stagnation or worse in coming months.

“Survey responses reveal that firms are worried about signs of faltering 
demand, but boardrooms have also become unsettled by concerns regarding the 
increased risk of Brexit, financial market volatility and weak economic growth 
at home and abroad.”

The slowdown in services sector activity reflected sluggish growth in new 
business for companies last month. New contracts rose at the weakest pace in 
almost three years, with some firms commenting that rising levels of global 
economic uncertainty had resulted in delays in clients placing new orders, 
according to Markit.


Services employment rose at the slowest pace in two and a half years. 


Separate PMI reports by Markit from the eurozone suggested private sector 
growth there decelerated to its weakest rate in 13 months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/mar/03/china-slowdown-deepens-service-sector-uk-eurozone-business-live?page=with:block-56d7fec0e4b0a02aed205c96#block-56d7fec0e4b0a02aed205c96>
, dragged back by France.

In China, growth in the service sector slowed in February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/mar/03/china-slowdown-deepens-service-sector-uk-eurozone-business-live?page=with:block-56d7ec6ce4b0e3026187a0d0#block-56d7ec6ce4b0e3026187a0d0>
, according to a report from the data provider Caixin. Chinese service sector 
companies told Caixin that activity and new orders both grew at a slower rate, 
meaning they also cut back on job creation.


The latest UK news will reinforce expectations that interest rates will remain 
on hold at their record low of 0.5% for many months to come and perhaps into 
2017.


This week marks seven years of interest rates at their historic low 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/02/low-interest-rates-savers-monetary-policy>
. With global growth slowing and the UK economy expected to lose steam, there 
is talk on financial markets of the Bank of England cutting interest rates even 
lower.

Markit’s Williamson said the PMI reports had “moved down into territory 
normally consistent with the central bank cutting interest rates rather than 
hiking” interest rates.

“The extent of the slowdown will be a shock to policymakers and surely puts to 
bed any talk of the Bank of England raising interest rates. The focus will 
instead increasingly shift to whether policymakers may soon need to dig deeper 
into their toolbox to introduce new measures to shore up the economy with 
additional stimulus, and what tools might be used,” he said.

James Knightley, economist at the bank ING, said the outcome of the EU 
referendum would also influence policy as well as the strength of the pound, 
which has alreadybeen hit by Brexit worries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/22/brexit-pound-seven-year-low-european-union-referendum-boris-johnson>
.

“As the referendum approaches, businesses will become more cautious on hiring 
new workers and implementing investment plans, which will likely see growth 
rates slow,” he said, reacting to the PMI report.

“Should the UK vote to remain an EU member, we are likely to see a bounceback 
in sentiment and activity in the third quarter and fourth quarter of 2016. 
However, should it vote to leave then the near-term growth backdrop will 
deteriorate even further, which will likely result in renewed Bank of England 
policy stimulus and add to the downside risks for sterling.”
 