
Two important European figures have warned of dire political and economic 
consequences for theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> and 
therefore the UK if June’s referendum leads to Britain leaving the EU.

Conservative grassroots divided over Europe, poll finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/06/conservatives-grassroots-divided-over-europe-poll-finds>
The Italian finance minister, Pier Carlo Padoan, said that Britain’s departure 
could cause a domino effect in which Eurosceptic parties and electorates feel 
emboldened, while the German finance minister, Wolfgang Schäuble, claimed an 
out votewould be “poison” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/06/british-exit-eu-poison-german-finance-minister-wolfgang-schaeuble>
 to the British, EU and world economies.

In an interview with the Guardian, Padoan predicted a British departure might 
even lead to pressure for France to leave the EU in the2017 presidential 
elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/07/front-national-triumph-french-elections-mainstream-parties-reeling>
, saying: “We are already seeing a domino effect with anti-European parties 
gaining a lot of support, starting in France.”

Like Schäuble, Padoan warned Britain would find it complicated to negotiate 
free-trade deals with Brussels from outside the EU. He said: “Whenever you 
break an agreement you know what you are going to lose, you do not know what 
you are going to gain in the next agreement.”

Schäuble told BBC1’s Andrew Marr Show: “We would have years of the most 
difficult negotiations, which would be very difficult for the EU as well. And 
for years we would have such insecurity that would be a poison to the economy 
in the UK, the European continent and for the global economy as well.”

Padoan also used the interview to set out a radical agenda for far greater EU 
integration, including a European finance minister to build a growth-oriented
Eurozone <https://www.theguardian.com/business/eurozone> economy that puts as 
much focus on creating jobs as on controlling inflation.

He also proposed an immigration fund financed by bonds; a deeper single 
market; a European unemployment insurance fund; a common banking insurance 
fund; and revised common fiscal rules that are as tough on countries like
Germany that run persistent trade surpluses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/dec/03/financial-crisis-global-savings-glut>
 as those running excessive budget deficits.

His plans, set out in a major paper issued by the Italian finance ministry, 
suggest that the UK, if it does vote to stay in the EU, faces a renewed battle 
to hold back thedemand for closer union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/17/david-cameron-eu-mission-ever-closer-union-doomed-failure-martin-schulz>
 as centre-left governments call for greater integration and growth oriented 
policies.

Padoan’s roadmap, now subject to a big Italian diplomatic push, is likely to 
be cited by leave campaigners as proof there is no status quo option available 
in future UK relations withEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

Padoan, after two years in post, is gradually becoming the ideological 
counterpoint to Schäuble and says many of his reforms could be achieved without 
treaty change. He also calls on theEuropean commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/european-commission> to do more to press 
Germany to increase investment and reduce its current account trade surplus, 
saying the German focus on inflation has held back the rest of Europe by 
creating low growth and unemployment.

But he suggests this reform programme will be threatened by a British 
departure. “From a political perspective, Brexit would be the demonstration 
that if you have an anti-European programme you can implement that programme,” 
he said. “It would be a message sent to many anti-European parties all across 
Europe and to some anti-European governments. It would have especially in the 
medium term quite dramatic implications.”


He also suggested that any domino effect might make the terms of a British 
departure more difficult to negotiate. “Some other countries might want to take 
another Brexit option and then the political landscape in Europe would be 
changing and so it all becomes more difficult to control.

“If there was a Front National victory in France for instance next year, given 
what the Front National programme is, I am not sure whereFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> would stand in the event of a Brexit 
vote in the UK. It makes everything more complicated.”

On Sunday, Boris Johnson argued that the UK would be able to negotiate a 
better trading deal with the EU from outside. “I want to campaign for free 
trade with the EU. That is what we need and what we will get,” he said on the 
BBC’s Andrew Marr programme.

“I want us to be able to trade freely with that zone. But I don’t want us to 
be subject to more and moretop down legislation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/06/boris-johnson-scandalous-suspending-bcc-chief-eu-referendum-remarks>
 and regulation.”

He said he thought most UK citizens did not want greater political 
integration: “The idea is that we have created a single country, that’s what we 
are being told. I think most people in this country don’t believe that they are 
part of a single country called Europe.”

But Padoan warned that renegotiating new trading arrangements with the EU 
would not be easy. “Either you embark yourself on a series of bilateral 
agreements – and that can be very costly and not beneficial – or you 
renegotiate with the EU as a whole. But it would not just be a matter of 
negotiating tariffs, but new rules.”


Italy, under the two-year-old premiership of Matteo Renzi, has become an 
increasingly assertive force inside the EU – repeatedly demanding greater
commission flexibility over how Italy meets the deficit rules 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/15/italy-budget-renzi-risks-brussels-battle>
.

Padoan also insists the reform-minded Renzi government has earned a right to 
lead a debate about Europe’s future, since it has scaled back public spending, 
imposed tax cuts, seen a return to modest growth and, in a major turning point, 
forecast a decline in its debt to GDP ratio this year. “Whatever the 
perceptions,Italy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> respects all the 
rules. We are very disciplined.

The Brexit campaign has divided the nation’s plonkers – so now where do I 
stand? | Tim Jonze
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/06/brexit-campaign-divided-nations-plonkers-where-do-i-stand>
“We need a higher level of debate about the future of the eurozone and Europe. 
For several years unemployment has been very high, especially youth 
unemployment. Growth has been very sluggish and we are not getting out of this. 
A more vocal Italy is not about national interest only but is also looking for 
a different European project.”


Padoan argues a Europe-wide employment insurance fund would reduce the impact 
of cyclical unemployment because imbalances in a monetary union land too 
heavily on employment. Equally an immigration fund financed by bonds would 
strengthen the policing of the EU’s borders and stabilise neighbouring poor 
countries in a bid to slow theflow of refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/25/greece-under-growing-pressure-to-stem-flow-of-refugees-and-migrants-into-eu>
. “If we accept the immigration issue is not going to go away next year but is 
a permanent challenge then we need a strategic response and European resources 
– if the challenge continues for another five years we need a structural 
response.”

The EU’s current fiscal rules, he insists are “flawed technically and 
ill-conceived” since the commission underestimates the potential output of 
economies, so requiring countries to implement tighter-than-needed fiscal 
policies.

Equally Padoan says the commission is not applying its rules to countries 
running a trade surplus, a potential role for a European finance minister. “If 
you are not respecting the rules they need to take corrective action. I would 
recommend Germany take corrective action and undertake more investment.Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> may say it has a historical problem 
with inflation – well, we would say we have a historical problem with too much 
unemployment.”
 