
The shocking failure rate of modern young offender institutions is the stated 
justification for Bring Back Borstal, ITV’s new faux prison reality show that 
began on Thursday night. And given that almost three-quarters of young people 
released from custodyreoffend within 12 months of release, 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/policies/preventing-more-young-offenders-from-re-offending>
 it’s a timely look at the issue.


­Before the era of YOIs, youngsters were sent down for “borstal training”, and 
the reoffending rate for released trainees was significantly lower than it 
currently stands – in the 1930s, the decade in which Bring Back Borstal is set, 
the figure was as low as 30%. This was because the trainees had to work hard, 
take part in sports and attend education classes, according to Professor David 
Wilson, the former prison governor and criminologist acting as governor of 
ITV’s Borstal. “It has to be tough so they can feel some pride in what they 
achieve,” he argues.

I guess it depends what he means by tough. As a borstal boy in the 70s, I 
remember the experience as a mixed bag. The prison criminal subculture 
dominated: “baroning”, the lending of tobacco at extortionate interest rates, 
was rife, as was “taxing”, the taking of protection money from the weak; the 
prisoner hierarchy was like a juvenile delinquent gladiator school. There was 
plenty of sport, and some education – until the prison officers went on strike 
and kept us locked in our cells for most of the summer of 1976, two to a cell 
sharing a bucket for a toilet.

There were some inspiring figures, though. I remember the senior PE officer, a 
man called Bill Bryce, who motivated us to lift heavy weights and encouraged us 
like the father most us had never had. And old Stan, the workshop foreman who 
taught me to weld cell doors.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F09%2Fbring-back-borstal-not-based-on-my-experience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F9%2F1420800540814%2F8a8766df-868f-43b1-bb81-7e44a9679294-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bring%20Back%20Borstal%3F%20Not%20based%20on%20my%20experience&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F09%2Fbring-back-borstal-not-based-on-my-experience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bring%20Back%20Borstal%3F%20Not%20based%20on%20my%20experience&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F09%2Fbring-back-borstal-not-based-on-my-experience%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F9%2F1420800540814%2F8a8766df-868f-43b1-bb81-7e44a9679294-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Borstal governor Professor David Wilson. Photograph: Justin Slee/ITV 

But the regime was punitive and encouraged social detachment. There was no 
therapy or counselling; not much kindness or gentleness. Enforced competition 
in games such as murderball encouraged us to be tough, and any sense of pride 
instilled in us was, in retrospect, distorted. Any good I got from the 
experience was undermined by the reinforcement of many of the negative 
qualities I’d taken into the borstal with me. I know my stay of 13 months left 
me a lot more dangerous than when I arrived.

As for reoffending, I met a number of my borstal contemporaries later in the 
adult prison system serving long sentences; one served life for murder 
alongside me. I wouldn’t blame borstal. But it failed as an intervention.

At least in this television version, the varying levels of dysfunction in the 
characters of the young men playing borstal boys is authentic. Petulance, 
aggression and immaturity abound. All are volunteers and the majority have 
criminal convictions. Many have already seen the inside of prison walls, and 
clever casting has produced a lineup that is typical of the boys you might find 
on the landings of young offender institutions all over the country. Typical, 
too, of the boys I lived with when I was doing my borstal time.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F09%2Fbring-back-borstal-not-based-on-my-experience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F9%2F1420800591887%2F057f3742-a9ae-4972-a6f8-bd121a933eb2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bring%20Back%20Borstal%3F%20Not%20based%20on%20my%20experience&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F09%2Fbring-back-borstal-not-based-on-my-experience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bring%20Back%20Borstal%3F%20Not%20based%20on%20my%20experience&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F09%2Fbring-back-borstal-not-based-on-my-experience%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F9%2F1420800591887%2F057f3742-a9ae-4972-a6f8-bd121a933eb2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 House master David Jackson. Photograph: Justin Slee/ITV 
Despite their collective failings, Wilson is optimistic that his regime will 
make a difference. “I’m angry for what they have done to their victims,” he 
says, “but I’m hopeful that they are all capable of change.”

Wilson’s team includes a reformed former young offender as matron and a 
retired prison governor as housemaster. Like most of the people who work in our 
prisons, they seem to be good people – hopefully their prior experience will 
have a positive impact on the young men in their charge. The only fly in the 
ointment so far is “Chief” Dugan, an ex-soldier who thinks violent bawling and 
shouting at problematic people is the way to get them to conform.

I met people like him in borstal, and later in prison. If there is one lesson 
we should learn from this programme, it is that they serve no purpose in the 
prisoner rehabilitation equation and should be kept well away from the troubled 
and the troublesome. Other than that, I think this experiment might just work.

 