
Britons might have to apply for advance permission to travel to the EU, the 
home secretary has conceded, warning that the prospect of such restrictions is 
likely to form part of the negotiations over departure.

In her first significant interview since taking over the post in July, Amber 
Rudd <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/amber-rudd> said the possible need 
to apply for permission to travel under a visa waiver scheme being considered 
by the European commission was not the preferred option but could not be 
discounted.


Rudd also raised the possibility of making it necessary for EU migrants to the 
UK to have work permits, saying the idea “certainly has value”.

Britons may have to apply to visit Europe after Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/09/britons-may-have-to-apply-to-visit-europe-under-eu-visa-scheme>
Appearing on BBC1’s Andrew Marr Show on Sunday, Rudd was asked whether UK 
nationals might be shocked to have to pay for permission to visit France. She 
replied: “I think they would be surprised. I don’t think it’s particularly 
desirable, but we don’t rule it out, because we have to be allowed a free hand 
to get the best negotiations.”

Rudd added: “My reaction to that is it’s a reminder that this is a two-way 
negotiation. The EU and the commissioners may be considering issues, 
alternatives. They will be considering their negotiations with us, just as we 
are with them. But I’m going to make sure that what we do get is in the best 
interests of the UK.”

On Saturday, the Guardian reported that 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/09/britons-may-have-to-apply-to-visit-europe-under-eu-visa-scheme>
 as part of draft European commission legislation for a proposed EU travel 
information and authorisation system, France and Germany have backed a system 
based on the USEsta scheme 
<https://uk.usembassy.gov/visas/non-immigrant-visa-faqs/esta/>. Under the 
American system, visitors from countries that do not require full visas are 
required to apply online for permission to travel at a cost of $14 (£11).

Such a scheme, if imposed, could end up applying to travellers from a UK no 
longer in the EU, legal experts said.

Opposition parties expressed alarm at Rudd’s comments. Andy Burnham, the 
shadow home secretary, said they pointed to “yet another example of the drift 
and confusion as a result of the government’s failure to plan for Brexit”.

The Liberal Democrat leader, Tim Farron, said the prospect of advance travel 
permission was “another sign that things are happening around this Brexit Tory 
government and all they seem to do is squabble amongst themselves”.

Rudd, a prominent supporter of remaining in the EU before the June referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/08/donald-tusk-theresa-may-article-50-brexit-negotiations-eu>
, otherwise gave very few details of how she might seek to balance controlling 
immigration numbers from the EU with keeping some access to the bloc’s single 
market.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Famber-rudd-britons-might-need-to-pay-for-permission-to-visit-eu%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a12bccaf882957fad071c031e643c0aaa16f197%2F0_454_3130_1878%2F3130.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Britons%20might%20need%20to%20pay%20for%20permission%20to%20visit%20EU%2C%20Rudd%20confirms&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Famber-rudd-britons-might-need-to-pay-for-permission-to-visit-eu%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Britons%20might%20need%20to%20pay%20for%20permission%20to%20visit%20EU%2C%20Rudd%20confirms&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Famber-rudd-britons-might-need-to-pay-for-permission-to-visit-eu%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a12bccaf882957fad071c031e643c0aaa16f197%2F0_454_3130_1878%2F3130.jpg>
 Amber Rudd arrives at BBC studios in London on Sunday. Photograph: 
Rex/Shutterstock 
“What I do think the British public voted for was to make sure that we reduce 
immigration from theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>,” 
Rudd said. “That’s a given. We have to find a way of doing that. I wouldn’t 
necessarily say what it means to do with the single market, but what I would 
say is we have to work out how we can do that, while promoting and protecting 
the economy.”


There are increasing signs within the government of internal jostling to push 
forward competing models for how Brexit might look. After David Davis, the 
secretary of state for exiting the EU, wascorrected by Downing Street after 
telling MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/06/david-davis-single-market-stance-not-government-policy>
 it was unlikely Britain would stay in the single market, Boris Johnson has
endorsed a new alliance of pro-Brexit politicians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/11/boris-johnson-backs-brexit-pressure-campaign-change-britain>
 aimed at pressuring Theresa May into fully delivering on leaving the EU.

Johnson, the foreign secretary and a prominent leave campaigner, said the 
Change Britain campaign, led by the pro-Brexit Labour MP Gisela Stuart and 
backed by Michael Gove, among others, would ensure the UK gained control over 
“laws, borders, money and trade”.

Change Britain immediately faced questions over the much-repeated claim by 
leave campaigners before the referendum that Brexit could see anextra £350m a 
week spent on the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/10/brexit-camp-abandons-350-million-pound-nhs-pledge>
.

More than 20 Labour MPs have written an open letter to Change Britain, asking 
for an apology if the promise is not kept.


The letter says: “They cannot walk away from it now, disown it or pretend it 
never happened. They must either admit it was a lie and apologise to their 
voters, or justify it and explain when it is coming.”

Speaking on Sunday, Stuart denied that anyone had been misled or that the 
pledge had been dropped. “For me, the priority was the NHS, but you need to be 
in government to actually implement that,” she said.


 