
Microsoft <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft> will increase the 
prices it charges British businesses by up to 22% to account for the slump in 
the value of the pound following the EU referendum result, the software company 
has announced.

The new prices, which will come into effect in January 2017, see the amounts 
expected for locally hosted software increase by 13%, while “most” cloud-hosted 
services will increase by the full 22%,the company said in a statement 
<https://blogs.technet.microsoft.com/uktechnet/2016/10/21/important-volume-licensing-update/>
. While once programs like Microsoft’s Office suite were installed locally on 
PCs, in recent years the cloud-based subscription version, Office 365, has 
become increasingly popular.

“We periodically assess the impact of local pricing of our products and 
services to ensure there is reasonable alignment across the region and this 
change is an outcome of this assessment,” Microsoft said. “These changes are 
similar to the recent harmonisation adjustments to pricing in Norwegian krone 
and Swiss franc we made in April 2016.”

Business customers will only see the price changes if they buy directly from 
Microsoft, but third-party resellers are likely to increase their own prices to 
match the headline increase.

Among the software expected to see a price rise is Microsoft’s Office suite of 
productivity tools including Word, Powerpoint and Outlook, as well as its 
Office 365 cloud platform. But the price rise will only apply to new purchases, 
not ongoing contracts, delaying the blow for many businesses and organisations 
which currently use Microsoft technology.

While Microsoft is one of the first major technology firms to announce such a 
large price increase for British customers following the collapse of the pound, 
other businesses have managed to avoid the announcements while still 
effectively increasing prices.

Amazon, for instance, charges all its Amazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> Web Services customers prices 
denominated in US dollars. Although customers, who include Netflix, Spotify and 
the Guardian, can opt to pay the bills in local currency, the fees are still 
determined according to the US dollar exchange rate at the end of each billing 
month.

Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> managed to smuggle in a 
price rise of its own when it announced new iPhones and boosted the storage 
available on iPads. The new phones cost 11% to 15% more than the devices they 
were replacing. The cheapest iPhone 6s, for instance, was £539, while its 
successor is £599. The iPad Air 2 used to start at £349, but now costs £379. 
Although the new version has more storage, in the US, that increase was offered 
with no change to the bottom line.

Similar increases are expected when the company announces updates to its Mac 
line of personal computers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/20/apple-event-27-october-macbook-pro>
 on 27 October.
 