
Parliament’s intelligence and security watchdog is expected to carry out 
“inquiries and discussions” relating to theTrump dossier prepared by a former 
MI6 agent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/intelligence-sources-vouch-credibility-donald-trump-russia-dossier-author>
 as part of its work in scrutinising the British intelligence agencies.

Dominic Grieve, the former attorney general who has led the intelligence and 
security committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/15/dominic-grieve-named-chairman-of-intelligence-and-security-committee>
 (ISC) since 2015, said it “clearly is a matter which could fall within the 
remit of the committee”, while cautioning that it only examines issues relating 
to the intelligence agencies, not freelancers or contractors.

Asked whether the committee would look into whether there had been any 
involvement of the British intelligence agencies in handling of the dossier, 
Grieve said: “The answer to that is that it must be the case that we would be 
in a position to look into that, yes, if we wish to.”


The ISC said it “will hold such inquiries and discussions as it considers to 
be necessary as a result of this news item”.

What we know – and what's true – about the Trump-Russia dossier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/trump-russia-dossier-explainer-details>
The committee is facing calls from a number of MPs to launch an inquiry into 
whether the intelligence agencies and government had seen the dossier or formed 
a view on its contents before it was passed to theFBI and Republican senator 
John McCain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/10/fbi-chief-given-dossier-by-john-mccain-alleging-secret-trump-russia-contacts>
.


Ben Bradshaw <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ben-bradshaw>, a former 
Foreign Office minister who oversaw the workings of the security services, said 
it was essential for the intelligence and security committee to launch an 
inquiry, especially given No 10’s refusal to comment on the document.

“You have a British citizen and former MI6 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi6>
 officer in hiding for fear of his life. You have a former British ambassador 
to Moscow implicated in the passing on of this dossier and total silence from 
the British government when the US administration has been pulling out all the 
stops to both reveal and publicise the extent of Russian meddling in their 
democratic process,” he said.

“Sweden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/11/russia-waging-information-war-in-sweden-study-finds>
,Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/german-spy-chief-russian-hackers-could-disrupt-elections-bruno-kahl-cyber-attacks>
, France all published fulsome accounts of evidence of Russian meddling in 
their democratic process. They have all set up specific units to counter it and 
we have a complete radio and media silence from the British government. It is 
completely impossible that all this is going on without the knowledge of UK 
ministers and yet the British public are being kept in the dark,” Bradshaw 
said, adding that he was planning to ask an urgent question in the House of 
Commons about it.

“I think the ISC should look at it. Given the comprehensive report published by
American intelligence agencies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/05/russia-election-hacking-hearing-congress>
 … it would be extraordinary in my view if the ISC do not look at this. The 
joint committee on national security should also broaden its inquiry on cyber 
to look at this. It is not just hacking but propaganda, fake news and billions 
of pounds that Russia spends employing trolls and bots.”

Bradshaw added: “Either the government has something to hide or we are way 
behind the curve on this.”

Mary Creagh, a former shadow cabinet minister, also called for the ISC to 
launch an inquiry and demanded Boris Johnson, the foreign secretary, come to 
the House of Commons to give an assessment of the contents of the dossier.

“This is a dossier that has emanated from the UK, from a former member of the 
UK intelligence services, where the UK government put out a D-notice to prevent 
his identification before dropping it, and where the author of the dossier 
shared it with the FBI. We can presume he shared it with our own intelligence 
agencies before the statement before Christmas fromAlex Younger warning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/08/hostile-states-pose-fundamental-threat-to-europe-says-mi6-chief>
 of hostile powers interfering in western democratic processes,” she said.

“It is clearly something that has been seen and considered by UK intelligence 
and I would hope by UK ministers. I asked to hear from the foreign secretary 
about his analysis. If they are unable to give an analysis in public then the 
ISC should investigate as a matter of urgency to satisfy themselves as to the 
dossier’s veracity or otherwise.”

Pressure is only likely to increase on the government from all sides to 
explain whether it had any knowledge of the dossier as it was being prepared by 
the former MI6 officer, who has beennamed as Christopher Steele 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/christopher-steele-ex-mi6-officer-named-as-author-of-trump-dossier>
.

Nigel Farage, the former Ukip leader and backer of Trump, said May should 
“make clear the UK had nothing to do with ex-MI6 agent’s bizarre dossier 
claims”.

But No 10 moved to distance the UK government from the dossier on Thursday, 
when Theresa May’s official spokeswoman refused to discuss whether there was 
any UK involvement in or knowledge of the intelligence.

“From the reports I have seen, those all seem to be about former staff,” she 
said. “There is a standard process that is followed with regard to the naming 
of people that have worked in certain roles in the civil service, be they still 
serving or former roles.”

The spokeswoman said she was “not aware” of anyone from Trump’s team
being in touch with the government over this, though general contact
was still in place.

“We are in touch with the team to continue the planning for the first meeting 
between the prime minister and president-elect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/05/theresa-mays-aides-visit-donald-trump-team-before-leaders-meeting>
 this spring,” she said.

Paddy Ashdown, the Lib Dem peer and former diplomat, said he thought the 
intelligence agencies would now be trying to get to the bottom of the veracity 
of the allegations but the dossier showed the hallmarks of the FSB [the 
modern-day KGB] planting false or heavily embellished information.


“In this hall of mirrors, anybody can indulge their wildest fantasy theory but 
you have to ask yourself who benefits. Clearly the CIA doesn’t. Clearly Mr 
Trump doesn’t. But every aspect benefits Russia,” he said.

“It absolutely leaves Britain in a difficult position and Moscow will make the 
most of that. But it doesn’t mean to say we can do anything about it.”
 