
British Gas owner Centrica has upgraded its profit outlook after cost cuts and 
strong trading, a day after it emerged thatthree-quarters of its customers are 
on expensive variable tariffs 
<https://www.ofgem.gov.uk/consumers/household-gas-and-electricity-guide/understand-your-gas-and-electricity-bills/energy-plans-what-standard-variable-rate-tariff-and-how-does-it-compare>
.

Despite volatile energy markets, Centrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/centrica> now expects adjusted earnings 
per share of 16.5p this year and adjusted operating cashflow of £2.4bn to 
£2.6bn, up from a previous estimate of more than £2bn.

Its shares were the biggest risers on the FTSE 100 index, gaining almost 3% to 
225p.

SSE to freeze energy prices this winter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/18/sse-to-freeze-energy-prices-this-winter>
An energy league table 
<https://www.ofgem.gov.uk/consumers/household-gas-and-electricity-guide/understand-your-gas-and-electricity-bills/energy-plans-what-standard-variable-rate-tariff-and-how-does-it-compare>
 published by the watchdog Ofgem on Wednesday showed that 74% of British Gas 
customers (6.6 million people) are on standard variable tariffs, and pay an 
average annual bill of £1,044. This is £129 more expensive than the company’s 
cheapest tariff.

British Gas, Britain’s biggest energy supplier, recently said it would freeze 
prices until March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/01/british-gas-freeze-prices-sse-tariffs>
 but consumer organisations said this was not enough and warned that price 
rises of up to 10% were likely after the end of the winter.

Energy companies have repeatedly been accused of profiteering and are under 
growing pressure from the government to treat their loyal customers better 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/14/greg-clark-to-meet-big-six-energy-firms-over-profiteering-report>
.

Centrica has slashed more than 3,000 jobs in an attempt to save £750m a year. 
More than £300m of that has already been achieved and operating costs are 
expected to be lower this year than in 2015.

Iain Conn, Centrica’s chief executive, said: “Our performance in the second 
half of the year has been strong and we expect to exceed our 2016 targets. We 
have made considerable progress in reshaping our portfolio and capabilities to 
deliver a robust platform for customer-focused growth. The Centrica team has 
performed very well in extremely difficult circumstances.”

Neil Wilson, a senior market analyst at ETX Capital, said: “Its upbeat trading 
statement today shows UK home energy accounts are virtually unchanged since the 
half-year update. That marks a fairly important milestone after it lost 400,000 
customers in the first half – 3% of its base. Improvements in customer service 
seem to be paying off.”
 