
In lots of ways, comments about UK banks not competing aggressively seem 
overly harsh.

For years now, they have all been battling to disgrace themselves in 
increasingly outrageous ways, while also pioneering more and more creative ways 
in which to further irk their shareholders.

We saw it again last week, when Royal Bank of Scotland slumped to a £2bn 
half-year loss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/29/rbs-and-barclays-struggle-in-eu-wide-banking-stress-test>
andHSBC reported a 29% fall in first-half profits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/03/hsbc-records-29-profit-slump-and-admits-compliance-issues-in-us>
 to $9.7bn – both of which came with a string of legal and regulatory warnings.

But this week, prepare for the focus to switch – when we’ll ask whether these 
institutions have been striving so hard to win in the humiliation stakes that 
they’ve forgotten to compete for the benefit of their customers.

The Competition and Markets Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/competition-commission> has been 
investigating the supply of personal current accounts and of banking services 
to small- and medium-sized enterprises – and on Tuesday it will publish a 
summary of its final report.

The CMA has shown only slightly more appetite for addressing these questions 
than the bankers – having previously stated thatbanks must cap overdraft charges
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/07/bank-customers-overdraft-fees-could-be-capped-say-regulators>
, while still allowing them to decide where to set the cap. Cynics have 
suggested that there may be a slight flaw in that plan. Rival suggestions could 
be sought.

Pru set to dent low strike numbers

As you may have read last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/02/number-of-striking-workers-now-lower-than-ever>
, the number of workers that went on strike in Britain last year was the lowest 
recorded in more than 120 years.

Official figures show that 81,000 workers were involved in strike action in 
2015, down from 733,300 in 2014 and the smallest number since records began in 
1893 (the previous low was 93,000 in 1998 and 2005).

When statisticians first began noting down those records, the insurance firm 
Prudential <https://www.theguardian.com/business/prudential> was in middle age, 
having already been operating for 45 years. It hasn’t troubled the industrial 
action scorers massively since then but, as we approach its results this week, 
the company is threatening to get its name on the scoresheet later this year 
after devising one of those schemes to outsource jobs to India.

Prudential employees based in Reading are now being balloted by the union 
Unite on strike action over the plans, which will see 75 jobs dealing with 
annuities being filled in Mumbai. Prudential says demand for annuities has 
slumped while Unite reckons the plan will save around £2m – which seems neat: 
new Pru UK boss John Foley can earn a maximum yearly salary and bonus of about, 
er, £2m.

Dinner party topic going flat

Is the south-east of England’s favourite dinner party conversation topic about 
to crash?

This is, of course, the most pressing concern for a chunk of the population 
post Brexit: can they deflect attention from how they’ve messed up the latest 
Yotam Ottolenghi recipe by bragging about how much their property portfolio has 
soared?

The evidence is beginning to come in – albeit in ways that frequently allow 
each side to see whatever they wish.

Last week a survey by Halifax, Britain’s biggest mortgage lender, suggested 
that house prices fell 1% last month after the vote to leave the EU, which 
followed figures from its rival Nationwide a week earlier, showing prices 
rising 0.5% in July. Meanwhile, economists at French bank Société Générale have 
said London prices could fall 30% and halve in the most expensive boroughs; 
Foxtons and other estate agents have warned that business has slowed sharply 
since the referendum (every cloud and all that); while the Royal Institution of 
Chartered Surveyors (Rics) has predicted a slump in property transactions, with 
its members more gloomy about prospects than at any point since the late 1990s. 
Rics’s take on the housing market in July will be published this week. 
Developing.
 