
The British aristocrat accused of trafficking £4.7m worth of cocaine into 
Kenya has said he is “filled with joy” following reports that the charges 
against him may be dropped.

Jack Marrian, the grandson of the sixth Earl Cawdor, was arrested in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/07/briton-family-baffled-arrest-100kg-cocaine-haul-kenya-jack-marrian-drug-shipping-containers>
 after Kenyan police seized a 100kg shipment of cocaine inside a container of 
Brazilian sugar at Mombasa port.

The sugar trader, who attended a prestigious Kenyan school with the British 
cyclist Chris Froome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/24/chris-froome-wins-third-tour-de-france>
, has consistently maintained his innocence. On Sunday, Marrian, 31, welcomed 
reports that prosecutors may drop the case against him as early as Wednesday.

Kenya’s anti-drugs police have asked the country’s directorate of public 
prosecutions to drop the case while they await a “further intelligence report 
from Brazil and Valencia”, according to a letterseen by the Mail on Sunday 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4044790/British-aristocrat-31-faced-30-years-African-jail-smuggling-millions-pounds-worth-cocaine-set-case-against-sensationally-dropped.html>
.


Marrian told the newspaper: “This is the first positive news I’ve heard during 
my whole ordeal. It fills me with joy to think of sharing this with my family 
in the lead-up to Christmas. If this injustice had continued, I stood to lose 
my freedom for the rest of my life and my family would have been destroyed.”

The Scottish aristocrat faced up to 30 years in a Kenyan jail if convicted of 
the smuggling charge. Hewent on trial last month in Nairobi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/11/british-aristocrat-cocaine-trafficking-kenya-jack-marrian>
 along with a clearing agent, Roy Mwanthi.

The trial heard that the sugar and cocaine were packed at Port of Santos in 
Brazil then shipped to Kenya via Valencia, Spain.

Spanish police and the US Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), which tipped 
off Kenyan authorities, believe the drugs were destined for the European market 
but they were not offloaded in Spain as planned.

Marrian, whose full name is Jack Alexander Wolf Marrian, was born into the 
famous line of Scottish nobility known as the Clan Campbell of Cawdor. His 
mother, Lady Emma Campbell of Cawdor, runs an upmarket interior design firm on 
the outskirts of Nairobi.

Campbell told the Guardian in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/07/briton-family-baffled-arrest-100kg-cocaine-haul-kenya-jack-marrian-drug-shipping-containers>
 that the family was “baffled” by his arrest and that his innocence was 
“palpable and obvious”.
 