
On 6 April last year the shackles were taken off Britain’s savers. No longer 
would they be required to buy an annuity – they were free to spend their 
pension money how they like.

So how have Britain’s savers fared under these new freedoms?

• Annuity sales have collapsed. Only one in eight people are buying the 
products, which promise an income for life

• Money has poured into buy-to-let. Some estimates suggest £700m has gone from 
pensions into property

•Savers who left their money invested in the stock market have done poorly. 
The FTSE 100 is 10% down since 6 April last year

•Many savers have used the cash to pay off mortgages and credit cards

• Around one in 10 of those cashing in have splashed out on new kitchens, cars 
and once-in-a-lifetime holidays

• The average saver is taking a very cautious 3.6% a year income from their 
pot.

The figures also show that what most people have actually done since pension 
freedom day is … nothing. Most 55-plus individuals have carried on as before, 
making contributions into their pension via their employer and not attempting 
to withdraw anything.

Data from the Financial Conduct Authority 
<https://www.fca.org.uk/your-fca/documents/fca-pension-freedoms-data-collection-exercise>
 shows that 383,571 pensions were accessed in the UK in the first six months 
after 6 April, which is a relatively small number compared to the7.3 million 
people <http://www.indexmundi.com/united_kingdom/demographics_profile.html>in 
the 55-64 age bracket.

Most people take the money and run. Of the 179,000 pensions accessed between 1 
July and 30 September 2015, 121,000 were fully cashed. Does this mean that 
people are recklessly spending and failing to keep money aside for their later 
years? Far from it, says the FCA; most of the pensions cashed in were “trivial” 
sums, perhaps when someone worked for an employer only briefly. “Of those that 
were fully cashed, 88% were small pot pensions,” it says.

But what of people with more serious sums? What are they doing, and what 
lessons are there for others?

You aren’t buying annuities

Pensions <https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> “liberation” couldn’t 
come a day too soon for many. Falling interest rates prompted a deluge of 
criticism of annuities because of the small amount of the income most people 
got in return for their savings. Since 6 April they have got worse, with 
incomes at record lows.

Since the reforms just 13% of savers have used their pension cash to buy an 
annuity. Last April, a man aged 65 with £100,000 in pension savings could swap 
that for a £4,609-a-year income with no inflation protection, but with a 
two-thirds payout to his widow on death. Twelve months later the same pensioner 
would get £4,518, according to figures from pension adviserWilliam Burrows 
<http://www.williamburrows.com/>.

But don’t write off annuities entirely. They give a guaranteed income for 
life, so if you reckon you’re going to live into your 90s they can be great 
value.

And unlike keeping money in the stock market (see below), they won’t fall in 
value. Many advisers recommend a two-tier approach: part of your pot in an 
annuity, then invest the rest.

The figures show that what most people have actually done since pension 
freedom day is … nothing

You are doing buy-to-let

Around £700m of the £5bn that has come out of pensions since the freedoms were 
announced has gone into buy-to-let, according to analysis by investment 
advisers True Potential, which has surveyed 4,000 over-55s over the past year. 
“Property is the most popular destination for cash withdrawn from pensions. 
While some have opted for overseas investments, alternative pension funds or 
Isas, 42% have reinvested their money into property purchases or improvements,” 
it found.

ONS figures this week show that the average property in the UK has gone up 
£20,000 over the past year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/22/london-house-prices-rose-almost-500-pound-a-day-january>
, so on paper it appears highly profitable.

But taking cash out of a pension to fund a property purchase also comes with 
considerable tax problems. Let’s say you have £100,000 in your pension pot and 
withdraw £50,000 as a deposit for an investment property.

Of the £50,000 only 25% would be tax free, so you are left paying income tax 
on the remaining £37,500 – which, if you add it to any other income, means the 
taxman could easily be snatching 40%. And from April 2017 there will benew 
taxes that make buy-to-let much less enticing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jul/11/buy-to-let-budget-tax-profits-mortgage>
 for those who are buying with a mortgage.

FTSE savers have struggled

When the reforms came in last April the global markets were relatively high. 
But the FTSE has slumped 10% since then, while emerging markets have performed 
even worse. This will have been partly offset by dividends.

The problem is that falls in the stock market are very difficult to recover 
from, especially if they hit in the early years of retirement. Analysis by 
Burrows shows that someone with £100,000 in April 2015 would have seen their 
pot shrivel to just £89,916 by January 2016 if they had split the money and had 
60% in shares and 40% in bonds.

Pensioners have to draw down an income from these shrivelling pots, and some 
have been wrongly advised to take too much, says Burrows. “High rates of income 
withdrawals expose the drawdown pot to significant levels of risk if investment 
returns get off to a bad start. Those who want a high income may be better 
advised to consider an annuity.”

But Hargreaves Lansdown, Britain’s biggest financial adviser, says investors 
have been very sensible about the income levels they have taken, and its 
clients have, on the whole, beaten the stock market with their choice of funds.

It says the 10 most popular funds held by self-managing pension investors have 
outperformed the market by an average of 4%. The Lindsell Train Global Equity 
fund has turned a profit of 5.4% over the past year, while the most popular, 
Woodford Income, is down by just 0.1%.

The typical Hargreaves investor has chosen to take an income of 3.6% a year 
from their pension pot, very much in the 3%-4% range that most academic studies 
say is sustainable over time.

Self-managing drawdown investors haven’t rushed off to buy sports cars … 
they’ve managed their money pretty sensibly
Tom McPhail, Hargreaves Lansdown 
Tom McPhail of Hargreaves says: “It appears that self-managing drawdown 
investors haven’t all been rushing off to buy sports cars. In fact, they’ve 
been managing their money pretty sensibly. They haven’t been panic-selling when 
the markets were falling; they’ve maintained well-managed, diversified 
portfolios which have outperformed their sector averages; they’ve been taking 
sensible levels of income; and they’ve also kept a prudent reserve of cash to 
tide them over when investments have fallen.”

Not many have spent wildly

We can’t know for sure exactly how the pension money that was cashed in is 
being spent. But a survey by Hargreaves in November 2015 found that 27% was 
held as cash (ie put in a bank or building society); 22% was put in the stock 
market; 22% into Isas; 20% on general living expenses; and 14% paid off 
mortgages or other debt. Only one person in 11 said any money went on holidays.

This broadly ties in with separate data from True Potential, which found that 
22% of the 4,000 polled said they had “spent it”. One had bought a house in 
Spain, one went to Vietnam, and another fixed up a classic car.

Savers need more guidance

Government website Pension Wise <https://www.pensionwise.gov.uk/> (also 
contactable on 0800 138 3944) is the best starting place for guidance on what 
to do with your pension, offering free phone or face-to-face sessions. But 
take-up has been relatively low, and it is hamstrung as it can only offer 
general guidance rather than direct financial advice on specific products.

Alan Higham of PensionsChamp.com <http://www.pensionschamp.com/> is another 
good option. He’s one of the UK’s most respected pension advisers and one-time 
spokesman for Fidelity. Now he’s opened a not-for-profit free help service. “As 
far as I am aware, no other recognised pension expert in the UK is willing to 
provide impartial help to members of the public for free without any catches,” 
he says.

And despite government efforts, he says savers approaching retirement face a 
serious challenge. “All the problems surrounding people shopping around for the 
right product at retirement remain and, if anything, are amplified by the 
changes. It is extremely difficult to compare different products, and firms 
selling them do not make it easy by having such complex charges that their own 
staff struggle to disclose clearly and completely when asked.

“The regulator’s work in this area is not yet complete and they need to do 
more to make sure consumers can shop around more easily.”
 