
I sometimes wonder if satire has reached a nadir in Britain because British 
society has itself become a parody of itself. TheChipping Norton Set 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2015/jan/08/chipping-norton-set-disbanded-alex-james-shatter-illusion-david-cameron-jeremy-clarkson>
: the prime minister, a tabloid editor and a Roger Mellie-ish TV icon all 
conveniently living in the same little town and taking turns at being the 
centre of scandal, feels like a novel Martin Amis bashed out because his 
conservatory was leaking. Likewise there has been an element of tragic irony 
this week as the growing drumbeat of anti-immigration election rhetoric has 
been punctuated bythe mass drowning of migrants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/19/italian-prime-minister-matteo-renzi-emergency-summit-700-drown-mediterranean>
.

Katie Hopkins calling migrants vermin recalls the darkest events of history | 
Zoe Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/19/katie-hopkins-migrants-vermin-darkest-history-drownings>
The SNP’s growing popularity has prompted a little low-level press racism of 
the kilts-and-porridge variety, as an English electorate struggles with the 
idea that there will be Scottish people holding the reins of power for the 
first time since the last government. Nicola Sturgeon has been called “the most 
dangerous woman in Britain” 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3024983/SNP-s-Nicola-Sturgeon-tells-Ed-Miliband-ll-call-shots-now.html>
, by someone who hasn’t met any other Scottish women. Of course, it’s difficult 
to explain to English people that we have always had their best interests at 
heart – if we hadn’t invented penicillin they would have all died in a Greek 
airport departure lounge. There have already been a couple of amusing moments 
in the campaign when leaders standing in front of union jacks expounding onthe 
need for a £100bn missile system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/apr/09/inside-the-campaigns-the-argument-about-trident-isnt-really-about-trident>
 have taken time out to warn us about the dangers of nationalism. Personally, I 
think it might be invigorating to have a hung parliament where, before any law 
was passed, the government had to have an argument with a Scottish person.

“Gosh, you seem awfully good at this. Have you had some practice?”

“I’m not actually part of the Scottish negotiating team, I’m just here to take 
your drinks order …”

“Ah, right, could I have a cup of tea?”

“NO.”

Ed Miliband’s anti-immigration stance 
<http://www.labour.org.uk/issues/detail/immigration> is odd: it’s hard to vote 
for a man who doesn’t have the confidence to defend his own existence. It seems 
that his main argument against immigrants is that his dad raised a befuddled 
fuckwit. Could you hand Labour’s “controls on immigration” mug 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2015/mar/31/immigration-big-issue-left-cant-get-right-labour>
 to a guest? There’s nothing like jollying up a Macmillan Cancer Support coffee 
morning by making your neighbours feel like the pakoras were a little 
unwelcome. Let’s not forget where coffee and tea come from: this mug is 
bitterly opposed to its own contents. Unless you drink hot Tizer from a coffee 
cup, the drink inside that mug will be an immigrant. The logic of a receptacle 
for hot beverages provided by slavery and colonisation being anti-immigrant 
bears no more examination than a pair of homophobic Speedos.

Then there’s Ukip, like someone made a heavy-handed version of The Thick of It 
for ITV. They don’t want Britain to be ruled by foreigners – with the notable 
exception of the royal family. They want an Australian-style points system for 
immigration. Who knows what this will look like, but my suspicion is “being 
white” will be like catching the snitch in Quidditch. If we have become a 
self-satirising society, Ukip are just the broader end, the easy slapstick 
laughs. They even havea porn-star candidate 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-bristol-32230155>. Of course, he isn’t 
the first MP to have filmed himself having sex. But he is the first to do so 
with an adult, whom he allowed to live.

Even our charity is essentially patronising. Give a man a fish and he can eat 
for a day. Give him a fishing rod and he can feed himself. Alternatively, don’t 
poison the fishing waters, abduct his great-grandparents into slavery, then 
turn up 400 years later on your gap year talking a lot of shite about fish.

In a further nod to satire, Comic Relief this year focused on Malawi and 
Uganda. I didn’t see any acknowledgement that Britain had been the colonial 
power in those countries.“Thanks for the gold, lads, thanks for the diamonds. 
We had a whip-round and got you a fishing rod.”

A lot of racism comes from projection. White Americans have a stereotype of 
black people being criminals purely because they can’t acknowledge that it was 
actually white people that stole them from Africa in the first place. Today, 
you have the spectacle of black men being gunned down by cops who, by way of 
mitigation,release footage to show that the victims were running away 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/apr/08/us-police-fatal-shooting-south-carolina-phone-footage-viral-video>
. This is what happens when you don’t understand or even acknowledge history. 
You end up in a situation where, when slavery is the elephant in the room in 
your relationship with African Americans, you think it’s OK to say that you 
killed one of them because he was trying to escape.

Britain is in a similar place with colonialism. We have streets named after 
slave owners. We profited from a vile crime and feel no shame. We fear the 
arrival of immigrants that we have drawn here with the wealth we stole from 
them. For much of the rest of the world we must be the focus of bitter 
amusement, characters in a satire we don’t understand. It is British people 
that don’t learn languages, or British history. Britain is the true scrounger, 
the true criminal.
 