
Well-off Brits are living in a savings paradise. There is almost no need to 
head off to Panama or the Caymans when Britain itself is such a tax haven. You 
may not think this, given the miserably low interest rates on savings accounts, 
but Brits – or, to be more accurate, Britain’s upper-middle classes, because 
few others have the money – get access to more tax breaks than virtually anyone 
else in the developed world.

Take the new personal savings allowance (PSA). The first £500 of savings 
interest is now tax-free if you are a 40% taxpayer. This roughly equates to 
zero tax on the first £35,000 or so of savings balances. It’s worth more to a 
lower-rate taxpayer, who can shield £70,000 in savings from tax, but show me 
someone on average earnings who has that much in savings and I’ll show you a 
junior doctor who supports Jeremy Hunt. The truth is that the main 
beneficiaries of the new PSA will be the already well-off.

Where to put your cash while savings rates are rock-bottom
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/11/where-put-cash-savings-rates-rock-bottom>
The same goes for Isas <https://www.theguardian.com/money/isas>. From next 
year you can put £20,000 into an Isa and avoid tax. That’s £40,000 for a 
couple, adding up to £200,000 over just five years. Let’s say the money is put 
into a bond fund yielding 4% a year. That means a couple on a high income can 
earn £8,000 a year in interest without paying a penny in tax.

Above the PSA and Isa is the alphabet soup of specialised schemes, such as VCTs
 <http://www.bestinvest.co.uk/investment-research/vcts/tax-rules>, EISs and 
SEISs, which give people with up to £200,000 spare a wodge of income tax 
rebates and dividend tax exemptions. And let’s not forget that even if the 
well-off don’t use an Isa or VCT for their investments, there is still the 
£11,100 profit that can be made without liablilty for capital gains tax. Were 
that not enough, the government has just slashed the tax rate on profits above 
that £11,100 limit from 28% to 20%.

Great, you might think. What’s not to like about encouraging saving and 
investment? True – but when the well-off complain about taxes, just look abroad 
to see how extraordinarily generous the situation in the UK reall is.

Take our nearest neighbour, Ireland. All savings accounts have a walloping 41% 
tax deducted at source, called rather imaginatively “Dirt” (deposit interest 
retention tax). There is no equivalent to the Isa, with about the best you can 
get being Post Office bonds paying 1% tax-free.

France has its Livret A 
<https://particuliers.societegenerale.fr/epargner/par_type_de_placements/livrets_epargne/livret_a.html>
 accounts – there are around 40m of them in existence – which are tax-free, but 
only up to a maximum of €22,950 (£17,900). Compare that to stories of the lucky 
few in Britain who are already “Isa millionaires 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/mar/15/investment-isas-shares-millionaire>
”. What’s more, interest paid is just 0.75%, worse even than our Isas.

The truth is that the huge new allowances benefit a tiny number of people

Germans have a workplace savings scheme, the Vermögenswirksame, but that’s 
about it. Savings accounts generally have a withholding tax applied, of around 
26%-28%. In Spain, savings are taxed at19% on the first €6,000 
<http://www.spainaccountants.com/it.html>, rising to 23%. In the US there are 
various tax breaks on workplace savings, with employees able to place part of 
their salary gross into a scheme, but Americans look at our tax breaks with 
wonder. Australia is so keen to make people save into pension “superannuation” 
schemes that pure bank deposit accounts receive no special breaks.

Now, classical economics would say that with all these tax breaks and 
incentives Brits should be among the biggest savers in the world. But we’re 
among the worst. British workers save less than 5% of their incomes; German 
workers save twice that amount. Six out of 10 people in Britain don’t even have 
an Isa. Those who did open one in 2014-15 put injust £6,000 on average 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/456379/ISA_Statistics_Release_August_2015.pdf>
.

The truth is that the huge new allowances benefit a tiny number of people. 
Income distribution is so skewed in Britain that only the very well-off can, 
and do, use them. Last year, Isa tax relief cost the Treasury £2.6bn. I’m not 
arguing for it to be scrapped, but let’s make it clear who the winners are here.
 