
Britain’s biggest lenders are braced for a decision by the Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> on whether they 
are strong enough to withstand turmoil in global markets, as Threadneedle 
Street considers restrictions on their activities to slow down the growth in 
consumer lending.

The results of the annual health check on six banks – Barclays, HSBC, 
Santander UK, Standard Chartered, Lloyds Banking Group andRoyal Bank of Scotland
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup> – and 
Nationwide building society are released on Tuesday and will determine whether 
the institutions need to tap investors for cash or take other steps to bolster 
their financial strength.

Consumer spending rise troubles Bank of England
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/24/consumer-spending-troubling-bank-of-england>
They are being announced alongside the Bank’s twice-yearly assessment of risks 
to the financial system, in which it will give a verdict on whether lenders 
should be forced to hold capital in order to rein in risky lending.

Speculation that the Bank could impose more stringent capital rules on banks 
was sparked byremarks last week by Andy Haldane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/24/consumer-spending-troubling-bank-of-england>
, the Bank’s chief economist, that consumer credit, and personal loans in 
particular, had been “picking up at a rate of knots”. His view that the Bank 
might want to look “fairly carefully” at this area had led to expectations that 
the Financial Policy Committee (FPC), set up to look for bubbles in financial 
markets, might use new powers to demand banks hold more capital against riskier 
lending operations.

The big seven lenders have been subjected to tests of their ability to 
withstand a dramatic slowdown in China and a contraction in the eurozone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/30/bank-of-england-stress-tests-to-include-fears-of-global-crash>
. The scenarios are regarded as a challenge to international banks HSBC and 
Standard Chartered, although the UK scenario includes inflation being negative 
for seven consecutive quarters and the interest rate being cut to zero from its 
current level of 0.5%.

In last year’s stress tests, the bailed-out banks Lloyds and RBS hovered above 
the pass rate while Co-operative Bank failed. Co-op is not being tested this 
year because it has scaled back its operations dramatically after a series of 
scandals.

Analysts at the investment bank Citi noted that banks had already started to 
take steps to bolster their capital, citing RBS and Standard Chartered,which 
earlier this month said it would raise £3.3bn and cut 15,000 jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/03/standard-chartered-seeks-billions-from-investors>
.

But, they said there would also be some focus on another measure of financial 
strength – known as the leverage ratio.Data published last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/24/european-banks-one-trillion-euros-bad-debt>
 showed that Barclays has the lowest leverage ratio – and therefore has the 
weakest position – of the major UK banks.

European banks sitting on €1tn mountain of bad debt, survey finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/24/european-banks-one-trillion-euros-bad-debt>
Analysts at Berenberg concurred that banks would not fall below the pass rate 
set by the Bank. But they said there was a “strong signal” that the Bank may 
use its powers to require banks to build up more capital, through so-called 
countercyclical buffers, which require banks to build up more capital during a 
more benign economic environment.

This additional capital would be held across all loans, though the FPC also 
has powers to demand capital is held more specifically across three broad 
sectors [pdf] 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/financialstability/Documents/fpc/policystatement140113.pdf>
: residential property and mortgages; commercial property; and other parts of 
the financial sector. The Bank has had these powers since last year but has yet 
to use them.

Joseph Dickerson, an analyst at the stockbroker Jefferies, said: “If the 
purpose of employing a countercyclical buffer is to push back on the financial 
cycle, we would argue that the loan market in the UK is far from a cyclical 
peak. Thus, gross mortgage originations are annualising 41% below their 2007 
peak.”

But analysts at Berenberg bank said the Bank might act: “The strength of 
recent communications [from the Bank] suggests to us that sector-wide capital 
actions may be imminent, most likely alongside the stress test results on 1 
December.”



 