
January marks one year since the 2015 Asian Cup, and — although it has passed 
with little fanfare — the 10th anniversary of Australia’s entry into the Asian 
Football Confederation. The report card is pretty good: both men’s and women’s 
national teams have won the Asian Cup, Adelaide United made the Asian Champions 
League final in 2008 and Western Sydney Wanderers won it in 2014. Late last 
year Ange Postecoglou and the Socceroos wonAsian coach and team of the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/30/socceroos-and-ange-postecoglou-pick-up-asian-team-and-coach-of-year-awards>
.

Melbourne City lock in four rising stars with long-term deals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/05/melbourne-city-locks-in-four-of-its-rising-stars-with-long-term-deals>
More than simply hosting tournaments or beating Asian opposition, however, the 
hope was that joining the AFC would be the harbinger for a shift in attitude – 
forAustralia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia> to truly become 
an Asian football nation.

 Far more memorable than the Socceroos winning the Asian Cup was the vibe of 
the tournament. Every country found support from local immigrant communities; 
for the Palestiniansit was a chance to raise the flag in defiance of 
Australia’s denial of their statehood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jan/12/asian-cup-palestine-fans-preview>
; for the Iranians it was an opportunity to enjoy footballfree of gender 
discrimination 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jan/23/asian-cup-iran-fans-protest>
; the tiny Uzbek community gainedunprecedented national coverage 
<http://www.theage.com.au/sport/soccer/drums-sound-defeat-for-uzbekistan-20150122-12wki2>
; even the mysterious North Koreanswere greeted in Melbourne by some 
enthusiastic Korean re-unificationists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jan/15/north-korea-asian-cup-blog>
. The quarter-final between Iran and Iraq in the nation’s capital was one of 
the most exciting matches ever held in Australia.

 It was football as it should be in this country — a messy, unpredictable and 
inclusive space for communities to celebrate their heritage free of the 
pressures of assimilation. There was politics and protest but there was also 
spontaneous joy and and genuine cross-cultural exchange. Being Australian while 
supporting the Iraq national team, for example, is something that we should 
value, not fear.

 Mark Falvo, Football Federation Australia’s head of international affairs and 
government relations, believes Australian football is now far better placed to 
engage with Asia. “There was one [Asian Cup] match, I think Iran versus Qatar, 
where I sat next to the AFC president Sheikh Salman,” says Falvo. “He turned to 
me and said, ‘I can’t tell whether I’m in Tehran or in Sydney’.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fbroader-horizons-australia-marks-10-years-in-the-asian-football-confederation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91e823fa6395d1d654d2a4f713dfdf588bda47b9%2F0_69_2200_1320%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Broader%20horizons%3A%20Australia%20marks%2010%20years%20in%20the%20Asian%20football%20confederation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fbroader-horizons-australia-marks-10-years-in-the-asian-football-confederation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Broader%20horizons%3A%20Australia%20marks%2010%20years%20in%20the%20Asian%20football%20confederation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fbroader-horizons-australia-marks-10-years-in-the-asian-football-confederation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91e823fa6395d1d654d2a4f713dfdf588bda47b9%2F0_69_2200_1320%2F2200.jpg>
 Iran’s Morteza Pouraliganji is mobbed by fans and teammates after scoring 
during their Asian Cup quarter-final soccer match against Iraq in Canberra. 
Photograph: Tim Wimborne/REUTERS 
 Falvo was one of the few staff to transition from the Asian Cup local 
organising committee to a role at FFA. With him he has brought a wealth of 
cultural fluency, a useful list of contacts and a desire to maintain the 
project of integrating Australia into the AFC. Indeed the attitude shift that 
underpins the creation of his role is encouraging.

 The Australian government and the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade are 
now actively engaged with FFA, and is seeing the potential of football to 
provide a common language in Asia. In March, FFA will be involved inMikta 
<http://dfat.gov.au/international-relations/international-organisations/mikta/Pages/mikta.aspx>
 — a forum of middle power nations Mexico, Indonesia, Korea, Turkey and 
Australia. FFA have also developed a memorandum of understanding with the Iran 
Football Federation, in the hope of bringing Iranian club giant Persepolis to 
Australia in the near future.

 “That’s off the back of the Asian Cup,” says Falvo. “The Iranian federation 
were surprised at the level of support they had in Australia. There’s a huge 
opportunity there, we’ve developed an MoU that just needs to be signed.”

 Yet for these diplomatic achievements, at club level football in Australia 
does not feel appreciably more Asian. Some of this can be put down to a lack of 
forward planning and vision from both A-League clubs and FFA.

 Just two days before the Asian Cup final, for example, FFA said that the 
mooted “4+1 policy” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/02/a-league-u-turn-proposed-reduced-foreign-quota>
 – which would allow A-League clubs four visa players plus one from the Asian 
region – was “not part of the discussion”. One very tangible way to engage with 
the region and reciprocate a ruling that allows Australian players to prosper 
abroad was stillborn.

 Just after the Asian Cup Sydney FC chief executive Tony Pignata blamed 
falling crowds on a“football overload” 
<http://www.smh.com.au/sport/soccer/sydney-fc/football-overload-cricket-hurting-sydney-fc-crowds-says-tony-pignata-20150325-1m7jif.html>
, while Western Sydney Wanderers did not continue theirsuccessful mini-Asian 
Cup tournament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/06/western-sydney-wanderers-court-australias-asian-football-fans>
 from November 2014. Thankfully, Melbourne Victory still support a similar 
tournamenthosted by the Melbourne Chinese Soccer Association 
<http://www.melbournevictory.com.au/article/melbourne-asian-cup-gets-underway-for-2015/wim2eo6rjh8912hwrdx3g2iy0>
. Curiously, there was only brief mention of Asia in FFA’s Whole of Football 
Plan.

 “I think as a means of growing interest in the A-League abroad, and also 
Asian communities here, it [the 4+1 policy] would be a good thing,” Falvo says. 
He admits programs targeting Asian communities in Australia have been lacking, 
attributing it to a lack of funding.

 “One of the great successes of the Asian Cup was the multicultural community 
program,” says Falvo. “There was hundreds of ambassadors and events organised, 
the result of that was really engaged communities and great atmosphere in the 
stadiums. I think the ambassadors are all just waiting to do more, because 
obviously they all love and support the game, and they all want to play a part. 
It’s just a matter of resources.”

 The encouraging sign is that FFA seem to have recognised the enormous 
potential to engage with Asia at both diplomatic and grassroots level. Bringing 
an Iranian club side to harness the support of the local Iranian community 
would have been unthinkable before the Asian Cup. Finding the requisite funding 
remains the biggest challenge, but a proper Asian strategy could have benefits 
that transcend football.

 Last century football played a vital, if under-appreciated, role in the 
development of multicultural Australia. As diplomatic relations normalise with 
Iran, trade continues to grow with China, Japan, Korea and Singapore, and 
thousands of new migrants continue to arrive from all over Asia and the Middle 
East, football is better placed than any other sport to carry Australia into 
the Asian century.

 “The Asian Cup was the first time, perhaps, that on a quite significant scale 
many AFC people visited Australia and saw what Australia in 2015 was,” Falvo 
says. “In some respects you can say that we’re most representative of the 
diversity of the AFC. They know that they can come here and be welcomed by 
Australians of all backgrounds.”
 