
Spoiler alert: this blog is for people watching Broadchurch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/broadchurch> 2. Don’t read on if you 
haven’t seen episode two.

Read Mark Lawson’s review of episode one here. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jan/06/broadchurch-season-two-episode-one-review-david-tennant>


For those who spent the end portions of the first series of Broadchurch 
shouting at the telly in disbelief as Ellie Miller was allowed to attack her 
husband while he was still in police custody, it was oddly gratifying to see 
the legal profession this episode raise their eyebrows at the same. I say 
oddly, of course, because sometimes it’s better to be proved wrong. While it 
might be satisfying to have your frustrations with the actions of fictional 
police officers vindicated by fictional barristers and judges, I think I’d 
rather a plot hole than the Latimers plunged into the horror that is beginning 
to take shape. With Joe Miller’s confession now ruled inadmissible by the 
court, a central block of the prosecution has gone with it, and quite possibly 
any justice for Danny.

By taking the case that was meant to bring Alec Hardy redemption and turning 
into the case that could further underline his errors of judgement – even if in 
both events the fault lies with one of his colleagues – writer Chris Chibnall 
is creating the detective’s worst nightmare. And he’s also doing a pretty good 
job of representing the horror of a grieving parent being cross examined on the 
witness stand; Beth’s incomprehension at the questions being posed coming after 
the judge’s instruction that “we’re going to run this with courtesy, dignity 
and respect. For the court, for each other, and for everyone involved”.

It’s an interesting take on the courtroom drama. The lawyers given not exactly 
a back seat – Sharon is clearly driving things along pretty ferociously – but a 
more equal billing with the witnesses they are examining than is traditional, 
in much the same way the victim’ s family were prioritised within the whodunnit 
set up of series one. Even the concerns of the perpetrator get airtime; the 
defiant fury of Lee at having had his life destroyed despite the lack of 
conviction, sitting alongside Joe’s desire and motivation to see his son.

I’m not sure I think the Sandbrook elements of the story show quite the same 
deftness. I just about bought the idea that Hardy had taken it upon himself to 
keep Claire safe, following the collapse of the case. But I’m less convinced 
that he’d be using her as bait for the (presumably dangerous) husband she 
betrayed, and organising a meeting in a completely unsecured house which also 
happens to be the former home of a man being tried for a local murder, without 
notifying anybody else. It is, to borrow a word from Ellie, crackers.

Chibnall does acknowledge this to some extent. Ellie questions his plan and 
suggests that Hardy is being pushed towards madness, Lee’s reappearance and his 
continuing guilt over Sandbrook sending him over edge. But for me the storyline 
jars with Broadchurch’s great strength: that it shows terrible, but 
recognisable events destroying a community. We might not want to imagine that 
Danny’s murder could happen where we live, but we know perhaps it could. The 
storyline with Claire and Lee, however? That feels like something that happens 
on television.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fjan%2F12%2Fbroadchurch-2-recap-series-two-episode-two%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F12%2F1421076067968%2F6bfc3969-f930-44cf-8782-5130c657ec3a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Broadchurch%20recap%3A%20series%20two%2C%20episode%20two%20%E2%80%93%20this%20fight%20isn't%20going%20to%20be%20pretty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fjan%2F12%2Fbroadchurch-2-recap-series-two-episode-two%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Broadchurch%20recap%3A%20series%20two%2C%20episode%20two%20%E2%80%93%20this%20fight%20isn%27t%20going%20to%20be%20pretty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fjan%2F12%2Fbroadchurch-2-recap-series-two-episode-two%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F12%2F1421076067968%2F6bfc3969-f930-44cf-8782-5130c657ec3a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Charlotte Rampling. Photograph: Patrick Redmond/ITV 
The lawyers

How good to see female barristers and a female judge on screen – not to 
mention the acting talent on display here. It’s a real joy to have Charlotte 
Rampling, Marianne Jean-Baptiste and Meera Syal sharing a screen. Despite the 
judge’s best efforts, however, I don’t think this fight is going to be pretty.

‘What these men have done to us’

A quick note here about that amazing scene between Olivia Colman and Eve Myles 
in front of the beach huts. Destroyed by men yes, but not without fight. I 
watched it twice – mainly for those moments when we saw the flashes of the old, 
not-angry Ellie. God knows, however, where Claire’s disappearance will leave 
her. (“Promise me she’ll be safe.”) She hasn’t exactly got many reserves to 
fall back on, particularly if she’s surviving on Kit Kats, scotch eggs and 
chips.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fjan%2F12%2Fbroadchurch-2-recap-series-two-episode-two%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F12%2F1421076130099%2F99141eec-56ec-4eda-9958-7cd6c7187401-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Broadchurch%20recap%3A%20series%20two%2C%20episode%20two%20%E2%80%93%20this%20fight%20isn't%20going%20to%20be%20pretty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fjan%2F12%2Fbroadchurch-2-recap-series-two-episode-two%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Broadchurch%20recap%3A%20series%20two%2C%20episode%20two%20%E2%80%93%20this%20fight%20isn%27t%20going%20to%20be%20pretty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fjan%2F12%2Fbroadchurch-2-recap-series-two-episode-two%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F12%2F1421076130099%2F99141eec-56ec-4eda-9958-7cd6c7187401-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Carolyn Pickles and Jonathan Bailey. Photograph: Patrick Redmond/ITV 
Thoughts and observations

• I have two questions for lawyers. One: would anyone in Broadchurch really 
have had a say in who the prosecuting counsel would be? Surely it’s entirely in 
the hands of the CPS. Two: even if Hardy had recorded Lee confessing to Claire, 
would any of that been admissible as evidence? Please put us all out of our 
misery in the comments.

• Beth’s logic – that Ellie could have known that beating up Joe would make 
his confession inadmissible – is pretty sound. I was surprised that the judge 
didn’t consider it when ruling the confession out.

• On which note: did Joe realise that the confession might be tainted when he 
changed his plea (without legal advice)?

• We found out more about why Mark Latimer is hanging out, playing games with 
Tom Miller. “Maybe because I’d want someone to look out for Dan if it was the 
other way around. Part of it feels like it was my fault.”

• Sharon is apparently as hard as nails – but the phone call in the hotel 
suggests she also has her vulnerabilities.

• Oh Oliver. A trial liveblog? I can’t imagine where you got that idea from …

• I love the low-level aggression levelled at the defence team by Rebecca via 
the hotel: cold showers, no Wi-Fi, and complaints about the volume of phone 
calls.

• I’m not the first to mention it, but David Tennant’s blow-dry is really 
quite ridiculous

• “Three proper coffees, no foam.” I enjoy Maggie’s refusal to be modern.

Breathtaking British seaside shot of the week

Surely Jocelyn in her boat, floating on a perfect turquoise sea with the 
cliffs as backdrop. Though the perfect line of beach huts comes not far behind.
 