
The first series of his hit drama was showered with praise and garlanded with 
Baftas. The second seemed to draw criticism from all sides – not least lawyers 
who criticised its portrayal of a murder trial.

Now Broadchurch <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/broadchurch> writer 
Chris Chibnall has defended his show against the critics, accepting that some 
viewers enjoyed the second series less than the first, but standing by his 
decisions – arguing that good drama is not about recreating instances word for 
word.

“I made a deliberate decision not to comment during transmission,” says 
Chibnall,writing for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/mar/04/broadchurch-writer-chris-chibnall-i-stand-by-the-dramas-court-scenes>
. “But now the series has finished, there’s one issue I do want to address: 
Legalgate.”

Broadchurch came under fire for various legal “blunders” 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-2914844/10-reasons-Broadchurch-totally-lost-plot-Ludicrous-storylines-legal-bloopers-mean-TV-s-murder-series-fatally-flawed.html>
 but Chibnall defends the process, as seen on screen, as being devised “as a 
result of months of research and consultation” with both legal and police 
advisors who gave notes on every script. The team were prepared for the plot to 
be analysed, he writes. “We knew our decisions would be chewed over. And they 
were.”

Chibnall chose to focus on the trial of Joe Miller, who confessed to the 
murder of 11-year-old Danny Latimer at the end of the first series of 
Broadchurch, because of a desire to explore the impact of a trial on the 
characters he had created.

Broadchurch writer Chris Chibnall: 'I stand by the drama's court scenes'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/mar/04/broadchurch-writer-chris-chibnall-i-stand-by-the-dramas-court-scenes>
That focus necessarily meant that the complexities of the trial were 
condensed, Chibnall writes: “Exact process and wording has to be dramatised … 
That’s not a scandal, it’s a legitimate dramatic technique.Drama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/drama> is not a literal portrayal of 
events. It’s a depiction, it’s impressionistic.”

Replying to criticism that Mark Latimer would not have been named as an 
alternate killer by defence barristers, Chibnall argues: “Our advisors were – 
and remain (I checked) – adamant on this: if they were defending, they could 
and would run this approach.” Similarly, he says, the cross-examining of DS 
Ellie Miller was not seen as unrealistic by police advisors. “Every opinion is 
open to argument. But we were not cavalier,” he writes.

Viewing figures for the second series of Broadchurch fell considerably after 
the season premiere,with seven-day figures 
<http://www.barb.co.uk/whats-new/weekly-top-10> (which include timeshifted 
viewing) showing a drop of around 1.5 million viewers for the second episode, 
which attracted close to 7 million people. Viewing for the rest of the series 
stabilised at around 6.5 million.

ITV announced that the show will return following the broadcast of the series 
two finale. Chibnall promises: “We’re now working on the third series. It will 
be different again. There’ll be plenty more to discuss.”
 