
Before we moved, we filled boxes. “Why are you packing those CDs?” asked my 
wife, eyeing them. “You’ve put them all on a hard disk, and with streaming 
services you can get what you want.”

I opened my mouth to offer a devastating rebuttal. No sound emerged. In other 
news, it turns out that charity shops love secondhand CDs. I looked forward to 
streaming it all.We last moved in 2006, when Inoted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2006/may/25/comment.insideit> here how 
essential broadband had already become. (And also, hilariously, that six 
megabits was “adequate for nearly everything we do today”. To be fair, the 
BBC’s iPlayer was then more than two years from launch.)

“After bereavement or divorce, moving is the most stressful life experience,” 
my wife said as the boxes piled up and we tried to figure out where the mugs, 
kettle and milk were. Perhaps so – then we tried to get our broadband sorted 
out. Our previous broadbandprovider wasn’t interested in us because we got our 
phone service fromBT <https://www.theguardian.com/business/btgroup>, – 
everything’s about the bundles now – so I had to call them to get broadband. 
Urgently. Without it, the risk of divorce or my death was rising rapidly. 
Though mobile data and phones have improved enormously since 2006, getting one 
bar of 3G reception in the new house was challenging.

“Hello, I’m Leon,” said the enthusiastic person in the BT call centre. His 
Scottish accent made me wonder if he was2007’s X Factor winner 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-2080513/Former-X-Factor-winner-Leon-Jackson-unrecognisable-saucy-shirtless-Twitter-picture.html>
 fallen on hard(er) times. He told various whoppers about our potential line 
speed – “Four megabits, and up to eight megabits!” – while our router suggested 
2.5Mb/s on a good day; BT’s own line checker later confirmed this. Leon wanted 
to upsell me to BT Sport, which I knew our line would be too slow for. By now I 
was annoyed, but also wanted broadband, dammit.

What I really wanted – and Leon would have been delighted to upsell me to – 
was properly fast broadband: fibre-optic cable, right up to the front door. No 
chance. Fibre delivery to rural areas like mine is a hot mess. The key problem 
is that BT hasn’t put the money into it because it hasn’t been forced to.

The original BT privatisation in 1984 missed the chance to create a properly 
competitive market in fixed phone lines by letting BT own the infrastructure as 
well as the phone service. It took 30 years for other suppliers toget 50% of 
the fixed line market <http://media.ofcom.org.uk/facts/>. Despite the best 
efforts of Ofcom, its regulator, BT still effectively controls their pricing 
via BT Openreach, the division that looks after the infrastructure.

Compare with the electricity, gas and train businesses, where no provider owns 
the infrastructure; or mobile, where competition was built in from the start 
through a duopoly, which expanded to a four-way then five-way fight which means 
we now have one of the world’s most flexible and lowest priced mobile markets.

But on fibre it’s different. Openreach is easily the most profitable division 
within BT, generating about 50p in earnings before interest, tax, depreciation 
and amortisation for every £1 of revenue. Such anomalies suggest either a 
monopoly, premium pricing, or both. That’s not right for a business that should 
be supplier-agnostic and building a new network based on fibre rather than 
copper. (By contrast, Network Rail’soperating margin is 30% or so 
<http://www.networkrail.co.uk/browse%20documents/interim%20results/2009-14%20Network%20Rail%20Limited%20Interim%20Financial%20Statements.pdf>
; National Gridabout the same 
<http://investors.nationalgrid.com/~/media/Files/N/National-Grid-IR/results-centre/full-year-results-2014-15-presentation.pdf>
.)

Rural fibre relies on government handouts to get BT to replace copper with 
fibre. But even those fail. A big contract in Devon and Somersetcollapsed in 
June 
<http://www.ispreview.co.uk/index.php/2015/06/bts-uk-superfast-broadband-rollout-deal-for-devon-and-somerset-collapses.html>
 because BT’s “best offer” didn’t match the council’s need for 95% coverage. So 
who else will step up? For now, nobody. Does BT lose out? No. It doesn’t have 
an incentive to add more, despite any pent-up demand.

We got our broadband. Leon was of course far too optimistic. It’s achingly 
slow by modern standards; audio streaming is hit-and-miss. Don’t ask about 
iPlayer. And fibre? We’re already talking about clubbing together to lay our 
own to the exchange. That’s how you recognise market failure.

• This article was amended on 15 September 2015. An earlier version said 
Openreach generated about 50p in operating profit for every £1 of revenue. That 
figure is for earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation, not 
for operating profit.
 