
The chief executive of BT’s contentious Openreach business has resigned to run 
Nationwide <https://www.theguardian.com/business/nationwide>, the country’s 
biggest building society.

Joe Garner will join Nationwide in spring 2016, replacing Graham Beale as 
chief executive of the customer-owned lender.

The appointment of Garner, a former HSBC banker, is unusual for Nationwide, 
whose last three chief executives came from within the company.

It will also mean that the top two posts at the society will be filled by 
ex-bankers. David Roberts, Nationwide’s chairman, is a former Barclays banker 
and was deputy chairman of Lloyds Banking Group.

Garner joined Openreach, which builds and maintains BT’s vast copper and fibre 
network, in February 2014 andhas spent much of his time trying to ward off 
criticism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/19/bt-hires-1600-staff-after-internet-criticism>
 and regulatory intervention over poor service standards and lack of 
competition.

He is likely to leave while BT is caught up in the most wide ranging review of 
competition in the telecoms sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/19/bt-hires-1600-staff-after-internet-criticism>
 for a decade. BT’s rivals are calling for Openreach to be separated from its 
parent as part of the inquiry when the regulator Ofcom reports on its findings.

Ofcom <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom> has said it will publish its 
preliminary thoughts on the question early in the new year, promising Garner a 
busy end to his time at BT.

BT is required to provide access to its network on equal terms to its 
competitors through Openreach’s fibre broadband network. But competitors for 
broadband businesssuch as Sky and TalkTalk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/12/talk-talk-sky-call-for-network-to-be-split-off-bt-ofcom-launches-probe>
 have claimed a conflict of interest that gives Openreach no incentive to cut 
prices whilecustomers have complained about long delays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jun/29/bt-openreach-broadband-phone-delays-new-build>
 in getting broadband cables installed.

Vodafone’s chief executive, Vittorio Colao, claimed last week that BT was 
trying to use Openreach tocreate a new monopoly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/10/bt-remonopolise-uk-telecoms-sector-vodafone-broadband>
 of the retail telecoms market, which BT dominates. Garner hassaid it would be 
a big mistake 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/newsbysector/mediatechnologyandtelecoms/digital-media/11862314/Openreach-boss-A-huge-mistake-if-Openreach-were-spun-off-as-an-independent-company.html>
 to split Openreach from BT and that he has been working to improve service.

Garner said: “I’ve greatly enjoyed my time at Openreach and deciding to leave 
has been an extremely hard decision, but Nationwide is a firm I long-admired 
during my time in financial services.

“It is BT’s investment that has helped the UK to become one of the strongest 
digital economies in the world and I am proud to have contributed. Openreach is 
now poised to take the UK from a superfast to an ultrafast nation and I am 
confident it can achieve this as part of theBT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/btgroup> family.”

Before joining BT, Garner ran HSBC’s UK bank for two years and was in charge 
when regulation of the banking sector stiffened. He rose through the ranks 
after joining HSBC in 2004 and won recognition for increasing HSBC’s UK market 
share, particularly of mortgages, when other banks were weakened.

Garner left HSBC in September 2012 because he was reluctant to move overseas 
for the bank and was reported to be a candidate to run Royal Bank of Scotland 
and the Co-operative Group. Earlier in his career he worked for Dixons, the 
electrical retailer, and Procter & Gamble, the consumer goods company.

The move to Nationwide will take Garner back to financial services but working 
for Britain’s biggest mutual lender. Beale, who announced his departure in May,
has criticised changes to the banking levy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/18/nationwide-chief-criticises-bank-levy>
, made partly to appease HSBC, that have increase costs for building societies.

Roberts said: “As a member-owned organisation, our sole focus is to deliver 
exceptional products and services to our members at every stage of their lives. 
Joe has an excellent track record in delivering outstanding service to 
customers across the financial services and retail sectors,”

Beale has led Nationwide since 2007 and steered the society through the 
financial crisis of 2008. Garner will be paid about the same as Beale, whose 
£2.6m pay last year attracted controversy for being far more than at any other 
building society.
 