
George Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> is to hand 
up to £3,000 to aspiring first-time homebuyers in a bid to help more people get 
onto the property ladder.

In a centrepiece budget measure, the chancellor announced the government will 
hand over £50 for every £200 a would-be buyer saves towards a deposit.

The new help-to-buy Isa means, if a first-time buyer can save £12,000 in a 
tax-free account, the government will add £3,000 – which could reduce 
substantially the length of time they need to save to buy a home. Anyone who 
has never owned a home before can open an account, which means a couple buying 
together can claim up to £6,000 towards their first property.

However, critics warned the new scheme would again fuel demand for homes 
without increasing supply, and said the £2bn cost to taxpayers over the next 
five years could instead have been used to provide thousands of affordable 
homes.

The chancellor said the help-to-buy Isa combined “two of our most successful 
policies… to tackle two of the biggest challenges facing first-time buyers – 
the low interest rates when you build up your savings, and the high deposits 
required by the banks.”

The scheme, set to launch in the autumn, can be opened by any aspiring 
first-time buyer aged 16 or over.

Savers can start with a lump-sum deposit of up to £1,000 and add up to £200 a 
month, which is boosted by £50 for every £200 saved. The minimum savings to 
qualify for the scheme are £1,600, but there is no monthly minimum investment.

Money in one of the new accounts can be accessed at any time, but the 
government payment is only added if and when it is used as a deposit on a home.

Before the financial crisis, first-time buyers were able to access mortgages 
of as much as 125%, and loans for buyers with only small deposits were widely 
available. The arrival of help to buy in Osborne’s 2013 budget has boosted the 
95% mortgage market, but high rents and rising house prices have made it 
difficult for would-be buyers to enter the market.

Mortgage lenders and brokers said the help-to-buy Isa would address some of 
the problems faced by first-time buyers who were struggling to save. “That’s 
especially true in areas where house prices have been on the rise, in some 
cases outpacing the rate at which first-time buyers can save,” said David 
Hollingworth of brokers London & Country. “This should help counter the erosion 
of the savings pot as a percentage of the purchase price.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Fbudget-2015-how-the-help-to-buy-isa-will-work%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F18%2F1426707921537%2Fc3e50a39-8280-4c5b-9728-8383ffa15622-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Budget%202015%3A%20help-to-buy%20Isas%20a%20boost%20for%20first-time%20buyers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Fbudget-2015-how-the-help-to-buy-isa-will-work%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Budget%202015%3A%20help-to-buy%20Isas%20a%20boost%20for%20first-time%20buyers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Fbudget-2015-how-the-help-to-buy-isa-will-work%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F18%2F1426707921537%2Fc3e50a39-8280-4c5b-9728-8383ffa15622-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Under the help-to-buy Isa, homes can be bought at any time, so a 16-year-old 
could open an account now to buy a property much later. Photograph: Joe 
Giddens/PA 
Stephen Noakes, of the government-backed Lloyds Banking Group, said the scheme 
“provides a genuine solution to the challenge of raising a deposit”. He added: 
“We know that this is the key barrier when trying to buy a first home and the 
help-to-buy Isa will reward positive savings behaviour and make a real 
difference in helping young people get on to the property ladder faster.”

Fionnuala Earley, director of research at Hamptons International said her 
calculations showed the initiative will enable a first-time buyer to save for 
their deposit around a year earlier than previously.

The scheme can be used for deposits on homes costing up to £450,000 in London 
and up to £250,000 elsewhere in the UK – which account for more than nine in 10 
first-time buyer purchases.

 It can be used alongside other government policies such as the help-to-buy 
interest-free loan scheme or the mortgage guarantee scheme for 95% loans.

Savers can use a help-to-buy Isa with a deposit saved elsewhere and, although 
the taxpayer payments will ease pressure on the bank of mum and dad, the cash 
can come from parents or grandparents.

Budget 2015: the winners and losers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/18/budget-2015-winners-and-losers>
The Isas <https://www.theguardian.com/money/isas> will be open to new account 
holders for four years from the autumn, but homes can be bought at any time, so 
a 16-year-old could open an account now to buy a property much later, although 
the value of the £3,000 boost would erode over time.

Richard Sexton, director of e.surv chartered surveyors, said the scheme 
“should turn up the wattage” at the lower end of the housing market. Lucian 
Cook from property firm Savills agreed the biggest impact would be in cheaper 
markets. “It is more likely to help get buyers over the deposit hurdle in the 
lower value, lower growth markets of the Midlands and the north than, say, 
London and the south-east, where significant constraints remain,” he said.

In the short term, activity could fall as first-time buyers resist entering 
the market until they can benefit from the assistance. However, most 
commentators expressed concern that in the longer term demand for homes could 
be boosted, pushing prices further out of the reach of aspiring buyers. “The 
additional demand stimulated by this new initiative will drive prices higher in 
the absence of additional housing supply,” said Earley. “This will undoubtedly 
lead to calls for more government help.” Capital Economics said a buyer using 
the scheme to fund a 5% deposit would effectively boost their buying power by 
£60,000.

The housing charity Shelter said the money spent on the policy could have been 
better used to provide housing. The budget projects the cost will be £45m in 
the current tax year, rising to £835m by 2019-20. “Only measures that actually 
build more homes will make a material difference to all those priced out and 
struggling with sky high housing costs,” its chief executive Campbell Robb 
said. “Put in black and white, the money spent on this scheme could build 
almost 65,000 affordable homes.”
 