
Rejoice, Scoobies: Buffy the Vampire Slayer is coming to ABC Family. “But it’s 
on Netflix!” you may cry. But watching 90s TV with lots of ridiculous ads and 
over a long period of time is the whole point, especially when ABC Family is 
practically inviting you to watch Buffy on an actual TV so you can use your 
laptop to write Spike-Xander slash fiction. Besides, the change in syndication 
networks is an opportunity to take a look back at the highlights of one of the 
best and most beloved shows of all time – Buffy might often feel a bit dated, 
but it’s in a charming way that doesn’t detract from enjoyment of the show. 
That means it’s also time to reignite some of the old Buffy fan debates. What’s 
the best season? (Three. Obviously). Angel or Spike? (Both, Spike if you have 
to choose). What are the best episodes? Thankfully, ABC Family itself is trying 
to answer this one – the network is kicking off its syndication run with a Fan 
Favorite Week before airing the series chronologically. Here are the ones they 
should choose:

Season one, episode seven - Angel

Look – early Buffy is important. And perhaps no episode more so than Angel, 
which finds Buffy discovering that the mysterious, brooding guy who likes her 
so much (and spends way too much time creeping around her at night) is actually 
a vampire with a soul. With most of Buffy’s initial anxiety and unwillingness 
to be a Slayer out of the way, the show is finally capable of delving into its 
characters complicated, centuries-long backstory, while also providing a great 
showcase for some of the teen angst that seeps out of the show once the main 
characters graduate high school. (Buffy is worried that Angel read her diary!) 
It’s one of the first serious showcases for Joyce Summers, allowing her to be 
threatened by a vampire while maintaining her firm denial about her daughter’s 
life. Overall, the episode is a look at a sweeter, simpler version of Buffy. 
It’s a good thing the series evolved, but sometimes it’s nice to look back and 
reminisce.

Season two, episode 14 – Innocence
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fbuffy-the-vampire-slayer-best-episodes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F12%2F1434139076409%2Fdbdd10d0-a3d6-428f-9c31-8efd1cf35745-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Buffy%20the%20Vampire%20Slayer%3A%20the%20five%20best%20episodes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fbuffy-the-vampire-slayer-best-episodes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Buffy%20the%20Vampire%20Slayer%3A%20the%20five%20best%20episodes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fbuffy-the-vampire-slayer-best-episodes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F12%2F1434139076409%2Fdbdd10d0-a3d6-428f-9c31-8efd1cf35745-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Joss Whedon loves Innocence Photograph: Jamie Simonds/BAFTA / Rex Featur 
A sad, necessary counterpoint to Angel, Whedon has repeatedly stated that 
Innocence is his favorite episode of Buffy, as well as themost important 
<http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/life/television/news/2003-04-28-buffy-top10_x.htm>
. This makes sense – the episode, which kicks off maybe Buffy’s best run of 
episodes, is the show’s most seamless metaphoric integration of slaying and 
adolescence, and also its most emotionally painful. After Buffy and Angel sleep 
together, Angel loses his soul, reverting to his supremely evil Angelus persona 
and teaming up with Drusilla and then villainous Spike. There’s a fantastic 
element, of course, in Angelus’s terrifying, casual cruelty (and, admittedly, 
increased cool) and the monstrous Judge Buffy has to blow up with a rocket 
launcher at the end of the episode. But the heart of Innocence is an all-too 
common growing experience: After sleeping with her boyfriend, Buffy finds 
herself alone. And she discovers that he is, both literally and metaphorically, 
not the man she thought he was.

Season three, episode 13 – The Zeppo

The funniest, cleverest episode of Buffy, The Zeppo is a basically perfect 
spotlight for the often-underappreciated, totally normal Xander Harris. As a 
non-magical human, Xander has a difficult time justifying his presence in and 
explaining his contributions to the mystical battles that pad out most of the 
series, but The Zeppo shows off his personality, tactical intelligence and 
simple sense of commitment – a willingness to try and do the right thing, even 
without supernatural abilities. Nicholas Brendon’s constantly bemused, 
frightened performance allows him to anchor an episode in which he fights off a 
gang of undead jocks, saves Sunnydale High and loses his virginity. Meanwhile, 
the rest of the Scooby Gang fends off a world-class threat, allowing a whole 
separate episode to play out in the background. We only get bits and pieces of 
the other fight, but the straight-faced seriousness of Willow, Buffy and Angel 
allows the show to gently poke at itself in a way that doesn’t undermine 
anything else going forward.

Season four, episode 10 – Hush
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fbuffy-the-vampire-slayer-best-episodes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F12%2F1434139218196%2F02786f7e-33e7-4431-ba1d-2dad728dce45-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Buffy%20the%20Vampire%20Slayer%3A%20the%20five%20best%20episodes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fbuffy-the-vampire-slayer-best-episodes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Buffy%20the%20Vampire%20Slayer%3A%20the%20five%20best%20episodes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fbuffy-the-vampire-slayer-best-episodes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F12%2F1434139218196%2F02786f7e-33e7-4431-ba1d-2dad728dce45-680x1020.jpeg>
 Buffy didn’t always have the best of times Photograph: Allstar/20 CENTURY 
FOX/Sportsphoto Ltd./Allstar 
No sound? No problem. Hush is a standout standalone episode of Buffy, allowing 
the creepy, buttoned-up gentlemen to steal the voices of everyone in Sunnydale. 
It’s one of the scariest episodes of the series, using the characters’ 
inability to communicate to divide them and make teamwork more difficult, in 
addition to perpetually redirecting viewer attention onto the 
mostly-unaccompanied visuals. But it also allows for a classic comic scene when 
Giles attempts to brief the Scoobies on the Gentlemen using an overhead 
projector. And that silence is mainly the centerpiece of an episode that 
displays many of the best aspects of mid-period Buffy, from Spike staying 
captive in Giles’ house to Xander and Anya’s spat-filled relationship (and 
Giles’ “orgasm friend”) to Willow’s burgeoning interest in campus witchcraft 
and the introduction of Tara. Season four is a bit uneven at times, but Hush is 
a Buffy fairytale – and that’s a genre that looks especially good on this 
genre-mashing series.

Season five, episode 16 – The Body

The best-remembered Buffy episodes tend to be off-format. The Zeppo focuses on 
one, somewhat secondary character, while Hush removes one of the major avenues 
for storytelling in sound. (One of theother fan favorite episodes 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VREnOZuC7qw> goes perhaps a little too far in 
the opposite direction.) The Body is almost certainly the least Buffy-like 
episode of Buffy, and with good, sad reason – it’s about death. Not the kind of 
death from which someone can be magically retrieved, or raised as a quirky 
undead version of the same person. Just plain, ordinary death. When Buffy finds 
Joyce after suffering an aneurysm, the episode follows the smaller moments in 
the aftermath – Anya’s inability to understand human grieving, Xander’s 
pointless quest for magical revenge, and Willow’s anxiety over what to wear. 
Buffy briefly fights a vampire in the morgue at the end, signaling something of 
a return to the Buffy status quo, but with Joyce’s body in the room, it’s clear 
nothing will be the same again.
 