
The federal building code attached to the Australian Building and Construction 
Commission bill would decrease apprentices on building projects and increase 
workers on 457 temporary skilled worker visas, the McKell Institute has said.

The progressive thinkthank has produced an analysis of the building code 
reframing it as “highly prescriptive red tape” that could increase strikes 
because existing agreements must be renegotiated.

The code, if passed, would stipulate that construction companies cannot bid 
for government work unless they exclude a wide range of otherwise legal clauses 
from industrial deals.

ABCC must enshrine union members' rights, says One Nation senator
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/31/abcc-must-enshrine-union-members-rights-says-one-nation-senator>
The McKell report notes the code bans common clauses including those that: 
ensure subcontractors and their workers are paid the same as other employees on 
site, limit the number of ordinary hours worked per day, guarantee rostered 
days off including public holidays, discourage discrimination against mature 
workers, and set stable rosters.

The report noted that at the end of 2015 there were 278,600 apprentices and 
trainees in training, 11.8% fewer than at the end of 2014.

It said “the only instrument that guarantees the number of apprentices to a 
workforce can be found in suitable enterprise agreements that mandate safety 
and apprenticeship ratios”, a practice the code would ban.

The report argues that since the cost of training apprentices outweighs their 
output for the first two years, the building code will encourage employers to 
source skilled labour from overseas instead.

Companies that choose to train Australian workers “are at a competitive 
disadvantage compared to those who avail themselves of the 457 [skilled 
temporary work visa] worker”, it said.

The code would apply to enterprise agreements struck after 24 April 2014, which
gives it retrospective effect because it bars builders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/26/michaelia-cash-criticised-over-industrial-relations-bill-with-retrospective-powers>
 from government work based on deals struck before the code was in place.

The McKell report said that, in order to comply with the code, some building 
companies would need to renegotiate their workplace deals which “could lead to 
further and significant industrial disputation”.

Decreasing industrial action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/22/does-malcolm-turnbulls-claim-the-abcc-will-increase-productivity-stack-up>
 is one of the government’s main objectives in reinstating the ABCC, which it 
says will help boost productivity in the sector.

The prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, has also suggested the code will help 
stop “excessive” pay rises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/01/election-2016-malcolm-turnbull-above-inflation-pay-rise-construction-workers-union>
, because it bans coercion to win above-award pay rises.

The McKell report argued the ABCC and building code were unnecessary because 
“the productivity of the building and construction sector still outpaces most 
other sectors and the industry is still healthy and growing”.

It said since the ABCC was abolished in 2008 labour productivity in the 
construction sector has grown annually by an average of 4.81% and in the heavy 
and civil engineering sector it grew by 6.38%.

“This compares to the average for all industries of 3.52%,” it said.

However, like the government’s claim that productivity increased by a total of 
16.8% when the ABCC last existed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/18/scott-morrisons-claim-abcc-will-boost-wages-shows-it-is-fast-becoming-a-magic-pudding>
, it is hard to establish whether productivity increases were caused by one 
regulatory regime or another.

Xenophon calls for subcontractor protections and may back ABCC
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/12/xenophon-calls-for-subcontractor-protections-and-may-back-abcc>
The McKell report argued the code would make work sites less safe because it 
banned the practice of inviting an officer of a building association or union 
on site except where they were exercising statutory rights to check work health 
and safety complaints.

The report said the code would “disproportionately affect women, older workers 
and unions” because it banned any form of affirmative action for certain 
categories of workers and banned union presence at staff inductions and safety 
talks.

Employment law expert and Adelaide law school professor Andrew Stewart has 
told Guardian Australia the codeis a source of significant concern in the 
construction industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/26/michaelia-cash-criticised-over-industrial-relations-bill-with-retrospective-powers>
.

“Virtually every major builder will be non-compliant,” he said, in reference 
to the broad range of deal content barred by the code and its retrospective 
effect.


He said the code could be changed to only bar agreements struck after it 
passed, in which case it would have “minimal practical effect”, or it would 
apply retrospectively and “force building companies to renegotiate their 
enterprise agreements simultaneously causing industrial mayhem”.

Stewart said the code barred “any clauses with any impact on productivity, or 
the right of companies to manage their business”.

“It essentially gives [Fair Work Building and Construction director] Nigel 
Hadgkiss or whoever is the director of the ABCC discretion to object to any 
union agreement on a very wide number of bases.”

The McKell report noted that the code was silent on whether builders with poor 
safety records, a history of bankruptcies and “phoenixing” activity should be 
excluded from government work.

Although the code is currently attached to the ABCC bill, the McKell report 
suggests that, since it is a regulation, it is still subject to disallowance by 
the Senate.
 