
A Nice court finally suspended the burkini ban on Thursday after city 
authorities haddefied a ruling  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/28/french-mayors-burkini-ban-court-ruling>
by the country’s highest administrative court.


Judges in Nice said the terror attack on 14 July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/21/nice-attacker-plotted-for-months-and-had-accomplices-prosecutor>
 in the French Riviera resort city gave insufficient grounds to justify such a 
ban.

Thursday’s decision follows last week’s ruling by France’s highest 
administrative court, in a test case expected to set a legal precedent, to 
suspend the burkini ban in one French Riviera town. Bans have introduced by 
about 30 towns, mainly in the south-east.

Nice and several towns had ignored the ruling and kept their bans in place in 
the midst of a raging debate about religious clothing in secularFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>.

Why we wear the burkini: five women on dressing modestly at the beach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/31/why-we-wear-the-burkini-five-women-on-dressing-modestly-at-the-beach>
Nice was one of the first places to ban the Islamic swimsuit this summer, with 
city authorities claiming there was a risk to public order from wearing the 
garment after a jihadist in a truck ploughed into crowds on the city’s 
waterfront, killing 86 people.

But the city’s administrative court ruled on Thursday: “In the absence of such 
risks, the emotions and the concerns resulting from terrorist attacks, and 
especially from the attack on July 14, are insufficient grounds to legally 
justify the contested ban.”

The court also found burkinis posed no risk to “hygiene, decency or safety 
when swimming”.

The emotive issue of the burkini was further inflamed last week when 
photographs taken on a beach in Nice showed police surrounding a woman in a 
headscarf and a long-sleeved top.

Nice authorities denied the woman had been forced to remove clothing. They 
told AFP she was showing police the swimsuit she was wearing under her top, 
over a pair of leggings, when the picture was taken.

At least 30 fines have been issued in Nice since the burkini ban was 
introduced.

France’s Human Rights League and an anti-Islamophobia group challenged the ban.

The chief lawyer for the city authorities had argued on Wednesday that 
burkinis posed a risk of public disorder.

She said the city was “almost on the brink of civil war”.

• This article was amended on 2 September 2016 to clarify that the ruling by 
France’s highest administrative court suspended a ban on full-body swimsuits in 
only one town.
 