
Top of the City’s wishlist for 2017 would be a firm commitment from Theresa 
May to pursue a transitional deal for the financial industry to ease 
Brexit-related disruptions. Here, for example, is the Christmas message from 
Mark Boleat, policy chairman at the City ofLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> Corporation: “Firms’ nervousness can 
only be allayed if they know how they can continue running their business. A 
transitional arrangement should be agreed as soon as possible.”

He’s right, of course. The “cliff edge” model 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/21/government-working-hard-avoid-brexit-cliff-edge-business-theresa-may-cbi>
 of Brexit is dangerous for everyone, including the rest of the EU since the UK 
is “effectively the investment banker for Europe”, as Mark Carney put it last 
month. Given the City’s dominance in critical areas such as foreign exchange 
and debt issuance, a sudden rupture could increase the cost of borrowing across 
Europe. Better to adjust slowly and avoid the need for contingency plans and 
double overheads.

Italy's political class should be very alarmed if MPS needs state bailout
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/dec/21/italy-political-class-very-worried-monte-dei-paschi-di-siena-bank-state-bailout>
But how slowly? Lobbyists like Boleat would help their case if they spelled 
out what they want. There is a strong suspicion that a rapid transition – say a 
year or two – would barely be an improvement on a cliff edge. Carney, in front 
of the Treasury select committee in November,pointed out that the shortest 
transition period he had ever seen in a trade deal was two years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/15/mark-carney-bank-of-england-brexit-treasury-select-committee>
, which was the Swiss-EU deal on insurance. “Normally, it is in the range of 
four to seven years,” he said, adding that the post-crisis Basel reforms to the 
banking industry were phased in over eight.

Such a timetable might cause uproar, at least with hardline Brexiters. But, if 
the City thinks an orderly transition implies half a decade or more, it should 
speak up and make its case in detail. Being vague creates a real danger that 
the UK government serves up a grossly inadequate arrangement and proclaims it 
to be a triumph of negotiation.
 