
Lending to buy-to-let investors rose by almost two-thirds in the 12 months to 
February, as some landlords took advantage of low interest rates to remortgage, 
while others added to their portfolios ahead of changes to stamp duty rates.

Figures from the Council of Mortgage Lenders (CML) showed that 23,700 
buy-to-let loans worth £3.7bn were taken out during the month, a 47% increase 
in volume on the previous February and a 61% rise in value.

The key driver was remortgaging, with borrowers taking advantage of low rates 
to refinance their portfolios 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/11/buy-to-let-landlords-keep-benefiting-from-cheaper-mortgages>
. Of the total, 13,100 mortgages worth £2.2bn were remortgages.

The changes to stamp duty on second homes, which came into force on 1 April, 
also boosted buying activity by investors in the early part of the year. The 
CML said the number of house purchase loans for buy-to-let was up by 30% 
year-on-year, at 10,300.

Buy-to-let landlords keep benefiting from cheaper mortgages
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/11/buy-to-let-landlords-keep-benefiting-from-cheaper-mortgages>
The CML’s figures also show strong year-on-year growth in house purchasing by 
first-time buyers, with the value of loans hitting £3.4bn – 21% up on February 
2015’s figure.


The number of first-time buyer mortgages was up by 11% year-on-year, at 22,000.

First-time buyers typically borrowed 83% of the value of the property they 
were buying, and spent 18.1% of their gross monthly income on mortgage 
repayments.


The monthly cost of servicing a loan was down from 18.9% in February 2015, as 
mortgage rates continued to fall. However, the rising cost of homes meant new 
buyers were borrowing more relative to their incomes, with the average loan 
worth 3.46 times earnings, compared with 3.33 in February 2015.

Separate figures from the Bank of England 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/other/monetary/ccs/2016/q1.aspx>
 show that lenders expect demand for buy-to-let loans to fall significantly in 
the second quarter, while demand for other mortgages should increase slightly.

Paul Smith, CEO of haart estate agents, said the CML’s figures pointed to “a 
very healthy property market”, and that the next few months could be good for 
new entrants into the market.

UK first-time buyers 'spend more than £50,000 on rent'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/feb/12/uk-first-time-buyers-average-rent>
“For first-time buyers the next few months is a good time to buy – 
particularly now they are no longer competing with buy-to-let investors after 
the stamp duty surcharge that came into effect at the beginning of this month,” 
Smith said.

“Prices for first-time buyers are still at sky-high levels – with the average 
price of a starter home at £176,281 in February, a 9.8% annual increase – but 
today’s data shows that lenders are providing the funds for many of them to get 
on the property ladder, and help to buy has played an important role in this.”

David Whittaker, managing director of Mortgages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/mortgages> for Business, a broker which 
focuses on buy-to-let loans, said he expected figures for March to also show 
strong lending to investors buying ahead of the stamp duty change.

“Over the next few months, I am expecting the buy-to-let market to quieten 
down somewhat as landlords take time to factor in the cost of the new stamp 
duty levy and, perhaps more importantly, work out new investment strategies to 
manage the forthcoming relief restrictions being imposed on individual higher 
rate tax payers,” he said.

“I also expect that remortgaging activity will continue to drive growth in the 
mortgage market, as increasing numbers of people opt to use their first homes 
as a means of securing a second home for investment purposes.”
 