
In a recent article, the novelist and academic China Miéville warns 
progressives against adopting the cynical savviness so characteristic of 
mainstream punditry.

“Becoming a radical critic of capitalism,” Miéville writes 
<http://salvage.zone/in-print/on-social-sadism/>, “involves a process of 
disenchantment, the dying of surprise at the system’s depredations; butbeing 
one, a long-term witness to those depredations, is to repeatedly discover that 
we can be shocked by what no longer surprises us.”

That’s something to bear in mind when reading the latest Oxfam report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/18/richest-62-billionaires-wealthy-half-world-population-combined>
 into inequality in the global economy, a document that reveals that 62 
individuals now control more wealth than the bottom half of the planet’s 
population.

Richest 62 people as wealthy as half of world's population, says Oxfam
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/18/richest-62-billionaires-wealthy-half-world-population-combined>
Such statistics should come as a shock: not necessarily a surprise but 
something more like an electrical jolt, awakening us to the global order we’ve 
constructed, now, in its everyday operations, demonstrably more unfair than any 
previous society in human history.

In the ancient world, the rulers lived in a luxury denied to their subjects, 
so much so that they often imagined themselves deities. But there were material 
limits to their delusions. Rich or poor, noble or commoner, everyone on the 
Nile Delta or the fertile crescent of Mesopotamia crescent suffered alike from 
disease and natural disaster and the other privations of a low-tech society 
without medicine or science.

In 1844, Marx discussed the super-wealthy of his own time, explaining how they 
took on the properties of the money they possessed:

I am ugly, but I can buy for myself the most beautiful of women. Therefore I 
am not ugly, for the effect of ugliness – its deterrent power – is nullified by 
money. I, according to my individual characteristics, am lame, but money 
furnishes me with 24 feet. Therefore I am not lame. I am bad, dishonest, 
unscrupulous, stupid; but money is honoured, and hence its possessor. Money is 
the supreme good, therefore its possessor is good.

To update that list, add everything made possible for the wealthy by the 
almost magical technology of the 21st century. Once you do, it’s clear that 
today’s elite don’t need to imagine themselves gods. By every meaningful 
measure, that’s what they are. They have absorbed, via their wealth, all the 
attributes that religion traditionally attributed to divinities, even as the 
world’s poorest still endure conditions familiar to the labourers who 
constructed the pyramids.

Back in 1999, Adrian Peacock entitled his book on globalisation 200 Pharaohs: 
Five Billion Slaves. It’s now 17 years later and all that’s changed is the 
ratio.

Some will argue that income equality doesn’t matter, that we should concern 
ourselves only with absolutes. Between 1990 and 2010, they remind us, the 
number of people classified as enduring extreme poverty fell by a half. 
Economic growth in China and India lifts all boats – and, if some vessels have 
floated rather higher than others, at least they’re all rising.

But life in poverty (rather than extreme poverty) still means a deprivation 
unimaginable to the wealthy. How, then, does one morally justify a distribution 
of resources that allocates so very little to so many and gives a tiny few more 
than they can ever consume?

According to Oxfam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/oxfam>, the wealth of 
those richest 62 people grew by more than half a trillion dollars since 2010, 
even as the wealth of the bottom half of the world dropped by 41%. That, mind 
you, took place in the period after the global financial crisis, during the 
years of supposed recovery.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fis-inequality-an-unavoidable-fact-of-life-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20inequality%20an%20unavoidable%20fact%20of%20life%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fis-inequality-an-unavoidable-fact-of-life-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20inequality%20an%20unavoidable%20fact%20of%20life%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fis-inequality-an-unavoidable-fact-of-life-video&media=>
Is inequality an unavoidable fact of life? - video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2016/jan/20/is-inequality-an-unavoidable-fact-of-life-video>
In other words, inequality increased massively when the economy was growing, 
with most of the new wealth created going to the rich rather than those who 
needed it most. As the report explains, “in almost all rich countries and in 
most developing countries, the share of national income going to workers has 
been falling”. In contrast, “the owners of capital have seen their capital 
consistently grow (through interest payments, dividends, or retained profits) 
faster than the rate the economy has been growing”.

In the key scene in the Orson Welles movie The Third Man, Holly Martins 
(Joseph Cotton) confronts Harry Lime (Welles) while they ride the Vienna ferris 
wheel. He accuses Lime of selling penicillin on the black market: essentially, 
risking the lives of the sick to enrich himself. Lime scoffs at Martins’ 
concerns.

“Look down there,” he says, pointing at the revellers way down on the ground. 
“Tell me. Would you really feel any pity if one of those dots stopped moving 
forever?”

Lime’s question illustrates the implications of the Oxfam figures, extending 
well beyond economics. What, for example, can democracy possibly mean in a 
society resting on such disparities between the blessed and the damned?

“All men are created equal,” explained the Declaration of Independence. At the 
time, Thomas Jefferson’s slaves might have found that assurance rather hard to 
swallow. Nonetheless, by the mid-20th century, the social equality upon which 
genuine democracy necessarily rests seemed at least vaguely possible, with the 
American poor able to imagine themselves (as Steinbeck put it) not as a 
permanently exploited proletariat but as temporarily embarrassed millionaires.

Today, though, the notion that our 62 god-kings can be in any way constrained 
or controlled by Joe and Jane Citizen dropping their votes in a ballot box is 
too ludicrous for serious contemplation. On the contrary, the multibillionaire 
relates to the pauper as predator does to its prey, with the vast human flock 
simply a resource that, in Pushkin’s phrase, can be “either slaughtered or 
shorn”.

No global economic crisis yet, but the ingredients are there
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/20/no-global-economic-crisis-yet-but-the-ingredients-are-there>
Warren Buffett puts it like this: “Sure there is class war, and it is my 
class, the rich, who are making it and we are winning.”

Again, let’s emphasise that the Oxfam study describes developments since the 
world recovered from the global financial crisis. Today, we can all hear the 
Chinese economy sputtering and misfiring, and the reassurances from politicians 
sound (to borrow an old gag) rather like the Titanic’s captain announcing: 
“Nothing to worry about, ladies and gentlemen – we are merely stopping briefly 
to take on some ice.”

If the poor missed out during the boom, what do you suppose is about to happen 
to them during the coming slump?

In an era such as ours, it’s easy for progressives to develop a protective 
layer of cynicism, an ironic detachment predicated on the conviction that 
nothing can actually be changed. But we can’t afford that now. It’s way past 
time to rediscover some anger.
 