
Concerns have emerged over the accuracy of the first official attempt to find 
and register child refugees inCalais <https://www.theguardian.com/world/calais>
, just days before the camp is due to be demolished.

Hours after the census was concluded, several children said they had not been 
asked for their names, and it emerged that two of the main voluntary 
organisations working withchildren in the camp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/02/child-refugees-calais-failed-by-britain>
 were not consulted during the count.

Seventy-two police officers arrived in 17 vans just before 8am on Tuesday. 
They went through the camp in groups of 12, many armed with truncheons and 
firearms, and carrying riot helmets and clipboards. They spent three hours 
visiting every tent, attempting to count each refugee, noting their 
nationality, and the presence of children, for a census commissioned by the 
local prefect’s office.

Hungry, scared, and no closer to safety: child refugees failed by Britain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/02/child-refugees-calais-failed-by-britain>
At the same time, more than a dozen workers for the charity France Terre 
d’Asile (FTDA), which has been contracted by the French and British governments 
to count theunaccompanied children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/28/unaccompanied-child-refugees-uk-home-foster-carers-support>
, made their way through the camp, taking the names of minors.

Shortly after the police census was completed, officers closed the cafe where 
children receive free meals, and took away one of the volunteers for 
questioning. Staff at the cafe have been compiling a list of vulnerable minors 
for the last few weeks. It was not clear whether this list had been handed to 
officials attempting to register children.

Volunteers at the Refugee Youth Service, where about 80 minors were present on 
Tuesday, said they had invited FTDA workers in to take names, but they had 
declined.

Jonny Willis, of the RYS, said he was sceptical about the accuracy of the 
counts. “It’s ridiculous to try to do a census like this in a place like this 
in just two days.”

On Monday, the British home secretary, Amber Rudd, acknowledged that she and 
her French counterpart, Bernard Cazeneuve, had a “moral duty to safeguard the 
welfare of unaccompanied refugee children”, and that hundreds of minorscould be 
given a safe space to live in France or brought to the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/10/300-children-from-calais-camp-good-result-amber-rudd>
 within the next fortnight.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fcalais-doubts-raised-over-accuracy-of-child-refugee-censuses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa105994cfc5a0ddd6258c4b75122d0214132d629%2F48_156_4089_2453%2F4089.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Calais%3A%20doubts%20raised%20over%20accuracy%20of%20child%20refugee%20censuses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fcalais-doubts-raised-over-accuracy-of-child-refugee-censuses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Calais%3A%20doubts%20raised%20over%20accuracy%20of%20child%20refugee%20censuses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fcalais-doubts-raised-over-accuracy-of-child-refugee-censuses%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa105994cfc5a0ddd6258c4b75122d0214132d629%2F48_156_4089_2453%2F4089.jpg>
 A young boy rides his bicycle outside the cafe in the Calais camp. Photograph: 
Christopher Furlong/Getty Images 
After this commitment, several organisations were trying to collate a 
definitive list of who needed assistance. But given the fluctuating size and 
unofficial nature of the camp, finding, counting and registering children was a 
considerable challenge.

“I haven’t given my name to anyone,” said Omar Khan. “No one has asked me so 
therefore I have not put my name on any list.” The 16-year-old from Afghanistan 
has been in the camp for four months. He said he hoped to join friends in 
Manchester, but had no idea whether he had any chance of going legally, and did 
not know who to ask.


Omar said he had seen charity employees in blue vests walking around the camp 
with clipboards. “There was a big crowd around them. No one told me to talk to 
them.”

Efrem Negusse, 17, from Eritrea, who was waiting outside the closed children’s 
cafe, said neither he nor his three friends (aged 15, 16 and 16) had registered 
with the French charity when workers walked through the camp.

‘It is a disgrace to Europe’: former child refugee Lord Dubs on the Calais camp
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/05/disgrace-to-europe-former-child-refugee-lord-dubs-calais-camp>
“I saw them but none of us put our names down. We didn’t know what they were 
doing. We didn’t ask them,” Efrem said, resting on crutches after injuring his 
leg falling from a lorry on which he tried to get to the UK four days ago. “So 
many people come and try to register us. We don’t know what for. We will wait 
to see what happens; if there is a chance to go to England, we will.”

As well as the police and the FTDA count, a more detailed survey of the camp’s 
residents was launched by the charity Help Refugees, aimed at noting residents’ 
particular needs. Another list, of vulnerable minors who might be eligible for 
transfer to the UK under the Dubs amendment to the Immigration Act, was being 
made by the UK charity Safe Passage.


Annie Gavrilescu, who was conducting the 10-day census for Help Refugees, said 
it would be a miracle if FTDA managed to do an accurate count in two days.

The conclusions of the police and the FTDA counts were expected to be made 
public on Wednesday.

Rudd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/03/tory-mps-urge-amber-rudd-do-more-help-child-refugees-calais>
 said UK and French officials had been working together for the last three 
weeks to find children in Calais who might be eligible to enter the UK under 
the Dubs amendment, which commits the government to offer sanctuary to some 
vulnerable refugee children. Volunteers with children’s organisations in Calais 
said they had not encountered any UK officials.

There was also confusion among camp residents about where they were likely to 
be sent once the camp was demolished, and an absence of available information.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fcalais-doubts-raised-over-accuracy-of-child-refugee-censuses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88946180a2ebdedc05f050376db98e46c309855d%2F0_143_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Calais%3A%20doubts%20raised%20over%20accuracy%20of%20child%20refugee%20censuses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fcalais-doubts-raised-over-accuracy-of-child-refugee-censuses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Calais%3A%20doubts%20raised%20over%20accuracy%20of%20child%20refugee%20censuses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fcalais-doubts-raised-over-accuracy-of-child-refugee-censuses%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88946180a2ebdedc05f050376db98e46c309855d%2F0_143_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Refugee children walking among the tents at the camp. Photograph: Chris 
Radburn/PA 
Etienne Desplanques, the official in the local prefect’s office responsible 
for the census, said the precise timing of the eviction – which may happen as 
early as this weekend – would depend on how many people were counted in the 
camp. Almost 7,000 spaces were available in refugee accommodation centres around
France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, he said, but if the camp 
population was higher, the demolition would wait until enough places were 
available.

Ahmed Essa, 25, a Sudanese farmer who fled the violence more than a year ago, 
applied for asylum in France in August and is still waiting for the result. “If 
I don’t have a place to go, I will sleep in the streets, or any place I can.”

Desplanques said he was confident a heightened police presence in Calais after 
the demolition would be enough to stop a new camp being set up on the same site.

But Calais residents were more cynical about the prospects of a complete 
demolition. One dismissed the idea as “utopian” and predicted it would simply 
spread the refugee population across the area and into the city centre. “At 
least at the moment, there is a clear place where people go; once thecamp is 
demolished 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/01/child-refugees-despair-calais-camp-close>
 people will be back sleeping in doorways. It will be worse for the residents 
and worse for the refugees,” he said.

Rudd said earlier this week that the UK government would fund safe facilities 
in France for children potentially eligible to come to the UK in the future, so 
they no longer had to sleep in tents. However, organisations on the ground said 
they had no details of where such accommodation would be.

“We are the main service for distributing information and we are not able to 
do that because we don’t have any information. It’s very frustrating,” Willis 
said.

Omar, who has no family in the UK, said he planned to sleep rough if he was 
evicted from the camp. “I will sleep on a blanket by the port. I won’t have 
anywhere special to stay.”
 