
French police have begun detaining young people in the Calais 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/calais> refugee camp amid continuing scenes 
of chaos, as bulldozers began to demolish shelters and new fires erupted in 
sections of the settlement.

Charities were told police would arrest anyone remaining on the site on 
Thursday afternoon if they had not registered. Some arrests had already taken 
place in the morning.

Video footage emerged showing officers taking away four young people from the 
site as they queued for food. It was not clear why they had been removed or 
where they had been taken to. Volunteers said they saw two police vans removing 
young people from the site.


“We saw four children with wristbands being taken into the back of a police 
truck,” Inca Sorrell of HelpRefugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/refugees> said. It is not clear how many 
people had been held by police.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fcalais-camp-police-detain-young-people-amid-chaotic-scenes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea044e93e5931241ea19c373e7761f4900b45d6f%2F0_94_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Calais%20camp%3A%20police%20detain%20young%20people%20amid%20chaotic%20scenes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fcalais-camp-police-detain-young-people-amid-chaotic-scenes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Calais%20camp%3A%20police%20detain%20young%20people%20amid%20chaotic%20scenes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fcalais-camp-police-detain-young-people-amid-chaotic-scenes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea044e93e5931241ea19c373e7761f4900b45d6f%2F0_94_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Bulldozers are used to tear down makeshift shelters and tents in the camp. 
Photograph: Philippe Wojazer/Reuters 
The remaining refugee population was under instruction to queue and register 
by the motorway bridge at the entrance to the site or face arrest. “We have 
been told that everyone without a registration bracelet will be arrested from 
12,” Annie Gavrilescu, of HelpRefugees said.

There were chaotic scenes as people made their way to the bridge and attempted 
to register themselves, with children and adults jostling together. “It is 
unbelievable chaos as it has been for the past few days,” Gavrilescu said.

Hundreds of riot police were on site during the clearance operation earlier in 
the week. Children were kettled into pens and made to sit on damp grass for 
hours as they queued for registration.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnUW1LTkOlf0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnUW1LTkOlf0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnUW1LTkOlf0&media=>
 Police force journalists back in Calais 
Minors who have not had a chance to be registered were wandering around in the 
camp in a state of panic and confusion. Charities say there has been a stark 
absence of information for the remaining young people about their options; they 
estimate that there could be up to 150 unregistered children.

Here lie the unwanted of Calais – an indictment of us, not them | Jonathan 
Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/27/refugees-calais-humanity-migrants>
A Save the Children representative said: “The situation for children in Calais 
after the demolition is the worst it has ever been … Vulnerable children slept 
under bridges, outside warehouses and in the Jungle camp itself, which has 
become an increasingly volatile environment.”

Fires broke out next to the container camp, where 1,500 children who have 
registered are being accommodated. Meanwhile, dozens more were huddled together 
outside, accosting anyone who might help.

There were new buses laid on to take up to 200 remaining adult migrants to 
reception centres aroundFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> but 
children, some of whom have a right to enter the UK, were also being put on 
board.

“There is complete lack of information,” said Stuart Lock of Refugee Youth 
Service, which has had a constant pastoral presence outside the container camp 
all week.

On Wednesday night, the service helped to provide blankets, food and water for 
about 50 unaccompanied minors who were forced to sleep rough on the sandy verge 
opposite the container camp.

With a risk of people traffickers and sexual exploitation a reality in the 
camp, they provided through-the-night volunteers to watch over the children.

The local prefecture was defensive in a press briefing, saying they had 
provided shelter for 68 more children in a warehouse that had room for 
thousands.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fcalais-camp-police-detain-young-people-amid-chaotic-scenes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e2e2e6ce4d335fe3051776e10833712ac2112e9%2F0_115_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Calais%20camp%3A%20police%20detain%20young%20people%20amid%20chaotic%20scenes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fcalais-camp-police-detain-young-people-amid-chaotic-scenes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Calais%20camp%3A%20police%20detain%20young%20people%20amid%20chaotic%20scenes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fcalais-camp-police-detain-young-people-amid-chaotic-scenes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e2e2e6ce4d335fe3051776e10833712ac2112e9%2F0_115_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Refugees near containers used as temporary housing in the camp. Photograph: 
Pascal Rossignol/Reuters 
But volunteers were critical of the support offered. “The chaos has caused 
children to sleep on the ground in front of the place where they were meant to 
get safe shelter. It is absolutely despicable. Other children were sent to go 
back to sleep in the camp where the camp was billowing with smoke, and where 
gas canisters were exploding,” Gavrilescu said.

The Guardian spoke to at least half a dozen 15-, 16- and 17-year-olds who said 
they had slept rough on the verge near the processing centre on Wednesday night.


Unaccompanied children were among refugees and migrants queuing on Thursday 
morning outside the warehouses where authorities carried out registrations 
earlier in the week but they remained closed.

The French authorities said on Wednesday they had completed the clearance of 
people from the camp but the large numbers of rough sleepers suggested this was 
not the case.

Yvette Cooper, chair of the Commons home affairs committee, tweeted: 


Josie Naughton of Help Refugees said: “We are disturbed to see children being 
arrested with no explanation. The clear lack of planning to protect these 
children during the demolition has without question placed them at risk. We 
urge the British and French authorities to quickly rectify the situation and 
safeguard these children properly.”


Another busload of children was understood to have left Calais on Thursday 
morning, bringing children eligible for sanctuary in the UK to be registered in 
London. There were no details about how many were on the bus, although about 
300 are believed to have been brought to the UK in the past 10 days, according 
to Safe Passage UK.


The Labour peer, Alf Dubs, whose amendment to the Immigration Act has forced 
the government to accept a number of vulnerable children, said he was 
“satisfied that more children are arriving here”, but he described the 
situation in Calais as disastrous. “We argued that the children in Calais 
should be in a place of safety, but they are not. I don’t know who to blame,” 
he said.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fcalais-camp-police-detain-young-people-amid-chaotic-scenes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5355a0b4ff97382428d095f131a8ccd51907229%2F0_0_5290_3590%2F5290.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Calais%20camp%3A%20police%20detain%20young%20people%20amid%20chaotic%20scenes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fcalais-camp-police-detain-young-people-amid-chaotic-scenes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Calais%20camp%3A%20police%20detain%20young%20people%20amid%20chaotic%20scenes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fcalais-camp-police-detain-young-people-amid-chaotic-scenes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5355a0b4ff97382428d095f131a8ccd51907229%2F0_0_5290_3590%2F5290.jpg>
 Felt-tip pens lie discarded after the demolition of the Calais migrant camp. 
Photograph: Christopher Furlong/Getty Images 
A Home Office spokesperson said: “We are absolutely committed to safeguarding 
and protecting children in Calais and have already transferred a considerable 
number of unaccompanied minors to the UK so far this year.

“The French interior minister made a specific commitment to the home secretary 
that his government would continue to take responsibility for all children in 
Calais during the clearance operation – including those being assessed for 
possible transfer to the UK. We have no jurisdiction to operate on French 
territory, but we continue to work closely with our French partners and have 
offered assistance to ensure the safety of children during the clearance 
process.”

Dorothy Sang, a Save the Children aid worker in the camp, said: “Last night, 
we spent hours trying to negotiate a place for three young Eritrean boys – two 
were 13 years old and the other was 14 years old. Despite their pleading and 
most of ‘the Jungle’ being burnt to the ground, these boys were refused.

“They had to spend another night in the Jungle, which is now the most 
dangerous it has ever been for children. It’s disappointing to see this being 
reported as a ‘success’ when so many vulnerable children have been left behind 
and so many more have run away. We may never know where they’ve gone.”

 