
French children’s services are struggling to cope with a dramatic surge in 
unaccompanied refugee children who have abandoned plans to travel to the UK and 
now want to remain inFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>.

In the past three months staff employed by the main French charity working 
with refugee children in Calais have had to turn away between 15 and 35 
unaccompanied refugee children every day because they have no beds for them in 
the emergency shelter.

Call for Calais child refugees to be given UK safeguarding protection
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/22/call-for-calais-child-refugees-to-be-given-uk-safeguarding-protection>
Since July around 95% of the unaccompanied children who come to the charity 
for assistance say they want to remain in France permanently, according to 
Jean-François Roger, director of the charity’s child refugee centre. This is a 
huge change from last year, when only 15% of the 1,483 unaccompanied children 
that staff registered at the France Terre d’Asile emergency shelter in Saint 
Omer, said they wanted to stay; the remaining 85% returned to the Calais camp 
after a five-day break, to try to travel on to the UK.


“A few things have happened that have persuaded children to stay. Since July, 
and the Brexit vote, the migrants are wondering what will happen to them if 
they turn up in Britain. We are not sure it is connected to Brexit, but there 
is a fear of what kind of welcome foreigners will have there now,” Roger said.


The rise in numbers opting to stay in France is also a reflection of the fact 
that increased security and fencing by the port has made it much harder and 
much more dangerous to attempt to cross to the UK illegally. This week, workers 
began to build the foundations of a four-metre high, kilometre-longwall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/06/uk-immigration-minister-confirms-work-will-begin-on-big-new-wall-in-calais>
 between the camp and the motorway, estimated to cost £1.9m.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fcalais-refugee-children-abandoning-plans-to-reach-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67b0cd77671794783d7ec4015d8ec97185ec7cda%2F0_45_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Calais%20refugee%20children%20abandoning%20plans%20to%20reach%20UK&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fcalais-refugee-children-abandoning-plans-to-reach-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Calais%20refugee%20children%20abandoning%20plans%20to%20reach%20UK&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fcalais-refugee-children-abandoning-plans-to-reach-uk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67b0cd77671794783d7ec4015d8ec97185ec7cda%2F0_45_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Unaccompanied minors seeking asylum learn French at the home for young 
refugees run by French charity Terre d’Asile. Photograph: Teri Pengilley for 
the Guardian 
In parallel there has been a concerted drive by charities working in the 
Calais camp to inform children that, aside from the dangers of trying to make 
an illegal crossing, it is often easier to get long-term permission to remain 
in France than it is in the UK.

Last Friday a 14-year-old boy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/18/afghan-boy-killed-in-calais-in-attempt-to-climb-on-to-lorry-to-uk>
 from Afghanistan died when he fell from a lorry and was hit by a car on the 
motorway leading to the port; he was the third asylum-seeking child to be 
killed in the Calais area this year.


“It is getting harder and harder to cross the frontier. There is a bigger 
police presence, there are more checks, the barrier is bigger. It was always 
dangerous, but it is much more dangerous now for the children, and so they are 
forced to take much greater risks,” Roger said. “It is also more dangerous in 
the camp in Calais itself. You have 10,000 people in a confined space and 
tensions are getting worse, and the children are more vulnerable.”


A census carried out by the charity Help Refugees  
<http://www.helprefugees.org.uk/>estimated this week that the camp population 
has increased to around 10,188, a 12% increase on last month, with 1,179 
minors, of whom 87% are traveling alone; the youngest unaccompanied child is 
eight years old.

Almost a third of the children are from Afghanistan, a quarter from Sudan and 
a quarter from Eritrea. Police clashed with camp residents on Wednesday, using 
teargas grenades, and violent incidents are increasing.


The current emergency provision of just 45 beds for refugee children in Saint 
Omer was completely inadequate, Roger said. Two further emergency centres, one 
with 70 beds and one with 75 places, will be opened in November and early 2017, 
but these are also likely to be insufficient to house the rising numbers, he 
said.Children <https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> eventually move 
into foster care or more permanent housing, but they often need to stay in the 
emergency shelter for weeks, while their application to remain is processed.

Theresa May isn’t interested in refugees’ welfare. She just wants fewer of 
them in Britain | Patrick Kingsley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/19/theresa-may-refugees-welfare-migrant>
“We do feel powerless. It is very hard psychologically for my colleagues who 
have to turn them away. It is difficult to explain to them why there are no 
places,” Roger said. “It will be worse when it gets colder, when there is water 
up to your knees in the camp.”


When the charity turns children away, staff alert the local social services, 
but usually they are also unable to offer a bed, so the children are forced to 
return to tents or huts in the Calais camp, or if they are relatively lucky, 
the newly-installed metal shipping containers.


The charity has been campaigning for more emergency beds for months, but has 
faced considerable political hostility. It took Roger three years to find a 
mayor willing to agree to accommodate a centre for child refugees. With the 
growing presence of the Front National in the region, there is a wariness of 
offering more facilities for refugees, even unaccompanied children.


“People don’t treat them as children, but as foreigners and migrants,” Roger 
said. “There is also fear that by creating better accommodation there will be a 
magnet effect, attracting more people.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fcalais-refugee-children-abandoning-plans-to-reach-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc77a63f29fe3d299e06e23223c748f84765b5bd8%2F0_70_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Calais%20refugee%20children%20abandoning%20plans%20to%20reach%20UK&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fcalais-refugee-children-abandoning-plans-to-reach-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Calais%20refugee%20children%20abandoning%20plans%20to%20reach%20UK&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fcalais-refugee-children-abandoning-plans-to-reach-uk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc77a63f29fe3d299e06e23223c748f84765b5bd8%2F0_70_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 A man walks past the fence designed to stop migrants and refugees trying to 
reach Britain. Photograph: Pascal Rossignol/Reuters 
He said the French authorities had not reacted swiftly enough to the crisis. 
“Since 2014 the numbers are just going up and up. The 45 spaces we have here no 
longer corresponds to the reality of the situation in Calais. This system was 
created in 2009 when there were only 1,500 people in the camp, and perhaps 
around 100 children,” he said. “We have never had an ambitious, long-term plan. 
It is frustrating.”


A permanent solution to the issue needed to be worked out between Britain and 
France, he said. “This is a European problem. We need a joint solution,” he 
said. The former French president Nicolas Sarkozy visited Calais this week, and 
said it was not up to France to “be England’s border guards”.

Although the British government made a commitment earlier this year to offer 
shelter to a share of the95,000 
<http://www.unicef.org.uk/Media-centre/Press-releases/Unaccompanied-refugee-and-migrant-children-in-urgent-need-of-protection-warns-UNICEF/>
 estimated unaccompanied refugee children across Europe, with the so-calledDubs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/05/disgrace-to-europe-former-child-refugee-lord-dubs-calais-camp>
 amendment of the Immigration Act, no children have yet been transferred to the 
UK under this legislation.

Those children who do not want to remain in France and continue to attempt to 
get to the UK, often have strong family connections which make them determined 
to try to cross the channel to claim asylum in the UK. The boy who died on the 
road this week, had family in Britain, and consequently a legal right to be 
reunited with them – but because the bureaucratic process is so slow, he had 
given up waiting.


The Labour MP Stella Creasy launched a new attempt to amend immigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/22/call-for-calais-child-refugees-to-be-given-uk-safeguarding-protection>
 legislation  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/22/call-for-calais-child-refugees-to-be-given-uk-safeguarding-protection>
 on Thursday to force the government to take responsibility for unaccompanied 
children in Calais. This week the UK’s modern slavery commissioner,Kevin Hyland,
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/20/uk-delays-calais-children-exploitation-anti-slavery-chief>
 criticised the government for its slow response to the crisis.

“It is absolutely unacceptable that these children are left in the camp at the 
disposal of the criminal networks and they continue risking their lives daily 
to reach the shores of the UK,” he wrote in a letter to the home secretary, 
Amber Rudd.
 