
Rioting broke out among teenagers on the site of the largely cleared Calais 
camp, hours before they were due to be taken from the site in buses to 
undisclosed locations aroundFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>.

About 20 police riot vans arrived early on Tuesday evening and teargas was 
used to quell fighting and protests among the remaining estimated 1,500 asylum 
seekers, most of whom are teenagers.

The violence came at the end of a day of mounting tension after minors were 
told that they were to be removed to “juvenile centres” across France on 
Wednesday morning. Those with family in the UK, or who have specific 
vulnerabilities that may make them eligible to claim asylum in the UK, were 
told that their applications would be processed from the new locations.

The Calais <https://www.theguardian.com/world/calais> prefecture issued a 
notice in nine languages informing the people still living in disused shipping 
containers on the site of the now-demolished camp that they needed to register 
for wristbands, securing them a place on the buses which will begin leaving at 
8am.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fcalais-camp-hit-riots-refugees-teenagers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F077c8d2336c57009a373d4248246021a643964e7%2F0_234_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Calais%20camp%20hit%20by%20riots%20as%20remaining%20refugees%20prepare%20to%20be%20removed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fcalais-camp-hit-riots-refugees-teenagers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Calais%20camp%20hit%20by%20riots%20as%20remaining%20refugees%20prepare%20to%20be%20removed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fcalais-camp-hit-riots-refugees-teenagers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F077c8d2336c57009a373d4248246021a643964e7%2F0_234_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 A riot policeman patrols close to where 1,500 minors are being housed in 
converted shipping containers. Photograph: Pascal Rossignol/Reuters 
British officials would be on the buses, accompanying the asylum-seeking 
children, the notice added. “No further applications for transfer to the United 
Kingdom will be dealt with in Calais,” the statement read. “All cases will be 
handled and all departures for the UK will take place from the juvenile 
centres.”

The absence of any detail about the destination of the buses caused great 
anxiety among the child refugees. By the fenced-off container area of the site, 
there were hundreds of people milling around, most of whom were very confused 
about what was planned.

Aladdin Adam, 16, from Sudan, had been given a wristband marked 33 and had 
been told to be ready at 8am. “I am so worried. I don’t know where I will be 
going. Everyone is feeling worried; some people are feeling angry,” he said.

That anger erupted into protests as dusk fell and large groups of teenage 
migrants made their way from the shipping containers into the deserted camp, 
carrying sticks and shouting. Some vehicles’ windows were smashed and some 
asylum seekers were reported to have been injured.

Among the remaining camp population there were a smaller number of 11 or 
12-year-olds but the majority seemed to be slightly older teenagers, perhaps 
aged between 15 and 17. There were a few visibly older people claiming to be 
minors, who appeared to be leading the protests.

There was anger from volunteers, who have worked with the younger Calais 
residents for the past year, that the children had been left behind after the 
adult population was taken last week to accommodation around France.

Michael McHugh, who worked with unaccompanied child refugees, said he was 
dismayed to find more riot police on site than social workers, teachers or 
therapists. “These are some of the most vulnerable children inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>,” he said.

Tina Brocklebank, from Help Refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/refugees>, said: “If it had been up to us we 
would have got the most vulnerable children out first. They are completely at 
risk and vulnerable.”

This final large-scale transfer may be the last major stage of the Calais camp 
clearances. Throughout the day trucks were taking away debris from the camp, 
crushing tents and wooden shacks, and the grinding noise of bulldozers was 
audible throughout the camp.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fcalais-camp-hit-riots-refugees-teenagers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49649dd12c316899b38fb1406dca850aea838682%2F0_202_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Calais%20camp%20hit%20by%20riots%20as%20remaining%20refugees%20prepare%20to%20be%20removed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fcalais-camp-hit-riots-refugees-teenagers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Calais%20camp%20hit%20by%20riots%20as%20remaining%20refugees%20prepare%20to%20be%20removed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fcalais-camp-hit-riots-refugees-teenagers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49649dd12c316899b38fb1406dca850aea838682%2F0_202_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 An aerial view of earthmoving equipment at work on the site of the Calais camp 
on Tuesday. Photograph: Philippe Huguen/AFP/Getty Images 
Wasil Anwari, 14, who said he fled Afghanistan earlier this year after both 
his parents were killed, showed a purple wristband marked Bus 30. He said he 
had been given no information about where in France they were going to be 
taken. He was hoping to be given papers allowing him to come to the UK 
eventually, so that he could join his uncle, who works in a shop in London.

Some people thought that the buses were going to take them straight to London; 
others thought they would be driven to Lille. “We aren’t given a choice. We 
will go somewhere in France, but we don’t know where,” Wasil said.

Noorullah Hussaini, 17, from Afghanistan, also had a purple wristband and was 
preparing to leave on a bus on Wednesday. He said he hoped that his application 
to join his sister in Manchester would eventually be successful, after a 
30-minute interview with Home Office officials in the camp last week.

“They told me it would take between two weeks and two months,” he said. He 
said he hoped to study to become a dentist in the UK. Because he was confident 
that his request would be granted, he said he was not trying to come illegally 
to the UK on the back of lorries. But several other young people said they were 
continuing the night-time attempts to head to England by smuggling themselves 
into vehicles, convinced that this was the best option for them to rejoin 
family in the UK.

“I want to go legally. There are too many dangers on the lorries,” Noorullah 
said.

Children were carrying belongings in plastic bin bags, many of them wearing 
flip-flops and shorts in the November weather.

The cleanup continued around them, as workers gathered abandoned duvets 
hanging in the trees, half-burnt tents and singed blankets submerged in the 
sand.

Digena Gesesew, 17, from Ethiopia, was with friends, washing some clothes in a 
bucket and hanging them on the fencing to dry. “The bus will leave at 8 
tomorrow morning. I don’t know where we will go,” he said. “It’s very 
difficult.”

The French authorities declared the cleanup complete on Monday, but at the 
edges of the camp small clusters of tent remained, with people living in them. 
The president, François Hollande, said on Tuesday that an increased police 
presence around the camp would ensure that people were not able to return. But 
there were new arrivals, some from an informal migrant camp in Paris, who had 
come to see if they could find space on a coach to London.

Ben Teuten, the co-founder of Refugee Youth Service, a charity that has looked 
after minors in the camp for the past year, said he was disappointed by the 
lack of clear information for young people. “All the decisions have been quite 
poorly communicated. The children are very confused and scared. The children 
are left not knowing what their status is. We have a real concern that many 
have been given false hope when we know a lot of them won’t be going to the UK.”

He said he was worried that a lot of the children would disappear from the 
French children’s centres once it became clear that there was little prospect 
of them being transferred legally to the UK.
 