
The final chapter of the Calais debacle  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/28/calais-france-rebukes-britain-over-abandoned-refugee-children>
promises to be as depressing as those that preceded it. With around 1,500 
teenage refugees still held in shipping containers on the smouldering site 
waiting for a decision on their future, French and British officials have 
embarked on a last-minute flurry of undignified diplomatic buck-passing over 
who should be responsible for them.

For the past 18 months both governments have behaved appallingly in their 
failure to address the crisis; this disorganised denouement is merely the 
predictable continuation of the chaos that went before.

The refusal of both governments to resolve what was (from a global refugee 
crisis perspective) a very small problem was startling. In the past year1.4m 
asylum applications 
<http://http//ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/File:First_time_asylum_applicants,_Q2_2015_%E2%80%93_Q2_2016.png>
have been made in Europe; 641,000 of them in Germany, 142,000 of them in 
Sweden. The scale of the Calais site should have been easily manageable.

Instead the crisis was ignored and the camp became a uniquely horrific spot. 
With no proper water supplies, sewage systems or electricity and only 
second-hand tents for shelter, it felt worse than the worst slums of Mumbai, 
and yet it was overlooked by comfortable suburban houses, just half a kilometre 
from the town’s cheerful zinc-countered bistros.

Conditions were worse than in camps set up in disaster and war zones because 
of the absence of any mainstream charity or official French involvement in 
providing food or shelter for its 10,000-plus inhabitants. A network of 
grassroots charities stepped in to try to help; some were brilliant, some much 
less so. It was disturbing to see responsibility for providing food and shelter 
for thousands fall on the shoulders of volunteers.

Refugees <https://www.theguardian.com/world/refugees> could not conceal their 
dismay when they arrived. The smell of burning plastic and raw sewage was 
overpowering. In the summer there were piles of fly-ridden, dead rats on the 
pathways. In the winter, families slept in wooden shacks that let in the rain.

Calais: France bows to pressure on abandoned refugee children
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/28/calais-france-rebukes-britain-over-abandoned-refugee-children>
Most striking was the large number of lone child refugees, dispatched by their 
parents to seek safety inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>
. British tabloids have raged with scepticism about the ages of the children 
and the motivations of their parents, but over the course of numerous trips 
over the past year I met dozens of children aged between 8 and 16, who had 
spent months living in total squalor, hoping to join relatives in the UK.

Volunteers collected accounts of tear-gassing of children and documented cases 
of children hit by rubber bullets shot by riot police. But the bigger scandal 
was that hundreds of children were left to live in a water-logged field, some 
for over a year, with no help from the French or British governments.

While both countries were languidly debating who should take responsibility, 
vulnerable asylum-seekers with family in the UK were taking matters into their 
own hands, and trying to get to Britain illegally; they risked their lives most 
nights trying to hurl themselves on to lorries, hiding in refrigerated 
containers – usually unsuccessfully, sometimes with fatal consequences.

There is no memorial for the 14 refugees who died this year except the 
understated list kept by the local prefect’s office – the file includes
Raheemullah Oryakhel <http:// 
https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/15/very-scared-death-teenage-stowaway>
, the 14-year-old from Afghanistan who died when he fell from a moving lorry 
and was hit by a car (the driver did not stop). It lists a “migrant whose sex 
could not be identified, found drowned in the port of Calais”, an “Afghan 
migrant 22 years, hit by an HGV on the A16”, and an “18-year-old female 
Eritrean found dead on the ring road near junction 47”.


Most of these deaths went unreported. When the Guardian wrote about 
Raheemullah’s death, the coverage attracted some no longer surprising vitriol, 
with tweets commenting “Good” and “One less to worry about”. One of the most 
dispiriting aspects of writing about the refugee crisis has been this exposure 
to the high-levels of public hostility to a group of people who have mostly 
spent the last year fleeing violence.

While it is good that the British government has begun to accept some 
responsibility, the disparity in the numbers housed by the French (6,000), and 
the 274 children given shelter by the UK speaks for itself. The president of 
the local regional council, Xavier Bertrand, joined Bernard Cazeneuve, France’s 
home office minister, in criticising the British response, describing it as 
insufficient.

As work progresses swiftly on the £1.9m UK and French co-funded 
one-kilometre-long wall, designed to stop a newCalais 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/calais> camp from forming, it would be nice 
to think that homes could be found for the remaining refugee children with 
equal speed and efficiency.
 