
An episode of Call the Midwife, the hugely popular BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> drama about the travails of women in 
London’s East End during the 1950s and early 60s, is to be shot in South Africa.

Filming for the episode starts in April, when several members of the cast are 
to fly south for a story set in the apartheid-era regime in 1962.

The BBC is expected to pay no more than the usual fee for such high-end drama, 
about £1m an episode, despite transporting the main characters from the drab 
surroundings of postwar working-class London.

Although shrouded in secrecy, the storyline could involve the sisters at 
Nonnatus House visiting a similar religious outfit in South Africa. Racial and 
political tensions at the time included the first sabotage attack byUmkhonto we 
Sizwe <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Umkhonto_we_Sizwe>, the militant wing of 
theAfrican National Congress 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/African_National_Congress>, and a five-year jail 
sentence forNelson Mandela <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nelson_Mandela> after 
he was judged to have illegally left the country.

Although based on an original memoir from Jennifer Worth about her time as a 
midwife helping women in the East End before the contraceptive pill was widely 
available, the book only accounted for roughly two series of Call the Midwife.

Season six, which will start in January 2017, has been written like the others 
by Heidi Thomas, who said that the forthcoming episode showed how the nuns and 
midwives “rise to the challenge of supporting a small community in South 
Africa”.

So popular has the programme proved that there are tours of Call the Midwife 
locations, with fans visiting St Joseph’s Missionary college in London’s Mill 
Hill as well as Chatham’s historic dockyard, where the outside scenes are shot.

Its combination of heartache and uplifting heroism has helped turn Call the 
Midwife into one of the BBC’s biggest hits. The season five finale attracted 
more than 9.2 million viewers in March, half a million more than tuned in to
watch the final episode of the fourth series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/apr/27/bbc-poldark-finale-viewers-aidan-turner>
, with a 38.4% share of total TV viewing between 8pm and 9pm on Sunday night.

The show has also proved a huge hit overseas. BBC Worldwide, the corporation’s 
commercial arm, has sold the previous five series to some 200 countries, making 
it one of the corporation’s highest earners.

A spokesman for the series producers, Neal Street Productions, said that the 
exotic location will cost no more than the usual sets in London, Kent and 
Surrey.

PBS, the American broadcaster, acts as co-producer to Neal Street and the BBC, 
which has had a string of hits in its drama department from last year’s Poldark 
to January’s War and Peace. Earlier this year the corporation made BBC Three 
online only and committed £30m of the savings to the drama department.

The costs of the show are unlikely to be anywhere near the £20m cost for the 
six episodes of The Night Manager, which is coming to an end this Sunday night. 
The BBC paid around one third of this total – roughly £6m for six episodes – 
with international partners paying for the rest. Simon Cornwell, son of author 
John Le Carré and the executive producer of the drama, told theTelegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/bbc/12165661/John-Le-Carre-admits-that-The-Night-Manager-needed-updating-for-modern-audiences.html>
: “It’s a cinematic experience. It just looks amazing. It is basically a 
six-hour film.”
 