
David Cameron visited a refugee camp in Lebanon on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/14/david-cameron-visits-lebanese-refugee-camp>
. Our prime minister, a man who can normally muster all the moral authority of 
Roman Polanski’s penis, has discovered his soul. Amazing what a three-week 
break away from parliament can do. It only took David Cameron six years to 
finally come out and take a moral stand, and all it took was the death of one 
toddler. You may call the Tories’ glacial crawl towards respecting human life a 
political and personal train crash. I call it compassion.

David Cameron visits Lebanese refugee camp
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/14/david-cameron-visits-lebanese-refugee-camp>
In Europe we have the stereotype that Africans view life cheaply, but we’ve 
spent much of the summer watching van loads of Syrians being washed in by the 
tide and all we worried about was whether this meant the beach might be closed 
during the October holidays. There were Greek kids incorporating human remains 
into their sandcastles and yet the big story here was that the drinks trolley 
didn’t make it down the Eurostar. One dog locked in a car on a sunny day – 
Britain goes apeshit.Seventy-one dead migrants roasted in a truck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/28/more-than-70-dead-austria-migrant-truck-tragedy>
 – oh that reminds me, Bake Off’s on tonight.

It seems we are naive about the workings of this modern culture, where people 
Skype each other masturbating before a first date, and forget that the general 
populace now don’t believe children are dying unless you show them a closeup 
picture of a dead child.The Kurdi family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/03/refugee-crisis-friends-and-family-fill-in-gaps-behind-harrowing-images>
 were trying to get from Turkey to Kos, so many people said, “Why would they 
want to leave Turkey? Turkey is nice!” Turkey is nice if you’re a sunburnt Brit 
with a taste for overpriced kebabs, cheap jeans and waterslides. It’s not so 
nice for a member of their oppressed minority who speak a language that’s been 
banned by law. What we haven’t heard is that children get washed up on the 
shore at Bodrum every single day. What are Turkish journalists doing? Generally 
about two to four years’ hard labour.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fdavid-cameron-refugee-camp-lebanon-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F14%2F1442217087667%2FKP_475314_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Cameron%20visits%20refugee%20camp%20in%20Lebanon%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fdavid-cameron-refugee-camp-lebanon-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Cameron%20visits%20refugee%20camp%20in%20Lebanon%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fdavid-cameron-refugee-camp-lebanon-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F14%2F1442217087667%2FKP_475314_crop_640x480.jpg>
 David Cameron visits a refugee camp in Lebanon on Monday 
Of course there are many people who say we shouldn’t be helping refugees when 
there are homeless people here that we can do nothing to help first. Indeed 
Britain may have entirely forgotten how to be welcoming. We’ll probably welcome 
refugees by putting the word Syrian in the sidebar of xHamster. We are only 
taking people from camps – we don’t want refugees already in Europe as they 
cheated and didn’t wait to shout “What’s the Time Mr Wolf?” We don’t want any 
refugees who are already close to us, like there’s some kind of humanitarian 
offside rule.

Of course when parliament was asked to bomb Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/01/uk-syria-vote-impact-parliament>
 as part of Operation Hornets Nest it was to avert a humanitarian crisis. Now 
that there actually is a humanitarian crisis, our government doesn’t seem to 
care. We were going to bomb Assad, soon we will be asked to bomb the forces 
fighting Assad. The only difference between our lives and those of the workers 
in 1984 is that at least their jobs had breaks for drinking gin. Perhaps I’m 
being cynical, and the way to bring stability to a region is to bomb both sides 
in a bitter civil war, creating a power vacuum to be filled by moderate groups 
like The Screaming Sword of Allah or Superjihadi Endgame. Bombing would be an 
interesting response to a refugee crisis, resting as it does on the theory that 
Syrians are fleeing not because their country is at war, but because the war 
itself is not big and dramatic enough to really hold their interest.

I certainly don’t want to see Islamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> in a war with our troops because – 
let’s be honest – they are just impressionable young men who have been 
manipulated into a life of murder by those who teach hate, and Isis isn’t much 
better. Still, at least Britain is briefly considering the morality of its 
actions abroad rather than obeying the usual propaganda limits, where liberal 
elements debate the practicality of our involvement in various international 
horror stories, and more honest elements the strategic importance.

Both sides know that it’s rude to mention the money. Enjoy our ethical renewal 
while it lasts. Already we are killing our own citizens with drones, and the 
argument is quickly turned into a legal rather than a moral one. We live in a 
country where moral arguments are largely reserved for white people, so there’s 
a brief, legalistic debate about whether the missile should have to scream “You 
Have the Right to Remain Dead!” before it goes off, then the whole thing will 
be forgotten till the next time.

The Dirty Dozen was classic psychological projection; it’s not the troops who 
are corrupt but the ranged forces of politicians, arms manufacturers, 
intelligence agencies, Gulf State despots, and oil companies who send them in. 
Yes, Britain is a beautiful place to live, and we are lucky to be born here. 
Because of other people’s oil, other people’s sugar, other people’s tea, other 
people’s money. You weren’t born in a country – you were born in a getaway car, 
and the victims have been chasing you down ever since by boat, by lorry, and on 
foot.
 