
On the cover of his new live album Across America 
<http://ecx.images-amazon.com/images/I/41NRZD4YWGL._SL500_AA240_.jpg>, Art 
Garfunkel is wearing an untucked white shirt, loosened tie and black waistcoat. 
When I saw Art together with Paul Simon on their enormously successful last
reunion tour in 2004 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2004/jul/15/popandrock.simonandgarfunkel>, 
he belted out Mrs Robinson and Bridge Over Troubled Water wearing an untucked 
white shirt, loosened tie and black waistcoat. The last time he was in the UK, 
he wore the same get-up. It was no different at the legendary first Simon and 
Garfunkelreunion at Central Park in 1981 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8Kd8xp86reY&feature=related>. 

In fact, a quick trawl through some internet images reveals that Art seems 
unnaturally fond of this outfit to the point of having nothing else to wear. 
However if you really mine the archives it is eventually possible to find 
images of the Garfunker wearing other things. Alas, none of them are desirable. 
When he met David Bowie at the Grammies in 1974 he was wearing an ensemble so 
ridiculous thateven the hyper-cool Bowie looks stunned 
<http://www.virginmedia.com/images/bowie--art-garfunkel.jpg>.

This early photo of Simon and Garfunkel reveals that Art looked just as 
unhappy wearing athroat-choking black polo neck 
<http://www.paulingles.com/Simon&Garfunkel(SONY%20BMG)small.jpg>. Art looks 
moderately comfortablein a dressing gown 
<http://rateyourmusic.com/release/album/art_garfunkel/fate_for_breakfast/buy>, 
but he can hardly wear that outside his own home.

I'd have thought with his subsequent trillions of sales over several decades, 
the legendary voice would be able to afford some new, fashionable togs by 
now... Maybe he can, but just has no idea what to buy. Thus, in readiness for 
his UK tour, which starts today, perhaps any fashionistas or tailors out there 
would like to put forward a few suggestions for improving Art's attire. Would 
he look hunky in a hoody? Smouldering in a duffel coat? Molten in a Metallica 
T-shirt? Perhaps Art could take a leaf from bishop's son Timothy Westwood and 
don some hip-hop gear and shout "Yo! Sound of motherfuckin' silence"? What do 
readers want to clothe Art in? And what would any demon barbers out there do 
about that increasingly problematic hair?
 