
Studying at New York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> University 
has become so prohibitively expensive that the historic Manhattan school is 
introducing a scheme to help students save money by lodging in elderly people’s 
spare bedrooms.


Andrew Hamilton, NYU’s new president, has approved a pilot scheme to pair up 
students with low-income older people struggling to make ends meet. The scheme 
– dubbed “Grandma’s spare room” – may sound like the premise of an 
intergenerational sitcom but it will begin in fall 2017, and university 
officials said initial demand had been so strong that it could be extended to 
hundreds of students and perhaps other schools in New York and other expensive 
cities across the country.

Hamilton, a noted British chemist and former vice-chancellor of Oxford 
University, has made tackling the high cost of attending NYU a key priority of 
his tenure.

 “The plain fact is that tuition at NYU places an unacceptable financial 
strain on too many students,” he saidin his inaugural address at the start of 
the semester 
<http://www.nyu.edu/about/leadership-university-administration/office-of-the-president/communications/inauguration-speech-of-andrew-hamilton.html>
. “NYU is not unique in that regard by any means, but we have been among the 
most conspicuous … [and] we cannot be content with the status quo.”

The students happy to pay £1,000 a week to rent a flat in central London
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/sep/05/student-rent-1000-pounds-week-london-middle-eastern-royals>
The intergenerational homestay idea was generated by NYU’s affordability 
steering committee, which Hamilton introduced as a “taskforce” to “make a 
difference in the trajectory of college costs at NYU”.

The full average cost [not taking into account scholarships and financial aid] 
of attending NYU including tuition, fees, room and board is about $66,000 per 
year – one of the most expensive in the country. Hamilton increased tuition 
fees by 2.7% this year, less than a typical annual increase of 3.5%-3.9%.

Ellen Schall, the chair of the affordability steering committee, said the cost 
of attending NYU was higher than Ivy League schools because of the prohibitive 
cost of accommodation in New York. “This is a creative way of tackling that 
issue,” she said. “It occurred to us that there are lots of New York City 
families whose children have grown up and moved away and they’ve got an extra 
bedroom and maybe they are struggling financially. We hope this will be a way 
of helping the needs of two very different populations.”

Schall said she expected that students involved in the scheme would pay annual 
rent of about $5,000 – half of the cost of a shared room in NYU’s cheapest 
dorm. She made clear that students would not be required to work for their 
elderly landlords in return for cheap rent.

“You’re not a nurse, you’re not an aide, you’re not cleaning, you might help 
out with some technology or something,” she said. “You might make a deal that 
you would make with any roommate – ‘If you take the trash out, I’ll order us a 
pizza.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fnew-york-university-grandmas-spare-room-housing-costs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc44ca8caab79f5646f16fd1882655adca75cd1bb%2F0_368_1993_2492%2F1993.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can't%20afford%20an%20NYU%20dorm%3F%20School%20to%20offer%20'Grandma's%20spare%20room'%20instead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fnew-york-university-grandmas-spare-room-housing-costs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%27t%20afford%20an%20NYU%20dorm%3F%20School%20to%20offer%20%27Grandma%27s%20spare%20room%27%20instead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fnew-york-university-grandmas-spare-room-housing-costs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc44ca8caab79f5646f16fd1882655adca75cd1bb%2F0_368_1993_2492%2F1993.jpg>
 ‘This is an opportunity to help low- or fixed-income seniors, and help address 
the wider housing affordability crisis in New York City,’ said Eric 
Weingartner, who is working with NYU on the scheme. Photograph: Erik M/ 
Pacific/ Barcroft Images 
NYU is working with University Settlement, a not-for-profit group that helps 
low-income families on the Lower East Side, to bring the project to life. Eric 
Weingartner, the chief executive of University Settlement, said the plan was to 
identify apartment buildings near NYU that had a high proportion of older 
people so that several students could be accommodated in different families’ 
apartments, but near each other to retain some of the feeling of living in a 
dorm.

“This is an opportunity to help low- or fixed-income seniors, and help address 
the wider housing affordability crisis in New York City,” he said. “There are 
people live in apartments with massive amounts of room no one really lives in, 
while other people struggle to afford anywhere to live.”

Schall and Weingartner said both student and senior communities were excited 
about the project and had already approached the organisations to try and sign 
up to the scheme, which hasn’t launched yet.

However, some students suggested that NYU could use its $3.5bn endowment to 
cut the costs faced by students. Schall said NYU raised $147m for financial aid 
in the last academic year, and its endowment per student was much lower than 
Ivy League schools.

While many students in New York struggle to pay rent for dorms or rooms in 
shared houses in neighborhoods like Bushwick and Bedford-Stuyvesant, the city 
also attracts the children of the world’s billionaires, presidents and 
oligarchs who live in some of the most expensive property on the planet wile 
they’re studying.

The daughter of the Russian billionaire Dmitry Rybolovlev spent $88m on a 
penthouse at 15 Central Park West, arguably the most grandiose address in the 
city, as her base while studying at an undisclosed US university. Ekaterina 
Rybolovlev’s 6,744 sq ft apartment, which was listed for sale earlier this year 
after she finished her studies, features 10 rooms and a terrace overlooking 
Central Park.

In the line for coffee in Starbucks on the corner of Washington Square Park, 
Alexandra Bloshenko said she would definitely apply to live with a grandma. “I 
can barely afford to study here. I get half of my costs tuition paid for by 
scholarship, otherwise there is no way in hell I could go to this school,” she 
said. “I also think it’s important to mix with other generations, we can learn 
a lot from each other.”

Bloshenko, 22, who is from upstate New York and studying to become a 7th-12th 
grade biology teacher, said: “I feel there are a lot of kids at NYU who could 
benefit from some real life experiences. There are so many kids here with tons 
of money but no experience of the real world.”

• This article was amended on 29 November 2016. An earlier version incorrectly 
described NYU as an Ivy League school.
 