
The first time I went on a silent meditation retreat, a few years back, I was 
terrified the experience might prove impossible to endure. The last time I 
went, the other week, I faced a different problem: I was pretty sure it would 
be deeply enjoyable and refreshing. You might be wondering why that counts as a 
problem. Here’s why. It was on the evening of Day One, watching the sun sink 
below the horizon, savouring the stillness in the air, that a thought first 
occurred: “Damn it, only a few more days of this, and it’ll be time to leave!” 
According to a cheesy old saying, there are two ways to be unhappy. One is not 
getting what you want. The other is getting it. The trouble with happiness is 
that the prospect of it ending makes you sad.

I was in a good location to be entertaining such thoughts, since this insight 
is most commonly attributed to Buddhism, and meditation can help. But the same 
point crops up in multiple traditions: there’s more to “wanting” than meets the 
eye. Youthink the solution to wanting something is to obtain that thing, 
whereupon you’ll feel satisfied. But it rarely works out that way. Either the 
thing fails to live up to your expectations, or alternatively it does and then 
you’re desperate not to lose it. Worse, what you’re really sometimes craving 
isn’t the thing itself, but novelty – and by definition, you can’t keep 
obtaining that from the same person or possession.In a recent essay 
<http://www.raptitude.com/2016/05/what-we-want/>, Getting What We Want Isn’t 
What We Really Want, the blogger David Cain recalled the bittersweet experience 
of buying new CDs as a teenager: “Every glorious listen came with a faint 
streak of dread, because I knew I was only sucking the magic out of it with 
each play.”

Want to imbibe wisdom by accident? | Oliver Burkeman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/03/why-aphorisms-suit-the-modern-world-oliver-burkeman>
Clearly, the problem here isn’t really with the specific things you want but 
don’t yet have. Rather, it’s something to do with the phenomenon of wanting 
itself. Recent work by the neuroscientistsJaak Panksepp 
<http://qz.com/684940/neuroscience-confirms-that-to-be-truly-happy-you-will-always-need-something-more/>
 andRobert Sapolsky 
<http://www.wired.com/2011/07/sapolsky-on-dopamine-not-about-pleasure-but-its-anticipation/>
 suggests that the brain’s reward mechanisms are designed to give us squirts of 
dopamine not when we get what we want, but when we pursue it. We’re chemically 
rewarded for maintaining a state of unfulfilment. From an evolutionary angle, 
this isn’t a shock: constant restlessness is a better recipe for propagating 
your genes than contentment. And consumerism exacerbates the situation: the 
biggest profits come not from fully satisfying your customers, but from making 
sure they never stop seeking.

According to some hardcore Buddhists, the answer is to transcend desires 
entirely. A more immediately practical option is simply to keep in mind that 
wants can be misleading. It always seems as if it’s the next delicious meal, 
career choice or relationship that will finally deliver, as Cain puts it, “the 
experience of ease and unfettered enjoyment” they falsely promise. In fact, 
there’s far more ease to be had “by understanding our wants, rather than 
scrambling to relieve them”. What you really want is to get proficient at 
questioning your wants.

 * oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com>
 