
Max McMurdo stands on the doorstep surrounded by toolboxes, neat as a pin. A 
professional upcycler, he has offered to convert my worst bits of household 
junk into brilliant new forms. It’s hardly surprising that he is smiling:
upcycling is a form of recreational optimism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jun/06/homes-upcycling>. The 
whole pursuit is underpinned by the belief that no tat is too tatty. All junk 
can be saved.

McMurdo, 38, defines upcycling as <http://www.maxmcmurdo.co.uk/> “adding 
emotional or financial value [to waste objects] through the addition of 
design”. The idea has been around since at least the 1990s, and while the 
principle of adding value to waste makes sense, I have always disliked most of 
the interiors styles it has generated. Too often, upcycling bolts an adjective 
– such as “shabby” or “industrial” – to the word “chic” in the hope of 
rendering rubbish desirable. But maybe Max will change my mind.

I take him on a tour of the house. There’s the mop with a sagging head, a 
warped tennis racket, a chair that can’t be trusted, the set of metal shelves 
at the top of the stairs that belong to my husband and that I’ve been trying to 
dump for at least 10 years. There’s even an old clothes airer that can’t stand 
up. That’s definitely junk.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fcan-an-upcycling-expert-transform-my-junk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b49183b0f6663ccb86d272c928a9e50b99b383e%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20an%20upcycling%20expert%20transform%20my%20junk%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fcan-an-upcycling-expert-transform-my-junk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20an%20upcycling%20expert%20transform%20my%20junk%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fcan-an-upcycling-expert-transform-my-junk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b49183b0f6663ccb86d272c928a9e50b99b383e%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 McMurdo considers how to make shelving from an abandoned rack. Photograph: 
Teri Pengilley for the Guardian 
“Well, no, because that’s quite exciting ... You’ve got a lot of decent wire 
there. Wire is really in!” McMurdo says, before launching into a discussion of 
caged lighting and caged storage. I’ve also got a space hopper that lost a 
fight with a fox and lies crumpled in a muddy heap at the end of the garden. 
Max’s eyes light up. “Have youreally got a deflated space hopper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/jan/20/how-we-made-space-hopper>
? That’s all our childhood, isn’t it? You must be able to keep the ears and 
face and stretch it over a frame or do something really cool and fun ... A 
little light behind it. Then it would glow with its wild ears!”

And so it goes on. The tennis racket could be “a leg for a chair”. The bit of 
plastic guttering would “make a really cool birdbox”.

Upcycling is an act of faith. Whether you happen to be the one with the tools, 
the cash, the nous or the junk, the activity requires a total suspension of 
cynicism. Think of it as DIY theatre, with the upcycler as a sort of deus ex 
machina who will descend and fix all your unfixables. Certainly, McMurdo 
believes in the power of improvement; he too has been transformed by his hobby. 
Mid-project he sometimes stops and remembers “the uninterested 15-year-old me 
at school” and imagines how he would react to the adult Max’s upcycling ideas: 
“‘Oh, I like that! I might design something!’”

His personal uplift came in 2007 after he appeared on BBC’s Dragons’ Den 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uRo5bZR7smw> and secured funding for his 
company, reestore <http://www.reestore.com/>, from Deborah Meaden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2012/mar/16/deborah-meaden-what-see-in-mirror>
 andTheo Paphitis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2014/jul/08/theo-paphitis-startups-dragons-den>
 (he has since bought the pair out). Clients for his high-end upcycled 
furniture include Google and the Body Shop. He also works as a broadcaster on 
shows such asFill Your House For Free 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/goks-fill-your-house-for-free>: this in 
itself is concerning because what I would really like to do is empty my house. 
His bathtub sofas sell for about £2,000.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fcan-an-upcycling-expert-transform-my-junk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffaf1bad44eb2086e716b95762fa4afd4458e98f8%2F0_0_3840_5760%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20an%20upcycling%20expert%20transform%20my%20junk%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fcan-an-upcycling-expert-transform-my-junk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20an%20upcycling%20expert%20transform%20my%20junk%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fcan-an-upcycling-expert-transform-my-junk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffaf1bad44eb2086e716b95762fa4afd4458e98f8%2F0_0_3840_5760%2F3840.jpg>
 Unloved metal shelves take shape as a candle-holder. Photograph: Teri 
Pengilley for the Guardian 
“The first thing we need is to discuss what items you would like in your 
home,” he says. “We know what we’ve got to work with, now we’ve got to identify 
the items that would be most useful to you and your family.”

I would like McMurdo and his assistant, Nikkita, to take away the settee, with 
its holey cushions and wine-stained arms, and turn it into a version ofCarl 
Malmsten’s round samsas sofa <https://www.skandium.com/round-samsas-sofa>, but 
this seems a big ask. “I could do with a picture frame for the kids’ school 
photo,” I say. “Some shelving for my daughter’s room.” We are standing in the 
lounge. “Something to put all these toys in.”

We carry all the junk into the garden. “A big pile of stuff,” McMurdo says 
approvingly. He plucks a metal hyacinth container from the grass. “This just 
screams out to be a gorgeous lampshade, doesn’t it? For your little boy’s room. 
I don’t know what that fabric one is he’s got in there.” (It’s fromthe Conran 
Shop <https://www.conranshop.co.uk/>.) Next, McMurdo lifts the collapsing chair 
and studies it mid-air. “That chair would make a perfect towel rail and shelf 
for the bathroom, upside-down.”

I worry that it will just look like an upside-down chair stuck on the wall. 
McMurdo looks surprised. “You don’t want it to look repurposed?”

He wants to use timber dumped in the garden for some “gorgeous” shelves for my 
daughter’s room: “Lots of little interlocking sections, quite organic.” The 
hyacinth lampshade will go to her brother, along with a noticeboard made up of 
a crisscross of clothes-airer wires. “Like an old 80s piece of artwork with 
string,” says McMurdo. We can peg artwork on it. That just leaves something for 
the adults.

“It’s nice to pick on this,” he says, stroking the hideous metal shelves. 
“Because you hate it so much. And because it is a genuine problem – there will 
be loads of them in the world. Most upcyclers wouldn’t touch them.”

McMurdo believes upcycling could provide marriage therapy – “For couples who 
hate each other’s possessions” – although as he only got married last month, 
I’m guessing he has yet to test this out. “The person who hates it gets to work 
their magic on it, and that’s the condition: you can keep it if we both fall in 
love with it.” You have to admire his optimism, that upcycling your partner’s 
possessions could create marital harmony. But it’s worth a go – I give him the 
shelves.

Soon the garden fills with makeshift workbenches. The air judders with the 
sound of the electric sander. A little wooden shelving unit that sat outside 
the shed is sawed into new lengths. The guts of the airer are snipped. A hole 
is drilled in the hyacinth pot. When the children, aged six and eight, return 
from school, each is given a saw. It is unclear who is happiest: the kids or 
McMurdo.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fcan-an-upcycling-expert-transform-my-junk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd52bdce664714c856aca89a57b255bc25a0ea5d%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20an%20upcycling%20expert%20transform%20my%20junk%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fcan-an-upcycling-expert-transform-my-junk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20an%20upcycling%20expert%20transform%20my%20junk%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fcan-an-upcycling-expert-transform-my-junk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd52bdce664714c856aca89a57b255bc25a0ea5d%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Paula shows off three completed items - a candle-holder, made from an unloved 
metal shelving unit; a lampshade for her son, made from a discarded plant pot; 
and shelving for her daughter made from an abandoned rack. Photograph: Teri 
Pengilley for the Guardian 
“Something I didn’t realise until very recently,” he says, “is that I’m doing 
this completely for my mum and dad. They never had much money. It was a second 
marriage for both. So, they were starting again with nothing.”

When McMurdo was growing up, his father, who worked as an accountant, was 
known as “the guy who jumped in skips. Everything was salvaged.” He even 
straightened old nails. If they saved up for a toy car, it was “basically an 
excuse for dad and I to go to the garage and build a wooden ramp system for the 
car to go round. Those times, learning how to use tools, were more enjoyable 
than the car itself.”

These adventures may be what McMurdo had in mind when he said that upcycling 
is about adding emotional value to worn things. It is clear that, for him, even 
the most emotional possessions are ripe for improvement. After his dad died, 
for instance, McMurdo inherited his old rugby boots. For a while they sat on 
display, but McMurdo’s partner had never met his father, and the boots moved to 
a box under the bed. Saddened to see them become “a dust-collecting thing”, he 
took the drill to one and turned it into a lamp.

Some would shudder at this as an act of sentimental sabotage. But if you are 
an upcycler, you look to the future. Now, McMurdo is “desperate” to transform 
the other boot.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fcan-an-upcycling-expert-transform-my-junk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7476d1daa15a707c70c853a9469faa330b6b7fd%2F0_0_3840_5760%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20an%20upcycling%20expert%20transform%20my%20junk%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fcan-an-upcycling-expert-transform-my-junk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20an%20upcycling%20expert%20transform%20my%20junk%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fcan-an-upcycling-expert-transform-my-junk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7476d1daa15a707c70c853a9469faa330b6b7fd%2F0_0_3840_5760%2F3840.jpg>
 The finished candle-holder. Photograph: Teri Pengilley for the Guardian 
The garden swarms with sawdust, and finally the sander falls silent. My 
daughter is quietly staining her unit blue. It is not quite the interlocking 
maze I had envisioned; more like an asymmetrical noughts-and-crosses board. I 
am not keen, but she looks thrilled. She is so thoroughly invested in those 
shelves, it will be impossible ever to throw them away.

The metal unit, on the other hand, has been significantly reduced – to a 
curved, metal candle foil about 20cm high. Sprayed copper, it stands on a bit 
of smoothed tree stump. We carry it inside, darken the lounge and light the 
candles. The hearth flickers with coppery warmth, and for a minute we are all 
transfixed by the glow, the wisp of flame through the little metal holes of 
what was once those hideous shelves. The kids lean in. I’m still not sure about 
the aesthetic, but our spirits – our day – have been totally upcycled. McMurdo 
says he would sell the old-shelf candleholder, including the tree-stump base, 
for £90, or £45 without. (If you’re interested, drop me a line.)

After Max and Nikkita pack up and leave, my son finds a quiet moment to ask if 
he can have his old lampshade back; the hyacinth pot is deposited on a kitchen 
chair. A few weeks on, I’m afraid it’s still there. The shelves lean against 
the wall in my daughter’s room awaiting a grandparental visit. The 80s 
art-style noticeboard, which was to be finished off-site, has yet to arrive. 
Out in the garden, the sad things I started with look even sadder. It turns out 
that one thing more rubbish than an airer that cannot stand is an airer that 
has no rails. But the worst surprise awaits at the top of the stairs. 
Apparently, the candle-holder only required the removal of the back panel of 
the metal shelves, so the rest of the unit lives to fight another decade.

Still, we are all upcyclers now. We must make the best of things.

Upcycling: 20 Creative Projects Made from Reclaimed Materials by Max McMurdo 
is published by Jacqui Small (£20).Click here to buy it for £16.40. 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/upcycling.html>
 