
What constitutes “real work”? Anyone who has dug a ditch by hand would say 
that certainly qualifies, but when it comes to computing and screens, the 
distinction becomes more difficult. Since the introduction of the iPad in 2010, 
the insistence among some that what gets done on aniPad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ipad> is not “real work”, while stuff 
done on a computer with a keyboard running some flavour of Windows is, has 
become gradually more hilarious.

What stopped people from doing “real work” on the first iPad? According to 
various comments after its introduction, the lack of Photoshop; no access to 
the file system; no USB port for flash memory drives, or a spinning hard drive 
capable of storing 160GB, or a physical keyboard. Then there was the lack of 
computer-aided design/manufacturing programs, and the absence of Microsoft 
Office. How could you do “real work” in the modern age without touching Office?


Apparently for some, no app or capability of whatever power can replace the 
presence of a 'full-fat operating system'

Insistence on the physical keyboard – how could people type for any length of 
time on glass? – must mean that the amount of “real work” done has plummeted 
precipitously with the decline ofBlackBerry’s subscriber base 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/27/blackberry-phones-handsets-losses>
 (by about 50 million) over the past couple of years. Or is typing emails not 
“real work”? The issue also became moot once companies such as Logitech 
introduced add-on keyboards for the iPad.

Since 2010, the need for flash memory and big hard drives has receded as 
services such as Dropbox and Box (not to mention Microsoft’s OneDrive, Google 
Drive and Apple’s own iCloud) have become pervasive. CAD programs are available 
for Apple’s iOS, and one of the first thingsSatya Nadella did on taking over 
Microsoft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/feb/04/microsoft-satya-nadella-new-ceo>
 was tointroduce Office for iPad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/mar/27/microsoft-announces-office-apple-ipad?CMP=Share_iOSApp_Other>
 in March 2014, well before the touch-optimised version of Office for Windows 8.

Did that end the “real work” argument? No; it just gained nuance. Take Apple’s 
iPad Pro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/09/apple-ipad-pro-129in-iphone-6s-event>
, introduced in November, which sports a 33cm (12.9in) screen 76% bigger than 
the 2010 iPad with its 24.6cm (9.7in) screen. It can run two applications 
side-by-side, has a processor that benchmarks favourably compared to an Intel 
laptop and has an (optional) attachable keyboard and (optional) drawing stylus. 
Pricey, too; surely only “real workers” could afford it?

But now, the comparisons in the commentaries aren’t with laptops, but with 
Microsoft’s Surface Pro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/01/microsoft-surface-3-review-one-of-the-best-tablet-laptop-hybrids>
, with an attachable keyboard, optional stylus and 12.3in (31.2cm) screen. The 
two devices approach each other from different ends of thetablet/laptop divide, 
yet only one is deemed capable of doing “real work”.

iPad Pro – the creative future’s looking good
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/29/apple-i-pad-pro-review> 
What constitutes “real work” keeps moving, a line drawn in shifting sands. 
Running FTP programs? The iPad can do that, withCoda 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/coda/id500906297?mt=8>. Writing code? Try 
Pythonista <https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/pythonista/id528579881?mt=8> or 
Coda. Running ad-hoc scripts?Workflow 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/workflow-powerful-automation/id915249334?mt=8> 
is pretty handy. The iPad Pro can even edit 4K video, which many cheap laptops 
can’t. But apparently for some people no app or capability of whatever power 
suffices to replace the presence of a “full-fat operating system”, a phrase 
defended with the passion of a London cabbie insisting that an Uber driver 
isn’t really navigating, just following directions from their smartphone. No 
matter that the phone is updated constantly with traffic data and advisories; 
it’s new, so it isn’t Real Driving.

At some point, the difference vanishes. Most people never did “real work”, by 
whatever metric, on their computer; they were happy to browse web pages, send 
emails,Skype <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/skype> friends, whatever. 
Yet the redoubt of “real work” is defended valiantly, perhaps by those whose 
jobs depend not on the work, but on the tools used for it – the PC. It’s very 
notable how often those defending the “real work” divide are also systems 
administrators of some sort. It’s as if, like the London cabbie, they felt 
their employment was in peril, while everyone else adapts around them.

For myself, I wrote this on an iPad Pro (with the keyboard). It certainly 
beats digging a ditch.
 