
I am all for diversity and nontraditional lifestyles, but what’s with that 
small percentage of the population who, according to numerous surveys, say 
their commute is the best part of their day? That’s just wrong. Everyone knows 
commuting is hell. It’s depressing; it damages your health; it’sassociated with 
higher divorce rates 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/business/moneybox/2011/05/your_commute_is_killing_you.html>
 – and the longer the commute, the more acute the effects. Even worse, because 
traffic jams and train delays are so unpredictable, it’s a form of suffering to 
which people never fully adjust. That’s one reason you shouldn’t trade your 
short commute for a nicer house a longer distance from the office: the fixed 
pleasures of the new house will fade, while the variable torture of the daily 
schlep never will.

So who are the 16% of Canadians – to pick one representative study, 
highlighted recently in The Atlantic 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2016/03/a-mystery-the-people-who-enjoy-commuting/474138/>
 – who say they greatly enjoy commuting, or the 3% who appreciate it more than 
anything else? Cyclists, mainly. Buta study out this year 
<http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2714478> suggests another 
factor: people with higher levels of self-control enjoy commuting more, Harvard 
researchers found, because they use it for “prospection”, or mentally planning 
the day ahead, while those with lower self-control try to focus on fun, by 
listening to music or playingCandy Crush 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/mar/26/candy-crush-saga-king-why-popular>
. In another part of the study, participants who were actively encouraged to 
engage in prospection were happier commuters, too. In short: you’re better off 
embracing the fact that you’re heading into the office, and preparing 
accordingly, than trying to prolong the feeling of not yet being at work.

This draws attention to something intriguing about unpleasant situations in 
general, not only those involving close proximity to other people’s armpits on 
the train: often, it’s more stressful to try to zone out from them than to 
accept them for what they are. This first struck me forcefully when I started 
running without headphones. True, listening to music or podcasts did distract 
me from the discomforts of physical exertion, but it also served as a constant 
subliminal reinforcement of the notion that exertion was something unpleasant 
from which I needed distracting.

With the earbuds off, there’s at least a chance that I’ll actually enjoy the 
running.Research suggests 
<http://time.com/4108442/mindfulness-meditation-pain-management/> even intense 
physical pain can be reduced through paying mindful attention to it; by 
contrast, mental gymnastics to distract yourself from the situation you’re in 
never definitively works – because you are, despite all your inner efforts, in 
that situation.

Want to get things done? Stop thinking, start doing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/11/idea-debt-procrastination-oliver-burkeman>
“Let reality be reality,” said the ancient Chinese sage Lao-Tzu 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laozi>, who admittedly didn’t have to deal with 
a gruelling commute, not least because he may never have existed. All the same, 
he’s right: “acceptance” needn’t mean resigning yourself to fate; but it does 
mean stopping pretending things aren’t how they are. You’re on a late-running, 
scandalously overcrowded train, and you hate it. So quit your job! Or don’t 
quit your job. But don’t imagine that half-quitting it – quitting on the 
inside, but not the outside – will help. The external world is annoyingly 
stubborn like that.

oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com>
 