
‘She’s dead, wrapped in plastic…” With those five words, drawled by lumberjack 
Pete Martell about murdered homecoming queen Laura Palmer,David Lynch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/davidlynch> transformed television. The 
opening scene of his dramaTwin Peaks ensured that audiences on both sides of 
the Atlantic spent much of 1990 obsessed with uncovering who killed Palmer, the 
supposedly good girl with a whole host of bad habits.

Was it her boyfriend Bobby, the beautiful football player with a terrible 
attitude? Her other, secret boyfriend James, the brooding not-such-a-bad-boy 
biker? Her chain-smoking mother Sarah? Her weepy father Leland? Local 
businessman Ben Horne with his plans within plans? Or his daughter Audrey, a 
poor little rich girl with a nose for secrets and a talent for mischief? Not 
sincePeyton Place <http://www.vanityfair.com/news/2006/03/peytonplace200603> 
had a group of small-town citizens had so many secrets to hide and we drank 
them all in as fervently as the show’s hero, the indefatigable FBI agent Dale 
Cooper, inhaled his damn fine cups of coffee, desperate to uncover the truth.

Twin Peaks' final scene: 25 years on, it's as disturbing as ever
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/10/twin-peaks-final-scene-anniversary-showtime>
Even the slow-dawning realisation that Lynch was less interested in a 
traditional crime story than in melding aBlue Velvet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2012/feb/10/david-lynch-blue-velvet-bfi>
-style excavation of small-town America with a supernatural mystery did little 
to dim the fervour of true believers (although the show’s ratings plunged 
dramatically, leading network ABC to pull the plug at the end of the second 
season). To its army of fans,Twin Peaks was impossible to predict and like 
nothing else on air. “It was the show that changed television,” says Rob 
Lindley, who has run the annualTwin Peaks festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/oct/12/twin-peaks-return-fans-weird-america>
 with his wife Deanne since 2013. (The festival itself has run since 1993 in 
North Bend and Snoqualmie, Washington, where both the show’s pilot episode and 
the later Twin Peaks film,Fire Walk with Me  
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0105665/>were filmed.) “The first TV show that was 
intelligent, funny, spiritual, dramatic and mysterious.”

It has also only grown in reputation in the 25 years it has been off air. 
Practically every drama with a mystery at its heart, fromLost to Wayward Pines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2015/may/14/wayward-pines-review-m-night-shyamalan-matt-dillon>
, has been branded as the new Twin Peaks, and its influence can be seen 
everywhere from programmes that began soon after, such asThe X-Files, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-x-files> to classics such as The 
Sopranos (which borrowed its dream sequences and willingness to play with 
tone). Most recently, the second season of murky hacker thrillerMr Robot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mr-robot> played out like an extended 
homage to Lynch, while the much-praised 80s-set supernatural dramaStranger 
Things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/05/netflix-hit-stranger-things-highlights-tvs-trend-for-nostalgia>
 deliberately modelled its opening titles on those of the earlier show. Yet for 
every show to reference Lynch successfully, there are hundreds that fail to hit 
the right note. “These days networks want something different that makes their 
programmes stand apart from the pack and break through popular culture, but 
it’s hard to do,” saysVariety TV critic Maureen Ryan. “There have been a ton of 
shows that tried to create a singular tone or display a unique vision and 
failed pretty hard.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Ftwin-peaks-dark-legacy-david-lynch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe41fc23a919bc0699b5757997c516fcef1f7dfa2%2F7_28_4073_2444%2F4073.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20the%20new%20Twin%20Peaks%20keep%20up%20with%20today%E2%80%99s%20TV%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Ftwin-peaks-dark-legacy-david-lynch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20the%20new%20Twin%20Peaks%20keep%20up%20with%20today%E2%80%99s%20TV%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Ftwin-peaks-dark-legacy-david-lynch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe41fc23a919bc0699b5757997c516fcef1f7dfa2%2F7_28_4073_2444%2F4073.jpg>
 Winona Ryder in the Netflix supernatural drama Stranger Things. Photograph: 
Netflix/Everett/Rex/Shutterstock 
Small wonder then that expectation is rising for the third series of Twin Peaks
, which is due to hit screens in 2017 with Lynch, cowriter Mark Frost and much 
of the original cast and crew still on board. At Cannes last week, Kyle 
MacLachlan, who played the coffee-loving Cooper, teased fans by refusing to 
speculate on his character’s fate, saying only that “it was thrilling not only 
to revisit the character of Dale Cooper, but also to have the chance to work 
with people that, in many cases, I hadn’t seen for 25 years”. However, Sherilyn 
Fenn, who played the seductive Audrey, has been less complimentary, hinting on 
Twitter that the show’s much-loved female characters have been marginalised 
this time around. A deliberately vague teaser trailer, featuring only Angelo 
Badalamenti’s haunting theme tune and the image of Sheryl Lee’s Palmer in 
homecoming regalia, failed to provide a clear answer.

The final scene was the greatest cliffhanger of all time. I intend to savour 
every episode like a fine wine
Rob Lindley, festival organiser 
Until the truth is revealed, the terminally addicted will have to make do with 
Frost’s tie-in book,The Secret History of Twin Peaks 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/secret-history-of-twin-peaks.html>, which 
purports to provide “access to all of Agent Cooper’s files and tapes” and 
presents detailed backgrounds for many of the show’s best-loved characters, 
from perpetually weeping sheriff’s deputy Andy Brennan (Harry Goaz) to the log 
lady (Catherine E Coulson, who reportedly filmed scenes for the new series 
before her death last year). “I wanted to deepen the world of the show and 
place its origins in historical and mythological context,” Frost says, adding 
that it felt like the right time to expand on the show’s wider world.

He’s right that if ever a show was made to be obsessively pored over, it is 
Twin Peaks. Savvy and self-referential, Lynch was a master of the “Easter egg”: 
the small, clever moments aimed at rewarding devoted fans. From witty jokes 
linkingTwin Peaks’ kindly Sheriff Harry S Truman to his presidential namesake, 
to Frost’s brief cameo as a news reporter and nods to everything from noir 
classicsDouble Indemnity and Laura to Lynch’s own Eraserhead, Twin Peaks set 
the standard for today’s pop culture-driven TV. “It’s hard to create a truly 
surreal tone that works for week-to-week TV storytelling, yet for a whileTwin 
Peaks somehow did that,” says Ryan. “It reflected a unique sensibility and was 
happy to stand apart from the crowd – something not many shows did back then.”

Indeed to viewers raised in the era of peak TV, where any and every kind of 
show is available at the swipe of a screen, it’s hard to explain just how 
differentTwin Peaks felt when it aired on BBC2 to just over 8 million viewers 
in October 1990, six months after its launch in the US. From Badalamenti’s 
shiver-inducing opening theme to the way in which Lynch’s camera slowly 
directed our gaze to Laura Palmer’s plastic-encased body, forcing the audience 
into the role of voyeur, it was instantly clear that this was not your ordinary 
murder tale. “The first season was absolutely riveting in its strangeness,” 
says Ryan. “The show created a world that felt complete and perfect and also 
perfectly weird. In season two it began to fall apart but the first season 
holds up to this day.”

That it does so is largely because of three things. First, Lynch and Frost’s 
wonderfully deadpan script, packed full of quotable one-liners. Second, the 
cast’s ability to play the most surreal material absolutely straight, ensuring 
that fans not only went along with but endlessly picked over the most seemingly 
innocuous sentences. And third, and most important, Frost and Lynch’s absolute 
commitment to the world they created, a place where middle-aged women share 
psychic connections with logs, one-armed men hunt demons, besuited dwarves drop 
clues while talking backwards, and even the owls are not what they seem.

It was the sort of show that inspired real devotion – something that happens 
regularly in today’s social media-driven age but which was less common in an 
era when conversations about popular culture took place in real life. There 
were parties, in which fans ate cherry pie and drank coffee, best-selling 
tie-in books,The Secret Diary of Laura Palmer and The Autobiography of Special 
Agent Dale Cooper, and even a board game. “I think the biggest reason fans 
responded so strongly was the quality of the writing,” says Lindley. “It was 
brilliant TV that never insulted your intelligence – also there were many 
elements within the show that fans can relate to on a deeper level.”

Yet is it a mistake to return after all this time? Ryan singles out the recent 
“frankly wretched”X-Files reboot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/08/x-files-review-new-series-underwhelming-unnecessary>
 as an example of the pitfalls of returning to once-loved material, and it’s 
certainly arguable that Lynch has already drawn from this well once with less 
reward in 1992’s muddled movie. “One of the great things aboutTwin Peaks was 
that it was so singular for that time,” says Ryan. “This year alone American TV 
will have almost 430 primetime scripted shows on the air. We’ve watched TV 
explode with an array of treatments, approaches, themes and atmospheres.Twin 
Peaks will not be a singular presence and, given that, will it be able to 
recapture the magic it once had?”

In other words, the very culture that Twin Peaks helped to create has evolved 
and moved on. HasTwin Peaks moved with it? Lindley for one doesn’t care. “The 
final scene was the greatest cliffhanger of all time and many of us have hoped 
and dreamed for years thatTwin Peaks would continue in some way, so we’re 
beyond excited,” he says. “I intend to savour every episode like a fine wine.”

The Secret History of Twin Peaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/twin-peaks> by Mark Frost is 
published by Pan Macmillan, £19.99. The new series will air on Sky Atlantic in 
2017

INSPIRED BY LYNCH

Lost (2004-2010)

Complex storylines, a large cast of characters, mystical overtones and 
meandering plot lines, JJ Abrams’s island-set drama stole both the good and the 
bad from Lynch’s playbook.

Veronica Mars (2004-2007)

Over a decade after Lynch’s show ended, this teen noir payed homage, posing 
the question Who Killed Lilly Kane? and making it’s vibrant victim a good girl 
with bad habits.

Hannibal (2013-2015)

From its surreal visual images to its unsettling atmosphere, this horror drama 
from Bryan Fuller almost out Lynch’s Lynch.

Mr Robot (2015-now)

Pop culture magpie Sam Esmail played homage to Lynch with a woozy second 
season in which nothing was quite what it seemed.

Stranger Things (2016)

It’s impossible to link all the references to Twin Peaks in this excellent 
supernatural small-town story without spoiling it, but suffice to say that the 
storyline knowingly nods to Lynch’s masterpiece.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Ftwin-peaks-dark-legacy-david-lynch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2784ebcd8767e9b3de28cea990631ac643814fe%2F0_228_1888_1133%2F1888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20the%20new%20Twin%20Peaks%20keep%20up%20with%20today%E2%80%99s%20TV%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Ftwin-peaks-dark-legacy-david-lynch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20the%20new%20Twin%20Peaks%20keep%20up%20with%20today%E2%80%99s%20TV%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Ftwin-peaks-dark-legacy-david-lynch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2784ebcd8767e9b3de28cea990631ac643814fe%2F0_228_1888_1133%2F1888.jpg>
 The cast of Wayward Pines. Photograph: Patrick Hoelck/FOX  