
There’s a man in Colorado who, it’s safe to say, is pretty irritated by the 
noise of aircraft approaching and leaving Denver airport, 30 miles from his 
house. How irritated, exactly? In 2015, he made 3,555 complaints out of 4,870 
received by the airport, according toa new research paper 
<https://www.mercatus.org/publications/airport-noise-nimbyism>. And he’s not 
unique. Five people made 61% of the complaints about Portland airport, and in 
Washington, DC, “two individuals at one residence” clocked up 6,852 complaints 
in a year against Ronald Reagan Washington National airport. (About the noise, 
I mean. No word on how many complained about it being named after Reagan.)

As an inveterate maker of official complaints myself, I confess to some 
admiration for these moaners. Yes, I know the adage that the definition of 
insanity is doing the same thing repeatedly, while expecting different results. 
But there’s a cosmic defiance here that I respect. The world may be enraging 
and absurd – yet at least someone has the self-respect to keep protesting 
against that fact.

It won’t make them happy, though. These findings illustrate how irritation and 
complaint are self-reinforcing: objecting to something you can’t control brings 
a moment of catharsis, but mainly makes things worse, by increasing the 
attention you bring to the problem, which makes it more intrusive. You end up 
listening more acutely for the next noise and getting more irritated when it 
comes. It’s stressful even when there’s no noise, because you’re on edge, 
waiting for the silence to be broken. No wonder a single complaint becomes 
hundreds: the complaining is nourishing the problem. This gets easier to see if 
you think about these minor irritations like a difficulty encountered in a 
relationship – in this case, between you and your environment. Railing against 
them is like falling out with your partner, then continuing, over and over, to 
pick further fights for the sake of it. And when hasthat ever helped?

Find fun where you least expect it | Oliver Burkeman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/14/find-fun-least-expect-it-oliver-burkeman>
As so often, the Buddhists figured this out before most of us. The “first 
noble truth” ofBuddhism <https://www.theguardian.com/world/buddhism> is often 
translated as “life is suffering”, but that’s a bit melodramatic; it implies 
constant agony, when for most of us that’s thankfully rare. The word in 
question, dukkha, means something closer to“unsatisfactoriness” 
<http://www.leighb.com/bummer.htm>. Life can be wonderful, awful or somewhere 
in between, but there’s always an undertow of not-quite-right-ness: either 
what’s happening is unpleasant, or it’s pleasant but you know it must end. The 
aircraft noise complainer is mired deep in dukkha, unhappy when a plane is 
passing, and unhappy when one isn’t, because the silence can’t last.One big 
Buddhist insight <http://www.lionsroar.com/the-myth-of-permanence/> is that 
this dissatisfaction doesn’t arise from our circumstances themselves, but from 
the way we try to attain happiness, by lining up our circumstances just right, 
then keeping them fixed in place for good. It’s a quest that’s doomed to fail, 
since nothing lasts. Planes come, planes go, and you’re happy to the extent 
that you don’t mind that fact. Though I think the Buddha did make an exception 
for that“jaunty whistle” Samsung ringtone 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z5h411OcttA>. That’s just legitimately 
horrendous.

oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <>
 