
Two reports have warned of an explosion in cancer deaths among women, with a 
toll, mainly from breast cancer, of around 5.5 million a year by 2030 – roughly 
the population of Denmark.


This represented a near 60% increase in less than two decades, said an 
analysis conducted by the American Cancer Society (ACS), released on Tuesday at 
the WorldCancer <https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer> Congress in Paris.

As the global population grows and ages, the highest toll will be among women 
in poor and middle-income countries, it said, and much of it from cancers which 
are largely preventable.

“Most of the deaths occur in young and middle-aged adults”, placing a heavy 
burden on families and national economies, said Sally Cowal, senior 
vice-president of global health at the ACS, which compiled the report with 
pharmaceutical company Merck.

We could prevent millions of cancer deaths with knowledge we already have | 
David Hunter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/17/prevent-millions-of-cancer-deaths-with-knowledge-already-have>
A second report, published in the Lancet medical journal 
<http://www.thelancet.com/series/womens-cancers> on Wednesday, said the number 
of women diagnosed with breast cancer alone could almost double to 3.2 million 
a year by 2030 from 1.7 million in 2015.

For cervical cancer, the number of diagnoses could “rise by at least 25% to 
over 700,000 by 2030”, mainly in low- and middle-income countries, said a 
statement from the Lancet.

Cancer is already killing one in seven women around the world, said the ACS 
report – the second highest cause of death after cardiovascular disease.

All four of the deadliest cancers – breast, colorectal, lung and cervical 
cancer – are mostly preventable or can be detected early, when treatment is 
more successful.

In poorer countries, a much smaller proportion of cancer cases are diagnosed 
and treated than in rich ones, while a much bigger group dies. The relative 
burden is growing for developing countries as people live longer due to better 
basic healthcare.

Women in these countries are also increasingly exposed to known cancer risk 
factors “associated with rapid economic transition”, said Cowal, “such as 
physical inactivity, unhealthy diet, obesity, and reproductive factors” 
including postponing motherhood.

“Due to these changes, cancers that were once common only in high-income 
countries are becoming more prevalent,” saidthe report entitled The Global 
Burden of Cancer in Women 
<http://www.cancer.org/research/cancerfactsstatistics/global-burden-cancer-in-women>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fbeth-vyse-breast-cancer-funny-side-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beth%20Vyse%3A%20A%20breast%20cancer%20appointment%20is%20like%20Deal%20or%20No%20Deal%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fbeth-vyse-breast-cancer-funny-side-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beth%20Vyse%3A%20A%20breast%20cancer%20appointment%20is%20like%20Deal%20or%20No%20Deal%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fbeth-vyse-breast-cancer-funny-side-video&media=>
Beth Vyse: A breast cancer appointment is like Deal or No Deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/video/2016/oct/28/beth-vyse-breast-cancer-funny-side-video>
According to the International Agency for Research on Cancer, there were 6.7 
million new cancer cases and 3.5 million deaths among women worldwide in 2012. 
Of these, 56% of cases and 64% of deaths were in less developed countries.

“These numbers are expected to increase to 9.9 million cases and 5.5 million 
deaths among females annually by 2030 as a result of the growth and ageing of 
the population,” said the ACS report.

The biggest concentration is in eastern Asia, with 1.7 million cases and a 
million deaths in 2012, mainly in China.

The highest ratio of cancer cases per population group are still reported in 
high-income countries in Europe, the Americas and Asia, but this was partly due 
to better access to screening and detection.

Deaths, however, were proportionally much higher in low- and middle-income 
countries with reduced access to diagnosis and treatment. The countries with 
the highest death rate were Zimbabwe, Malawi, Kenya, Mongolia and Papua New 
Guinea.

Breast and lung cancer are the two most common types in both rich and poor 
nations, with colorectal cancer the number three killer in developed countries 
and cervical cancer in less developed ones.

Patients over politics: Sudanese breast cancer clinic that beat sanctions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/01/patients-over-politics-sudanese-breast-cancer-clinic-that-beat-sanctions>
Cervical cancer can be staved off by vaccination 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/22/hpv-rates-drop-vaccination-cdc-human-papillomavirus>
 against the cancer-causing human papillomavirus (HPV) and can be detected 
throughregular Papanicolaou (pap) smear tests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/11/does-a-smear-test-hurt-google>
.

The Lancet report, comprised of three research papers 
<http://www.thelancet.com/series/womens-cancers>, said a basic cancer control 
package could be introduced in low- and middle-income countries for as little 
as US$1.72 (£1.40) per person – the equivalent of just 3% of current health 
spending in these countries.

Universal HPV vaccination of all 12-year-old girls could prevent 420,000 
deaths worldwide over their lifetime.

“The global community cannot continue to ignore the problem – hundreds of 
thousands of women are dying unnecessarily every year,” said Richard Sullivan 
of King’s College London, who co-authored the Lancet report.

“Not only are the costs of essential cancer services for women lower than 
expected, but scale-up of diagnostic, surgical and treatment services are a 
highly effective investment compared the devastating economic cost to 
countries, communities and families.”
 