
GPs <https://www.theguardian.com/society/gps> are increasing the anguish of 
cancer patients by depriving them of pain relief, research has suggested.

War on prescription drugs: what if you depend on opioids to live a decent life?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/12/prescription-drugs-what-if-you-depend-on-opioids-chronic-pain>
A study found that terminal patients in the UK were often not prescribed 
powerful opioids such as morphine until nine weeks before their death.

Many would have been suffering pain for much longer, said the authors. Doctors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/doctors> were waiting too long before 
allowing patients with advanced cancer to have the drugs, they claimed.

Lead researcher Dr Lucy Ziegler, from the University of Leeds, said: “We have 
identified for the first time the relatively late onset and short duration of 
strong opioid treatment in cancer patients prior to death.

“This pattern of prescribing does not match population data which points to 
earlier onset of pain. Nine weeks before death is considered late in the course 
of the cancer trajectory.”

The scientists used cancer registry data and medical records to investigate 
the fate of 6,080 patients who died between 2005 and 2012. They found that 48% 
were issued prescriptions for morphine and other opioids during the last year 
of their lives.

Thousands who die with cancer spend last days in pain, study finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/13/thousands-who-die-with-cancer-spend-last-days-in-pain-study-finds>
Typically, the time interval between the first prescription and death was only 
nine weeks. Late diagnosis could not explain the delay. On average, patients 
were diagnosed with the disease long before receiving opioids.

Ziegler said: “Although the prevalence of pain is higher in patients with 
advanced cancer and towards the end of life, for many patients pain is 
experienced at many stages throughout the illness.

“In fact, pain is the most common presenting symptom at diagnosis. Our 
research highlights the need to prioritise earlier access to effective pain 
management for patients with advanced cancer.”

The study found that over-60s were more likely to be prescribed painkillers 
late.Cancer <https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer> patients who died in a 
hospice, rather than in hospital, at home or in a care home, were more likely 
to have been offered the drugs earlier.

One explanation for the findings, published in the journal Pain, could be 
concern over the so-called opioid epidemic – the overuse of potentially 
addictive opioids, said the researchers.

Woman diagnosed too late with cancer 'was in terrible pain'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/03/jeanette-scully-inquest-cancer-undiagnosed-excruciating-pain>
NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> data showed that in 2000-10 
opioid prescriptions soared by 466%. However, it increased by only 16% for 
cancer patients. Previous studies have found up to 86% of patients with 
advanced cancer will experience pain.

“Within the advanced cancer population there is a need to develop mechanisms 
to improve pain assessment and initiate a more proactive approach to 
prescribing, particularly for older patients,” said Ziegler.

“Effective pain control is fundamental to good quality of life. For patients 
who are approaching the end of their lives, it is crucially important we strive 
to get this right and that we help them achieve the best quality of life 
possible.”

 