
What is it? A glossy doc series about abject human misery and kidnap. Merry 
Christmas.

Why you’ll love it: Because you live such a golden life of disease-free, 
non-violent delight that you need to experience that “alive” feeling 
vicariously through the drawn-out torment of others? That’s putting it a bit 
strongly, but this beautifully shot series, complete with gritty 
reconstructions, explores famous real-life hostage situations, a facet of the 
human experience none of us hope to suffer personally. Film crews have covered 
the globe to interview victims, families and officials as far afield as the 
Philippines, Iraq and Somalia.

The first of these eight films is a grim insight into the bloody 1993 prison 
riot that overtook an Ohio correctional facility near Lucasville in the US. 
Former convicts and prison officers talk us through events with frequent cuts 
away from original news footage to high-spec dramatic reconstructions. They’re 
so well done, you sometimes forget which is which as the camera pans over the 
bloodied, face-down corpse of a murderer prisoner. Could be real, could be an 
actor. And it’s all underscored with the kind of “feel this now” compositions 
you’d more usually find in a quality drama.

One of the executive producers is Doug Liman, director of Swingers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/oct/26/my-favourite-film-swingers>
 andThe Bourne Identity <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jason-bourne>, but 
these unfortunate people had no Jason Bourne to abseil in and save them from 
the drawn-out terror and dehumanisation of enforced detention. And – spoiler! – 
not all of the hostages make it out alive. This offshoot of the true-crime 
genre (Making a Murderer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/jan/07/making-a-murderer-the-netflix-documentary-beating-tv-drama-at-its-own-game>
 and so on) is another effective way to experience the worst moments in other 
people’s lives from a safe distance. But as you can dip in and out of these 
stand-alone episodes, it doesn’t bring about the creeping unease that the 
episodic true-crime shows sometimes can when audiences start to consume them 
like fiction, inured to the very real tragedy unfolding in front of them, 
gagging for the next instalment.

In some examples, it is interesting to go behind the headlines of a news story 
you were vaguely aware of, as in the case ofPaul and Rachel Chandler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/oct/30/paul-rachel-chandler-kidnap-somali-pirates>
 from Tunbridge Wells. They were famously jumped by Somalian pirates while on a 
yachting holiday in the Indian Ocean and held to ransom for over a year. The 
sheer length of time they spent in captivity makes the snail-like progress of 
the film equally agonising as the British government sticks to its policy of 
never paying ransoms and the family scrape around for every last penny they can 
muster.

Watching former hostages talk about their experiences (and they are just the 
lucky ones) is bittersweet as the lasting effects of such appalling trauma are 
not detailed. The ones who came home are getting on with their lives, we are 
told. It might have been interesting to hear about what life is like after such 
appalling trauma but this is what true-crime shows do. They make nosey parkers 
of us all.

Where: Netflix <https://www.netflix.com/gb/title/80065491>

Length: Eight episodes available to stream from 9 December.

Stand-out episode: Episode two, about the British couple and the Somali 
pirates, at least has an upbeat ending. Many of the other stories do not.

If you liked Captive watch: Making a Murderer 
<https://www.netflix.com/gb/title/80000770> (Netflix), Hostages 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Hostages-The-Complete-First-Season/dp/B00J8WKN9O> 
(Amazon Prime).
 