
Having entertainingly engaged Glouceste 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby>r seven days ago in an indoor
Heineken Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heinekencup> romp in the 
Millennium Stadium next door, theCardiff Blues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cardiffblues> found themselves more open to 
the Arms Park elements in theEDF Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anglowelshcup>, but more closed in terms of 
style.Leicester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> do not 
readily do fancy dress.

The visitors reintroduced Seru Rabeni to the wing - the Fijian had had a 
suspension for eye-gouging lengthened after appearing in a sevens tournament 
while suspended - which might have suggested a willingness to pass the ball, 
but they also gave an outing to Derick Hougaard at outside-half. The South 
African - and, for that matter, Englishmen Harry Ellis, inside him, and Toby 
Flood, outside - opted for a slightly less sparkling kicking game. No fancy 
dress; this was overalls rugby.

The Blues, by way of contrast, shipped the ball as often as they could, but 
not as often as they would have liked because of the discomfort visited upon 
their scrummage by Julian White, to their outside backs. And several players 
revelled in the industry: Jamie Roberts, in the centre, large and direct; Ben 
Blair, at full-back, ever ready to counter-attack; Leigh Halfpenny, on the 
wing, sharp and elusive.

Halfpenny was nearly as dainty on his feet as the much larger figure of prop 
Taufa'ao Filise. As the Blues pressed for the try that would give them an ounce 
of comfort towards the end, Filise burst into space and tried to side-step the 
last man. It ended with a shudder around the ground and a deep indentation just 
short of the line.

Until that point, the game had been tilting back Leicester's way and they had 
turned around trailing by one penalty from Hougaard to two from Blair. True, 
the Blues had scored a peach of a try, quick ball delivered from a scrum into 
the arms of firstly Roberts and then Jamie Robinson. Simple, but very 
accurately executed and beautifully angled.

But Leicester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers>, in 
typically obdurate mood, had begun the long haul back. Hougaard landed a second 
penalty, which gave them the confidence to strike for the try, the conversion 
of which would level the scores. They chose to scrummage and scrummage again 
from a penalty, driving for the pushover and then trying to launch replacement 
wing Tom Varndell into midfield.

If ever a player looks out of sorts it is Varndell. He appears destined to go 
through lows before he can reveal his outstanding pace. Here, he was stripped 
of the ball and the Blues broke free.

It was only a temporary release, for Leicester were soon back, Hougaard 
kicking a third penalty. A converted try would again level the scores.

The home team's response to all the pressure was summed up by their No 8, Andy 
Powell. Against Gloucester, he had a dream game, brilliant as an explosive 
runner. Against Leicester, he was prone to spilling the ball. On the other 
hand, he produced a couple of runs that left tacklers scattered all over the 
field. A mixed bag.

It was left to Filise to take the Blues to within striking range and, once at 
the right end of the field, they put pressure on one of Leicester's strike 
runners, Jordan Crane. The No 8 sent a horrible pass in his own 22 to Toby 
Flood, who was penalised.

Innocent victim there, Flood then sent a clearance straight to Halfpenny, who 
set in motion the move for the winning try. Blair was in support and, from the 
ruck he created, Jason Spice ran through a large gap to score. Chic won the day.

Cardiff Arms Park 9,815

Game rating |||||||||| Referee D Pearson (Eng)

Cardiff Blair; Halfpenny, J Robinson, Roberts, Mustoe; N Robinson, Spice; 
Yapp, G Williams (Rhys Thomas 70), Filise, Jones (Morgan 70), Tito (capt), 
Molitika, Sowden-Taylor (M Williams 70), A Powell

Tries J Robinson, Spice Cons Blair 2

Pens Blair 3

Leicester J Murphy (Varndell 57); Rabeni, Hipkiss, Flood, Smith (Erinle 79); 
Hougaard, Ellis (Dupuy 60); Stankovich (Cole 54), Chuter (Davies 70), White, 
Blaze, Wentzel (Kay 70), Corry (capt), Croft, Crane

Pens Hougaard 3
 