
The Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> could cut interest 
rates to zero, but will seek to avoid following Sweden, Denmark and the 
eurozone by setting negative rates to bolster growth and inflation.

Mark Carney, the Bank’s governor, said Threadneedle Street had “no intention 
and no interest” in implementing negative interest rates andwould adopt the 
full range of the Bank’s other powers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/10/global-stock-markets-face-rout-amid-fears-central-bankers-out-of-ammunition>
 to deal with a downturn in the economy.

He said: “If we were in a position where the economy needed additional 
stimulus ... we could cut interest rates towards zero. We could engage in 
additional asset purchases, including a variety of assets.

Negative interest rates: what you need to know
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/18/negative-interest-rates-what-you-need-to-know>
“We could also provide a perspective where we could adjust our policy horizon 
– in other words we could shorten our policy horizon over which we wanted to 
return inflation to target.”

Carney, who was responding to questions from MPs on the Treasury select 
committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2016/feb/21/central-bankers-on-the-defensive-as-weird-policy-becomes-even-weirder>
, said the world economy had entered a period of low growth and low interest 
rates and was likely to be prone to financial shocks.

He added that Threadneedle Street might need to respond with additional 
stimulus measures, but to protect the profitability of the UK’s banks and 
building societies, the monetary policy committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/04/bank-of-england-votes-9-0-to-keep-interest-rates-on-hold>
 (MPC) would avoid cutting from the current base rate of 0.5% to below zero.

The message that negative interest rates would be a last resort comes before 
an expected push by theEuropean Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank> to deploy the 
measure on a bigger scale at its next meeting to increase lending and growth in 
the eurozone.

Japan and Switzerland have also adopted negative interest rates in recent 
months.

Carney said negative rates in the UK would damage building societies, which 
would find it difficult to make a profit on mortgage lending if they were 
forced to pay an interest rate on funds deposited at the Bank of England.

The aim of negative interest rates, which effectively puts a charge on savers 
depositing funds, is to discourage commercial banks from leaving cash on 
deposit with Threadneedle Street and lend it to businesses and consumers 
instead.

Some central banks have also pushed rates below zero to discourage foreign 
investors from depositing funds and putting pressure on the exchange rate. 
Sweden and Denmark did so to drive down the value of their currencies to 
maintain parity with the euro.Japan cut its rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/29/investors-love-cheap-money-and-hate-optimistic-central-bankers>
 to to depress the value of the yen.

Carney said building societies would find it difficult to make money in a 
negative interest rate environment.

“We take very seriously the potentially counter-productive impact on the 
building society sector and the financial sector more broadly.”

He said in Switzerland, mortgage rates have gone up despite the country’s 
central bank setting negative interest rates. “So it is not clear that the 
domestic transmission mechanism has been effective,” he noted.

Deputy governor Minouche Shafik said she was sceptical that negative interest 
rates were passed on by banks to the benefit of customers.

“What we observe from that experience is that the effect is passed on to lower 
money market rates, but what we don’t see is that it gets passed on to deposit 
rates,” she said.
 