
“Mother and I live next door to each other, separated by one daunting hill,” 
says Carrie Fisher in the HBO documentary Bright Lights, which had its North 
American premiere at theTelluride film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/telluridefilmfestival> on Saturday. “I 
usually come to her. Ialways come to her.”

Alexis Bloom and Fisher Stevens’s cinema verité-style film about Fisher’s 
close relationship with motherDebbie Reynolds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/debbie-reynolds> will doubtless draw 
parallels to Albert and David Maysles’s iconic 1975 documentary Grey Gardens, 
which centered on a similarly eccentric mother-daughter duo, who shared an 
equally deep bond. But Fisher likens the film more to a “surreal reality show” 
featuring “unreal people.”

“I didn’t think that we were the new Grey Gardens,” Fisher said during a 
conversation after the screening. “It’s really an ideal reality show.”

“My mother and I, we used to go shopping – not a lot, because it would turn 
into a show,” she continued. “And people would sort of linger because we had 
loud voices. They would stay in the store to listen us. So [Bright Lights] 
captures that.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE1EnDqhFU6I&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE1EnDqhFU6I>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE1EnDqhFU6I&media=>
The film finds Reynolds, now in her mid-80s, on the cusp of retirement and 
planning one last hurrah variety show in Vegas, much to the chagrin of Fisher, 
who would rather she rest. “Performance feeds her in ways her family cannot,” 
says Fisher. She meanwhile is documented in the throes of staging her own 
comeback, preparing to reprise her role as Princess Leia inStar Wars: The Force 
Awakens <https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-wars-episode-vii>. 


“I had always wanted to show my mother off the stage, off the screen, because 
she’s such an amazing character,” Fisher said. “I wanted someone to capture 
that.”

Despite her wishes, Fisher admitted that she had “third and fifth thoughts 
about making it” once Bloom and Stevens came on board, mainly because she’s not 
fond of her own appearance on screen.

“I don’t like looking at myself,” Fisher said. “I’m just getting bigger and 
older. That’s not good. Meryl Streep does three movies a year, so she can watch 
herself age. I went from Princess Leia at 23 in a bikini to this broad. So that 
was distressing for me. I hate being vain and I’m working on it – and taking 
classes.”

 * Bright Lights will air on HBO early next year. It next screens at the New 
York film festival in October.
 