
Carrie Fisher has revealed how the makers of Star Wars: The Force Awakens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-wars-episode-vii> sent a personal 
trainer to her home to weigh her, remove unhealthy food from her cupboards and 
persuade her to exercise.

Carrie Fisher: I felt pressured to lose weight for Star Wars: The Force Awakens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/dec/01/carrie-fisher-weight-loss-star-wars-the-force-awakens>
Fisher was at the Cannes film festival this weekend for Saturday’s screening 
of theHBO documentary Bright Lights <https://youtu.be/E1EnDqhFU6I>, about her 
relationship with her mother, the 84-year-old Hollywood icon Debbie Reynolds.

The film, directed by The Cove producer Fisher Stevens and Alexis Bloom, shows 
the 59-year-old actor being persuaded to perform lunges and use a cross trainer.

While working out on a treadmill, the actor wonders if she will be 
retrospectively thinned down by Star Wars’ makers if her character Leia Organa 
should die and return as a “Force ghost”. She asks: “My question is, if you die 
when you’re fat, are you a fat ghost, or do they go back to a more flattering 
time?”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE1EnDqhFU6I&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE1EnDqhFU6I>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE1EnDqhFU6I&media=>
 Bright lights trailer 
At one point in the film, the fitness professional empties Fisher’s kitchen of 
unhealthy food and drinks. But Fisherreportedly 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/05/15/carrie-fisher-star-wars-makers-sent-personal-trainer-to-help-me/>
 fought back against the fitness regime, buying cans of cola and refusing to do 
lunges.

Bright Lights features footage of Fisher when she was a little girl, as well 
as archive material highlighting her mother’s years of Hollywood fame. The 
actor and comic previously riffed on the relationship for her 1987 
semi-autobiographical novel Postcards from the Edge, which was later adapted by 
the author for the acclaimed 1990 film starring Meryl Streep, who received an 
Oscar-nomination for the role.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fstar-wars-interview-carrie-fisher-dog-princess-leia-abc-gma-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F6%2F1449420320774%2FKP_680560_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Star%20Wars%3A%20take%20interview%20seriously%20Carrie%20Fisher%20will%20not%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fstar-wars-interview-carrie-fisher-dog-princess-leia-abc-gma-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Star%20Wars%3A%20take%20interview%20seriously%20Carrie%20Fisher%20will%20not%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fstar-wars-interview-carrie-fisher-dog-princess-leia-abc-gma-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F6%2F1449420320774%2FKP_680560_crop_640x360.jpg>
Carrie Fisher addresses weight issues in interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/dec/06/star-wars-interview-carrie-fisher-dog-princess-leia-abc-gma-video>
Fisher reprised her role as Leia Organa in JJ Abrams’ blockbuster space opera 
The Force Awakens last year. She will return as the Resistance leader in the 
upcoming Star Wars: Episode VIII.

In December the actor and writer revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/dec/01/carrie-fisher-weight-loss-star-wars-the-force-awakens>
 she felt pressured to lose 16kg (2st 7lb) for her return to Star Wars, 
directing criticism at the “insane” image obsession of Hollywood. “They don’t 
want to hire all of me – only about three-quarters! Nothing changes, it’s an 
appearance-driven thing,”she told Good Housekeeping magazine 
<http://www.goodhousekeeping.co.uk/lifestyle/gh-women-celebrity-interviews/carrie-fisher>
. “I’m in a business where the only thing that matters is weight and 
appearance. That is so messed up. They might as well say get younger, because 
that’s how easy it is.”

• This article was amended on 16 May 2016 to clarify that Bright Lights is 
directed by Alexis Bloom and Fisher Stevens.
 