
Global casino operators are vying to move into Japan’s potentially lucrative 
market after a ban was lifted by lawmakers in Tokyo, despite warnings over 
gambling addiction and the involvement of organised crime.

Japan’s parliament approved legislation in the early hours of Thursday 
allowing the construction of “integrated resorts” that will include casinos 
alongside hotels and entertainment facilities.

Despite withdrawing from Macao 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/15/james-packer-retreats-from-china-with-sell-off-of-crowns-overseas-casinos>
 and moving to concentrate on his casino interests in Australia, James Packer’s 
Crown Resorts is reportedly one of several casino operators that see huge 
potential in establishing a presence inJapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>, regarded as the industry’s “final 
frontier”.

Packer’s company, Crown Resorts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/crown-resorts>, could find the 
prospect of operating in the world’s third-biggest economy more attractive 
following a crackdown on gambling in China and the arrests there of 18 Crown 
employees there for alleged “gambling crimes”.

But first Crown, which is 48% owned by Packer, and other foreign operators 
would have to convince Japanese authorities they are able to promote 
responsible gaming and integrate their casinos with the resorts’ hospitality 
business.

“Japanese authorities will be telling foreign operators what they need to do,” 
an industry source told the Guardian. “That means that to have a presence in
Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>, they will have to play by 
Japanese rules.”

Melbourne-based Crown said on Thursday it had ditched a proposed spinoff of 
its international assets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/15/james-packer-retreats-from-china-with-sell-off-of-crowns-overseas-casinos>
. It also agreed to sell half its stake in the joint-venture Melco Crown 
Entertainment for $1.6bn and use the proceeds to reduce debt, fund a special 
distribution and enable a share buyback.

Japan’s prime minister, Shinzo Abe, has long pushed for a lifting of the 
casino ban, arguing it will boost the economy with the arrival of wealthy 
tourists from mainland China – where gambling is banned – and other parts of 
Asia.

MPs passed the bill despite warnings from opposition politicians and mental 
health experts that casino construction could lead to a rise in gambling 
addiction and prove fertile ground for money laundering by theyakuza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jan/05/japanese-yakuza-gangs-face-crackdown>
, Japan’s organised crime syndicates.

Tokyo, Yokohama and Osaka are among the cities jostling to be chosen as casino 
venues, while foreign operators have spent years lobbying Japanese authorities 
for access to a market that could generate huge profits.

Just three casinos could generate nearly US$10bn in net profit annually – 
equivalent to 0.2% of Japan’s GDP – according to the Daiwa Research Institute. 
The investment bank CLSA recently estimated the Japanese market could bring in 
gross revenues of US$30bn a year.


Billionaire casino operators such as Sheldon Adelson, head of Las Vegas Sands, 
and Steve Wynn of Wynn Resorts have visited or sent representatives to Japan to 
lobby for legalisation.

Crown is understood to have been in contact with Japanese local authorities in 
a bid to become part of the country’s first integrated resort consortiums. 
Crown’s Hong Kong-based chairman, Robert Rankin, has also shown a keen interest 
in Japanese moves to legalise casinos aftermore than a decade of public debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2006/jun/12/gambling.japan>.

The first casinos will not be ready in time for the 2020 Olympics in Tokyo, 
however, as new legislation will be needed to decide the number and location of 
casino resorts, admission regulations and rates of taxation on gambling 
profits. They are expected to open in around 2022 at the earliest.

Despite its ban on casinos, Japan is a nation of keen gamblers: horse, 
speedboat and keirin bicycle racing together bring in the equivalent of tens of 
billions of dollars a year.Pachinko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2004/aug/16/japan.internationalnews>, a 
pinball-like game, occupies a legal grey area and has been in decline in recent 
years but still produced more than US$200bn in revenue last year, according to 
the Japan Productivity Centre.

“The reason why everyone’s spending the time on this is that the potential is 
absolutely enormous,” said James Murren, chairman of Las Vegas-based MGM 
Resorts International. Japan, he added, “would dwarf the Singapore market in 
size and could be extraordinarily lucrative for all the investors, real estate 
and operators alike”.

Abe has dismissed concerns that casinos would become magnets for antisocial 
behaviour, insisting they would form only a small part of resorts that would 
also include conference facilities, shops, restaurants and entertainment venues.

“It’s not like entire cities will be taken over by casinos,” he said. “These 
facilities will attract investment and do a lot to help create jobs.”

Abe noted that foreign tourist numbers had more than doubled from 8 million in 
2012 to 20 million in 2016. “These integrated resorts will be able to be 
enjoyed by families, not just for business activities or conferences,” he added.

Analysts said the move could make Japan the second-biggest gambling market in 
the world after Macau.

“Quite simply it represents the next and perhaps only other large opportunity 
to develop large-scale integrated resorts in Asia for a lot of these 
companies,” said Grant Govertsen, a Macau-based analyst at investment firm 
Union Gaming.

“Some of these companies, their revenues and cash flow are so large today that 
it would take an opportunity like Japan to move the needle for them.”

The Japanese public remains firmly opposed to casino legalisation, however. A 
recent poll by public broadcaster NHK showed 44% of people did not want 
casinos, while just 12% supported them.

Some experts accused the government of overstating the potential benefits.

“The estimated economic impact is too optimistic, while the negative impact – 
including gambling addiction – has been understated,” said Yoichi Torihata, a 
professor of economics and gambling business expert at Shizuoka University.

A 2014 study by the health ministry found that nearly 5 million Japanese were 
addicted to gambling, compared with around 1% in many other countries. The high 
rate of addiction is largely blamed on pachinko, in which players get around 
gaming laws by exchanging prizes for cash off the premises.
 