
Amazon Prime

Roadies

As HBO’s disappointing Vinyl showed, rock music is a tricky area to 
fictionalise. Part of the problem is that the songs are the point – and who’s 
going to give their best tunes to a TV drama? Cameron Crowe’s new series tries 
to sidestep this problem by homing in on the triumphs and disasters of the road 
crew. The pacing is a little sluggish at first and the characters feel 
underdeveloped but it’s rendered watchable by turns from Imogen Poots, Rafe 
Spall and Luke Wilson.

Available now

BBC Three

Fleabag

Phoebe Waller-Bridge’s second sitcom of the year is a more promising prospect 
than her first, the underpowered property-guardians comedy Crashing. Fleabag 
stars Waller-Bridge as a sexually, spiritually and career- confused 
twentysomething, who regularly breaks the fourth wall to divulge grisly details 
of one-night stands and other improprieties. On the face of it, she’s not the 
most sympathetic of characters, but there’s a deeper poignancy that reveals 
itself across this smart and sardonic series.

Available from Thursday

The Paris Lees Sex Show

Transgender rights activist and Vice columnist Paris Lees has made a career in 
delivering frank and sometimes filthy sex advice and commentary, so she seems a 
good fit for a BBC3 series offering the same. Covering all areas of the sexual 
spectrum, it promises some Eurotrash-style cheek (Latex fetishes inevitably 
feature) but also, crucially, insight and understanding, as shown by an episode 
about the prevalence of braille pornography.

Available from Wednesday

Netflix

Power
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-roadies-to-bojack-horseman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee5512239f17634873043c8b9424a70145b9f589%2F0_79_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20from%20Roadies%20to%20Bojack%20Horseman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-roadies-to-bojack-horseman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20from%20Roadies%20to%20Bojack%20Horseman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-roadies-to-bojack-horseman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee5512239f17634873043c8b9424a70145b9f589%2F0_79_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Drugs don’t work... Omari Hardwick (left) as James ‘Ghost’ St. Patrick and 
Joseph Sikora as his side kick Tommy Egab. Photograph: James Minchin/Netflix 
There are two series of this 50 Cent-produced gangsta melodrama on Netflix, 
and anyone who has made it through the lot will be refreshing in search of 
series three (which arrives at some point on Monday). The opening of James 
“Ghost” St Clair’s club Truth brings him into contact with an old flame from 
school who’s oblivious to his sideline shifting drugs. His attempts to juggle 
his affairs – business and personal – are tense, comic and bloody.

Available from Monday

Bojack Horseman

Things are looking up for the washed-up sitcom horse (voiced by Will Arnett) 
as the animated series returns: he’s finally got his passion project, a biopic 
of racehorse Secretariat off the ground, and is now chasing an Oscar. Of 
course, those familiar with Bojack will know that failure isn’t far away in a 
series that brings to mind the dry, lugubrious comedy of Simpsons-affiliated 
90s cartoon sitcom The Critic.

Available from Friday

Sky Go

The Late Late Show With James Corden

A remarkable rise for a man who, just seven years ago, was starring in Lesbian 
Vampire Killers, James Corden is now the toast of US late night. His CBS 
vehicle is a hyperactive affair featuring guests in an everyone-all-at-once 
format complete with bands singing their hits in their cars and the odd rap 
battle. Enjoyment will hinge entirely on your feelings for the host; if you’re 
a fan, this is a whole lotta Corden.

Available from Tuesday
 