
Netflix

Easy

From True Detective to American Horror Story, anthology shows have exploded in 
recent years. And if you take the premise to a micro level and switch the focus 
each episode, the format also lends itself well to emphasising the multitude of 
lives which run parallel to one another in big cities (see: recent HBO 
acquisition High Maintenance). The latest show to utilise the format is this 
drama from mumblecore veteran Joe Swanberg, which dips into the lives of 
individuals from different areas and backgrounds in Chicago. As well as varied 
tales, there are big-name appearances from the likes of Orlando Bloom and 
comics Hannibal Buress and Marc Maron.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbzRjfA_9Akw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbzRjfA_9Akw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbzRjfA_9Akw&media=>
Available from Thursday

BBC3

Josh

Josh Widdicombe’s self-titled sitcom hit its stride towards the end of its 
first run, when it ditched flatshare comedy tropes in favour of increasingly 
bleak set-ups – like Jack Dee’s clueless landlord Geoff packing the pals off to 
a crumbling amusement park in Clacton. Here’s hoping the second run continues 
to hone the same sense of millennial malaise: in the opening episode, 
perennially anxious Josh is dumped by his girlfriend, so naturally housemate 
Owen sets up a double date with “cougars” Valerie and Karen (Tamzin Outhwaite 
and Susannah Doyle).

Available from Thursday

BBC Store

Scum

It’s not the most familiar iteration of the devastatingly bleak, utterly 
brilliant film. But this original BBC version of Roy Minton’s play shares 
plenty of common ground with the subsequent cinematic version – as well as 
boasting a number of small yet disorientating differences, such as a disturbing 
scene in which Ray Winstone’s Carlin takes a prison “missus”. Still the daddy.

Available now

SyFy

Halcyon
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-easy-to-bullseye%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ad42b97bec260dc19e98e9ac49ef8cdc2f92701%2F0_341_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20from%20Easy%20to%20Bullseye&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-easy-to-bullseye%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20from%20Easy%20to%20Bullseye&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-easy-to-bullseye%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ad42b97bec260dc19e98e9ac49ef8cdc2f92701%2F0_341_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Jules Dover(right) and Asha in Halcyon. 
Interesting one, this. Accompanying the launch of SyFy’s latest futuristic 
drama – about an investigation into the murder of a virtual reality company 
bigwig in 2040 – come five scripted virtual reality tales. More complex than 
those 360-degree videos you see on Facebook, the episodes are interactive, 
allowing viewers to engage with detective Jules Dover’s investigation as it 
progresses. You will need VR sets to take part – either Oculus Rift or Samsung 
Gear VR at this point – but for those who own them, this could either be an 
intriguing glimpse into the future of entertainment or an ultimately pointless 
curio. Time will tell.

Available from Thursday at halcyonvr.com

Podcast

Bullseye

This US public radio show about pop culture isn’t groundbreaking in its 
approach: host Jesse Thorn sits down with culture-makers to find out more about 
their backstories and projects. What sets it apart, however, is the quality of 
the guests and Thorn’s honest, nonintrusive presenting style. Whether it’s 
Spike Lee on gentrification or Shamir talking gender troubles, each episode is 
warm and insightful. Closer to home, Thorn also interviews Armando Iannucci and 
Josie Long this Friday as part of the first London Podcast festival at Kings 
Place in Kings Cross.

Available now
 