
Amazon Prime

Transparent

Amazon’s transgender-themed dramedy recently returned for its third run, once 
again tackling identity, upheaval, family and Jewishness. While season two 
focused in on the Pfeffermans’ history, complete with flashbacks, this third 
series zooms back in on the dysfunctional brood in the present; indeed, it 
begins with Maura coming out of her comfort zone while volunteering for an LGBT 
charity and ending up hospitalised in the process. A must-stream.

Available now

Eat The World
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DC9Hcrrd5Igo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DC9Hcrrd5Igo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DC9Hcrrd5Igo&media=>
This six-part series sees chef Emeril Lagasse – best known across the pond for 
being a sort of Ainsley Harriott-ish telly cook who shouts the word “Bam!” a 
lot – gorge on a variety of global delicacies. These range from New Nordic 
Cuisine made in “caveman fire” and calf brain ravioli cooked by fellow New 
Yorker Mario Batali to authentic Shanghai soup. Although ETW lacks the artful, 
meditative quality of Netflix’s Chef’s Table, this is still cordon bleu food 
smut.

Available now

BBC3

Searching For Purple Aki
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dwm0FQMo85GM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dwm0FQMo85GM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dwm0FQMo85GM&media=>
The urban legend of Purple Aki has gone from menacing to meme-worthy in recent 
times. However – as this film shows – the story of a Liverpool man who asks to 
touch and measure strangers’ muscles is more insalubrious than parody songs and 
fake Twitter accounts seem to indicate. Could Akinwale Arobieke be responsible 
for decades of intimidation or is he merely misunderstood? Liverpudlian 
reporter Ben Zand discovers some disturbing truths in this concise but 
intriguing doc.

Available now

UKTV Play

Zapped

Best known as perpetual bragger Jay of Inbetweeners fame, Jay Buckley plays 
perhaps an even more hapless character in this new fantasy comedy exec-produced 
by Steve Coogan. Online marketing assistant Brian is transported to a parallel 
universe by a mysterious amulet, his only hopes for return in the hands of a 
perpetually drunk and dozy wizard (Game Of Thrones’ Paul Kaye). Think The 
Mighty Boosh meets Westeros and you might be halfway there. Catch it online a 
week ahead of its televisual airing.

Available from Friday

Podcast

A Word In Your Ear <http://wordpodcast.co.uk>

Veteran pop critic Paul Morley took a bit of stick earlier this year for his 
characteristically impressionistic biography The Age Of Bowie. So it’s 
refreshing to hear him talk lucidly and candidly about his relationship with 
what he calls “the illusion of Bowie” in this live chat with the Guide’s David 
Hepworth. Also worth your time are recent episodes featuring Hunter Davies, 
John Savage and the incomparable Sylvia Patterson.

Available now

Netflix

Designated Survivor
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DN_f1v0Nx5Sw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DN_f1v0Nx5Sw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DN_f1v0Nx5Sw&media=>
This new political thriller stars Kiefer Sutherland as Tom Kirkman, a minor 
government minister who finds himself heading up the White House after an 
explosion wipes out the rest of the cabinet. The standard post-9/11 anxieties 
aside, what could really make this series interesting is the fact that its 
premise – a politician housed away from Capitol Hill in case of emergency – is 
rooted in fact rather than fiction.

Available now
 