
Netflix

The Crown

Netflix parks its tanks on the BBC’s lawn, offering up the kind of lavish, 
faithful period fare that’s more readily associated with Sunday evenings on 
BBC1. Small-screen old hand Peter Morgan is at the helm for this unarguably 
plush drama, detailing the occasionally stormy passage of our beloved Queen 
Elizabeth II from baffled heir apparent to starchy national matriarch. Claire 
Foy polishes up her RP in the leading role, and Matt Smith relishes the role of 
her darkly charismatic but sometimes gaffe-prone Greek suitor.

Available from Friday

BBC3

Trump’s Youngest Superfans

A spectacular implosion in the past couple of months has left Donald Trump 
looking almost certain to fail in his grim bid to become leader of the free 
world. Yet the former Apprentice host and alleged serial groper still manages 
to attract a surprising number of followers to his dubious cause. In this 
one-off, Angela Scanlon meets some of Trump’s younger supporters, from primary 
school children to LGBT and African-American voters. Scanlon also encounters 
some of the white nationalist “alt-right” sewer people, who believe a Trump 
presidency would bring their hateful movement into the mainstream.

Available from Thursday

BBC iPlayer

Louis Theroux: Savile

You have until Tuesday to watch Louis Theroux’s documentary on Jimmy Savile, 
which considers how so many people – the film-maker included – managed to miss, 
or even turn a blind eye to, the entertainer’s misdeeds. Crucially, it devotes 
as much time to hearing from some of Savile’s victims, all of whom show 
remarkable honesty and fortitude in recounting details of their abuse. Truly 
essential viewing.

Available now 

Online

Yaddo
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-the-crown-to-yadoo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F989b5679d81da9d4df75bcc12ff53d572e2d6d44%2F148_6_1952_1171%2F1952.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20from%20The%20Crown%20to%20Yaddo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-the-crown-to-yadoo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20from%20The%20Crown%20to%20Yaddo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-the-crown-to-yadoo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F989b5679d81da9d4df75bcc12ff53d572e2d6d44%2F148_6_1952_1171%2F1952.jpg>
 India’s Daughter. Photograph: BBC/Assassin Films 
Nick Fraser left his role as overseer of the BBC’s reliably wonderful 
Storyville strand to curate this new platform, so we can be assured of Yaddo’s 
pedigree. It looks to offer the very best of documentaries from around the 
world and it currently hosts superb films such as Leslee Udwin’s searing 
India’s Daughter. Its latest initiative is particularly intriguing: Yaddo is 
looking for pitches from the general public with a view to commissioning 125 
documentaries in the next 12 months. So if you’ve a burning idea, this might be 
your chance to receive professional guidance and maybe even some proper funding.

Available now

Podcast

Videohead

In heartening news, MTV has started to show a willingness to actually live up 
to the M in its name and focus a bit more on all things musical. This newish 
podcast looks at an area that was once the network’s meat and drink: music 
videos. It sees Daniel Ralston interview prominent directors from Jonas 
Akerlund (responsible for the Prodigy’s Smack My Bitch Up and Lady Gaga’s 
Telephone) to Tamra Davis (Hanson’s MMMBop and Sonic Youth’s 100%), discussing 
with them the qualities that contribute to an agenda-setting vid. It’s part of 
an ever-expanding podcast network that also features regular series on politics 
(The Stakes), feminism (Lady Problems) and general pop-culture (Speed Dial).

Available now
 