
Amazon Prime

I Love Dick

Jill “Transparent” Soloway’s latest trick is this adaptation of the much-loved 
novel of the same title. Set in an oddball academic community in Texas, it 
tells the story of troubled couple Chris and Sylvère and their obsession with 
Kevin Bacon’s titular professor. The tone of simultaneously blase and needy 
middle-class American entitlement will be familiar to Transparent devotees.

Available now

Halt And Catch Fire

Anyone in the market for more 80s period drama action in the wake of Stranger 
Things could do worse than taking a look at this compelling Amazon drama, which 
is beginning its third season. Set in the dawning era of the tech industry, one 
of its main plots this time concerns Donna and Cameron taking their software 
company Mutiny into the big league, AKA a comparatively embryonic Silicon 
Valley. If you feel like catching up on the first couple of seasons, they’re 
both also available on Amazon.

Available now

Podcast

The Quietus Podcast

Peerless music and culture website The Quietus has been working at a second 
(or third, if you count their record label) string to its bow for a while now. 
Their once-sporadic streamed radio show is now downloadable and pretty regular. 
And the site’s founders John Doran and Luke Turner are now regularly joined by 
well-chosen guests, recently including gone-to-seed funnymanStewart Lee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/stewart-lee>, artist Natalie Sharp and 
East India Youth William Doyle. A confident and increasingly indispensable 
cultural fixture.

Available now

BBC3

Getting High For God?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fcatch-up-halt-catch-fire-i-love-dick-kevin-bacon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d6ad273b40ce24062e4e47e94664de26e7b3a50%2F38_0_1125_675%2F1125.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20from%20I%20Love%20Dick%20to%20the%20Quietus%20Podcast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fcatch-up-halt-catch-fire-i-love-dick-kevin-bacon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20from%20I%20Love%20Dick%20to%20the%20Quietus%20Podcast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fcatch-up-halt-catch-fire-i-love-dick-kevin-bacon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d6ad273b40ce24062e4e47e94664de26e7b3a50%2F38_0_1125_675%2F1125.jpg>
 Photograph: BBC 
“Just an excuse for hippies to take drugs in the hills.” That was the slightly 
flippant Mawaan Rizwan’s initial suspicion about peyote in the first episode of 
this web series. However, as he spends time in the sweat lodge and wanders the 
beautiful countryside of the corner of Utah where peyote is legal, he asks 
himself a few searching questions. Is it God he’s after? Or just the experience 
of empathetic community? And is there really much difference?

Available now

Night Tube: The First Weekend

On Friday 19 August, Transport for London finally got the 24-hour tube on the 
rails. BBC3 followed the first weekend’s action, doubtless secretly hoping for 
entertaining encounters with amusing drunks and some sort of gigantic technical 
snarl-up. The rest of the country might be shrugging apathetically but, for 
people in London, this is a big deal.

Available from today

All4

The Only Gay Bar In The Village

Why would a straight, middle-aged, teetotal family man open a gay bar in 
Strabane, a conservative Northern Irish border town? As this cheerful short 
documentary suggests, James McCarron simply saw a (debatable) gap in the market 
and went for it. The result was The Central, an establishment that’s become as 
popular with straight punters as it is with gay ones. “Was there a need for a 
gay bar here?” wonders one regular. “Probably not. But it’s changed the 
mentality of so many people.” Uplifting.

Available now
 