
Netflix

The White Helmets

Half a decade in and with nearly half a million estimated deaths, the 
intractable conflict inSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> shows no 
sign of easing. This Netflix documentary follows a group of three volunteer 
workers handed the unenviable task of rescuing victims of the many airstrikes 
carried out during the war. It’s a job that frequently puts their own lives in 
peril, all the while suffering from the unending worry that their own family 
members might also be caught up in the violence. A harrowing portrait, though 
one not without small moments of optimism, not least in the courage of the 
workers themselves.

Available from Friday

YouTube

How To Make It In USA

Joe Pera is a standup whose shtick is, essentially, a featureless voice. 
Conner O’Malley is a stunt-happy comedian who employs self-consciously shouty 
pugnacity to devastating effect. Their webseries, in which Pera plays a 
hopeless comic and O’Malley his hilariously charmless agent, is very funny and, 
once you get started, oddly compulsive viewing. In it, O’Malley makes repeated 
(and apparently real) phone calls to cruise-liner booking agents offering 
Pera’s worthless services while Pera road-tests absurdly dull jokes. 
Surprisingly great.

Available now

Trump Dubs

Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> is a man of 
many faces. There’s Liberace Trump. Sassy Trump. Sophisticated Trump. Lairy 
cockney geezer Trump. And Peter Serafinowicz has them all covered. These voice 
dubs over the Donald’s variously furious, paranoid and skittish speeches do a 
wonderful satirical job. The secret is that they’re completely verbatim: by 
tweaking the style but not the content, Serafinowicz hilariously exposes the 
true bankrupt banality of Trump’s vision.

Available now

Podcast 

Laura Marling: Reversal Of The Muse
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-the-white-helmets-to-trump-dubs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa48adffb22c72f8ddd476f3295693967da6274ef%2F0_496_5341_3204%2F5341.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20from%20The%20White%20Helmets%20to%20Trump%20Dubs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-the-white-helmets-to-trump-dubs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20from%20The%20White%20Helmets%20to%20Trump%20Dubs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-the-white-helmets-to-trump-dubs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa48adffb22c72f8ddd476f3295693967da6274ef%2F0_496_5341_3204%2F5341.jpg>
 Photograph: Rough Trade 
Why are women so under-represented in recording studios? What difference does 
this make to the finished product? And what can be done to even things up? A 
new podcast withLaura Marling <https://www.theguardian.com/music/laura-marling> 
is an intriguing, questioning affair: the first two invite sound engineer 
Vanessa Parr and members of Haim to discuss their experiences. Neither po-faced 
nor trivial, this is a sensible, constructive and engaging treatment of the 
kind of everyday gender imbalance that needs to be addressed.

Available now

All4

The Unlikely Bikers

It’s debatable whether people still regard bikers as terrifyingly delinquent 
figures. But if so, this cheerful webseries challenges the stereotype. The six 
short films introduce us to leather-clad menaces who range from vicars to 
estate agents. There’s also a glamour model and a disabled woman who rejoices 
in the freedom of the open road.

Available now

BBC3

Obesity: The Post Mortem

In the interests of proving, beyond reasonable doubt, how bad obesity is, this 
doc follows a specialist pathology team as they conduct a postmortem on the 
body of a 17st woman who, it should be stressed, donated her body to medical 
science. What is the effect of fat on our vital organs? Grimly fascinating.

Available from Tuesday
 