
All4

Mafiosa

The second and third series of the cult French crime drama – which aired 
between 2006 and 2014 – are the latest arrivals on Channel 4’s foreign language 
strand Walter Presents. While gangster-themed, antihero-led dramas aren’t 
exactly a groundbreaking genre (see: The Sopranos, Breaking Bad), Mafiosa has 
something a little different to offer, bar la belle langue: its protagonist is 
female. The moral decline of lawyer Sandra – who finds herself at the helm of a 
powerful gang – puts an intriguing twist on your average mob caper.

Available now

BBC iPlayer

The Moonstone

The latest adaptation of Wilkie Collins’s 1868 detective novel aired last 
week, tucked away in BBC1’s daytime schedules. Adventurer Franklin Blake 
searches for an Indian diamond gifted to his cousin/love interest Rachel in 
this quality period crime drama. Something to whet appetites for yet another 
Beeb adaptation of Collins’s The Woman In White – or to somewhat fill a 
Downton-shaped hole in schedules.

Available now

BBC3

Sexy Murder
 Photograph: BBC 
Rich Fulcher (above) stars as thoroughly incompetent murder expert Christoph 
“call me Christ” Spinelli in this six-part parody of dramatic true-crime series 
like Making A Murderer. Apropos of nothing, the disappearance of a young woman 
turns into a murder investigation, with Spinelli cross-examining local loner 
Tom Jessop. (“Did you ever have any disagreements with Polly? Never enough to 
brutally or viciously murder her, like throw her off a cliff – or pour a lime 
on her?”) Timely ridiculousness, featuring turns from rising comics including 
Phil Wang, Lolly Adefope and Nick Mohammed.

Available now

Breaking Into Prison

Investigative journalist Livvy Haydock explores the contraband epidemic in 
British prisons, in the first of three new programmes for the online channel. 
As well as heading undercover to meet the criminals flogging drugs to prisoners 
for up to 10 times their street value, Haydock also investigates the factors – 
from dodgy police officers to drones – that facilitate this illicit trade.

Available from Monday

Amazon Prime

Red Oaks

Second series of the 80s-set US comedy starring Submarine’s Craig Roberts as a 
teenager who gets a summer job at a high-end country club. With its John 
Hughes-ish coming-of-age vibes, this is a good-natured retro adventure that 
provides a nice counterpoint to some of Amazon’s more weighty series (see: 
Transparent, Goliath). Plus, Jennifer “Baby” Grey’s presence adds a certain 
tangibility to the soft-hued nostalgia.

Available from Friday

Netflix

Crazy Ex-Girlfriend

New episodes from season two of the bizarre yet moving musical melodrama are 
now airing in the UK two days after showing across the pond. Our titular crazy 
ex, Rebecca, is still pining after teenage crush Josh down in West Covina, in a 
series that will appeal to fans of Flight Of The Conchords and Fleabag alike.

New episodes available every Sunday
 