
Amazon Prime

Ripper Street

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrXR7S8JxpTg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrXR7S8JxpTg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrXR7S8JxpTg&media=>
A fifth and final run for the BBC-turned-Amazon detective drama that used Jack 
the Ripper as a jumping-off point for all manner of grisly goings on in 
19th-century Whitechapel. As another serial killer lurks, Reid, Jackson and 
Long Susan’s efforts to capture the bad ’un are hindered by the fact that 
they’re also on the run from the police themselves. Hopefully there be a sense 
of closure and comeuppance-getting at the end of these last six episodes, with 
the programme-makers promising that this is the logical conclusion of the tale 
rather than merely another axing.

Available from 12 October

Goliath
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuOPnIrjrDiE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuOPnIrjrDiE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuOPnIrjrDiE&media=>
There are shades of Better Call Saul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/better-call-saul> in this new drama 
about a charmingly dishevelled lawyer investigating a suspicious death at sea. 
Inevitably, he ends up on the other side of the courtroom from his old firm – 
now a ruthless legal mega-corp that just happens to employ his ex-wife. Billy 
Bob Thornton is typically watchable as our roguish protagonist – also named 
Billy – boozing, shagging and issuing demand letters from his Santa Monica 
motel room. Everyone else, however, is a little bit 2D.

Available from 14 October

Podcast

FiveThirtyEight elections podcast 
<http://fivethirtyeight.com/tag/elections-podcast/>

If you’re looking for a steer on the US election, FiveThirtyEight – the 
political site renowned for analysing the news using hard stats rather than 
hot-air punditry – is a good place to start. Its presidential race podcasts 
have been ramping up over the summer, investigating topics such as the 
candidates’ campaign spend and what makes a “tipping-point” state. The latest 
edition is the start of a miniseries on the electorate themselves, drilling 
down into the demographics to identify who is likely to vote Republican and why.

Available now

Netflix

Haters Back Off

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbDDAClMibkM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbDDAClMibkM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbDDAClMibkM&media=>
“All the most famous people in the world started on the internet – Justin 
Bieber, Susan Boyle, that cat that fell off the table when it got scared.” So 
declares real-world online sensation Miranda Sings at the beginning of this new 
eight-episode series based on the so-bad-it’s-great YouTube channel. As well as 
following the talentless, nasal-voiced “singer” – portrayed by US comic and 
classically trained vocalist Colleen Ballinger – the show expands on the pop 
parody premise to incorporate Miranda’s fame-hungry dad, supportive but 
clueless mum and highly embarrassed younger sister into the mix. Strange, 
hilarious and – of course – tuneless in the extreme.

Available from 14 October

All 4

Framed 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/walter-presents/videos/all/framed-trailer/5155012223001>

Continuing his televisual world tour, Channel 4’s resident foreign-language 
selector Walter has nabbed three Dutch series to add to his collection. The 
first to hit UK screens is this pacy six-parter about a software consultant who 
– as the title suggests – finds himself framed for a string of wrongs. What 
begins as a tale of cybercrime, infidelity and embezzlement soon gives way to a 
murder mystery and a Europe-wide fundamentalist Christian conspiracy against 
protagonist Michael Bellicher. Quietly compelling.

Available from 14 October
 