
Amazon

BrainDead 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/First-Look/dp/B01GSSHPWI/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1466767494&sr=8-1&keywords=BrainDead>

Good Wife creators Robert and Michelle King return with a show that, on paper, 
is about as far from that legal drama as you could imagine: BrainDead is a 
comedy thriller/political satire/gross-out sci-fi about alien bugs infecting 
the brains of US politicians, causing their behaviour to be even more savage 
than usual. Full of eye-openingly icky moments of creepy crawlies entering 
ears, it also offers up some neat commentary on bipartisan cooperation, or the 
lack of it, in Washington.

Available now

All Or Nothing: A Season With The Arizona Cardinals
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkRZnRVtnvGE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkRZnRVtnvGE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkRZnRVtnvGE&media=>
Narrated by Jon Hamm, this series promises an immersive look into the 2015-16 
season of American football side the Arizona Cardinals, following players on- 
and off-field, from the locker room to the sidelines. Amazon have certainly 
chosen their subject wisely: the Cardinals’ season was hardly lacking in drama, 
beginning with a season-ending injury to star quarterback Carson Palmer and 
ending – spoiler alert! - with an against-the-odds run to the playoffs and, 
ultimately, a defeat in the NFC Championship game.

Available from Friday

BBC3

The Insider: Reggie Yates In A Texan Jail 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p03ymv61>

After encountering teen gangs and the Russian far right, this week’s Guide 
cover star clearly had no intention of taking the easy option for his latestBBC3
 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc3> doc. The Insider sees Yates spend a 
full week in a Texas detention centre cell, encountering inmates and learning 
about the mental health issues affecting many incarcerated there. A further 
episode, in which Yates spends a week with the Mexican army, will be added next 
week.

Available from Tuesday

Netflix

Marco Polo
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOXfgvcJ5T8E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOXfgvcJ5T8E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOXfgvcJ5T8E&media=>
The first season of Netflix’s expensive-looking historical saga was greeted 
with a frosty response from critics, who lamented its hoary dialogue and lack 
of surprises. Might this second season, in which Marco and Kublai Khan deal 
with populist unrest in south China, finally put the series on the (silk) road 
to greatness?

Available from Friday

All4

The Border <http://www.channel4.com/programmes/the-border>

Channel 4’s international drama strand Walter Presents has given foreign fare 
a leg up in recent months, from Afghan comedy to Danish thrillers. Its latest 
import is a six-part Polish drama by HBO’s European arm. A unit protecting the 
border with Ukraine from people-traffickers falls victim to a bomb attack. When 
it transpires that the sole survivor received a phone call moments before the 
blast he finds himself under suspicion. The Scandi-noir vibes are strong, but 
there’s an eastern European feel too, with the desolate Bieszczady Mountains 
taking centre stage.

The full series is available now

Podcast

Level Up Human <http://leveluphuman.com/>

Another brainy podcast to add to your regular rotation, this series sees 
scientists and comedians, including Holly Walsh and Robin Ince, consider how 
humans can be improved, suggesting potential and sometimes preposterous 
upgrades to our frail forms. Perfect for fans of Ince’s other show, The 
Infinite Monkey Cage.

Available now
 