
BBC3

Class
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPAycTsDzW-w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPAycTsDzW-w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPAycTsDzW-w&media=>
Ever since the sad demise of Torchwood, Doctor Who fans have been looking for 
something to fill those fallow months when the Tardis is away in another part 
of the galaxy and Who is missing from our screens. Now they might finally have 
it. Created by noted YA author Patrick Ness, Class is set in Coal Hill Academy, 
a recurring location in Doctor Who, which is beset with murderous alien beings. 
It’s up to four sixth-formers to prevent these creatures from targeting 
humanity itself, all the while negotiating the usual challenges adolescence 
brings. Fortunately for the quartet, a certain Time Lord is on hand to help 
with the former, though he might struggle with the latter.

Available now

Hayu

Rob And Chyna
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV_goR16qVDM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV_goR16qVDM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV_goR16qVDM&media=>
This berserk reality show which charts the eventful romance between hip-hop 
starlet Blac Chyna and member of the Kardashian family, Rob Kardashian, is the 
tip of the Hayu iceberg. This online platform is essentially a one-stop shop 
for all your reality, constructed reality, scripted reality and augmented 
reality needs. Expect many more encounters with members of the Kardashian clan, 
plus the adventures of allegedly Real Housewives from almost every conceivable 
metropolitan location in the developed world.

Available now <https://get.hayu.com/welcome?gclid=CM6EmbnV688CFc0y0wodb5kCZQ>

BBC Store

Classic Children’s Programmes
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fcatch-up-and-download%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41cedbbd7be800c825000c47c9abbf695f8bdeb1%2F0_213_1604_962%2F1604.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20from%20Class%20to%20DJ%20History&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fcatch-up-and-download%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20from%20Class%20to%20DJ%20History&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fcatch-up-and-download%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41cedbbd7be800c825000c47c9abbf695f8bdeb1%2F0_213_1604_962%2F1604.jpg>
 Andy Pandy with Teddy. 
The BBC is unleashing a veritable battalion of retro kids’ TV charmers this 
week. Whether you’re curious to see if their gentle ways will work on your own 
offspring or just in the mood for a nostalgia trip, you could do worse than 
revisit the animated stoner classic Crystal Tipps And Alistair, cult 
time-travel epic The Adventure Game and, particularly, the astonishingly lo-fi 
Andy Pandy, which now looks like a transmission from another world.

Available from Monday

Podcasts

Keepin’ It 1600
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fcatch-up-and-download%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fefabcde8f5cad588125a654c27a57f4ef30e40f6%2F0_0_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20from%20Class%20to%20DJ%20History&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fcatch-up-and-download%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20from%20Class%20to%20DJ%20History&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fcatch-up-and-download%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fefabcde8f5cad588125a654c27a57f4ef30e40f6%2F0_0_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Former White House speech writer Jon Lovett. Photograph: Getty 
“There is nothing worse than an untalented narcissist. That is a useless 
person.” One guess as to who US political podcaster Jon Lovett might be 
discussing there. This series of conversations is the ultimate insider job, 
boasting as it does contributions from former aides to President Obama. It’s 
also undeniably partial – but at the moment, who isn’t? Happily, in addition, 
it’s informed, approachable and alternately outraged and uproarious; the sound 
of people who know whereof they speak talking shop. Michael Gove might have had 
enough of experts but we haven’t.

Available now

DJ History

One of the most irresistible details in the tributes paid to Rod Temperton 
earlier this month was that the man who contributed so much to Jacko’s 
Thriller, Off The Wall and other disco-soul classics not only came from 
Cleethorpes but worked in a Ross frozen fish factory. It certainly wasn’t lost 
on Grimsby boy Bill Brewster, who trod the same slippery path to dancefloor 
greatness and celebrates Temperton’s influence here with an hour-long mix on 
his great DJ History podcast, now fast approaching episode 400.

Available now
 