
All4

Dare To Believe

Channel 4’s commitment to the Paralympics in particular and disability issues 
in general has long been impressive. And with the Games almost upon us again, 
these stirring short films are a good reminder of the remarkable stories they 
throw up. For example, Ali Jawad (pictured) – who was born with no legs – was 
directionless until a gym visit revealed a talent. He bench-pressed 100kg on 
his first visit and will lift for gold in Rio. Jawad’s story, along with 
numerous others on All4, should get you in the mood for the main event.

Available now
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE9CmSoPwgRI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE9CmSoPwgRI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE9CmSoPwgRI&media=>
Netflix

Slow TV

Slow TV was a surprise hit when BBC4 rolled out its delightful assortment of 
boat trips and craft showcases last spring. Netflix has now done the decent 
thing and picked up the Norwegian equivalent – and, excitingly, it’s arguably 
even slower. Highlights include sweater knitting, salmon fishing and, perhaps 
most notably, a real-time seven-and-a-half-hour train journey from Bergen to 
Oslo. Don’t be surprised to find yourself watching the whole thing. It’s 
genuinely mesmerising.

Available now

BBC iPlayer

The Girl From Ipanema: Brazil, Bossa Nova And The Beach
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fcatch-up-and-dowmload-from-dare-to-believe-to-the-tick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F122b598fef5f64764bb4a065e8ce75aff9ad8dc6%2F0_277_4273_2564%2F4273.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20From%20Dare%20To%20Believe%20to%20The%20Tick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fcatch-up-and-dowmload-from-dare-to-believe-to-the-tick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20From%20Dare%20To%20Believe%20to%20The%20Tick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fcatch-up-and-dowmload-from-dare-to-believe-to-the-tick%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F122b598fef5f64764bb4a065e8ce75aff9ad8dc6%2F0_277_4273_2564%2F4273.jpg>
 Katie Derham (right) travels to Rio De Janeiro. Photograph: unknown/BBC 
With the eyes of the world still on Brazil, this documentary helmed by Katie 
Derham is a charming insight into the ambitious circle of young, middle-class 
songwriters who gathered in late 50s Rio to create what’s described here as 
“Brazil’s first – and last – truly international art form”. The bossa years 
also coincided with a window of democracy between two military dictatorships, 
so it’s little wonder the music is still cherished as a memory of the country 
at its best.

Available now

Amazon Prime

The Tick

Ben Edlund’s satirical comic book hero, a muscle-jawed manchild who dresses 
like a giant blue insect, has been adapted for TV before but never quite 
achieved the recognition afforded to his more serious-seeming superhero 
contemporaries. Yet Deadpool suggested an audience appetite for more knockabout 
comic book fare, so perhaps this Amazon reboot, part of the company’s comedy 
pilot season, might find a fanbase. The fact that the never-less-than-great 
Peter Serafinowicz is starring as the big blue berk can hardly harm its chances.

Available from Friday

Podcast

The Buzzfeed Podcast

As anyone who is attempting to follow the presidential election knows, a week 
is a long time on the internet. For those unable to keep up, Buzzfeed has put 
together a podcast answering all the big questions. These include the following 
burning issues: why are people putting three sets of brackets around their 
names on Twitter? And why do Brazilian teenagers think Beyoncé is holding Sia 
captive? Reporters Katie and Ryan discuss the latest trends in their meme 
updates, as well as offering deeper investigations into catfishing and online 
hoaxes. It’s easy to dip straight into this friendly podcast, and the 
presenters’ in-depth knowledge of the culture makes it a fascinating, and 
ridiculous listen.

Available now
 