
All4

No Limit

Created by Luc Besson (Leon, The Fifth Element), this fast-paced French series 
pairs a nostalgic ode to the 80s spy genre with relatable relationship dynamics 
– picture James Bond as a family man. Vincent Elbaz gives up his career in 
espionage to live near his teenage daughter when he is diagnosed with terminal 
cancer. But he soon finds himself dragged back into his old world, as to gain 
access to experimental medical treatment, Vincent joins a secret agency taking 
the fight to organised crime. Expect some darkly funny moments as Vincent 
balances his deteriorating health, his rebellious daughter, and his secret life.

Available from Friday

Avatards 

The latest in Channel 4’s well regarded (if daftly titled) Comedy Blaps 
series, this three-parter also might be its most ambitious. Avatards follows a 
group of gaming obsessives as they play a role-player in the vein of Warcraft, 
switching between the “meat space” of the real world and their CGI selves. If 
that doesn’t pique your interest, the fact that Avatards is exec-produced by 
Peep Show duo Sam Bain and Jesse Armstrong should do.

Available now

Netflix

David Cross: Making America Great Again

Arrested Development man and sardonic standup Cross looks to have emerged from 
a period of relative dormancy. After reuniting with his long-time collaborator 
Bob Odenkirk for sketch show With Bob And David, this year he’s embarked on a 
Trump-mocking standup tour, one date of which has been recorded for this 
Netflix special. Expect splenetic – and very funny – broadsides against the 
idiocy of the American right.

Available from Friday

BBC3

Jade: Why I Chose Porn

The sort of BBC3 doc likely to raise the hackles of the Daily Mail, this 
one-off tells the story of a university graduate who has eschewed a job in 
fashion to venture into the world of adult entertainment. Beyond answering the 
question of why she has made such an unlikely career choice, it considers the 
ethical and logistical issues faced by women in the industry.

Available from Tuesday

Amazon

Please Like Me
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-not-limit-to-please-like-me%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2862af87207b41a88a178d09eb8e343a0c8ec7d9%2F199_107_2631_1578%2F2631.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20From%20No%20Limit%20to%20Please%20Like%20Me&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-not-limit-to-please-like-me%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20From%20No%20Limit%20to%20Please%20Like%20Me&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-not-limit-to-please-like-me%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2862af87207b41a88a178d09eb8e343a0c8ec7d9%2F199_107_2631_1578%2F2631.jpg>
The Guide first flagged up this Australian comedy drama in 2014 as one we 
wanted to see on British screens. Two long years later and someone has finally 
heeded our call. Please Like Me stars Josh Thomas as a twentysomething who has 
recently come out to his friends and family and is now seeking some direction 
in his life. Gentle and understated, it largely avoids traditional sitcom beats 
in favour of the freeform pacing of a Louie or a Girls. The first three seasons 
are available to watch in full.

Available now

Podcast

Close Encounters

From Modern Love to the Savage Lovecast, sex and relationships have proved 
fruitful topics in podcasting. This Guardian series looks to add to that genre, 
with journalist Alix Fox having “unguarded conversations” with members of the 
public around matters of love and sex. Early instalments have dealt with the 
challenges faced in the bedroom after a severe injury and one woman’s creative 
solution to problems with penetration.

Available now
 