
Netflix

Gilmore Girls

Over seven series, this sentimental teen drama attracted a cult audience for 
its rapid-fire dialogue and weighty issues, so much so that Netflix have 
decided to revive the series for four seasonally themed films, the first of 
which is expected later this year. Before they arrive you can catch up on the 
previous series, which features, among others, a pre-fame Melissa McCarthy. 
(Don’t worry, Gilmore Girl superfans, she’s returning for the revival.)

Available now

BBC iPlayer

Genius Of The Modern World

Sprawling, multistranded docu-series are what BBC4 was made for and this 
three-parter is a fine case in point. Each of its episodes looks at a thinker 
who, in presenter Bettany Hughes’s words, “dragged the world as we know it, 
kicking and screaming into being”, beginning with Karl Marx’s analysis of 
capitalism before moving on to Nietzsche’s findings on morality and finally the 
psychoanalytic work of Sigmund Freud. Redoubtably clever stuff.

Available now

Amazon

American Gothic

Another addition to the neverending list of TV shows, films and books to have 
taken their title from Grant Wood’s endlessly reproduced painting, this soapy 
series concerns a Boston family, who learn that their patriarch may have been a 
serial killer. Intriguingly, it’s co-created by James Frey, the man responsible 
for notorious memoir A Million Little Pieces, much of which was found to be 
fabricated. Hopefully he’ll bring that rampant imagination to bear here.

Available now

The Bureau

Sadly not an updating of The Day Today’s Eldorado-style soap opera, this 
French thriller stars actor and La Haine director Mathieu Kassovitz as an 
intelligence officer looking to readjust to civvy life in Paris after six years 
spent in Syria. Things, as you might expect, don’t quite pan out that way. All 
of series one is ready to watch, with series two following in August.

Available now

All4

The Hunter
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-gilmore-girls-to-the-hunter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48d3919473b5ef42c76734c42222e19ef6037771%2F0_118_3432_2059%2F3432.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20from%20Gilmore%20Girls%20to%20The%20Hunter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-gilmore-girls-to-the-hunter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20from%20Gilmore%20Girls%20to%20The%20Hunter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-gilmore-girls-to-the-hunter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48d3919473b5ef42c76734c42222e19ef6037771%2F0_118_3432_2059%2F3432.jpg>
 Killing me softly.... Yannick Soulier as Samuel Delaunay in The Hunter. 
Photograph: Aurelien Faidy 
More Francophone fare, this time with a comic bent. Samuel Delaunay is a 
professional hitman who works for his mother. When she signs him up to carry 
out a murder in the manner of a notorious serial killer, it spells danger for 
both him and his family. Unlike so much contemporary European drama, it doesn’t 
take itself too seriously, hopping from energetic action scenes and 
well-observed comedy at the flick of a switch.

Available from Friday

Podcast

Andy Zaltzman’s Summer Of Sport

Euro 2016 may have colonised the TV schedules like a bunch of Northern Irish 
fans singing “Will Grigg’s on fire” in a French town square, but there’s more 
to this summer’s sporting calendar than the beautiful game. In this Guardian 
podcast series, Bugle presenter, and a man who has never met a pun he didn’t 
like, Andy Zaltzman provides a weekly primer on all sport that isn’t football, 
joined by Guardian journos as well as comedians such as Al Murray and Mark 
Steel to discuss everything from the NBA final series to more niche events such 
as the World Nettle-Eating Championships.

Available now
 