
 Netflix

The Get Down

With the excellent Crazy Ex-Girlfriend proving that musicals on TV needn’t be 
a disaster, now seems a good time for Baz Luhrmann to enter the fray. His new 
Netflix series charts the period in New York’s history when the dying days of 
disco intersected with the birth of hip-hop, told through the eyes of a group 
of artistically inclined South Bronx teens. If you can deal with the strange 
juxtaposition between gritty archive footage and overwrought song-and-dance 
numbers, there’s plenty to enjoy here, not least the period costumes.

Available from Friday

YouTube

Hot Ones
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-get-down-to-life-in-pieces%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8d0be1b231f8fcc3526cda45e2e01720c2d851b%2F17_12_1598_959%2F1598.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20From%20The%20Get%20Down%20to%20Life%20In%20Pieces&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-get-down-to-life-in-pieces%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20From%20The%20Get%20Down%20to%20Life%20In%20Pieces&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-get-down-to-life-in-pieces%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8d0be1b231f8fcc3526cda45e2e01720c2d851b%2F17_12_1598_959%2F1598.jpg>
 DJ Khaled on the Hot Ones. Photograph: Youtube 
The “extreme food” genre seems as unstoppable as it is unappetising, with 
videos of people eating dangerously hot, sour or fatty things making up an 
increasingly hefty portion of YouTube’s output. This US webseries from First We 
Feast at least manages to smuggle some engaging conversation in with the pain, 
as comedians including David Cross and rappers such as Coolio are interviewed 
while sampling increasingly spicy hot wings. The pick of the contributors are 
sketch duo Key and Peele, whose appalled reactions to these piquant treats 
(“Let’s be honest, you put battery acid in this bottle”) also prove very funny.

Available now

Her Story

Transgender representation on the small screen has vastly increased in recent 
years. However, the latest trans-related narrative to gain acclaim – even 
snagging an Emmy nomination – isn’t another big-budget production but rather a 
crowdfunded webseries. Her Story follows Paige and Violet, two trans women 
navigating the Los Angeles dating scene and even encountering prejudices within 
the LGBT community itself – not least when Violet becomes involved with Allie, 
a lesbian who has never dated a trans woman before. This highly original 
six-part series certainly gives bigger shows such as Amazon’s Transparent a run 
for their studio-backed money.

Amazon

Life In Pieces

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-get-down-to-life-in-pieces%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98fb6e7c37f53fef8e220306cf427840cf0777b9%2F122_71_4720_2831%2F4720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20From%20The%20Get%20Down%20to%20Life%20In%20Pieces&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-get-down-to-life-in-pieces%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20From%20The%20Get%20Down%20to%20Life%20In%20Pieces&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-get-down-to-life-in-pieces%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98fb6e7c37f53fef8e220306cf427840cf0777b9%2F122_71_4720_2831%2F4720.jpg>
 Photograph: Cliff Lipson/CBS 
This zippily paced US comedy follows three generations of the Short clan 
(pictured, above left) as they face life’s trials and triumphs. Each episode is 
told in four sections, through the eyes of a different branch of the family. 
Starring Colin Hanks, Betsy Brandt (AKA Skyler’s difficult sister Marie in 
Breaking Bad) and The Newsroom’s Thomas Sadoski, the opening episode covers 
everything from love after divorce to the difficulties of staging a fake 
funeral. The entire series is online now. Available now

BBC iPlayer

Cold War: Stories From The Big Freeze

From conflict in Korea to the Cuban missile crisis, former BBC diplomatic 
correspondent Bridget Kendall’s oral history is a reminder of the confusions 
and contradictions of life during the early cold war. This Radio 4 series 
combines interviews with those who lived through the period with clips from the 
BBC’s extensive archives. The three tales featured in the Berlin Wall episode 
are particularly captivating.

Available now
 