
Amazon

Baron Noir

If the real-life political backstabbing and double-dealing of the past few 
weeks hasn’t been enough for you, this French drama should provide a timely 
top-up. After the mayor of Dunkirk is betrayed by his former mentor, now the 
country’s president, he wages a populist campaign against the government, 
engaging himself in all manner of nefarious activity in the process. Stylishly 
shot, there’s a savageness at the heart of this series that keeps things 
engrossing.

Available now

BBC Three

Unsolved

Whether it’s down to a grim fascination with the dark side of humanity or the 
excitement of turning into desktop detectives, everyone seems hooked on the 
thrills of the true-crime genre. Unsolved: The Boy Who Disappeared follows two 
investigative journalists as they consider rumours and leads connected to the 
case of Damien Nettle, who went missing in 1996 after a night out in his home 
town on the Isle of Wight. The series’ eight 10-minute episodes will be 
released in one go, encouraging a Making A Murderer-style binge.

Available from Monday

Podcasts

Sooo Many White Guys
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fcatch-up-baron-noir-unsolved-alan-bleasdale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1bd1cd957cbc3c582d0458df2779fab968e854b9%2F73_0_700_420%2F700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20from%20Baron%20Noir%20to%20Sooo%20Many%20White%20Guys&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fcatch-up-baron-noir-unsolved-alan-bleasdale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20from%20Baron%20Noir%20to%20Sooo%20Many%20White%20Guys&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fcatch-up-baron-noir-unsolved-alan-bleasdale%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1bd1cd957cbc3c582d0458df2779fab968e854b9%2F73_0_700_420%2F700.jpg>
 Phoebe Robinson. 
The premise of this new podcast from Phoebe Robinson (best known for her ‘cast 
2 Dope Queens) is a bold one: each week she interviews a host of people from 
diverse backgrounds, none of whom are white and male, before interviewing a 
“token” white man at the end of each episode. It’s not as heavy as that setup 
might suggest, though, thanks to Robinson’s droll humour and engaging guests 
such as Broad City’s Ilana Glazer.

Available weekly

Chips With Everything

The Guardian podcast formerly known as Tech Weekly returns with a better name 
and a renewed focus on digital culture. Inevitably, recent episodes have taken 
on the all-consuming Pokémon Go, but has also featured discussions on the 
political impact of memes and an exploration of the internet’s dark underbelly.

Available weekly

BBC Store

Alan Bleasdale At The BBC

Alan Bleasdale’s social-realist dramas were a defining presence in the divided 
80s, proving both hugely popular and also much criticised by those of a 
Thatcherite persuasion. This BBC Store collection features some of his major 
works from the period, including – of course – the decade-defining Boys From 
The Blackstuff, as well as its Play For Today predecessor The Black Stuff, plus 
the Pete Posthelwaite-starring play The Muscle Market and the period drama The 
Monocled Mutineer, used by the rightwing press as evidence of an apparent 
leftist bent at theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>.

Available now

All4

The Government Inspector

With the ink scarcely dry on the Chilcot Report’s 6,000 pages, now is a good 
point to revisit Peter Kosminsky’s factual drama about the death of Dr David 
Kelly, the UN weapons inspector instrumental in the Labour government’s case 
for intervention in Iraq. Mark Rylance, currently undertaking another giant 
role in The BFG, is excellent as the muted Kelly, while Kosminsky’s script is 
damning in its understatedness.

Available now
 