
YouTube

Inhuman Condition

This polished Canadian webseries offers the sort of brooding sci-fi that 
wouldn’t be out of place on a bigger budget show. Set in a world where 
supernatural beings including werewolves and zombies roam freely but are 
treated as outcasts, it’s the job of therapist Dr Kessler (Torri Higginson of 
Stargate: Atlantis fame) to make sure that they stay safe. While it’s currently 
on a mid-season break, there are 17 of a promised 33 episodes to catch up with 
before its return.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpYn_AoU22vU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpYn_AoU22vU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpYn_AoU22vU&media=>
Available now

BBC iPlayer

Brought Up On Porn
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-inhuman-condition-to-ill-sleep-when-im-dead%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5cbfa96c2431a67fcc180ca3dd28dc3145194a1%2F226_2_2285_1371%2F2285.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20From%20Inhuman%20Condition%20to%20I%E2%80%99ll%20Sleep%20When%20I%E2%80%99m%20Dead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-inhuman-condition-to-ill-sleep-when-im-dead%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20From%20Inhuman%20Condition%20to%20I%E2%80%99ll%20Sleep%20When%20I%E2%80%99m%20Dead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-inhuman-condition-to-ill-sleep-when-im-dead%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5cbfa96c2431a67fcc180ca3dd28dc3145194a1%2F226_2_2285_1371%2F2285.jpg>
 Newsbeat - Brought Up On Porn. Photograph: BBC 
Successfully transferring from radio to online TV, this Newsbeat doc explores 
young people’s experiences of watching pornography. While familiar topics are 
covered – particularly the unrealistic expectations engendered by porn – some 
controversial issues are also touched upon. It is worrying, for example, to 
hear about the effects of porn on a survivor of sexual abuse. However, a point 
about the lack of LGBT sexual education emphasises why the availability of 
material with an open-minded approach towards sexuality is important.

Available from Monday

BBC3

People Just Do Nothing

The first instalment of series three (produced by Ash Atalla of The Office 
fame) has certainly done its predecessors justice. The YouTube 
hit-turned-mockumentary follows the juvenile antics of the gang behind Kurupt 
FM, a fictional pirate radio station. Prepare to wince as the group record a 
track that hinges on the sound of a breaking bottle and cringe as Miche and 
Grindah’s drunken mistake of an engagement begins to unravel.

Available from Wednesday

Podcast

The Vice UK Podcast

Vice has made a podcast and it sounds exactly like its news articles read: 
sarcastic and waffling but more fun to consume than most traditional ways of 
getting your daily allowance of current affairs. In this episode, journalists 
offer their take on Marina Joyce-gate; the method behind the madness of the man 
who hid a bag of cocaine in his foreskin is explored; and, more importantly, 
the team discuss generational resentment following the EU referendum from an 
unashamedly biased but necessary perspective.

Available now

Netflix

I’ll Sleep When I’m Dead
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-inhuman-condition-to-ill-sleep-when-im-dead%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2efbaae2f9787d964010f8bd2aa0521cbe2be685%2F0_319_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20From%20Inhuman%20Condition%20to%20I%E2%80%99ll%20Sleep%20When%20I%E2%80%99m%20Dead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-inhuman-condition-to-ill-sleep-when-im-dead%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20From%20Inhuman%20Condition%20to%20I%E2%80%99ll%20Sleep%20When%20I%E2%80%99m%20Dead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fcatch-up-and-download-from-inhuman-condition-to-ill-sleep-when-im-dead%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2efbaae2f9787d964010f8bd2aa0521cbe2be685%2F0_319_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Steve Aoki in I’ll Sleep When I’m Dead. Photograph: Caesar Sebastian/Netflix 
EDM might be big business these days but it’s also the punchline to many a 
joke about laptop DJs who press a few buttons, twiddle a knob or two and bring 
in the kajillions before retiring in their 20s (see: Avicii). A doc about 
cake-throwing house agitator Steve Aoki might sound like a riot of partying and 
premium vodka but, in fact, it opts for a more ambitious angle, focusing on his 
relationship with his successful yet absent father and Aoki Jr’s own deeply 
work-oriented life.

Available from Friday

All4

Eden

A worthy sociological experiment? Or simply Love Island in Gore-Tex? However 
you’ve viewed this exercise in isolated society-building, it’s been undeniably 
entertaining. The whole Lord Of The Flies-evoking, pig-slaughtering, 
homebrew-glugging series is now available for bingeing.

Available now
 