
BBC iPlayer

Fleabag <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p040tlqx/episodes/player>

Having spawned one of 2016’s most talked-about TV offerings, Phoebe 
Waller-Bridge’s tragicomic hit recently returned to its one-woman theatrical 
roots with a limited run at Soho Theatre. Tickets sold out in no time, but 
thankfully there’s another chance to catch the TV version, heavy on 
humiliation, masturbation, grief and acerbic one-liners.

Available now 

Planet Earth II Playlists <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p04glqgd>

For those who can’t get enough of the BBC1 nature documentary’s swoonsome 
visuals, the iPlayer is offering three half-hour interludes of aerial and drone 
footage from the series, set to a wide-ranging selection of music curated by 
Benji B, David Rodigan and Huw Stephens. Slow TV for viewers without the time, 
the selections veer from the obvious (Many Rivers To Cross over shots of a 
river) to the inspired (Alice Coltrane in the rainforest canopy). There’s no 
Tinariwen for the desert or Moby by the ocean but, yes, there is some jungle in 
the jungle.

Available to 27 Dec

BBC3

Seann Walsh: One For The Road <http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer>

Feted observational comic/all-round wally Seann Walsh took his gags to the 
Highlands back in September as part of his One For The Road tour, along with 
punning “support act and driver” Mark Simmons. Expect carnage and comedy as the 
pair career around remote Scotland without a tour manager or 4G signal in sight 
in this one-off.

Available from Wednesday




 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fcatch-up-and-download%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4be4429fc4d82260b014eab210e4128820fbc9d6%2F0_533_960_576%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20From%20Fleabag%20to%20Chapo%20Trap%20House&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fcatch-up-and-download%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Catch-up%20and%20download%3A%20From%20Fleabag%20to%20Chapo%20Trap%20House&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fcatch-up-and-download%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4be4429fc4d82260b014eab210e4128820fbc9d6%2F0_533_960_576%2F960.jpg>
 Seann Walsh (left) and Mark Simmons 
Netflix

Ten Percent

Naturally, this cameo-filled French dramedy about actors has drawn comparisons 
with the likes of Extras and Entourage. Its Parisianfroideur and style do, 
however, give it a distinctly Euro edge. Agents Mathias, Andrea, Arlette and 
Gabriel look after some of France’s biggest names, but behind the doors of 
their swanky offices, trouble is afoot: actor Cécile de France is dropped from 
a US flick for being too old, while Mathias is pursued by an unexpected, 
persistent visitor.

Available from Sunday 

Podcast

Griefcast <https://player.fm/series/griefcast>

A shroud of taboo, fear, mystery and polite euphemism still surrounds the way 
we speak about death today. Comic Cariad Lloyd – whose father died when she was 
15 – draws on mortality with humour and warmth, throwing the shroud to one side 
as she speaks to fellow funnypeople about their own experiences of death. 
Episodes released so far feature Adam Buxton, Jayde Adams, Jon Harvey and Sara 
Pascoe, with more to follow.

Available now 

Chapo Trap House <https://soundcloud.com/chapo-trap-house>

There’s a new demographic in US politics known as the Dirtbag Left. They’re 
the left-behind Bernie Bros; the young people energised by Sanders who voted 
for Clinton with a heavy heart, or didn’t vote at all. The sensibility is well 
represented by this podcast, which comes courtesy of a trio of smart but 
cynical twentysomethings whose first post-election mission is to eat plenty of 
humble pie. Their subsequent moves should be well worth watching as the 
response to Trump develops.

Available now
 