
The Labour party believes it is on course to have raised up to £500,000 from 
its gala dinner on Wednesday night which saw one bidder pledge more than 
£100,000 for a sculpture by SirAntony Gormley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gormley>.

Senior Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> figures believe 
that the gala dinner, organised by Dame Tessa Jowell, succeeded in raising 
large amounts to help fund the party's general election campaign.

"We had works of art and they all just had some rather flashy stuff," one 
Labour source said of the contrast between its gala dinner at the Roundhouse 
and last week's Tory fundraiser at the riverside Hurlingham Club in Fulham, 
south west London.

The Labour event, which was compered by Stephen Fry, saw a series of 
money-spinning pledges for works by some of Britain's leading artists. The 
Financial Times reported that one bidder pledged more than £105,000 for 
Gormley's cast-iron statue, Small Turn III (2013). A ceramic lion emblazoned 
with the words "Vote Labour" byGrayson Perry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/grayson-perry>, which featured in the 
Guardian earlier this week, fetched £42,000, according to a Labour MP quoted by 
the FT.

An untitled gouache on paper – a float inside a window mount – donated by Sir 
Anish Kapoor raised £36,000. An editioned model of the proposed 50m (164ft) 
sculpture for Ebbsfleet, Kent – White Horse (2011) – by Mark Wallinger raised 
£12,000.

Mary Creagh, the shadow transport secretary, said that Fry opened the event 
with a joke at the Tories' expense. He said: "Unlike the Tories we will have a 
grouse shoot against racism" in reference to the Tories having auctioned a 
"fantastic eight-gun pheasant shoot" in Oxfordshire at their summer ball.

Fry told the gala that Labour must defeat "a rancid regime which looks after 
the rich and reprehensible", according to atweet by the Unite member Mark Latham
 <https://twitter.com/MarkLathamUK>.

More than 600 guests attended the dinner where a "premium table" for nine 
people cost £15,000. The "donation element" was set at £7,000,according to the 
Labour party website 
<https://shop.labour.org.uk/products/election-gala-dinner-2014-384/>, allowing 
donors to avoid making a declaration under Electoral Commission rules. The 
ceiling for donations was £7,500.

A "premium table" was "in a central position in the room" with a "political 
host on each table". It also gave a guaranteed entry to the afterparty. The 
other tables were a "gala table" for £10,000 and a "standard table" at £5,000.
 