
Members of the Treasury select committee get the chance to grill the governor 
of the Bank of England on Tuesday. Mark Carney will make the short journey from 
Threadneedle Street to Westminster to face questions on thestate of the economy 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/inflationreport/default.aspx>
. It should be an intriguing contest. The committee’s chairman, Andrew Tyrie, 
will treat the governor with the weary disdain of a headteacher ticking off a 
pupil for a substandard piece of homework. Carney will answer in sentences so 
long that MPs may feel the need for a drinks’ interval half way through them.


Tyrie deserves to be cheered on, because central banks have had it far too 
cushy for far too long. It is taken as read that the best way to run an economy 
is to muscle politicians out of the way and let technocrats run things.

When the financial crisis turned nasty in 2008, central banks were at the 
zenith of their influence and were handed the responsibility for cleaning up 
the mess. Theyslashed interest rates and pumped up the money supply through the 
use of quantitative easing, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/mar/05/interest-rates-quantitative-easing>
 the process whereby a central bank buys bonds and exchanges them for new 
electronic money.

Economic policy quickly became lopsided. For a brief period, fiscal policy was 
used to cut taxes and increase public spending but the general approach since 
the crisis has been for monetary policy to remain ultra loose and for budgets 
to be kept tight. Governments have relied on low interest rates and QE to 
generate enough growth to offset the impact of raising taxes and cutting public 
spending.

The strategy prevented a second Great Depression but has not delivered a 
strong and durable recovery.Interest rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/interest-rates> were supposed to stay at 
emergency levels for only as long as it took to return life to normal. In the 
UK, these emergency levels have now lasted for longer than it took for the 
Beatles to record every one of their albums.

There seems not the remotest chance of emergency rates ending any time soon. 
January 2016 was the month when inflation was supposed to shoot up in the UK, 
because the big 0.9% monthly drop in prices seen in January 2015 then dropped 
out of the year-on-year calculation of the cost of living. In fact,there was 
only a small 0.1 point increase in inflation to 0.3% 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/cpi/consumer-price-indices/january-2016/index.html>
 because the price fall in January 2016 of 0.8% was almost identical to that in 
January 2016.

What’s more, the annual inflation rate will fall over the coming months unless 
last year’s monthly increases in prices – of either 0.3% or 0.2% - for each 
month between February and May are repeated.

It’s the same story everywhere of weird policy becoming even weirder. Seven 
and a half years after the collapse of Lehman Brothers theUS Federal Reserve 
has tried raising rates and is already regretting it 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/fcb4202a-c04d-11e5-846f-79b0e3d20eaf.html#axzz40n1OeqNS>
. The City half expects the next move in UK interest rates to be down. 
Elsewhere interest rates are negative, with commercial banks being penalised 
for depositing cash with central banks in the hope that they will instead use 
their funds to lend to the private sector. What started in some of the smaller 
countries – Switzerland and Sweden – has now spread to the big boys. Both the
European Central Bank <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-27717594> and the 
Bank of Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/29/bank-of-japan-achieve-imposing-negative-interest-rates>
 now have negative rates.

Growth is tepid, productivity is poor, and inflation is too low for comfort. 
The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development 
<http://www.oecd.org/eco/outlook/economicoutlook.htm>last week joined the 
International Monetary Fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/19/imf-cuts-global-growth-forecasts>
and theWorld Bank  
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-worldbank-economy-idUSKBN0UK2JI20160106>in 
cutting its growth forecasts for 2016. Another recession now would send the 
global economy spiralling into deflation and put the eurozone under immense, 
and perhaps terminal, strain. Clearly, all is not quite going according to the 
masterplan drawn up by central banks.

As far as the OECD is concerned, monetary policy is being forced to take too 
much of the strain. Its chief economist Catherine Mann made the point that 
lasting recovery required three things: stimulative monetary policy; activist 
fiscal policy; and structural reform. TheOECD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/oecd> wants the second of these 
ingredients to be added to the recipe in the form of increased spending on 
public infrastructure, something it says would more than pay for itself at a 
time when governments can borrow so cheaply.

The Paris-based thinktank says collective action by the world’s leading 
economies is needed because a go-it-alone approach will result in the effects 
of stronger demand being blunted by higher imports. It will make the case for 
higher investment spending at this week’s meeting of the G20 in Shanghai, 
almost certainly to little effect. Central banks will argue that they still 
have plenty of ammunition left, even though as the years tick by it becomes 
more and more apparent that relying solely on monetary policy is the equivalent 
of pushing on a piece of string.

Central banks now have one last chance to live up to their exalted 
reputations. A prolonged period of low but positive interest rates carries the 
risk that it will create the conditions for asset price bubbles. That risk is 
amplified by quantitative easing.

All the dangers associated with low but positive borrowing costs apply to 
negative interest rates – but with some added complications. One is that it 
affects the profitability of banks, by squeezing lending spreads, at a time 
when many of them have yet to make a full recovery from the last crisis. 
Another is that central banks will overcook things and that the deeper into 
negative territory interest rates go now the higher they will have to go later.

Perhaps though the biggest danger is to the reputation of central banks. 
Throughout the crisis, the assumption has been that the Federal Reserve, the 
Bank of England, theEuropean Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank>, the Bank of Japan 
and all the other central banks are in control of a tricky situation. Central 
bankers give the impression that they can model the impact of interest rates 
and QE on growth and inflation; that is part of their mystique.

Now, it may be that it is simply taking time for central banks to get to grips 
with a protracted and complex crisis. Everything may work out well in the end, 
with inflation returning to target and interest rates back to more normal 
levels. The absence of supportive fiscal policy could be making an already 
tough job that much tougher.

But the longer this goes on the more the suspicion grows that central bankers 
aren’t quite so clever as they think they are, and that what is dressed up as a 
carefully calibrated policy response is really just blundering around in the 
dark. Central banks have been conducting a gigantic experiment over the past 
seven years and Tyrie will want to know from Carney whether he actually knows 
what he is doing. It is a perfectly fair question.
 