
I love a remote mountain cabin perhaps slightly more than the next person, so 
imagine, if you will, the opposite of that. It’s probably Las Vegas, where I am 
right now, sitting on a suspiciously wipe-clean faux leather chair in a hotel 
room with walls so thin I can hear humans on every side expelling every 
possible fluid in every possible way. It’s no less depraved and vulgar than when
Hunter S Thompson came all those years ago 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/politics/news/fear-and-loathing-in-las-vegas-19711111>
, only he wasn’t here for theConsumer Electronics Show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ces-2016>.

CES <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ces> is often described as 
revealing the future of technology, but really it’s about the now. Everything 
here has been in gestation for years, a slow and carefully managed process from 
conception to development to marketable product, and with a (usually) contrived 
finale of a January CES launch to bring it to a variously eager, ambivalent or 
completely ignorant public, depending on the product. As the public interest 
and appetite for technology has expanded, so has our recognition that it is no 
longer one industry but part of every sector.

CES 2016: six things to look forward to this year (including the smart bra)
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/04/ces-2016-six-things-smart-bra-drones-virtual-reality>
CES <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ces> feels that way; there are 
device, security and robotics companies here, of course, but there are also 
every major car brand, government policy specialists, health experts, finance, 
entertainment, sports, education … in short, every part of our lives is being 
upended.

Beyond sales, what many of these executives are looking for, as they patiently 
navigate the incongruously flooded pavements and overpriced burgers of Vegas, 
is some kind of key to what this all means and where it is headed. Beyond the 
noisiest product launches, the hope is that the 2.4 million square feet of 
exhibition space, the conversations and (very often) the beer will encourage 
some happy accident of vision, a glimmer of some new idea that will propel them 
and their product into the future.

But this is the anomaly of CES. There is a tribal, sociable element to it, as 
there is every industry event.Vegas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/las-vegas> looks different when CES is in 
town; 170,000 people interested enough in tech to all want to come. And so 
there is a kind of shared mentality, a consensus around the biggest buzz, or 
the worst keynote, or the most surprising announcement. The scale and intensity 
of the event is overwhelming, but so is the shared identity. It leads to more 
than a little groupthink, some products are inflated with hype (and the 
marketing dollar, clearly) only to disappear from public interest later.

Cabin porn: why hideaways are hot right now
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jan/04/cabin-porn-hideaways-gucci-furry-loafers-prada-coat-fashion-log-cabin>
But the counterpoint is more interesting. Much as we pine for the log cabin, 
for some kind of antidote to the hyper connection, we need the critical, 
cultural, creative mass of others to encourage our own creative thinking. The 
author Steven Johnson has written about how individuals become smarter when 
they are connected to and contribute to a network, that the best kind of 
brainstorming is still a group of people sitting round a table talking.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Flas-vegas-consumer-electronics-show-2016-tech%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F210d753175178b9d948c147cf085a7045bfbd0e9%2F0_0_3600_2400%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=CES%20is%20the%20event%20to%20get%20every%20brain%20storming%20%E2%80%A6%20but%20where%20will%20it%20lead%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Flas-vegas-consumer-electronics-show-2016-tech%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=CES%20is%20the%20event%20to%20get%20every%20brain%20storming%20%E2%80%A6%20but%20where%20will%20it%20lead%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Flas-vegas-consumer-electronics-show-2016-tech%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F210d753175178b9d948c147cf085a7045bfbd0e9%2F0_0_3600_2400%2F3600.jpg>
 One corner of the enormous, bustling CES in Las Vegas. Photograph: Sam Morris 
/Handout/EPA 
But part of the power of being in a large networked, chaotic event such as CES 
is serendipity and discovery. In his 2014 bookHow We Got to Now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/03/how-we-got-to-now-by-steven-johnson-six-innovations-made-modern-world>
, Johnson concludes by encouraging us all to explore, to take risks, and not to 
stick to conventional wisdom. “The innovators profiled in this book had the 
tenacity to stick with their hunches for long periods,” he wrote. “But there is 
comparable risk in being true to your own sense of identity … better to 
challenge those intuitions, explore uncharted terrain, both literal and 
figurative. Better to make new connections than remain comfortably situated in 
the same routine.”

How We Got to Now by Steven Johnson - review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/03/how-we-got-to-now-by-steven-johnson-six-innovations-made-modern-world>
There is no proven path to disruption and innovation, but embracing the chaos 
is to embrace the opportunity. CES is true of that, albeit within the limited 
confines of a corporate event.

Johnson, again, muses on the “hummingbird effect” in which seemingly small 
innovations in one field can end up significantly affecting something 
completely unintentionally: that the introduction of chlorine to drinking water 
led to public swimming baths, which, indirectly, led to women’s bodies being 
publicly on display; that Johannes Gutenberg’s printing press revealed a 
hitherto unrealised long-sightedness among readers, which led to the 
development of reading glasses; and thatLas Vegas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/las-vegas> was only made bearably 
habitable through the development of air cooling systems which were advanced by 
the work of one Clarence Birdseye while experimenting with frozen food.

This is the law of unintended consequences, something intrinsic to technology 
and the impact it has. The myriad concurrent developments of technology, and 
consecutive competing and collaborative contributions, drive the pace of 
progress constantly, rhythmically.

We enjoy the ebbs and flows of all this progress, but we do need to ask better 
questions about the impact it has on us further downstream. Hemlines, reading 
glasses and Las Vegas are all very well, but unintended consequences can cut 
both ways.
 