
Group A

Champions League draw: Man City face Barcelona and Celtic, Arsenal play PSG
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/25/champions-league-draw-manchester-city-barcelona-arsenal-celtic>
Arsenal have been eliminated in the second round 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/mar/16/barcelona-v-arsenal-champions-league-last-16-live>
 of the Champions League for the past six seasons and it is easy to imagine 
something similar happening again because they appear most likely to finish 
second in this group. PSG are now established as one of Europe’s major forces 
and, while the loss of Zlatan Ibrahimovic is a setback, he had a patchy record 
in this competition. Basel have a 100% record in the Swiss Super League this 
season and Arsenal’s trip to Switzerland will not be easy, while Ludogorets are 
clear underdogs, even if the Brazilian striker Wanderson looked dangerous in 
the qualifying rounds.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Farsenals-champions-league-group-all-you-need-to-know-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arsenal's%20Champions%20League%20group%3A%20all%20you%20need%20to%20know%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Farsenals-champions-league-group-all-you-need-to-know-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arsenal%27s%20Champions%20League%20group%3A%20all%20you%20need%20to%20know%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Farsenals-champions-league-group-all-you-need-to-know-video&media=>
Arsenal’s Champions League group: all you need to know 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/aug/25/arsenals-champions-league-group-all-you-need-to-know-video>
Group B

The top seeds Benfica tended to play a simple 4-4-2 system on their way to the 
Portuguese title last season, with Kostas Mitroglou up front alongside the 
suddenly prolific Brazilian striker Jonas. But Napoli could be the team to 
beat: Maurizio Sarri’s side were thrilling last season, although replacing 
Gonzalo Higuaín – whose 36 goals was the highest in Serie A for 87 years – is a 
huge task for the inconsistent Arkadiusz Milik. The Dynamo Kyiv legend Sergei 
Rebrov has assembled a dangerous counterattacking side with inverted wingers, 
while Besiktas have qualified for the first time since 2009-10 and are good at 
home.

Group C

Manchester City’s run to last season’s semi-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/may/04/real-madrid-v-manchester-city-champions-league-semi-final-live>
 was a step in the right direction but with Pep Guardiola’s influence they will 
be a significantly greater force. His tactical acumen will obviously be crucial 
against his old side Barcelona, the bookmakers’ favourites. They are relatively 
unchanged from last season’s 4-3-3, with the terrifying trio of Leo Messi, Luis 
Suárez and Neymar still the main threats. Borussia Mönchengladbach are possibly 
the most tactically flexible team in the competition, often using a back three, 
while Celtic’s Brendan Rodgers, will look to pack the midfield against good 
technical opponents.

Group D

Real Madrid win Champions League on penalties against Atlético
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/28/real-madrid-atletico-madrid-champions-league-final-match-report>
The two group favourites met in a fascinating semi-final last season, with 
Atlético prevailing on away goals. They have avoided losing star names and are 
strengthened by the arrival of Kevin Gameiro. The new Bayern manager, Carlo 
Ancelotti is aiming to win the competition with a third club and is asking 
defenders to play deeper than under Pep Guardiola. Phillip Cocu’s PSV have a 
mix of possession play and quick counterattack, with the former winger Andreas 
Guardado epitomising the variety as a deep-lying playmaker. Rostov play 5-3-2 
and have already changed their manager this season, with Dmitri Kirichenko 
caretaker coach.




Mauricio Pochettino’s young and energetic Tottenham side 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/25/crystal-palace-reject-tottenham-hotspurs-bid-for-wilfried-zaha>
 should be fully confident of reaching the knockout stage. Their tie against 
Leverkusen should be fascinating: they will be up against a similar side, with 
Roger Schmidt’s heavy-pressing system receiving rave reviews in Germany. CSKA 
Moscow’s attack is spearheaded by the 6ft 8in Ivorian Lacina Traoré, although 
it remains to be seen how he functions in a counterattacking side who spend 
long periods defending very deep, while the Monaco coach, Leonardo Jardim, is 
clearly not sure of his best starting XI – he made eight changes for Monaco’s 
second game of the season.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Ftottenhams-champions-league-group-all-you-need-to-know-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tottenham's%20Champions%20League%20group%3A%20all%20you%20need%20to%20know%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Ftottenhams-champions-league-group-all-you-need-to-know-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tottenham%27s%20Champions%20League%20group%3A%20all%20you%20need%20to%20know%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Ftottenhams-champions-league-group-all-you-need-to-know-video&media=>
Tottenham’s Champions League group: all you need to know 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/aug/25/tottenhams-champions-league-group-all-you-need-to-know-video>
The holders, Real Madrid, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/28/real-madrid-atletico-madrid-champions-league-final-match-report>
 have a largely unchanged squad, although their questionable organisation 
without possession could be problematic against disciplined, cohesive sides. 
The Dortmund coach, Thomas Tuchel, is one of the most promising tacticians in 
Europe, creating a versatile, organised and efficient side lacking the dynamism 
of the Jurgen Klopp years, but perhaps more suited to European football, while 
Jorge Jesus’s Sporting will have a midfield diamond, featuring William 
Carvalho, Andre Silva and João Mario, who played in that system during 
Portugal’s Euro 2016 victory. Legia Warsaw are well-drilled defensively, with 
Nemanja Nikolic a dangerous striker.

Claudio Bravo: The reluctant goalkeeper who became Pep Guardiola’s No1 man
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/25/claudio-bravo-manchester-city-joe-hart>



It will be fascinating to see how Claudio Ranieri’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/13/hull-leicester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 counterattacking approach works with Leicester in the Champions League – it 
could prove very dangerous away from home, although they may need other 
approaches to break down defensive-minded visiting teams. Their toughest 
opponents will be Porto, who underlined their quality with an impressive 4-1 
aggregate victory over Roma in the play-off round, and look much better back in 
their classic 4-3-3 system, under their former goalkeeper, Nuno Espírito Santo. 
Club Brugge, coached by Michel Preud’homme, will be a counterattacking threat, 
while Copenhagen’s old-fashioned 4-4-2 might be exposed against more 
technically talented sides.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fleicester-citys-champions-league-group-all-you-need-to-know-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Leicester%20City's%20Champions%20League%20group%3A%20all%20you%20need%20to%20know%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fleicester-citys-champions-league-group-all-you-need-to-know-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Leicester%20City%27s%20Champions%20League%20group%3A%20all%20you%20need%20to%20know%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fleicester-citys-champions-league-group-all-you-need-to-know-video&media=>
Leicester City’s Champions League group: all you need to know 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/aug/25/leicester-citys-champions-league-group-all-you-need-to-know-video>
Group H

Max Allegri’s Juventus have lost Paul Pogba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/09/manchester-united-sign-paul-pogba-93-million-juventus>
 but the additions of Miralem Pjanic and Gonzalo Higuaín mean they have more 
creativity and firepower in their 3-5-2 system. Their games against Sevilla 
could be brilliant: the Europa League holders are set to thrill under Jorge 
Sampaoli – in his first game in charge on Saturday, the former Chile manager 
used a 3-3-1-3 formation for an astonishing 6-4 victory over Espanyol. Bruno 
Genesio’s Lyon side could provide entertainment, with Alexandre Lacazette 
seemingly set to stay and lead a 4-3-3, while Dinamo Zagreb face an uphill 
task, though they defeated Arsenal last season and play good technical football.

Champions League draw: Man City face Barcelona and Celtic, Arsenal play PSG
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/25/champions-league-draw-manchester-city-barcelona-arsenal-celtic>
Michael Cox’s predictions

A: PSG, Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal>, Basel, 
Ludogorets

B: Napoli, Benfica, Besiktas, D Kiev

C: Barcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona>, Man City, B 
Monchengladbach, Celtic

D: Atletico, Bayern, PSV, Rostov

E: Tottenham, Leverkusen, Monaco, CSKA

F: Dortmund, Real Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid>, 
Sporting, Legia Warsaw

G: Leicester, Porto, Brugge, Copenhagen

H: Juventus, Sevilla, Lyon, D Zagreb
 