
The quarter-finals of the European Champions Cup are a determinedly 
Anglo-French affair, with five clubs from the Premiership and three from the 
Top 14 making up the last eight. This must be as pleasing for the architects of 
European rugby as it is disturbing for the victims ofthe coup of 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/apr/11/beginners-guide-european-rugby-champions-cup>
.

Those victims have a repository, the Pro12 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/pro12>, a cross-border competition in its 
own right, but one that in its stretch – all the way from Glasgow and Galway to 
northern Italy – is overextended and under-appreciated. Nothing represented the 
Pro12’s loss of influence more than the physical shifting of European rugby’s 
headquarters from Dublin to Neuchâtel in Switzerland. The new authority took a 
new name, European Professional Club Rugby, where there is pointedly no mention 
of the provinces of Ireland, the regions of Wales or the districts of Scotland. 
There is space only for clubs, and with all due respect to Treviso and the 
Zebre, that meant England and France.

Connacht and the Newport Gwent Dragons will play in the quarter-finals of the 
secondary European Challenge Cup but their away ties at Grenoble and Gloucester 
are a far cry from the days when Leinster and Munster won five Heineken Cups 
between them in seven years. Of course, it was that very period of Irish 
dominance between 2006 and 2012 that made the English and the French gnash 
their teeth and hatch their plot.

The Pro12 must respond positively now. It has always been lighter on its feet 
on the field of play than the heavyweights of England and France, built to 
batter their way through a nine-month club season but aerobically suspect at 
international level. And now that nimbleness may have to dance with the 
prospect of jettisoning the Italian clubs and inviting the Exile clubs of 
England’s capital – London Welsh, Scottish and, who knows, perhaps even Irish – 
to strengthen the Celtic knot. The Pro12 (or 13) must continue to be 
progressive, thinking of where a concussion-conscious game is heading next, 
emphasising accuracy over bulk, technique over brute force, and putting a 
premium on pace and space, ahead of unremitting contact. More Glasgow, less
Toulon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toulon>.

For the moment, however, the European champions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/02/clermont-auvergne-toulon-european-champions-cup-final-match-report>
 of the past three seasons are still in the mix, where might rules. Toulon no 
longer have Jonny Wilkinson or Ali Williams, who were once their concessions to 
a little grace on the field, but they are still in the chase, away to Racing 92 
in the one all-French quarter-final. They still have Matt Giteau on the books, 
although it will be touch and go for him to be fit. The Australian against Dan 
Carter would be the duel of the day – and evidence of a spending power in 
France beyond the dreams of any Pro13.

Despite the appeal of their showdown in Paris, it should be England’s weekend. 
Three of their clubs will have home advantage: Wasps, Saracens and Leicester. 
Saracens are the team of the past couple of years, growing in confidence in all 
forms of competition and poised to win the European prize that has eluded them. 
They had, if this is possible, their domestic hiccup at just the right time. 
Theylost to Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/20/leicester-saracens-premiership-rugby-match-report>
 andNorthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/05/saracens-northampton-premiership-match-report>
 but felt the full benefit of being reinforced by their large contingent of
England grand slam winners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/19/england-win-six-nations-grand-slam-france-match-report>
 andbeat Exeter last weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/26/saracens-exeter-premiership-match-report>
 in the Premiership.

Owen Farrell and Billy Vunipola shine as Saracens go top with win over Exeter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/26/saracens-exeter-premiership-match-report>
Should Saracens beat Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints>, they will face the 
winners of Wasps and Exeter in neutral Reading. Wasps have the experience and 
Exeter have the ambition; both clubs built themselves on togetherness, where 
forthrightness was more influential than flamboyance. Both then built on that 
unforgiving base – as if they too sensed where the game was going – and put a 
real sparkle into their attacking play. Henry Slade is not yet Carter, nor 
Elliot Daly a Giteau, but they bring something daring to the field.

Leicester are Leicester, and will be feisty and uncompromising as long as 
Richard Cockerill is in charge. They are at the same time – and their coach 
probably scratches his head furiously about this – a little bit more 
free-flowing and a little bit more prone to an upset than is traditional. Losing
at home to Sale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/27/sale-leicester-premiership-match-report>
 andaway to Newcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/12/newcastle-leicester-premiership-match-report-rugby-union>
 will have annoyed them.

A home tie against Stade Français 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/stadefrancais>, who are the fallen giants of 
the French season – the reigning Top 14 champions have been just above the 
relegation zone all season – is a tonic, a chance to relive Leicester’s first 
triumph in the Heineken Cup, a 34-30 victory over Stade at the Parc des 
Princes. Leicester might point out that they played with a bit of daring that 
day. And so they truly did.

If Leicester are to go all the way again, they may be hoping to play against 
Racing 92 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/racing-metro-92> rather than 
Toulon. A semi-final against Carter would be at the City Ground in Nottingham; 
against Giteau would be in Nice – splendid for the Riviera; a little hostile 
for rugby. Even so, if England have three semi-finalists it may be hard, in 
their time of rediscovered national self-esteem, to argue against an 
all-England final.
 