
Philip Hammond is clearly keen to tell us he has a populist touch. Even George 
Osborne never issued a formal pre-announcement of the goodies in his bag. The 
new chancellor’s approach takes the Treasury’s news management operation to new 
heights (or depths, depending on your point of view) but Hammond has at least 
created a talking point by slapping a ban on the upfront fees letting agents 
charge their tenants.

Everybody can applaud that measure – or, rather, everybody apart from the 
agents, but they have only themselves to blame. Upfront fees have become 
divorced from the costs of arranging a tenancy and are instead a means to gouge 
the tenant. London-based Foxtonscharges £420 per tenancy 
<http://www.foxtons.co.uk/let/fees_and_terms/>, which is essentially a fee for 
printing out a standard letter and is ridiculous given the princely cut of the 
rent normally enjoyed by the agent.

Foxtons and its ilk can, of course, attempt to recoup their £420 fees by 
pushing them onto landlords but one suspects they won’t succeed in full. 
Landlords, who already pay the same fee for their own letters from Foxtons, are 
better equipped to negotiate or take their business elsewhere. Hammond’s reform 
is pro-competition, which means the reform stands a better chance of making a 
small difference.

Hammond’s other selected highlights are less flashy. It’s hard to know if “an 
additional £1.4bn to deliver 40,000 affordable homes” really amounts to “a 
major housing package”. The Treasury didn’t bother to define the period in 
which the new homes will be built. But, in any case, central government 
intervention of some size was necessary. Data from the Department for 
Communities and Local Government showed last week that the number of affordable 
homes built in England in 2015-16fell to its lowest level for 24 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/17/number-of-affordable-homes-built-in-england-slumps-24-year-low>
. In that context, Hammond’s new £1.4bn may be merely a sticking plaster.

A boost in the national living wage, which applies to workers aged 25 and 
over, from £7.20 to £7.50 is, perhaps, just good housekeeping. If Hammond is to 
make progress towards Osborne’s target of £9 by 2020, increases have to happen 
annually. But a 4.2% rise from April 2017 will delay for lower-paid workers the 
squeeze on real incomes that will arrive with the inflationary impact of a 
lower pound.

One knock-on effect, of course, will be higher prices in pubs, bars, hotels 
and restaurants. Those operators must look after themselves but note the 
nuanced account offered by the pub and restaurant chain Mitchells & Butlers on 
Tuesday. Its pre-tax profits, down by a quarter to £94m in the past year, were 
impacted by wage inflation; on the other hand, it said competitive pressures 
have now reduced as the rate of openings of rival new restaurants has “slowed 
considerably” since the national living wage was introduced in July last year. 
That suggests the market is adapting quickly to the impact of higher wage bills.

The picture is less clear among care homes and in the social care sector, 
where Hammond’s concerns ought to be concentrated. Osborne introduced a 
voluntary 2% social care precept into the council tax bills to alleviate cost 
pressures but reports from local government suggest social care budgets are 
over-stretched, severely so in some cases. The official checklist of measures 
in Hammond’s autumn statement contained no hint of further offsetting measures.

Maybe they will follow, but one suspects not. The point of issuing edited 
highlights in advance is to try to maximise the applause so that the complaints 
are drowned out. Hammond is playing a grubby game. Maybe the rest of his bag 
contains some real horrors.

Diageo, Unilever and Compass flat despite dollar’s fizz

The post-Brexit currency-fuelled fizz in the share prices of some of the FTSE 
100 index’s big dollar-earners is evaporating. Diageo went from £18 to £22 
after the vote but now it is £20.Unilever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/unilever> raced to £36, now it’s £31.33, 
virtually where it stood on the day before the referendum. The same is true of 
contract caterer Compass Group – after hitting £15, the shares have returned to 
£13.26.

What’s going on? In part, president-elect Trump has changed the investment 
weather. If US infrastructure is now the thing, suppliers of raw materials to 
the construction industry are the place to be. The share prices of the big 
miners have been a roll for the past fortnight.

The other half of the story is that dull but reliable consumer-related stocks 
like Diageo, Unilever and Compass weren’t obviously bargains at their 
currency-inflated highs. Put another way, investors want to see more than just 
a translational currency boost. On that score,Compass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/compassgroup> had few fresh excitements 
to offer in its full-year numbers. Operating profit margins were flat at 7.2% 
and underlying operating profits rose 5.6% to £1.44bn. The shares fell 5%.

The reaction is churlish in the sense that Compass’ dull reliability and 
steadily improving dividend (up 7.8%) are virtues. It remains a high-quality 
company that is likely to reward long-term owners via steady annual revenue 
growth of 4% to 6% plus strong cash generation. But it is rated at 22 times 
earnings. That is not cheap in any currency.
 