
It began in an age when crafting a special mixtape was a popular way to 
impress a loved one.

So it seems appropriate that Channel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> is kicking off the celebrations to 
mark 30 years since its launch by effectively putting together a televisual 
mixtape for its viewers.

The Channel 4 Mash Up on Monday night will see some of the broadcaster's 
biggest personalities appear in one another's programmes

The comedian Alan Carr will join Kirstie Allsopp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/kirstie-allsopp> poking around other 
peoples' houses and being cross with buyers when they don't do exactly as she 
tells them.

The Made in Chelsea cast will pause the "highly annoying" button for about a 
second as they attemptCome Dine With Me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/come-dine-with-me> without caterers, 
butlers or any of the other ludicrous services they would usually employ – in 
between their important shopping trips and endless discussions of friendships 
and relationships behind each others backs.

Meanwhile, the teams from 8 out of 10 Cats will swap their comedy answers for 
nimble letter-arranging and the fiendish number round on Countdown, and the 
Channel 4 News presenters will attempt to giveHugh Fearnley-Whittingstall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/hugh-fearnley-whittingstall> a run 
for his money as they take over the River Cottage kitchen.

Recalling the experience, Jon Snow <https://www.theguardian.com/media/jon-snow>
 said: "I cannot believe I skinned a rabbit. I cannot believe I ate that rabbit.

"I learnt more about foraging from a few hours with Hugh than I have learnt 
about the euro in a decade. He warned me that the long thorns that surround 
sloe berries may inflict a wound upon you that will go septic. I have the 
wounds. I'm still waiting …"

Snow is actually quite squeamish about blood and guts, said fellow newsreader 
Krishnan Guru-Murthy <https://www.theguardian.com/media/krishnan-guru-murthy>.

Another colleague, Cathy Newman, said: "Turning hunter-gatherer for the 
weekend must surely come in useful for my day job. Slicing into a rabbit? 
Skewering a crab? Politicians coming into the studio for interview should know 
I'm now ready for anything."
 