
Lawyers for a leading refugee charity have begun legal proceedings against the 
Home Office, arguing that ministers have failed in obligations to give 
sanctuary to some of the thousands of unaccompanied children seeking asylum in 
Europe.

Help Refugees  <http://www.helprefugees.org.uk/>says the home secretary, Amber 
Rudd, has breached her relocation duties to some unaccompanied children in 
Europe, by misconstruing or misapplying the May Immigration Act under which the 
government was obliged to take some children into the UK.

UK theatres call for urgent help for child refugees in Calais
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/06/uk-theatres-call-for-urgent-help-for-child-refugees-in-calais>
The legal papers state that because of this failure it “is incontestable that 
the unaccompanied children” whom the legislation is intended to assist “are 
exposed to serious risks of abuse and exploitation”.

Help Refugees’ action comes amid rising concern for the safety of several 
hundred unaccompanied refugee children in Calais, with just one week left before
demolition of the unofficial refugee camp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/26/calais-migrant-camp-must-go-by-end-of-year-francois-hollande>
 is expected to begin.


Charities are worried 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/01/child-refugees-despair-calais-camp-close>
 that no plans for rehousing the children in safe alternative accommodation 
have been announced, and that there has so far been no attempt to begin a 
systematic registration of the children either by the French or the UK 
authorities.

Tory MPs urge Amber Rudd to do more to help child refugees in Calais
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/03/tory-mps-urge-amber-rudd-do-more-help-child-refugees-calais>
Although most volunteer groups on the ground support the demolition in the 
abstract, because camp conditions are so poor, they are worried that an 
eviction without clear plans for how residents will be relocated could make the 
situation worse, particularly for the children, some of them as young as eight, 
who are travelling without parents.

Josie Naughton, co-founder of Help Refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/refugees>, said: “We absolutely think that 
the camp shouldn’t be there and no human being should live in those conditions, 
but we need to make sure that the French keep their word so that proper 
alternative accommodation is provided and that the eviction is carried out as 
humanely as possible.”

Lily Caprani from Unicef UK said: “We are urgently calling for the UK to make 
sure comprehensive care plans are in place so that frightened children are not 
scattered by the bulldozers and facing a winter alone without a home. Unless 
the authorities do the right thing, it is likely many children will now go 
missing or attempt more dangerous crossings to reach family in the UK.”


Help Refugees’ legal action, which could trigger a judicial review, argues 
that Rudd has failed in urgent “relocation duties to unaccompanied children in 
Europe”, particularly under the so-called Dubs amendment to the Immigration Act.


Under this amendment, introduced by Alf Dubs, the Labour peer who arrived in 
the UK as a Kindertransport child refugee, the government pledged “as soon as 
possible” to “make arrangements to relocate to the UK” a number of 
unaccompanied refugee children. Since the act was passed it appears that no 
children have arrived in the UK under its provisions.

In her speech to the Conservative party conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/oct/04/amber-rudd-comes-down-on-immigration-and-foreign-workers-video>
 earlier this week, Rudd set out a commitment to help some of the children in 
Calais. “There are vulnerable, unaccompanied children in Calais at risk of 
people-trafficking and abuse,” she said. “Where those children have a relative 
in the UK, or it is in their best interests to come to the UK, we are doing all 
we can to bring them over here.”

But Lord Dubs said he was disappointed that the government was muddling its 
obligation to reunite refugee families. His broader campaign is to persuade the 
government to take its share of the 80,000 estimated unaccompanied 
asylum-seeking children in Europe, regardless of whether they have relatives in 
the UK. “I think it is a real cheat,” he said.

‘It is a disgrace to Europe’: former child refugee Lord Dubs on the Calais camp
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/05/disgrace-to-europe-former-child-refugee-lord-dubs-calais-camp>
Labour MP Stella Creasy, who has tabled an amendment to the government’s child 
welfare bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/18/call-to-bring-child-refugees-in-calais-under-uk-safeguarding-rules>
, aiming to give young refugees in Calais protection under British safeguarding 
rules, said she was worried by the slowness of the government’s response.

“Time is running out. Unless we step into the breach it will be a disaster. We 
haven’t got any more time for saying it is complicated. We need a process now. 
The government can’t just wait it out and hope the problem goes away,” she said.

Yvette Cooper <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/yvette-cooper>, chair of 
Labour’s refugee taskforce, has called for Britain and France to take half the 
unaccompanied children in Calais each. “The foot-dragging and the buck-passing 
between the French and British governments over the children in Calais is a 
disgrace. It is quite incredible that there is only a week to go before the 
camp is cleared but still no plan for the children who are there alone.”

But concern about the fate of the unaccompanied children in Calais 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/calais> is increasingly cross-party. This 
week 10 Conservative MPs wrote to Rudd urging her to speed up her response to 
the crisis. Damian Collins, MP for Folkestone and Hythe, who did not sign the 
letter but visited the camp last week, said he was shocked by what he saw.

“Walking around it you have to remind yourself that you are still in Europe 
and not on the edge of a warzone,” hewrote in a blogpost 
<http://www.damiancollins.com/blog/2016/10/my-visit-to-the-calais-jungle/>. “It 
is clear that no concerted effort has yet been made to find alternative places 
for the migrants, or to ensure that their asylum claims have been processed.”

The Home Office said it was working with the French government to speed up 
mechanisms to identify, assess and transfer unaccompanied refugee children to 
the UK, “where this is in their best interests”. It said a UK expert has been 
seconded to the French interior ministry in Paris, to help with the process.
 