
It’s an old cliche that if Shakespeare was alive today, he would be writing 
scripts for Coronation Street and EastEnders. But given the financial 
incentives, it might now be more accurate to say the fantasy epicGame of Thrones
 <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones>.


Take Charles Dance 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/entertainment/theater_dance/from-coriolanus-to-game-of-thrones-charles-dance-is-acting-royalty/2016/09/23/4179aab4-800f-11e6-9070-5c4905bf40dc_story.html>
. On a visit to Washington last month, strangers approached the actor to say 
his 1989 Coriolanus for the Royal Shakespeare Company had changed their lives. 
He was here to collect the William Shakespeare Award for Classical Theatre at 
theHarman Center for the Arts annual gala 
<http://www.shakespearetheatre.org/support/special-events/hca-gala/>.

But the ceremony began, inevitably, not with a clip from the Bard but a 
compilation video of Tywin Lannister’s greatest hits, culminating with the 
Westeros patriarch beingshot dead on the toilet 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yMoNv6yOSCQ> with a crossbow by his estranged 
son Tyrion (Peter Dinklage). Dance’s friend and fellow actor Tim Pigott-Smith 
sent a video message that tried to make the case that some Game of Thrones 
dialogue has a Shakespearean metre, at least the way Dance delivers it.

Finally, the honoree himself took the stage and, evidently gratified if a 
little bemused, said his thank yous with a few digressions then delivered a 
rendition of the seven ages of man speech – “All the world’s a stage/ And all 
the men and women merely players,” – from As You Like It. He added, by way of a 
parting shot: “Finally, if I may, I would just like to wish you all a 
Trump-free future.”

In Washington’s arts community, where Donald Trump voters are rarer than 
BlackBerrys, there was rapturous applause.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fcharles-dance-game-of-thrones-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb0975a8e2c5e73151666c4cc73a6c218e9f5298%2F0_366_2214_1327%2F2214.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Charles%20Dance%3A%20'Thank%20God%20the%20BBC%20didn't%20make%20Game%20of%20Thrones'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fcharles-dance-game-of-thrones-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Charles%20Dance%3A%20%27Thank%20God%20the%20BBC%20didn%27t%20make%20Game%20of%20Thrones%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fcharles-dance-game-of-thrones-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb0975a8e2c5e73151666c4cc73a6c218e9f5298%2F0_366_2214_1327%2F2214.jpg>
 Charles Dance as Tywin Lannister: ‘you’ve got a great death scene!’ 
Photograph: ©HBO USA 
Dance, who shares nothing with Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/23/us-election-trump-cruz-republicans-game-of-thrones-plot>
 but age (both are 70), is an Englishman to his boots with disarming mix of 
tall, aristocratic bearing and demotic earthiness and candour; he would 
doubtless be at ease both in the club and the pub. He casually admits he had 
little idea what he was getting into with Game of Thrones, having been put off 
the books by their “frightening” thickness.

“I didn’t know what it was about and I hadn’t read and I haven’t since read 
any of George RR Martin’s books,” he muses in an interview at theShakespeare 
Theatre Company <http://www.shakespearetheatre.org/>. “Do you happen to know 
what the RR stands for? Neither do I. Nobody can seem to tell me.”

The answer, Google reveals later, is Raymond Richard 
<http://www.webcitation.org/66ff9Skfe>. 

Was Dance ever concerned about the series’ extreme sex and violence? “No,” he 
says frankly. “They screened the first couple of episodes of season one for a 
whole bunch of us. I didn’t come into episode seven or something in season one, 
so this was all stuff I wasn’t involved in but I wanted to see what the flavour 
of the piece was.

“So there’s all this rumpy pumpy going on, it was all doggy fashion, and I 
said to David [Benioff] and Dan [Weiss], the two writers – and they’re also 
executive producers – ‘Well, obviously the missionary position didn’t come into 
vogue in the Seven Kingdoms for some time to come.’ They said, ‘We wanted it to 
be animalistic, Charles.’ I said, ‘Well, it’s certainly that! Wham, bam, thank 
you mam.’”

He laughs, not quite a dirty laugh. “I mean, if people are going to be 
offended by it, they can turn it off.”

As for his own notorious demise, which rivals anything in King Lear or Titus 
Andronicus, the news was broken to him by a man in the street. Dance puts on a 
cockney accent as he recalls the stranger saying: “You’ve got this great death 
scene!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fcharles-dance-game-of-thrones-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69d774af1c9caf0c592fbdcb216d504d540d64d5%2F0_63_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Charles%20Dance%3A%20'Thank%20God%20the%20BBC%20didn't%20make%20Game%20of%20Thrones'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fcharles-dance-game-of-thrones-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Charles%20Dance%3A%20%27Thank%20God%20the%20BBC%20didn%27t%20make%20Game%20of%20Thrones%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fcharles-dance-game-of-thrones-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69d774af1c9caf0c592fbdcb216d504d540d64d5%2F0_63_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
 Charles Dance as Guy Perron in The Jewel in the Crown. Photograph: ITV / Rex 
Features 
Few actors can speak of TV drama with the authority of the Worcestershire-born 
performer. His career spansThe Jewel in the Crown  
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/masterpiece/archive/76/76.html>(1984), set in the last 
days of the British Raj in India, and Game of Thrones (2011- ), which few could 
have predicted would have become such a phenomenon.

Dance reflects: “The pilot they made was not that successful but HBO kind of 
nurtured it, thought there was mileage in this, and embarked on the first 
series.

“If that had been the BBC [British Broadcasting Corporation], they’d have 
pulled the plug on it immediately and I was told that there was a time when the
BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> were going to be part of the 
co-production and thank God they weren’t, because HBO knows how to spend money, 
and it was HBO and Sky Atlantic.”

When it comes to the BBC, Dance pulls no punches. “They think they can get a 
hundred dollars’ worth for spending 10. It’s crazy. I know a lot of crew people 
and indeed actors whose enthusiasm for a project is dampened when they know 
it’s going to be made by the BBC because they know they’re going to be penny 
pinching.

“It’s a pain in the arse and they expect crews to work on very minimal deals 
and less than their usual fee. It’s just stupid, you know? They pour money into 
junk reality television. I know it’s struggling, it really is, so when I say 
they’re trying to make $10 go as far as $100, it’s probably because they have 
very little choice, but having said that, if they have a choice between making 
a piece of shit reality television and a terrific piece of drama, I think they 
should go for the terrific piece of drama and let the commercial companies make 
their reality television.”

In recent years Dance, seen in the magnificent BBC adaptation of Bleak House, 
has been impressed by British productions such as Sherlock, Wolf Hall and Happy 
Valley. But the past two decades in America have famouslyyielded a historic crop
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/aug/18/whats-next-after-mad-men-and-breaking-bad>
 including The Sopranos, The Wire, Mad Men and Breaking Bad.

“We rightly used to say we have the finest television in the world,” he says. 
“We don’t necessarily any more. Some of the best television now is being 
imported from America. There’s some really great writing going on and the 
production values are cinematic, especially Game of Thrones. There are some 
scenes inGame of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones> that take my breath 
away.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fcharles-dance-game-of-thrones-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6943efb091d51dc161ddb218d5269f82c25c206a%2F0_0_2054_1366%2F2054.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Charles%20Dance%3A%20'Thank%20God%20the%20BBC%20didn't%20make%20Game%20of%20Thrones'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fcharles-dance-game-of-thrones-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Charles%20Dance%3A%20%27Thank%20God%20the%20BBC%20didn%27t%20make%20Game%20of%20Thrones%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fcharles-dance-game-of-thrones-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6943efb091d51dc161ddb218d5269f82c25c206a%2F0_0_2054_1366%2F2054.jpg>
 Dance as Tulkinghorn in the BBC’s Bleak House. Photograph: BBC/Mike Hogan/BBC 
The image of 8,000 Unsullied soldiers marching out of the city was, he 
recalls, like a scene from a movie byLeni Riefenstahl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2003/sep/09/world.news1>, the Nazi 
propagandist with an epic vision. “Wow, this is sensational!”

The show has certainly boosted his profile in America. But in the course of a 
four-decade career, he recalls, he has only had one extended period, about 15 
years ago, when “the phone stopped ringing”. That apart, he has been 
indefatigably clocking up the air miles.

“I don’t really relish the travel. I relish the getting there. The travel is a 
pain in the arse. There was a time people used to list in their list of 
hobbies, ‘travel and art’. The art is fine, the travel no. That whole bloody 
security thing is just a pain.”

Improbably, in 1994, he went to Sun City in South Africa to be a Miss World 
judge <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Miss_World_1994> along with Iman, Patrick 
Lichfield and Nelson Mandela’s daughter Zindzi. It was six months after the end 
of racial apartheid. “I didn’t get to meet Nelson Mandela, unfortunately. I met 
[his wife] Winnie, who scared the shit out of me I have to say, actually.”

In 2003 he was in Beirut, Lebanon, to play a professor called Charles 
Lushington in the movieLabyrinth <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0388194/>. 
Sometimes, he admits, he does it just for the money (or the travel). “No shame. 
Purely because every now and again – it’s called no money. You go and think, 
‘OK, I’m going to try and do the best I can with this pile of shit, and I’m 
doing it because it will enable me for a few months to perhaps say no.’

“The Beirut job in particular: one of the worst scripts I’ve ever read. It’s 
far too late now; it will never see the light of day, I hope. But I did it 
purely because I wanted to go to Beirut. I thought, ‘This’ll be interesting,’ 
and I asked for a ridiculous amount of money, assuming they would say 
absolutely not, and three weeks later I get a call saying, ‘Remember that job 
in Beirut? Well they’ll pay.’ Fuck.”

Dance went, hooked up with the journalist Robert Fisk 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/author/robert-fisk> and spent a couple of 
“fascinating” evenings discussing the history and tragedy of the place.

Visiting America, he now finds New York’s commercialism overwhelming but 
Washington charming, at least while it remains Trump-free. “If he makes it into 
the White House, we’re going to have to find another planet to live on,” Dance 
sighs. “It’s alarming, really.”

He was no less depressed about Britain’s vote to quit the European Union. 
“It’s kind of xenophobic, little Britain, pull up the drawbridge.” Yet, soon 
he’ll be on the road again. He’s off to Botswana to promoteSavage Kingdom 
<http://channel.nationalgeographic.com/wild/videos/savage-kingdom-trailer/>, 
six National Geographic films he has narrated about nature red in tooth and 
claw. “It’s as violent as anything you’ll see on Game of Thrones.”

Indeed, the Seven Kingdoms keep cropping up in any conversation with Dance 
these days. But he is philosophical about having been killed off in a series 
where a being a lead character offers no armour. In his video message, 
Pigott-Smith urged him to brush up his Shakespeare.

So, with retirement apparently off the table, what would be his dream role? 
“I’d like to do a bit more of the Scandinavian plays, just because of the way I 
look, and I haven’t done enough. There’s a fair amount of Shakespeare I haven’t 
done. I love the history plays, actually, much more so than the comedies. It 
would take a brave person to ask me to do it but I would love to playMalvolio 
in Twelfth Night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/14/tim-crouch-twelfth-night>. He’s 
wonderful.”
 