
The actor Charmian Carr, who has died from complications relating to dementia 
aged 73, was a supporting player who appeared in only one feature film. But 
that film was the perennially popular, five-Oscar-winningThe Sound of Music  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/sep/21/musical>(1965), which has 
attracted obsessive devotion from legions of fans.

Charmian Carr – Liesl von Trapp in The Sound of Music – dies, aged 73
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/18/charmian-carr-liesl-in-the-sound-of-music-dies-aged-73>
Radiating youthful charm, Carr played Liesl, the slightly rebellious oldest 
daughter of the Von Trapp children, all seven of whom sang and danced toDo-Re-Mi
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pLm07s8fnzM>, The Lonely Goatherd 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CaD9Ozdthg8> and So Long, Farewell 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qy9_lfjQopU>. However, it was in the duet 
Sixteen Going On Seventeen <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hwK_WOXjfc0> that 
Carr had a chance to shine. Liesl makes a play for Rolfe (Daniel Truhitte), the 
blond telegram delivery boy, singing “I need someone older and wiser, Telling 
me what to do. You are 17 going on 18. I’ll depend on you.” When a storm breaks 
out, the couple shelter in a gazebo, where they dance romantically, ending with 
Rolfe giving Liesl a quick kiss, to her obvious delight. Carr later reprises 
the song in a duet with Maria (Julie Andrews), the fresh-faced 
singing governess.

Carr was 21 going on 22 when she got the role of Liesl. She was a student 
attending San Fernando Valley State College, California, studying speech 
therapy and philosophy, and working in a lab for a doctor, as well as modelling 
on the side, when her mother arranged for her to audition for a role in The 
Sound of Music, although she had never sung or danced professionally. Yet the 
producer-directorRobert Wise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/sep/16/guardianobituaries.film> chose 
her over several other beginners, including Mia Farrow, Geraldine Chaplin and 
Teri Garr, and changed her surname from Farnon to Carr.

She was born in Chicago, Illinois, to Rita Oehmen, a vaudeville performer, and 
Brian Farnon, a musician. Her winning the role of Liesl came after a four-month 
search by Wise. She could never have imagined how popular The Sound of Music 
was to become. With its catchy Rodgers and Hammerstein songs, the film, set in 
spectacular Tyrolean scenery and shot in magnificent Todd-AO and De Luxe Color, 
grossed $200m worldwide on its first release.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fcharmian-carr-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50b00a172743400f854de00463ef71d65775a0b1%2F266_315_1367_1367%2F1367.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Charmian%20Carr%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fcharmian-carr-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Charmian%20Carr%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fcharmian-carr-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50b00a172743400f854de00463ef71d65775a0b1%2F266_315_1367_1367%2F1367.jpg>
 Charmian Carr ran an interior design firm in California, whose clients 
included Michael Jackson. Photograph: Karen Robinson for the Observer 
More recently, since 1999, it has engendered a Sing-Along-A-Sound of Music, an 
interactive entertainment in which audiences dress up as characters from the 
film, and sing all the songs. Carr, who attended many a cast reunion, felt that 
singing along was a perfect therapy for people’s woes.

In 1966, she co-starred with Anthony Perkins 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-anthony-perkins-1551325.html>
 in Evening Primrose, a 60- minute musical written by Stephen Sondheim. The 
haunting work takes place after closing in a department store inhabited by 
night people, including Carr as a 19-year-old who has lived in the store since 
she was six. She and Perkins, as a poet seeking refuge, fall in love and 
attempt to escape. Carr’s poignant performance, which included singingTake Me 
to the World <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o-0OUDs9KRE> and I Remember 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UEkR1z4RRq8>, makes one wonder why she did not 
become a star.

Perhaps one reason was her marriage, in 1967, to a dentist, Jay Brent, with 
whom she had two daughters. (They divorced in 1991.) However, she later ran an 
interior design firm, Charmian Carr Designs, in Encino, California. Among her 
faithful clients was Michael Jackson, who became a friend.

She also wrote two books (co-written by Jean Strauss), Forever Liesl (2000) 
and Letters to Liesl (2001), inevitably dominated by her candid reminiscences 
of the shooting of The Sound of Music and its aftermath. In the memoirs, Carr 
revealed that she had a “huge crush” onChristopher Plummer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/christopher-plummer>, 13 years her senior, 
who played Captain von Trapp, her handsome widower father in the film.

Carr is survived by her daughters, Jenifer and Emily.

• Charmian Carr (Charmian Anne Farnon), actor, born 27 December 1942; died 17 
September 2016
 