
Charles Bronson, often dubbed Britain's most dangerous prisoner, is to have 
his conviction and life sentence for a hostage-taking incident in 1999 reviewed 
by theCriminal Cases Review Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/criminal-cases-review-commission>.

Bronson, now in his 40th year of imprisonment and one of the longest-serving 
prisoners in the UK, believes his case should be sent back to the court of 
appeal because the judge, Ronald Moss, allowed his trial to proceed after 
Bronson had dismissed his legal team, and then denied him the opportunity to 
enter a plea that he had acted under "circumstances of duress".

It meant the jury were left with no option but to find Bronson guilty of 
falsely imprisoning Phil Danielson, a prison teacher whom he held hostage in 
Hull prison's secure unit for 44 hours, and causing criminal damage to prison 
property. He was cleared of threatening to kill Danielson.

The incident was portrayed in the 2009 film about Bronson's life, titled 
Bronson. After the film's screening, Danielson said: "I hope he never gets out. 
I went through hell. I have nightmares. I've suffered post-traumatic stress, 
had three nervous breakdowns and never worked since."

Bronson has always maintained that he only took the teacher hostage because he 
was terrified of being sent to the secure unit in Woodhill prison, where he had 
been held previously and where he says he believed he would be mentally 
tortured if he returned.

An appeal on similar grounds in 2004 failed. But the Criminal Cases Review 
Commission has now agreed to look at new evidence. Bronson's solicitor, Robert 
Normile, said: "New medical evidence only alluded to previously potentially 
raises a significant question mark over the safety of Mr Bronson's conviction."

Sally Berlin, director of caseworker operations at the CCRC, confirmed that 
Bronson's case was "awaiting allocation for review".

Bronson, now 61, began his prison odyssey in 1974 when he was sentenced to 
seven years for armed robbery. Further sentences were handed down over the 
years for assaulting prison staff, taking hostages and destroying prison 
property. During one rooftop protest at Broadmoor special hospital he caused 
damage estimated at almost Â£500,000.

He has spent the majority of the last 39 years in solitary confinement and is 
currently held in one of the most secure cells in the country, the notorious 
"Hannibal" cage in Wakefield prison's close supervision centre. Yet at his 
appeal in 2004 the judges praised him for having acted "calmly and with 
dignity" throughout the hearing.

His supporters plan to deliver a 10,000-signature petition to 10 Downing 
Street this month, calling on the prime minister to intervene in his case. 
"Charlie has served long enough," said a spokesman. "He's never killed anyone, 
yet he's served longer than most murderers, rapists or paedophiles. He deserves 
a chance."

While in solitary confinement Bronson has smashed world records for pressups 
and situps, written a dozen bestselling books and created his own brand of 
artwork, originals of which sell for large sums on eBay and earn money for 
children's charities.

Having his case reviewed afresh by the CCRC may be his final attempt to secure 
his freedom. In a letter to a friend recently, Bronson said he felt he was now 
at a crossroads. "I'm still a category A prisoner, still in a cage, still 
isolated. I'll either walk free from this appeal or I'll die a very old man in 
prison," he wrote.
 