
When the dust settles on a tempestuous match, the finger-pointing stops and 
the bans are handed out, perhaps this will be the occasion whenChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> made it clear their title 
aspirations are authentic. They rode their luck at times – discounting the own 
goal from Gary Cahill – and their opponents were entitled to be aggrieved about 
some of the refereeing decisions. Yet nobody could question the endurance of 
Antonio Conte’s men, their competitive courage and the tactical acumen of their 
manager.

Manchester City’s lack of mental edge exposed in Pep Guardiola challenge | 
Paul Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/03/manchester-city-chlesa-premier-league-pep-guardiola>
Unfortunately for them, the occasion will be remembered more for the 
collective lack of discipline in stoppage time when City, to put it bluntly, 
lost the plot. Sergio Agüero, having already served one suspension this season, 
can expect a four-game ban after his scything red-card challenge on David Luiz. 
That, however, told only part of the story as the two sets of players clashed 
by the touchline and Fernandinho could be in serious trouble after reacting to 
some provocation from Cesc Fàbregas by grabbing him by the neck, levering him 
towards the crowd and eventually pushing him over the advertising hoardings 
almost into the laps of the front row of spectators.

Fernandinho wanted to prolong the argument even after being sent off and he, 
and City, might face further action when the Football Association studies the 
video replays and sees how stewards had to prevent it getting even more out of 
hand. Chelsea could also be fined given the number of players from the sides 
locking horns. To put it into context, the managers felt compelled to go on the 
pitch and Diego Costa, of all people, could be seen trying to calm down 
Fernandinho. Guardiola did at least recognise it was a shabby way to end the 
match – “I would like to apologise,” he said – but he was pushing his luck 
trying to argue that Agüero’s wild, two-footed challenge was not intentional 
and his own conduct was questionable, to say the least.

Pep Guardiola sorry for City fracas but refuses to lay blame on Sergio Agüero
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/pep-guardiola-sergio-aguero-manchester-city-chelsea>
At one point, late in the game, Guardiola could be seen sarcastically clapping 
the referee, Anthony Taylor, for giving City a free-kick, even punching the air 
and sticking up his thumbs to give his act an extra flourish. Guardiola 
insisted that he would never be disrespectful about referees in press 
conferences, but he had already done just that in front of a television 
audience stretching to millions. As for his apology, it was hardly uttered in 
the manner of someone who genuinely felt contrition or embarrassment. He was 
seething, no matter how determined he was not to criticise Agüero or 
Fernandinho directly.

It was a breathless contest, laced with controversy, and in fairness to City 
they did have legitimate complaints, in particular the first-half incident when 
David Luiz could feasibly have been sent off for halting Agüero’s run towards 
goal. City were also denied two penalty appeals in the opening 45 minutes and 
Taylor spent large parts of the game with an incensed crowd reminding him of 
his alleged boyhood allegiances to Manchester United.

Ultimately, though, there was a reminder here that Guardiola’s team are going 
to find it difficult to win the league when they defend with so little 
cohesion. City have kept two clean sheets in the league and having taken the 
lead it must have been startling for their manager to see how they unravelled 
in the face of Chelsea’s superb counterattacking.

Costa began the comeback on the hour and the next two goals came from the kind 
of breakaway attacks that have exposed City on several occasions this season. 
At least there was some form of mitigation for Eden Hazard’s goal, with the 
clock ticking down and the home side left with no choice but to advance in 
numbers. Yet, from one penalty area to the other, Chelsea opened them up in a 
matter of seconds when the substitute Willian ran clear to give the visitors 
the lead. Chelsea played with the better structure, the clearer heads and a 
greater understanding of the wing-back system employed by both sides.

Hazard’s late finish confirmed an eighth successive league win, Chelsea’s best 
run for 10 years in a single season and that made it a desperately 
disappointing afternoon for City bearing in mind the home team led at half-time 
and had a golden opportunity, two minutes before Costa’s equaliser, to double 
their lead. Kevin De Bruyne could not keep his shot down, the ball came back 
off the crossbar and the remainder of the match merely re-iterated that 
Guardiola is still to get the balance right between attack and defence.

Manchester City 1-3 Chelsea: Premier League – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/dec/03/manchester-city-v-chelsea-premier-league-live-report>
More than anything, City will look back to what happened on the half-hour mark 
when De Bruyne’s long pass sent Agüero chasing after two defenders and César 
Azpilicueta’s attempt to play the ball back to Thibaut Courtois fell short. 
Agüero would have fancied his chances in a sprint against David Luiz and his 
opponent seemed to realise it, leaning in with sufficient force to unbalance 
the striker, but also applying enough disguise to get away with it.

That was a key moment because if the free-kick had been given the next 
decision for Taylor would have been whether Agüero, running in diagonally 30 
yards from goal, had been denied a clear scoring opportunity and, if so, 
Chelsea would have been down to 10 men.

Taylor had already given Cahill the benefit of the doubt after a handball 
inside the penalty area and the volume turned up again when N’Golo Kanté got 
away with a challenge on Ilkay Gündogan. Cahill’s own goal came shortly 
afterwards and Agüero might consider, on reflection, that Chelsea’s centre-half 
had suffered enough indignity without rubbing it in by patting him on his head 
as he ran away in celebration. Jesús Navas had supplied the cross and as 
own-goals go this one was spectacular – a twisting volley to redirect the ball 
beneath the joint of crossbar and post.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fmanchester-city-chelsea-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff337902b47c7c7f0c84d2326220690142997f90e%2F478_72_1609_965%2F1609.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chelsea%20surge%20past%20Manchester%20City%20as%20Ag%C3%BCero%20and%20Fernandinho%20see%20red&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fmanchester-city-chelsea-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chelsea%20surge%20past%20Manchester%20City%20as%20Ag%C3%BCero%20and%20Fernandinho%20see%20red&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fmanchester-city-chelsea-premier-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff337902b47c7c7f0c84d2326220690142997f90e%2F478_72_1609_965%2F1609.jpg>
 Fernandinho, right, starts to grab and push Chelsea’s Cesc Fàbregas, leading 
to a red card for the Manchester City man. Photograph: Paul Ellis/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Costa’s equaliser was another demonstration of his ability to outmuscle 
opponents, on this occasion Nicolás Otamendi, before delivering a low 
right-foot shot past Claudio Bravo and from that point onwards it was the 
players wearing the darker shade of blue who looked like the more rounded side. 
Chelsea will enjoy the view from the top of the table.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fmanchester-city-chelsea-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26c1afc30e6b7b01e311e9397de66d996a2bbf31%2F65_96_2272_1363%2F2272.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chelsea%20surge%20past%20Manchester%20City%20as%20Ag%C3%BCero%20and%20Fernandinho%20see%20red&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fmanchester-city-chelsea-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chelsea%20surge%20past%20Manchester%20City%20as%20Ag%C3%BCero%20and%20Fernandinho%20see%20red&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fmanchester-city-chelsea-premier-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26c1afc30e6b7b01e311e9397de66d996a2bbf31%2F65_96_2272_1363%2F2272.jpg>
 Players square up to each other after Sergio Agüero’s foul on David Luiz, 
which led to a red card for the Manchester City striker followed by one for 
Fernandinho. Photograph: Clive Brunskill/Getty Images  