
When the original King Arthur wanted to park at Stonehenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/stonehenge>, he simply rode up, got off 
his horse, tethered it to a rock, and went about his business of worshipping 
ancient stones.

Parking in latter-day Britain is, of course, a nightmare. Which is why, when 
the reincarnation of King Arthur wants to go and worship the grey wickets 
during the summer solstice, he now has to pay £15 to stow his Kawasaki 
motorbike.

Yet this week brings new hope for the 62-year-old self-proclaimed 
reincarnation – legal name King Arthur Pendragon; former name John Rothwell – 
with the news that Salisbury county court may be sympathetic to the divine 
parking rights of kings.

Pendragon has petitioned the court to revoke all fees, citing articles nine, 
10, 11 and 14 of the European convention on human rights. As a neo-Druid, he 
argues that this “pay to pray” impinges on his free right of worship, and in an 
early victory, the court this weekgranted him a full day to hear his case 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-wiltshire-38558778>.

This is not the first time the former Royal Hampshire Regiment parachutist has 
gone into battle for the liberty of the Henge. In the 90s, when English 
Heritage first brought in visitor charges, he campaigned for free access to the 
site, resulting in multiple trespass arrests. More recently, hecalled for the 
immediate reburial <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-wiltshire-34688929> of 
the cremated remains of about 40 bodies found at a nearby archaeological site. 
And he has repeatedly stood for election in Salisbury, on a platform of 
green-ish libertarianism.

Pendragon was a happily mortgaged family man before he began joining biker 
gangs in the 1970s, rising to the top of the Gravediggers. In 1986, afteran 
encounter with a book of Arthurian legend 
<http://www.warband.org.uk/about-arthur.html>, he realised the similarities 
between his own life story – squaddie, biker, property owner – and that of the 
former English head honcho – mythic king, sword-puller – were unmistakable and 
overwhelming.

Six weeks later, browsing local shops, he came across a copy of Excalibur that 
had been used in the 1981 film of the same name, and the deal was sealed. The
Loyal Arthurian Warband <http://www.warband.org.uk/> was formed not long after, 
managedfrom his council flat in Farnborough, Hampshire 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/britons-behold-your-king-in-a-hampshire-council-maisonette-excaliburs-rightful-owner-has-renounced-1393154.htmll>
. In the ensuing years, he claims to have “knighted” many famous faces into his 
order, among them cage fighter and former Katie Price squeeze Alex Reid. He 
also co-wrote an autobiography in 2003, The Trials of Arthur.

Nonetheless, English Heritage continues to oppose his parking claim. In 2000, 
it points out, 10,000 people attended the solstice. By 2014, that number had 
risen to almost 40,000. Faced with such a deluge, it aims to encourage 
revellers to avoid parking, and instead lift-share or use buses.

For his part, Pendragon takes issue with the oft-floated idea that he might 
not be the reincarnation of the fifth-century king. The similarities are 
obvious,he said in 2014 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/stonehenge-mystery-will-druid-king-get-a-parking-space-for-his-kawasaki-1411353009>
: “He rode around on a horse and fought people. I bang Druids’ heads together 
and fight English Heritage.”
 