
At the time the 2005 Boxing Day tsunami struck, a little boy and his sister 
were playing on a pristine beach in the Maldives. They were engulfed by a huge 
wave and when the little boy came to his senses his sister had vanished. His 
parents searched in vain before realising that their daughter had perished. I 
am unsure if her body was ever found.

I met the little boy, barely six, when I arrived on his island as a 
Commonwealth volunteer physician. The neighbouring island had been decimated, 
hence evacuated. I worked amid a swollen population due to the relocation of 
residents from the other island.

There was the anticipated break of gastroenteritis that required door-to-door 
visits, skin infections arising from water-logged homes, exacerbations of 
asthma and hypertension, and blood sugars gone astray because food supply 
became unpredictable for a while. Two young nurses and I, working out of a 
basic facility, constituted all the medical expertise but the islanders were 
largely young and healthy so our care mostly didn’t seem onerous.

Victoria will take the 267 asylum seekers, Daniel Andrews tells Malcolm 
Turnbull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/06/victoria-will-take-refugee-children-says-premier-daniel-andrews>
Except in the case of the little boy. Some days after I had settled in, the 
parents brought him in.

“Our son doesn’t talk since the day of the tsunami.” It was now many weeks 
later.

“Can’t talk or won’t talk?” I probed.

“Just doesn’t talk.” Tears clouded their eyes. 

“Was he previously well?”

“He was the happiest boy.”

“Did he say anything after the tsunami?”

“Never.”

The other islanders corroborated the history that the child had been 
developmentally normal until the disaster. But after the tsunami he had never 
been heard to speak, inside or outside his home. My tentative efforts to engage 
him were in vain; I possessed neither the knowledge nor the amicability of 
paediatricians.

He refused to leave his father’s side, sitting quietly in his lap for entire 
days. His expression was placid, his eyes always lost in thought. What crossed 
his mind as he stared out at the vast ocean that gleamed like an emerald?

Did he wonder, like I did, how that calm, inviting surface could froth in 
rage, take lives and then resume being beautiful? Or did he just think of the 
last game he played with his sister? What did death mean to him? Did he 
understand that she would now only exist in his memory, or did his eyes stay 
peeled on the ocean in case she returned? The island elders tried to help, 
offering him treats, speaking gently and sometimes teasingly but all they got 
was a resolute silence.

More weeks went by and it was clear that the little boy was severely 
traumatised and needed the assistance of mental health experts. Mindful of the 
limited resources, I nonetheless suggested this to the island chief who 
immediately made enquiries. It turned out that there was such an expert 
stationed in the capital and the little boy and his father were shipped there 
with great fanfare. There was a palpable sense of relief among the islanders 
for whom no suffering was greater than that of a young child.

But much to our surprise, the little boy returned after two days. Apparently 
he had met a psychologist of international repute but there was no medical 
handover, no instructions to the parents and no follow up care. Needless to 
say, he remained mute and his parents remained alarmed.

As long as I was there, I kept pointing out the lack of genuine help and those 
in power kept nodding but nothing happened. Finally, the truth dawned on me. 
The boy was no better but the official boxes had been ticked – his handling had 
been a bureaucratic success.

Ten years since I met him, I have been thinking a lot about that little boy in 
the context of children in detention and what the Australian government boasts 
about the provision of medical treatment for refugees. The situations could not 
be more different – the tsunami gave rise to unprecedented international 
goodwill and more money than the Red Cross knew what to do with. The refugee 
situation has done the opposite. But when it comes to healthcare to 
disadvantaged and vulnerable people, the spin stories bear similarities.

The boy’s ignored plight with lifelong consequences represented a failure of 
the system but you would never know it. On paper, the island had a specialist 
doctor stationed on it, never mind that the doctor was a physician whose only 
paediatric experience had been on the ward of a Melbourne hospital as a medical 
student. On paper, a patient with unmet needs could be sent to the mainland for 
management but the process was haphazard and unaccounted for.

How did a scared, illiterate patient even know what had transpired? I saw a 
few times that while the official line on medical aid sounded good, only 
someone with inside experience would appreciate the innate deficiencies and the 
maddening contradictions. The notion of patient confidentiality was a fig leaf 
– it obscured the lack of process and transparency.

Last week we were shocked by images of babies in detention who risk being sent 
back to Nauru and then, by the illustrations of young children depicting their 
traumatic experiences and deepest fears, released as part of aHuman Rights 
Commission report 
<https://www.humanrights.gov.au/publications/asylum-seekers-and-refugees?source=our-work>
 in the wellbeing of children in immigration detention. I saw any number of 
such illustrations post-tsunami when the island’s school reopened.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Ftheres-no-hope-theres-nothing-heartbreaking-drawings-by-children-in-australias-immigration-detention-centres-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F3%2F1454477939447%2FKP_1669324_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='There's%20no%20hope%2C%20there's%20nothing'%3A%20drawings%20by%20children%20in%20immigration%20detention%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Ftheres-no-hope-theres-nothing-heartbreaking-drawings-by-children-in-australias-immigration-detention-centres-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27There%27s%20no%20hope%2C%20there%27s%20nothing%27%3A%20drawings%20by%20children%20in%20immigration%20detention%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Ftheres-no-hope-theres-nothing-heartbreaking-drawings-by-children-in-australias-immigration-detention-centres-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F3%2F1454477939447%2FKP_1669324_crop_640x480.jpg>
‘There’s no hope, there’s nothing’: drawings by children in detention – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/feb/03/theres-no-hope-theres-nothing-heartbreaking-drawings-by-children-in-australias-immigration-detention-centres-video>
We know that living in detention traumatises children. The Human Right 
Commission report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/04/children-who-fear-return-to-nauru-have-attempted-suicide-say-paediatricians>
 released last week found that 34% of children in detention visited by the 
report’s authors had severe to moderate mental illness, compared to 2% of 
children in the Australian community.

Figures released by International Health and Medical Services (IHMS) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/18/child-detainee-mental-trauma-will-last-immigration-healthcare-provider-warns>
 – the company contracted to run medical services in immigration detention 
centres in Australia, Nauru and Papua New Guinea – paint an equally grim 
picture for children in detention. Almost 16% of children under four had been 
taken to a doctor with a mental health condition in the quarter from April to 
June 2015. IHMS believes those figures are understated and have concluded that 
children suffer more serious mental health crises than adults in detention and 
that those conditions deteriorate the longer they are held in detention.

Child detainee mental trauma will last, immigration healthcare provider warns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/18/child-detainee-mental-trauma-will-last-immigration-healthcare-provider-warns>
Here are two things I’ve learnt about trauma in children.

First, children can’t employ the same frame of reference of adults and yet, 
their emotional struggles can be just as powerful, insidious and silently 
erosive. The little boy’s father used to glance at the sky and say it was God’s 
will his daughter died. His mother forced herself to imagine her at peace so 
she could get on with the cooking and cleaning. But the little boy didn’t have 
these perspectives to help him reconcile to his loss. His parents thought that 
he felt responsible for her death but didn’t understand what he had done to 
deserve such a harsh punishment. Many months later, still mute, he finally drew 
a picture depicting this.

Second, children are not little adults. Paediatricians say this in half jest 
to hapless medical students who like to retrofit adult concepts to children but 
the maxim applies especially to psychologically traumatised children who need 
expert and sensitive intervention, and crucially, continuity of care, to have 
any hope of restoration of their former selves.

I have lost touch with the islanders who kept me posted about the little boy. 
I console myself that surrounded by the community’s patience, understanding and 
compassion he eventually found his voice and halved the sorrow of his parents. 
But it’s difficult to imagine the psychological trauma of children in 
Australian detention being easy to erase even if by some miracle, we came up 
with the right ingredients.

Children <https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> do not belong in 
detention. Silently appalled and deeply conflicted, doctors are ready to help 
them. We can do better. Make our job easier, Malcolm Turnbull.
 