
The government’s stamp duty changes have left estate agents in Manchester with 
a festive spring in their step. “It feels like Christmas has come early,” said 
Nick Stanton, senior manager of Bridgfords’ city centre office. “Whether people 
are buying or selling, at certain price points the changes have created a new 
mood of optimism. It’s brilliant.”

One particular apartment in St Mary’s Parsonage, had been on the market for 
nine weeks by the time the chancellor rose in the Commons on Wednesday.

Bridgfords had valued it at around £260,000, but warned the owner that the old 
stamp duty threshold at £250,000 would be an issue.

“As soon as the announcement was made we spoke to everyone who had viewed the 
property and explained that at £260,000 they’d only be paying £3,000 stamp duty 
as opposed to £7,800.

“We had two people view that day, and three more will be viewing tomorrow. 
There’s already been one tentative offer, with maybe more to come, so it’s 
looking very positive.”

The £250,000 price banding has been a particular problem in recent years, with 
estate agents having to explain to vendors that while their property might be 
worth £10,000 or £20,000 more they might not actually achieve that.

“The reduction now isn’t enormous, but it gives them the confidence to make an 
offer,” said Stanton.

“It’s all very good news as we run up to Christmas. My whole team are now 
working hard to re-connect with buyers who didn’t think they could afford 
certain properties.

“We’re able to say you should think of buying something now because mortgage 
rates have never been cheaper and you’ve the added bonus of the stamp duty 
reform.”

Markus Jolleys, manager of Gascoigne Halman’s Wilmslow office, shares the new 
mood of optimism. “The signs we’ve seen have been very positive,” he said.

“Inside 24 hours of the changes being announced we had a sale agreed on a 
property at £382,000. The owner of the property was initially anxious to 
complete before the autumn statement, since he feared a rise in stamp duty.”

But at the higher end of the market buyers are not so happy.

One couple buying a £1.3m home found they would have to pay another £10,000 in 
stamp duty.

Overall Jolleys is confident the changes will reignite sections of the market 
that have stalled in recent years: “Across the whole market properties were 
disadvantaged if they were priced around the thresholds, but particularly when 
they went over £250,000. I think these changes will encourage prices to 
strengthen.”
 