
Chris Evans <https://www.theguardian.com/media/chris-evans> said Top Gear was 
“repositioning” the way people watch TV in the era of on-demand viewing, but 
the BBC show lost a third of its audience on the BBC’s iPlayer during its first 
series without Jeremy Clarkson.


The first episode of Top Gear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/top-gear> drew more than 1.4 million 
requests on the BBC’s catch-up service after it returned at the end of May, but 
by the time of the fourth episode three weeks later, the number had fallen by 
half a million to 901,000.


The figures, published by the BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> on 
Tuesday, echo the decline in the traditional TV ratings for the show, which 
began with an overnight audience of more than 4 million viewers but ended up 
with fewer than 2 million.


Chris Evans quits BBC Top Gear after just one series
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/04/chris-evans-quits-bbc-top-gear-after-one-series>
Defending the performance of the show, Evans had earlier pointed to the 
programme’s catch-up viewing as evidence of its continued popularity andsaid 
Top Gear was “repositioning the way” people watch TV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/06/chris-evans-top-gear-ratings-bbc>
.

Chris Evans (@achrisevans) 
The way Top Gear is being viewed is repositioning the way television is 
consumed. Last week 9 millions viewers. This week we shall see.
 <https://twitter.com/achrisevans/status/739756784395689985> June 6, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/achrisevans/status/739756784395689985> 
The new series of Top Gear began with a Sunday night audience of 4.3 million 
viewers on 29 May, growing to more than 6 million in the consolidated figures, 
which include people who recorded it and watched it in the subsequent seven 
days.


However, it fell during the course of the run to an overnight audience of just 
1.9 million for its final episode on 3 July, which grew to 2.6 million in the 
consolidated figures.


The iPlayer figures reveal that Top Gear’s total audience, including its 
entire TV audience andiPlayer <https://www.theguardian.com/media/iplayer> 
requests, nearly halved in three weeks, from 7.8 million for its first episode 
to 4.1 million for episode four.

Evans had said before the series started that he would be “disappointed” with 
anything less than 5 million viewers.


The day after the final episode of the six-part series, Evans quit the show, 
saying he had given the programme his best shot but it wasn’t good enough.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftop-gear-the-stig-interview-john-plunkett-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%20Gear's%20The%20Stig%3A%20the%20Guardian's%20hard-hitting%20interview%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftop-gear-the-stig-interview-john-plunkett-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%20Gear%27s%20The%20Stig%3A%20the%20Guardian%27s%20hard-hitting%20interview%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftop-gear-the-stig-interview-john-plunkett-video&media=>
Top Gear’s The Stig: the Guardian’s hard-hitting interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/video/2016/may/26/top-gear-the-stig-interview-john-plunkett-video>
The Radio 2 breakfast DJ is not expected to be replaced for the next series of 
the show – worth at the last count £50m a year to the corporation’s commercial 
arm, BBC Worldwide.

Evans’ co-presenter, former Friends star Matt LeBlanc, is expected to take the 
lead anchor role.

 