
The former Conservative party treasurer, Peter Cruddas, is donating £1m to the 
Vote Leave campaign to quit the EU and has predicted that “big business names” 
will support severing links with Brussels.

The multimillionaire founder of CMC Markets, the online trading firm, said he 
expected Vote Leave to raise £20m with more business figures waiting in the 
wings. “We are confident we will raise that. There are some big businesses, big 
business names that are with us, but they haven’t declared yet.” hetold the 
Financial Times 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/db7ce4fe-8e17-11e5-a549-b89a1dfede9b.html#axzz3rvhhGYMn>
.

Cameron faces EU referendum delay after Lords vote on teenager participation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/18/lords-back-eu-referendum-vote-for-16--and-17-year-olds>
The City of London has emerged as a key funding source for campaigns on both 
sides of the forthcoming referendum on EU membership, due to take place in 2016 
or 2017.Two major figures in the London hedge fund industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/06/why-are-hedge-funds-supporting-brexit>
, Crispin Odey and Sir Michael Hintze, are backing a Brexit, with EU regulation 
of financial services companies among their biggest concerns. However, two of 
their peers –David Harding of Winton Capital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/12/leading-hedge-fund-manager-david-harding-campaign-stay-eu>
 and John Armitage of Egerton Capital – came out last week as big donors to the 
In campaign, which is led by theBritain Stronger in Europe group 
<http://www.strongerin.co.uk/>. The Out campaign is led by Vote Leave 
<http://www.voteleavetakecontrol.org/> and the Nigel Farage-backed Leave.EU 
<http://leave.eu/>. 

Cruddas said he expected the referendum to galvanise the British public. “I 
think this will be the Scottish referendum times 10. It is a much wider, bigger 
issue which also has implications across the union,” he said. “There are 
windows in history whereby the British public decide what they want and it’s 
outside the control of politicians. This is one of those events.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fcity-financier-peter-cruddas-donates-1m-for-campaign-to-leave-eu%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14eecd58e765ccfa2f35fa9a7fb24f5d34910bea%2F355_139_1564_938%2F1564.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=City%20financier%20Peter%20Cruddas%20donates%20%C2%A31m%20for%20campaign%20to%20leave%20EU&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fcity-financier-peter-cruddas-donates-1m-for-campaign-to-leave-eu%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=City%20financier%20Peter%20Cruddas%20donates%20%C2%A31m%20for%20campaign%20to%20leave%20EU&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fcity-financier-peter-cruddas-donates-1m-for-campaign-to-leave-eu%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14eecd58e765ccfa2f35fa9a7fb24f5d34910bea%2F355_139_1564_938%2F1564.jpg>
 Peter Cruddas, pictured in 2012. He expects the referendum to galvanise the 
British public. 
Expressing confidence that the Out campaign would win, he said: “If I was the 
politicians I’d hang on to my hat.”

Despite the backing of high-profile figures such as Cruddas, Odey and Hintze, 
the wider UK financial services industry is seen as largely pro-single market. 
Most of the country’s big financial services institutions, including US 
investment banks Goldman Sachs and Citigroup alongside domestic names such as 
the Lloyd’s of London insurance market and the City ofLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> Corporation, believe Britain is better 
off staying in the EU.

The Out vote is backed 

Cruddas’s donation represents a return to public and political life for the 
businessman, after he was forced out of the Conservative partyin 2012 after a 
newspaper sting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/mar/25/peter-cruddas-resigns-cash-access>
. Cruddas was subsequently exonerated in alibel action against the Sunday Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/jul/31/tory-peter-cruddas-libel-victory>
 over false allegations that he charged £250,000 to meet the prime minister.

He told the FT that he had been “excommunicated” by the party three years ago 
but bore no grudge against theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> and had met David Cameron 
recently. “We’ve all moved on,” he said.
 