
The Financial Conduct Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/financial-conduct-authority> and the 
Treasury have called on the government to relax rules on financial advice to 
enable savers to plan for their futures.

The Financial Advice Market Review 
<https://www.fca.org.uk/your-fca/documents/financial-advice-market-review-final-report>
 (FAMR) said the government should act to fill gaps that leave many consumers 
unwilling or unable to pay for advice on how to invest relatively small sums.

The current regime requires financial advisers to charge customers for their 
services instead of taking fees for selling products. The rules,introduced 
three years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2012/aug/11/financialadvisers-family-finances>
, were meant to make advice more transparent and stamp out conflicts of 
interest for advisers receiving commission from companies.

Existing rules allow advisers to focus on particular needs but firms are often 
unsure where they stand in doing so, the review said. The FAMR, conducted by 
the FCA and the Treasury, recommended the government narrow the definition of 
regulated financial advice to leave firms more scope to offer guidance to 
customers.

The review also said the FCA should establish a unit to help firms develop 
automated services such as the “robo-advisers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/nov/08/financial-advice-robot-automated-treasury-fca-service>
” introducedby Royal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/13/rbs-royal-bank-scotland-cut-550-jobs-automating-investment-advice>
. Savers should also be able to make use of part of their pension pot to pay 
for advice before retiring, the review recommended.

Tracey McDermott, the FCA’s acting chief executive, said: “This review has 
taken place against the backdrop of social and demographic changes which have 
led to an increasing need for individuals to take more responsibility for their 
own financial future. But we know that people often find it difficult to engage 
with financial matters and we need to make it easier for them to do so.”

FAMR said the cost of providing face-to-face advice meant it was often not 
financially viable for firms to advise people with smaller amounts to invest or 
with simple requirements.

A survey this year found 69% of advisers had turned away potential clients in 
the previous 12 months, mainly because their services would have been too 
expensive. The result, compounded by lack of trust in financial companies, was 
that people were making more decisions on their own, FAMR said.

Tom McPhail, head of retirement policy at investment company Hargreaves 
Lansdown, said: “The most critical proposal is to simplify and clarify the 
boundary between advice and guidance. It should allow firms more latitude to 
deliver useful guidance without having to charge an advisory fee or worry about 
inadvertently straying into giving personalised advice.

“For many, the system had become increasingly dysfunctional with providers 
withdrawing from the market and consumers not getting access to the services 
they required.”

McPhail said he was concerned about FAMR’s proposal to allow “streamlined” 
advice, which he argued could allow poor practices, dealt with by the rule 
change three years ago, to creep back into the industry.
 