
A few minutes after I ring the bell at Clarke Peters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/clarke-peters>’ home in a tranquil corner 
of north-west London, he materialises behind me, padding up the path with his 
wife, Penny. “Sorry, mate,” he says, the British colloquialism sounding odd in 
his deep, soothing east coast tones. “We were getting coffee. I don’t get to 
spend too much time with my wife.” Their youngest son recently left for 
university and Penny tells me she’s feeling “the empty nest thing”. Does he 
call? “Sometimes too much!” Peters says with a toot of brassy laughter.

He and I wander into the living room where a piano is covered in hats from 
some of the 64-year-old actor’s roles. Here’s one he wore in a production of Ma 
Rainey’s Black Bottom. And here’s one fromTreme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/may/13/your-next-box-set-treme>, 
David Simon <https://www.theguardian.com/media/david-simon>’s series about New 
Orleans in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina; Peters played a Mardi Gras 
Indian chief. He touches another hat and seems momentarily stumped before the 
penny drops. “That’s my wife’s,” he says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fclarke-peters-the-wire-treme-midsomer-murders-five-guys-named-moe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3a00388ae88ef3444c3ccff76567ccec4acd889%2F895_0_2074_2592%2F2074.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clarke%20Peters%3A%20'I%20was%2015%20when%20I%20first%20stuck%20out%20my%20thumb%20and%20ran%20away%20from%20home'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fclarke-peters-the-wire-treme-midsomer-murders-five-guys-named-moe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clarke%20Peters%3A%20%27I%20was%2015%20when%20I%20first%20stuck%20out%20my%20thumb%20and%20ran%20away%20from%20home%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fclarke-peters-the-wire-treme-midsomer-murders-five-guys-named-moe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3a00388ae88ef3444c3ccff76567ccec4acd889%2F895_0_2074_2592%2F2074.jpg>
 After the hurricane … Peters as Albert Lambreaux in Treme. Photograph: Paul 
Schiraldi 
Simon has put a lot of work Peters’ way: the addicts-and-dealers tale The 
Corner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/organgrinder/2009/apr/06/the-corner-dvd-the-wire>
, the housing dramaShow Me a Hero 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/aug/10/show-me-a-hero-david-simon-return-to-form>
 and forthcoming chronicle of the porn industry,The Deuce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/sep/24/maggie-gyllenhaal-david-simon-the-deuce-hbo>
. Not forgettingThe Wire <https://www.theguardian.com/media/wire>, where Peters 
was the wise, unflappable detective Lester Freamon. The show turned him, as he 
has put it, into “an overnight sensation after 38 years in the business”.

What is it about Simon’s writing that he responds to? “It’s intelligent,” he 
says as he retires to the sofa. He’s wearing a grey wool jacket, maroon shirt, 
cream trousers and baseball sneakers; his shock of hair looks faintly 
electrified. “You watch The Wire and you think, ‘That’s not just Baltimore. 
That’s how things work everywhere.’”


Even without Simon, Peters’ dance card would be full. He has turned up in True 
Detective <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/true-detective>, London Spy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/london-spy>, The Tunnel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/dec/05/have-you-been-watching-the-tunnel-bridge-remake>
, the legal dramaDamages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2010/may/28/damages-review> and the 
ITV westernJericho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/08/jericho-jessica-raine-widow-annie-review>
; a while back, he had a stint on Holby City and was even that rare commodity, 
a black face on Midsomer Murders. “I mix it up to remind myself that this is 
what I do. It isn’t who I am.”


When there's a good big band behind you, you can lean back on it

As if to prove that point, he is currently preparing to be part of Guy 
Barker’s Big Band Christmas show 
<http://www.royalalberthall.com/tickets/events/2016/guy-barkers-big-band-christmas/ 
http://www.royalalberthall.com/tickets/events/2016/guy-barkers-big-band-christmas/>
. I ask how it feels to stand in front of that band and he swoons. “When 
there’s a good swinging big band behind you, you can lean back on it. If you 
know the arrangements you can play with that — when the horns are coming in, 
you might want to syncopate a melody or a rhythm with them. Sometimes it’s not 
what’s being played; it’s what’s in the gaps.”

Music has been a major force in Peters’ life: he wrote and starred in the 
musical Five Guys Named Moe and was part of the 70s soul group the Majestics, 
who provided backing vocals on Heatwave’s timeless Boogie Nights as well as for 
the Rolling Stones and David Essex. It’s also Peters you can hear singing the 
line “Oh, give me love” on Joan Armatrading’sLove and Affection 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9cgDIa9ndcY>.

He can’t remember when music entered his life: “It’s always been there.” But 
he knows when he understood it was something he could do. He was four years 
old, growing up in Englewood, New Jersey. “My father bought a reel-to-reel tape 
recorder when they were still fairly new. He and the shopkeeper played a trick 
on me. They pre-recorded some answers and then got me to ask the questions. So 
I’d say, ‘How old am I?’ And this box would reply, ‘You’re four years old.’ 
Amazing! How did it know that? Anyway we got this thing home and …” He falls 
silent and stares at the fireplace. “Oh wow. Nowthis is a memory. It was a Fats 
Waller song and I was singing into the tape machine.” He starts crooning 
wistfully: “I’m gonna sit right down and write myself a letter / And make 
believe itcaaame from you ...” 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fclarke-peters-the-wire-treme-midsomer-murders-five-guys-named-moe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61cea080f4a49608f0514b09970ffc0a686f5984%2F0_49_2400_1439%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clarke%20Peters%3A%20'I%20was%2015%20when%20I%20first%20stuck%20out%20my%20thumb%20and%20ran%20away%20from%20home'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fclarke-peters-the-wire-treme-midsomer-murders-five-guys-named-moe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clarke%20Peters%3A%20%27I%20was%2015%20when%20I%20first%20stuck%20out%20my%20thumb%20and%20ran%20away%20from%20home%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fclarke-peters-the-wire-treme-midsomer-murders-five-guys-named-moe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61cea080f4a49608f0514b09970ffc0a686f5984%2F0_49_2400_1439%2F2400.jpg>
 ‘It’s not just Baltimore. That’s how things work everywhere’ … as Lester 
Freamon in The Wire. Photograph: Blown Deadline/Rex/Shutterstock 
Peters tumbled into music and acting in high school. Ten years ago, he went to 
a reunion and performed with people he hadn’t seen since childhood – Ernie 
Isley of the Isley Brothers, the jazz guitarist Cliff Richmond, the actor Peter 
Coyote. “The only one missing was John Travolta. The rest were there. We 
played, we danced, we sang. We were kids again.”

His upbringing was happy but that didn’t stop him running away from home. 
“Wanderlust,” he grins. “I was 15 the first time I put my thumb out.” He’d been 
walking the dog one morning when he thought: I’m outta here. “I opened the side 
door at home, let the dog into the cellar and kept on going.” On another 
occasion, he was dispatched by his parents to bring his older brother back from 
Paris. “I brought the big guy back for Thanksgiving. Then after Thanksgiving, 
we both took off for Paris again and never came back.” His booming laugh 
rattles the window panes.

He got a job at 19 in the Parisian production of Hair, which wasn’t the sort 
of acting career he had envisaged. “In drama class we had done Antigone. I 
loved the classics without knowing that those roles were limited for a soul 
locked in a dark body. The opportunities weren’t there.” It’s a problem he 
encountered repeatedly.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fclarke-peters-the-wire-treme-midsomer-murders-five-guys-named-moe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50ed535314b20173d1e2fe776a5eecc837d1a9a2%2F0_221_3372_2023%2F3372.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clarke%20Peters%3A%20'I%20was%2015%20when%20I%20first%20stuck%20out%20my%20thumb%20and%20ran%20away%20from%20home'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fclarke-peters-the-wire-treme-midsomer-murders-five-guys-named-moe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clarke%20Peters%3A%20%27I%20was%2015%20when%20I%20first%20stuck%20out%20my%20thumb%20and%20ran%20away%20from%20home%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fclarke-peters-the-wire-treme-midsomer-murders-five-guys-named-moe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50ed535314b20173d1e2fe776a5eecc837d1a9a2%2F0_221_3372_2023%2F3372.jpg>
 ‘This is what I do. It isn’t who I am’ … with Jessica Raine in Jericho. 
Photograph: ITV 
His role as the terrifying pimp in Neil Jordan’s 1986 thriller Mona Lisa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/26/long-good-friday-mona-lisa-dvd-review-philip-french>
 represented a fork in the road. “I wasn’t willing to play that again. I didn’t 
think any black actor should. I wanted a role that had some integrity.” His 
mother took her workmates back in Jersey to see Mona Lisa. “She told them all I 
was doing this big film with Michael Caine. And here comes her son, the 
knife-wielding pimp.” Then there was the porn video scene. “Neil told Cathy 
[Tyson], ‘I want you to lick down the front of him. Wow, man.” He begins to 
sing again: “What we do for our art …” Then he shakes his head. “My mother 
called. She said, ‘Son, I didnot bring you up to act that way.’” 

Songs today leave nothing to the imagination – back up on this, twerk on this

When the parts weren’t there, Peters created them. In Five Guys Named Moe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/aug/11/five-guys-named-moe-edinburgh-review>
, he imagined a forlorn young man receiving counsel in matters of love from 
five figures who burst out of his radio and use the songs of Louis Jordan to 
make their points. The show went from London to Broadway in the early 90s and 
has just opened ina new production 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/30/five-guys-named-moe-review-edinburghhttps://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/30/five-guys-named-moe-review-edinburgh>
 in Edinburgh. Writing it was therapy, he says. “That was me trying to figure 
out how a young man gets on with his love life. It’s still relevant. Men don’t 
talk about those things. We boast about our conquests. Songs today leave 
nothing to the imagination. One of the numbers I’m doing with Guy is Shake 
Hands with Santa Claus: ‘If you want some candy, I’ll bring you the candy.’ How 
sweet is that? It’s not, ‘Baby back up on this shit, twerk on this thing!’ That 
doesn’t serve the manor the woman. It corrupts something in us as human beings. 
Kinda like that guy who has just been elected president.”

He tells me he was in bed when he heard the US election results. “One of my 
brothers called and said, ‘He’s in.’” He sighs. “As far as Trump goes, I wish 
him well. That’s all I can say. The whole world is watching.” He takes an 
optimistic view. “We’re being tested. Our patience, our tolerance, our 
altruism, our love. It feels to me that it’s that time. Use it for your growth. 
That’s how we’ll get through this. And hold on to the things you value because 
we’re in for a rough ride.”

• Guy Barker’s Big Band Christmas is at the Royal Albert Hall 
<http://www.royalalberthall.com/tickets/events/2016/guy-barkers-big-band-christmas/>
, London, on 11 December. Box office: 020-7589 8212.
 