
There have been nine episodes of The Grand Tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-grand-tour> now, all sequestered 
behind Amazon’s paywall. When the show works – as with the two-part Namibia 
special – its formula runs like clockwork.

However, a few things have started to grate, and these should probably be 
addressed before The Grand Tour starts to sputter and parp like Top Gear did 
before it. So here, then, is everything that’s currently wrong with The Grand 
Tour.

The scriptedness 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fthe-grand-tour-clarkson-hammond-too-desperate-to-offend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe640716609a26b8811ea18408637c070ec29e6c8%2F0_269_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clarkson's%20bracelets%20to%20Hammond's%20ice-cream%3A%20The%20Grand%20Tour%20is%20too%20desperate%20to%20offend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fthe-grand-tour-clarkson-hammond-too-desperate-to-offend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clarkson%27s%20bracelets%20to%20Hammond%27s%20ice-cream%3A%20The%20Grand%20Tour%20is%20too%20desperate%20to%20offend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fthe-grand-tour-clarkson-hammond-too-desperate-to-offend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe640716609a26b8811ea18408637c070ec29e6c8%2F0_269_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Unless they’re doing something as silly as the Edge of Tomorrow spoof, you can 
often see the hosts glumly going through the motions. Photograph: Ellis 
O'Brien/Amazon 
People watched Top Gear because they enjoyed seeing Jeremy Clarkson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/jeremyclarkson>, Richard Hammond and James 
May interact with the world. They liked watching what an ill fit these three 
unkempt berks were, and how badly they reacted to failure. Unfortunately, this 
prompted Top Gear to start manufacturing its own failure; baking cock-ups and 
explosions into the premise of each new film at the point of concept. And this 
has continued over into The Grand Tour. Unless they’re doing something as silly 
as episode two’s Edge of Tomorrow spoof, you can often see the hosts glumly 
going through the motions. The lack of spontaneity in the new show is 
deadening, and the reliance on premeditated catastrophe feels like a sign that 
Clarkson, Hammond and May have lost confidence in themselves.

The provider 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fthe-grand-tour-clarkson-hammond-too-desperate-to-offend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe315c0a69b038800c6ba3fa3637794fc77e2b56c%2F0_87_4800_2880%2F4800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clarkson's%20bracelets%20to%20Hammond's%20ice-cream%3A%20The%20Grand%20Tour%20is%20too%20desperate%20to%20offend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fthe-grand-tour-clarkson-hammond-too-desperate-to-offend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clarkson%27s%20bracelets%20to%20Hammond%27s%20ice-cream%3A%20The%20Grand%20Tour%20is%20too%20desperate%20to%20offend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fthe-grand-tour-clarkson-hammond-too-desperate-to-offend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe315c0a69b038800c6ba3fa3637794fc77e2b56c%2F0_87_4800_2880%2F4800.jpg>
 Amazon doesn’t care what Clarkson does … which leaves him twisting in the wind 
without a superior to needle. Photograph: Ellis O'Brian 
Only now is it becoming clear that Clarkson and the BBC belong together. 
They’re two sides of the same coin. The BBC needs Clarkson to provide a bite 
that’s absent elsewhere, and Clarkson needs the BBC to rebel against. Just look 
how weirdly they’re both doing on their own; the BBC’s new Top Gear was a flop, 
and Clarkson is twisting in the wind without a superior to needle. At the BBC, 
he gained cachet by being an irritant. But at Amazon, he’s just a tiny cog in a 
vast corporation that makes money by selling toilet roll to people. Amazon 
doesn’t care what Clarkson does. And if they don’t, why should we?

The outrage

The saddest thing about Richard Hammond’s recent “ice-cream is for gay people” 
rant isn’t that Hammond thinks ice-cream is effeminate. Nor is it that the 
segment made it to air. No, it’s that poor Hammond was trying so hard to cause 
offence. He was really straining to get there, the poor lamb. He was breaking 
his back to say something that warranted a thinkpiece, and the best he could 
come up with is “ice-cream is gay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/27/richard-hammond-ice-cream-gay-the-grand-tour>
”. The only thing sadder than all his effort was the fact that the episode had 
been online for five days before anyone even noticed he’d said it.

The music 

The Grand Tour relies on the sort of anonymous, cruddy soundalike incidental 
music you only tend to hear on Food Network shows about regional Canadian 
hamburger restaurants. For instance, in the Christmas episode, Clarkson 
compared a car to the Clash. If this was Top Gear, the next shot would almost 
definitely be the car thundering down the road to London Calling. Instead, The 
Grand Tour gave us a tinnily drab piece of muzak called Start the Party that 
sounded like what you’d get if you entered the search term the Clash into a 
copyright-free music library. It’s a small thing, but it makes the show feel 
cheap; less like Top Gear and more like those rubbishy DVDs Clarkson used to 
release, called things like Hot Metal and Powered Up and Dad’s Midlife Crisis.

Richard Hammond 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fthe-grand-tour-clarkson-hammond-too-desperate-to-offend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fc87e7738a04bdc09898da45e85bf41e94f66fc%2F0_160_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clarkson's%20bracelets%20to%20Hammond's%20ice-cream%3A%20The%20Grand%20Tour%20is%20too%20desperate%20to%20offend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fthe-grand-tour-clarkson-hammond-too-desperate-to-offend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clarkson%27s%20bracelets%20to%20Hammond%27s%20ice-cream%3A%20The%20Grand%20Tour%20is%20too%20desperate%20to%20offend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fthe-grand-tour-clarkson-hammond-too-desperate-to-offend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fc87e7738a04bdc09898da45e85bf41e94f66fc%2F0_160_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
 The man must be stopped … Richard Hammond is the show’s Mansplainer In 
Residence. Photograph: Ellis O'Brian 
Leaving aside his opinions on frozen desserts, Hammond is consistently the 
worst thing about The Grand Tour. He now exists purely as the show’s 
Mansplainer In Residence. Whenever Clarkson or May say something funny, as they 
sometimes will, you can bet your bottom dollar that Hammond will pipe up with a 
“No, because…” or a “Yes, but…” that will not only kill any humour, but loot 
its pockets and spend all its spare change on chips as well. The man must be 
stopped.

Jeremy Clarkson’s bracelets

For the life of me, I don’t know when they started to appear. But now that 
I’ve noticed them clanging around his wrists, they’re all I can see. Clarkson 
wears loads of bracelets, all at once, like his arm is a great big gap year 
curtain rail. It’s a little thing, and it shouldn’t bother me, but after all 
the trumpeting about the endless global logistics that go into making The Grand 
Tour, all I can think of when I see Clarkson is him standing at airport 
security, mumbling apologetically to the people behind him as he tries to 
wiggle one bracelet after another over his hands. Please, someone buy him a 
wire-cutter.
 