
Anne Perkins, political commentator and leader writer for the Guardian


I always thought serious fashion was about beautiful clothes for beautiful 
people and took place mainly on the pages of Vogue. This week I realised it in 
fact lies in the uncertain territory somewhere between art and politics.

It was reading interviews with the two leading young designers Demna Gvasalia 
(from Georgia) and Gosha Rubchinskiy (from Russia) that did it. Their stories 
read as if they are straight out ofSecond-Hand Time 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/398112/> by Svetlana 
Alexievich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/oct/08/everything-you-need-to-know-about-svetlana-alexievich-winner-of-the-nobel-prize-in-literature>
 – the book about the transformation of Soviet to consumerist Russia by which I 
am completely absorbed at the moment – and I am entranced by the idea that the 
unprecedented peacetime dislocation should be reflected in fashion designed by 
people who lived through it. I will never get dressed in quite the same way 
again. Nor will I be spending £700 on one of their hoodies, but I will 
understand that the price is part of the absurdity of the world that the 
designers are creating.

There was a time when I thought clothes were probably more important than 
food. I had a wild optimism about the transformational power of a new dress. I 
also had no money and there were no charity shops, although there were dress 
agencies where, if you were lucky, you could find Chanel or Dior for a fraction 
of their original price. But labels did not belong in my world, and it didn’t 
occur to me to mix them with the high street.

Also, I was rubbish with money. My early shopping career ended up with the 
threat of court action, a memorably unpleasant negotiation with a bank manager, 
and a lasting overdraft phobia.

That’s my excuse for wearing, for years and years, the dullest and most 
invisible clothes anyone could imagine. Not that I stood out: by then, in the 
late 80s, I was working as a reporter in the House of Commons, and female 
journalists, like female MPs, were so uncommon, it seemed preferable to be 
unobserved than leered at by male MPs in the corridors of power which we 
thought of as the Reeperbahn.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fstyle-swap-anne-perkins-morwenna-ferrier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff149ccca372c724229db8131dab6d6529e593e19%2F262_781_3242_4144%2F3242.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Classic%20chic%20v%20sportwear%3A%20this%20season's%20style%20swap&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fstyle-swap-anne-perkins-morwenna-ferrier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Classic%20chic%20v%20sportwear%3A%20this%20season%27s%20style%20swap&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fstyle-swap-anne-perkins-morwenna-ferrier%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff149ccca372c724229db8131dab6d6529e593e19%2F262_781_3242_4144%2F3242.jpg>
 Anne switches to Balenciaga dress, Gosha Rubchinskiy sweatshirt, Vetements 
jacket and Chiara Ferragni boots 
Mainly I bought intensely conservative suits, usually from somewhere like 
Jaeger. Occasionally I could afford Margaret Howell, and some of her clothes 
still hang in my wardrobe. To satisfy my money paranoia, I wanted everything to 
last for ever. I recognise something of myself inAngela Merkel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/angela-merkel>’s familiar trouser suit.

When I did break out, it usually had catastrophic consequences. In the same 
way that people trying to give up alcohol never fall off the wagon discreetly, 
I would opt for terrifying colour combinations (“You look like the flag of a 
newly independent country,” a colleague once observed) or heels so high I 
couldn’t actually walk home from the tube.

But then I started working from home. For a couple of years I wore nothing but 
sweaters and jeans. It was a kind of detox. When I started working at the 
Guardian, where some colleagues are extremely creative about the limits of 
office dress, it was a kind of liberation.

I hung on to the things I really loved, though, and they became the base of my 
new style. It still leans towards the conservative and classic, but it is much 
more considered, and it is about how I want to look rather than how I think I 
ought to look.

I rarely pass Cos or Whistles without stopping to look. It is easy to combine 
their distinctive shapes with stuff I already have. It is also practical: shoes 
I can walk in – brogues and trainers – and cashmere because I love its feel and 
the air conditioning in the office is icy. I do occasionally buy expensive 
clothes, most recently an Erdem dress. I love the way the heavy fabric falls 
and the sleekness of the cut.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fstyle-swap-anne-perkins-morwenna-ferrier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe78a67a56876abf2e7cdb86104199005ef42630f%2F0_0_3446_5039%2F3446.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Classic%20chic%20v%20sportwear%3A%20this%20season's%20style%20swap&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fstyle-swap-anne-perkins-morwenna-ferrier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Classic%20chic%20v%20sportwear%3A%20this%20season%27s%20style%20swap&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fstyle-swap-anne-perkins-morwenna-ferrier%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe78a67a56876abf2e7cdb86104199005ef42630f%2F0_0_3446_5039%2F3446.jpg>
 Morwenna as Anne, in head-to-toe Marni 
Erdem’s family may, like Gosha Rubchinskiy or Demna Gvasalia, be part of the 
great eastern bloc diaspora, but he grew up in Canada. “Modest” and “polite” 
are the kind of words people use about him. These are not words that occur in 
any description of either the eponymous Gosha or Demna Gvasalia, who is the 
inspiration behind Vetements, Morwenna’s favourite designers.

On the hanger, though, I thought the punkish Vetements tunic look was great. 
The wearing experience wasn’t. (Apart from the Chiara Ferragni cowboy boots 
which I could have worn with almost anything in my wardrobe.) Reading about the 
designers, I understand that this fashion is not really about the wearer, it’s 
about the designer. If you buy it, you probably hang out with people who speak 
the same cultural language.

So obviously when I put on these clothes for a work visit to the Institute of 
Fiscal Studies, the American-football shoulder pads made me feel as if the 
clothes were wearing me. Now I know it as a reference back to the dark ages of 
pre-consumerist Georgia, that is at least interesting. But I am not sure that I 
want to go out in clothes that make the people I pass in the street look scared.

The outfit I felt most comfortable in was also Vetements: I loved the 
silhouette, the wide shoulders and nipped-in waist of the maroon jersey hoodie 
and the long, narrow skirt. It felt stately and, with the skirt sweeping along 
the ground, grandly elegant (maybe this is a compromise between Demna and his 
brother Guram who manages the commercial side of the business).

On the other hand, when I see hoodies on other people, it always looks to me 
as if they’re trying not to be there, and the hood on this outfit had that 
effect on me, blotting out personality and reducing me to a shape.

The Balenciaga dress was definitely something I might wear. But adding the 
Gosha Rubchinskiy sweatshirt, then layering on another outsize Vetements 
sweatshirt and a sheepskin jacket in a working environment was about as 
enjoyable as if a great weight had fallen out of the sky, suppressing all 
capacity for independent movement. I could only shuffle along like a prisoner 
on the way to the electric chair.

I like clothes to underline freedom and independence; these had the absolute 
reverse effect, making me feel trapped and disempowered. Not so much clothes, 
then, as political commentary.

Morwenna Ferrier, online fashion editor for the Guardian

I’ve always noticed Anne’s style. She might be surprised to know that, but she 
has a confidence and consistency in the way she dresses that is hard to ignore. 
She’s stylish because she owns her look, a hashtag that smacks of Beyoncé, but 
still rings true. Plus it’s hard to distance the woman from the myth.

During the decade that I’ve worked as a journalist, I’ve been anything but 
consistent. As someone who is fairly introverted, I have often seen clothes as 
a surrogate. Or perhaps a crutch. After a prolonged period of green army 
jackets, heavy boots and piercings when I moved to Italy after university – it 
worked for the politics of the time and the place, especially the 
anti-Berlusconi riots – I settled into something a little less extreme but also 
more confusing: going sorority one day and streetwear tracksuit the next. The 
only constants are my tattoos.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fstyle-swap-anne-perkins-morwenna-ferrier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a139059a4693e384752170baeae32d5bd493790%2F0_820_3744_4471%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Classic%20chic%20v%20sportwear%3A%20this%20season's%20style%20swap&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fstyle-swap-anne-perkins-morwenna-ferrier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Classic%20chic%20v%20sportwear%3A%20this%20season%27s%20style%20swap&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fstyle-swap-anne-perkins-morwenna-ferrier%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a139059a4693e384752170baeae32d5bd493790%2F0_820_3744_4471%2F3744.jpg>
 Anne à la Morwenna, in Vetements hoodie and skirt

This is not just the result of my own style tics: the pace at which fashion 
has changed during the period of my working life is absurd, and I’ve mirrored 
each shift. I’ve revised my style repeatedly without spending much money (would 
that I could look after an investment piece long enough to actually warrant the 
initial investment). Shaving half my hair off and wearing Breton tops. Growing 
a fringe and going regrettably twee. Bleached hair with tracksuits. The whole 
gamut, none of it especially successful.

I sometimes change clothes halfway through the day, mostly due to boredom. My 
attitude is extremely nonchalant, which in itself, perhaps, suggests more 
consideration than I care to admit.

There are many misconceptions surrounding the fashion industry. I know this 
because I’ve only been working in fashion for a few years and before that I, 
too, judged. I thought it was all fluff and embellishments, or encyclopedic 
referencing. So when people ask what I do, then immediately ask for shirt 
recommendations, I always balk, though I’ve got better at hiding it. My 
experience of working in fashion has been, conversely, that there is little 
pressure to dress well. You can wear what you want because people will assume 
that it is in fashion. I often wear a tracksuit to the office and no one asks 
why. I might get the side-eye in the corridor but if challenged, I simply 
direct them towards the label Cottweiler and the British designer Caitlin 
Price, and walk away.

The world that I inhabit is quieter, less public and more guarded than Anne’s 
life in political journalism, where she has appeared on television and blazed a 
trail in the male-dominated Houses of Parliament. There are fashion shows, of 
course, and you make an effort with your appearance at the twice-yearly circuit 
of New York, London, Milan and Paris. But, a handful of bloggers and 
high-profile editors aside, the majority of journalists still dress in a 
variation of the industry uniform that won them the description of “black 
crows” back in the 80s. Dark colours, minimalist, functional. The shows are not 
about you – plus if you’re running around all day, you err towards practicality.

The fashion parties are also surprisingly tolerant towards eveningwear 
dissenters like me. Though latterly my night-time look has appropriated fetish 
(which, admittedly, is a little Rodarte).

Contrary to what you might think, fashion journalists don’t get much free 
stuff – we have the bribery act to thank for that – so I can only mimic the 
clothes by many of the brands that I write about. Helpfully, though, the high 
street is very effective at planting spies at shows and spinning up catwalk 
designs at broadband speed. I also habitually browse charity shops and eBay. At 
the moment I like 90s leitmotifs – particularly overt branding and big logos – 
as well as sportswear and androgyny. Think Adidas Originals Firebird 
tracksuits, leather and crop tops.

I also love the new eastern European designers such as Gosha Rubchinskiy and 
Demna Gvasalia. Vetements is my spirit animal. I like their irreverant take on 
fashion and the ideas that run through the clothes they design. I even like the 
use of a hammer and sickle on Gosha’s T-shirts which means they can only be 
worn outside former Soviet countries. (I’m told, by friends, that this is true. 
Not surprisingly, peers from the former eastern bloc have a different 
relationship with the insignia.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fstyle-swap-anne-perkins-morwenna-ferrier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ee21bc97f791a201323286cb13bf18eed515bc2%2F0_0_3479_5165%2F3479.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Classic%20chic%20v%20sportwear%3A%20this%20season's%20style%20swap&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fstyle-swap-anne-perkins-morwenna-ferrier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Classic%20chic%20v%20sportwear%3A%20this%20season%27s%20style%20swap&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fstyle-swap-anne-perkins-morwenna-ferrier%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ee21bc97f791a201323286cb13bf18eed515bc2%2F0_0_3479_5165%2F3479.jpg>
 Morwenna dressed by Anne, in a 1205 tunic and skirt, and Urban Outfitters 
shoes.
Stylist: Billie Brand. Hair and makeup: Juliana Sergot using Lancôme and 
Bumble and bumble 
It’s hard to imagine something more removed from this ethos than Marni. The 
Milanese fashion label founded by Consuelo Castiglioni in the 90s is great for 
vivid colour and eclectic prints, and its bohemian style is individual and 
chic. Its reputation as the label worn by women to impress other women is 
certainly well deserved.

It was, of course, a treat to dress up in Marni. How could it not be, it’s 
Marni. Hackney, where I live, hasn’t seen Marni before. I haven’t seen Marni 
either, at least not off a catwalk, where it whistles past me each season, all 
boxy, colourful and out-of-reach. I certainly haven’t tried to navigate Bethnal 
Green market, where I do my food shopping, wearing Marni before. The knee-high 
boots get stuck in the numerous potholes. My giant sleeves dragged across the 
okra on the veg stalls.

The whole outing became a bit of an ordeal, punctuated by immobility and the 
sort of heckling I imagine Anne may have experienced when she worked at the 
House of Commons. But I felt up to it. Dressing like a grown-up gave me 
confidence.

Would I wear it? Unlikely. I enjoyed the feeling of status, briefly, but I 
can’t imagine wearing something with such a sombre cut and refined style every 
day. Anne knows her mind when it comes to clothes. She has clearly thought 
about what complements her life and her style, and it really works for her. My 
clothes reflect my ambivalence. I like not knowing what I’m going to wear 
tomorrow, but having tried these clothes I can say, given the option, it will 
probably be a tracksuit.
 