
The fame of Claude Lévi-Strauss, who has died aged 100, extended well beyond 
his own subject of anthropology. He was without doubt the anthropologist best 
known to non-specialists. This is mainly because he is usually considered to be 
the founder of the intellectual movement known as structuralism, which was to 
have such influence, especially in the 1970s. He was one of those French 
intellectuals – like Jean-Paul Sartre, Simone de Beauvoir, Michel Foucault, 
Roland Barthes, Jacques Derrida and Paul Ricoeur – whose influence spread to 
many other disciplines because they were philosophers in a much broader sense 
of the word than the academic philosophers of the British and American 
tradition.

As a result, these French writers have seemed more stimulating to some 
Anglo-Saxon thinkers, working in intellectually more imaginative, but perhaps 
less rigorous, areas such as literature, history or sociology than the 
home-grown product. Yet it is something of an irony that Lévi-Strauss should 
have been thought of in this way, as he considered himself, above all, a 
technical anthropologist, and he was a little surprised, if not also a little 
suspicious, of the enthusiasm for structuralism manifested by students of 
literature and others. On the other hand, it cannot be denied that he relished 
the literary fame that his work acquired, especially for his 1955 book Tristes 
Tropiques.

Lévi-Strauss was born in Brussels into a family of French artists, and 
followed a fairly typical career for a successful French humanities student. He 
attended the Lycée Janson de Sailly in Paris, and then the Sorbonne, where in 
1928, at an exceptionally early age and with great success, he passed the 
formidable philosophyagrégation examination. He consequently became a kind of 
high-level school teacher in Laon, in Picardy, a type of post that was often a 
first step towards becoming a university teacher.

He soon became disillusioned with philosophy, however, because of what he saw 
as its sterile self-reference and mannerisms. He especially disliked the 
utilitarian and moralistic forms of philosophy dominant in France at the time. 
For a while he also became active in the French socialist movement but, 
subsequently, he seems to have lost interest in politics and was surprisingly 
uncommitted during the dramatic events of postwarFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>. Instead he became interested in 
anthropology, after reading the American anthropologist Robert Lowie, partly 
because he realised that the richness of the cultures then labelled as 
primitive gave the lie to the optimistic evolutionism of writers such as 
Auguste Comte.

As a result of this interest in anthropology he was proposed by the 
sociologist Célestin Bouglé as a member of a group of French academics who were 
being seconded to the new French-sponsored University of São Paulo inBrazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil>. He accepted a professorship in 
1935, largely in the mistaken belief that he would be able to study the 
Amerindians. He did attempt to carry out a certain amount of anthropological 
research from there, but it was difficult, and in 1939 he resigned from the 
post to carry out more systematic fieldwork among the Nambikwara and other 
indigenous peoples of the Mato Grosso and Brazilian Amazon. Although this field 
work has always been considered to be rather poor by many anthropologists, I 
find it rather impressive given the short time he spent with the Amerindians. 
More importantly it confirmed him in his sympathy and respect for the culture 
of the indigenous peoples of South America and also in his growing scepticism 
towards the philosophical and artistic achievements of the literate 
civilisations of the Old World.

This attitude must have been confirmed by the events of the second world war. 
First, Lévi-Strauss was called up for a very short time and experienced the 
humiliation of the fall of France and the armistice, and then he was faced by 
the growing discrimination and persecution against Jews in Vichy France. In 
1941, he managed to escape and ultimately made his way to New York, where, the 
next year, together with other French intellectuals, he was given a post at the 
New School for Social Research. There, he, the theologian Jacques Maritain and 
others founded a kind of Free French university, the École Libre des Hautes 
Études. After the war he stayed on in the US until 1948, working as cultural 
attaché to the French embassy in Washington. On his return to France, he held a 
number of increasingly important posts at institutions, including the Museé de 
l'Homme in Paris, where he served as assistant director (1949-50), and the 
École Pratique des Hautes Études, where he was director of studies in 
anthropology (1950-74). In 1959 he was elected to a chair of social 
anthropology at the Collège de France. Among many other honours he was, in 
1973, awarded the Erasmus prize and elected to the French Academy.

It was during Lévi-Strauss's period in the US that "structural anthropology" 
became constructed. This led to what has come to be known as "structuralism" – 
a term used for a variety of theories both in anthropology and beyond, which, 
although they claim to be derived from his ideas, do not always bear much 
relation to his work. It is striking how, in spite of the immense respect with 
which he is treated, especially in France, he has no direct followers or 
students. Many claim and have claimed to be structuralists but it usually turns 
out that only a limited aspect of his thought has an influence on them, and at 
worst the adoption of the label "structuralist" was merely a matter of passing 
fashion. He is a lonely, if imposing, figure in the history of thought.

Levi-Strauss's own structuralism is a personal amalgam of a naturalist 
approach to the study of human beings and a philosophical attitude derived from 
this. The strictly scientific aspect was largely the result of the combination 
of two types of theoretical influences. The first has to do with his contact 
with American cultural anthropology, a relation that is ambiguous since it is 
so much "at a distance", as was to be his attitude to all other contemporary 
theoretical influences. Secondly, he came into contact with structural 
linguistics, a behaviouristic amalgam of European and American theories, and 
particularly the more imaginative work of Roman Jacobson, the Russian 
theoretician of language who was also at the New School at the time.

While in New York, Lévi-Strauss immersed himself in the great body of 
anthropological accounts of North and South Amerindians that early US 
anthropologists and linguists had been accumulating for more than a century. 
The data collected from the Amerindians and its complexity delighted him, and 
made him react permanently against reductionist explanations of culture, which 
implicitly denied the intellectual achievement that indigenous mythology and 
social thought represented. The contact with the structural linguists suggested 
to him an approach that could both generalise and remain true to the richness 
and specificity of the original material. Thus Levi-Strauss adopted the term 
"structural" from a very particular school of linguistics that flourished in 
the 1940s and 50s, which combined the influence of the Swiss, Ferdinand de 
Saussure, with that of the American Leonard Bloomfield.

The basis of the structural anthropology of Lévi-Strauss is the idea that the 
human brain systematically processes organised, that is to say structured, 
units of information that combine and recombine to create models that sometimes 
explain the world we live in, sometimes suggest imaginary alternatives, and 
sometimes give tools with which to operate in it. The task of the 
anthropologist, for Lévi-Strauss, is not to account for why a culture takes a 
particular form, but to understand and illustrate the principles of 
organisation that underlie the onward process of transformation that occurs as 
carriers of the culture solve problems that are either practical or purely 
intellectual.

For him anthropology was scientific and naturalistic, that is scientific in 
the way that structural linguistics had become scientific. By looking at the 
transformations of language that occur as new utterances are generated, by 
using the tools that a particular language makes available, structural 
linguistics was able, so Lévi-Strauss believed, to understand not only the 
irreducible specificities of a particular language, but also the principles 
that made their production possible. In this way, linguistics, as he understood 
it, was a branch of the humanities and a natural science that is able to 
connect directly with psychology and neurology.

By studying the richness of cultural forms and their continued 
transformations, much the same was to be achieved by anthropology, which was to 
be both a cognitive and a historical science. Thus, the meaning of symbols and 
concepts had to be studied both within the context of the working of the brain 
and the specificity of the historical flow of a particular culture.Anthropology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/anthropology> was for Lévi-Strauss one 
of the cognitive sciences. It was to be compatible with recent discoveries 
concerning the working of the brain, although as time went on he seems to have 
given up keeping up with developments in this field. He was, however, insistent 
that although the cognitive could explain structure, it could not explain 
content.

This is the programme lying behind all of Lévi-Strauss's major works. But, in 
a sense, it is also a manifestation of a much more fundamental approach and 
mood from modern English-speaking anthropologists. In contrast to most 
professional anthropologists, whose work often seems contained within the 
controversies of their time and which lacks a general theory of human nature, 
Lévi-Strauss writes as though he were a naturalist from far away, observing our 
planet and the ecology of its different species, including the human species, 
with an Olympian lack of involvement.

He was thus interested in the human species in general terms but, because he 
knew that for 99% of its existence, humankind has consisted of small groups 
with very low population densities living in close interaction with a multitude 
of other living species, he considered the study of peoples such as the 
pre-contact Amazonian Indians to be far more important and relevant than the 
details of the short-lived modern industrialised world.

This approach led him to pay particular attention to Amerindian myths, the 
study of which was the subject of most of his writing since the 1960s. In 
particular, it is the subject of the four-volume Mythologiques (1964-71). For 
Lévi-Strauss, Amerindian myths are the Indian's speculation on the condition of 
interdependence of living things. Thus a myth about the origins of wild pigs is 
related to marriage rules and to another myth about the benefits of cooking.
 Lévi-Strauss at the Collège de France in 2001. Photograph: Joel 
Robine/AFP/Getty Images 
This is, for him, a speculation not so much utilitarian as philosophical. 
Human thought is, of course, governed by the structuring capacity of the human 
brain but not explained by it. In this light, the myths are the record of the 
true history of the principal philosophical endeavour of mankind, and 
Lévi-Strauss not only wanted to record this endeavour, but also to join it. The 
myths' subject matter is his subject matter. Thus, this most aloof of 
intellectuals saw himself as a participant in the Amerindian dialogues he 
analysed without claiming any kind of precedence for himself. Because the myths 
are about the interrelationship of living things, it is essential for him to 
understand the natural history of all species in order to understand our own 
natural history.

Understanding, or participating, in the ecological reflection of humans such 
as the Amerindians is not only what he considered most important to study for 
himself as an anthropologist: it also coloured his values. These, from time to 
time, particularly towards the end of his life, he allowed himself to make 
public. He repeatedly expressed his distaste for the narrowness and sterility 
of much post-neolithic thought, and its obsession with the exploitation of 
other living things rather than simply reflecting on the latter's complexity 
and mutual relationships. As a result, he became something of a hero to certain 
modern ecological ideologues. For Lévi-Strauss, writing and formal education 
are just as likely to lead to philosophical impoverishment as to anything else.

There is also another, even more fundamental, way in which his thought seeks 
to rejoin that of the mythology of the Amerindians as he understands it to be. 
Myths have no authors. Their creation occurs imperceptibly in the process of 
transmission or transformation over hundreds of years and across hundreds of 
miles. The individual subject, the self-obsessed innovator or artist so dear to 
much western philosophy, had, therefore, no place for Lévi-Strauss, and indeed 
repelled him. He saw the glorification of individual creativity as an illusion. 
As he wrote in Tristes Tropiques: "the I is hateful". This perspective is 
particularly evident in his study of Amerindian art. This art did not involve 
the great individualistic self-displays of western art that he abhorred. The 
Amerindian artist, by contrast, tried to reproduce what others had done and, if 
he was innovating, he was unaware of the fact. Throughout Lévi-Strauss's work 
there is a clear aesthetic preference for a creativity that is distributed 
throughout a population and that does not wear its emotions on its sleeve.

This central philosophical tenet of his approach has often been forgotten, 
partly because of some subsequent writers, such as Foucault or Derrida, who 
although they acknowledged his influence, were bizarrely labelled as 
post-structuralists, as though they differed from him in this respect. They 
were then credited with the idea of the "death of the subject" while, in this, 
they simply followed in his footsteps. Yet, the philosophical implications of 
this position not only implicitly underlay so much of his thought, but were 
made quite explicit in the polemic against Sartre's glorification of individual 
choice, which forms the final part of Lévi-Strauss's most adventurous book, The 
Savage Mind (1962).

Of course, his theories have been much criticised, and few would now subscribe 
to them in the way that they were originally formulated, but nonetheless many 
anthropologists, including myself, are continually amazed and awed by the fact 
that, through the use of a theory that many consider flawed, or at least rather 
vague, Lévi-Strauss gained the most illuminating and unexpected insights in 
almost all fields of social and cultural anthropology.

Given his personality and, indeed, his theories, the extraordinary lionisation 
he received on the occasion of his 100th birthday seems ironic. It was as if 
the French establishment and the French state had decided that he was suddenly 
a major diplomatic asset. He had received drawers full of medals and prizes 
from all over the world and, as the international fame of its public 
intellectuals is the kind of thing France has always prided itself on, it made 
sure the birthday did not go unnoticed. Lévi-Strauss had become the last 
survivor of these great beasts such as Sartre, Foucault and the sociologist 
Pierre Bourdieu and, what was more, he was politically uncontroversial. Also, 
the genuine interest of the previous French president Jacques Chirac in the 
culture of native peoples and in the acquisition of "primitive art" encouraged 
this apotheosis of a person who, for the general French public represented, 
above all, the lure of primitive exoticism.

So, when the great date came, nearly every French magazine had his photo on 
the cover. President Sarkozy went to his flat to wish him a happy birthday, and 
the ministry of foreign affairs helped to finance seminars in his honour in 
places as far apart as Iceland and India. The imposing amphitheatre of the 
newly created collection of indigenous art at the Quai Branly museum, in Paris, 
was named after him. Most significant of all, a large part of his work was 
republished in the Bibliothèque de la Pléiade. This honour is normally reserved 
for dead greats such as Racine or Aristotle, whose writings are thereby placed 
in a kind of leather-bound bibliophilic mausoleum and printed on paper normally 
only used for bibles.

This treatment is significant because, as Vincent Debaene points out in a 
cheeky introduction to the volume, France much prefers to represent its 
scientists and thinkers as great literary figures, rather than celebrate what 
they said or discovered.

And indeed all this adulation hardly considered seriously the core of 
Levi-Strauss's work, the groundbreaking analysis of kinship systems that he 
published on his return to France in 1947 as The Elementary Structures of 
Kinship, consisting of a detailed study of those societies where family ties 
determine who people must marry, or the minute examinations of North and South 
American myth. All these public tributes seem to obscure his prime identity as 
a professional anthropologist struggling with the basic traditional questions 
of the discipline.

We do not know what he thought of all this, since by then he felt too ill to 
respond, but his often-expressed preference for the anonymous creator, which 
seems to accord so well with his personality, does not square with all this 
fuss. He hated public occasions and was a very private person. He loved to be 
out of step with the received "correct" view of the moment. He was 
uncomfortable with disciples and fled from adulation.

To the members of his team in Paris, the image he evoked above all was the 
nearly permanently closed doors of his study. This is not to say that he was in 
any way a recluse. He was secretly warm and had a delightful sense of humour. 
He was charming and very considerate and respectful towards whoever he was 
dealing with, irrespective of status. I remember him at Johns Hopkins 
University, in Baltimore, on the occasion of his being given an honorary 
degree, listening to students telling him about what they got from his work and 
not allowing them to be interrupted by the French ambassador, who failed in the 
attempt to barge in and drag him away in the direction of more important 
guests. The nearest he approached discourtesy was a faint hint of irony, but on 
the whole he preferred to be alone, working, reading and accumulating ever more 
details about the lives of the native Americans whom he so admired.

He married Dina Dreyfus in 1932, Rose Marie Ullmo in 1946, and Monique Roman 
in 1954, and had a son by each of his second and third wives - Laurent and 
Matthieu. He is survived by Monique and his sons.

• Claude Lévi-Strauss, anthropologist, born 28 November 1908; died 30 October 
2009
 