
When Claudio Bravo takes his seat it is not entirely easy for an interviewer 
to point out that English football has never really seen a goalkeeper like him 
before. “Sweeper-keeper” seems to be the popular name for it although, back in 
Barcelona, they have never felt the need to give it a clever term. Either way, 
it all feels very new for the Premier League and no doubt there are still many 
people who find it all slightly perplexing.

For Bravo it is just the way he has always liked to play. Manuel Neuer is the 
same, so accomplished with the ball at his feet the Germany manager, Joachim 
Löw, has suggested Bayern Munich’s goalkeeper would not look out of place in 
midfield. Pep Guardiola is another manager who thinksa goalkeeper should be the 
team’s 11th outfield player 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/25/claudio-bravo-manchester-city-joe-hart>
 and, slowly but surely, more and more clubs are deciding Ruud Gullit was 
mistaken with his assessment about what constitutes the man traditionally 
wearing the No1 shirt. “A goalkeeper is a goalkeeper because he can’t play 
football,” the Dutchman observed.

Almost 20 years on Bravo has been signed by Manchester City precisely because 
he can play football whereas Guardiola did not think Joe Hart could – or not, 
at least, to the requisite level. Hart is an England international with 68 
caps, held in great affection by City’s fans, and that alone meansBravo’s first 
few months in Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/10/manchester-united-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 have been accompanied by some intense scrutiny.

Claudio Bravo: The reluctant goalkeeper who became Pep Guardiola’s No1 man
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/25/claudio-bravo-manchester-city-joe-hart>
Bravo was on the bench for Barcelona the night in March 2015 when Hart put in 
perhaps the greatest performance of his life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/18/barcelona-manchester-city-champions-league-match-report>
, earning City’s goalkeeper a long, appreciative embrace at the final whistle 
from Luis Suárez, and the Chilean still remembers the occasion because “if it 
wasn’t for him [Hart], City would have conceded many goals that day”.

Yet the man sitting down for his first in-depth interview since arriving from 
the Camp Nou in August does not seem in the slightest bit uptight. “Of course 
there are always going to be comparisons between the previous goalkeeper and 
the one now,” Bravo, speaking through an interpreter, says. “I know what Joe 
did here, he had some great seasons andhe won many things with the club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/11/manchester-city-v-west-ham-premier-league-title-race-live-football>
. But I had the same situation when I joined Barcelona, replacing Víctor 
Valdés, one of the best goalkeepers around. That’s just how football works. I’m 
here now andJoe is in another place [on loan at Torino] 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/01/joe-hart-manchester-city-exit-transfer-torino-loan>
. You just have to be calm about these things and I’m a very relaxed person.”

He also has a relaxed style that old‑fashioned goalkeeping aficionados would 
not necessarily recognise given that it often means straying 30 yards from his 
goalline to thread passes through midfield. “I play in a way that means taking 
risks,” Bravo says. “The problem is that, from 300 passes, you make one mistake 
… I had that bad luck in one game, the Champions League tie in Barcelona,when I 
was sent off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/19/barcelona-manchester-city-champions-league-match-report-messi>
. But it’s a risk you must take. The criticism is going to exist but I have no 
problem with that. In fact, I often accept criticism because I feel it helps me 
to get better and get stronger. And I hardly ever remember the compliments.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fclaudio-bravo-manchester-city-goalkeeper%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf7e5be5bad71cf8ac75af993c6bbd2558052a9e%2F0_15_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Claudio%20Bravo%3A%20%E2%80%98Criticism%20is%20going%20to%20exist.%20I%20feel%20it%20helps%20me%20to%20get%20better%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fclaudio-bravo-manchester-city-goalkeeper%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Claudio%20Bravo%3A%20%E2%80%98Criticism%20is%20going%20to%20exist.%20I%20feel%20it%20helps%20me%20to%20get%20better%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fclaudio-bravo-manchester-city-goalkeeper%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf7e5be5bad71cf8ac75af993c6bbd2558052a9e%2F0_15_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
 Claudio Bravo takes part in an event forCityzens Giving 
<http://cityzensgiving.org/manchester>, Manchester City’s global community 
initiative. 
Bravo is a worldly, experienced competitor, 34 on his next birthday, and 
certainly has an impressive CV given that it includes a 12-year international 
career, making him the most-capped player in the history of the Chile national 
team. Bravo reached Leonel Sánchez’s record of 85, set in 1968, two years ago 
and is on 110 appearances. He has been captain and played every minute as Chile 
have won the past two Copa Américas, last year and this, earning a place each 
time in the team of the tournament, and his two years at Barcelona were not too 
shabby, either.

“When you are playing against Lionel Messi day to day in training it forces 
you to improve your level,” he says. “We are talking about the best player in 
the world, with an execution [shooting] faster than any other player. He forced 
me to raise my performance.”

Bravo’s spell at Barcelona began by not letting in a goal in their first eight 
games of the 2014-15 season and going, in total, 754 minutes without conceding, 
breaking a club record set by Pedro María Artola in 1977 in the process. His 
time at City, by his own admission, has not started so well bearing in mind his 
new team have not won a league game at homesince 17 September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/manchester-city-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
 and dropped to fourth in the table going into Saturday’s game at Leicester 
City.

Equally he believes the switch to a new system was never going to be entirely 
seamless. “We are changing the idea of how the team plays. I think it’s been 
positive in that sense. Maybe the results at home haven’t been positive but 
overall we have made some great performances. We need to keep following the 
same idea. We cannot play 10 games this way and then switch the method to play 
another way. We just need time. In Barcelona they have been playing this style 
for years, from the kids to the first team. Here we have had only a few months 
trying to learn a different way of playing from the rest of the teams in the 
Premier League.”

That style plainly needs a goalkeeper who sees his job as much more than 
saving shots and catching crosses. Yet it is also clear Bravo wants to be known 
for his more orthodox duties first and foremost, rather than what else he 
brings to the team. “Playing with my foot is something innate,” Bravo says. “I 
have played as a goalkeeper since I was six but I always worked on my ball 
skills, playing with my foot, knowing how to control the ball, how to pass. But 
the main thing is to save goals. What I really enjoy is to save goals and to 
perform well in the goal. After that then I can help the team playing with my 
foot.

Patrick Roberts has no regrets about Celtic loan move from Manchester City
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/07/patrick-roberts-manchester-city-celtic>
“I feel comfortable with that role. Our style means I am very involved 
because, if you have a goalkeeper who is far away from the defensive line and 
doesn’t give support to the central defenders, I don’t think the system works. 
I need to know where to move and the positions to take because, aside from 
saving goals, there are many more things in that role.”

It all sounds very complicated, one imagines, for some of the people who were 
brought up with Bert Trautmann and Joe Corrigan between the sticks. Yet these 
are changing times. Bravo is adamant he has had “very happy months so far”, 
despite the criticism he has attracted, and there is absolutely no sense 
whatsoever of a man pining for Barcelona.

“It wasn’t difficult at all,” he says of his £14m transfer. “I didn’t make 
this move only for the feeling the club gave me. It was for my family, too. For 
us, it was very important to come to England, learn a new language and be in a 
culture that is so different from our country. As far as I’m concerned, I feel 
more and more comfortable in the club every day. I think I have arrived in the 
ideal place.”

Manchester City’s global community initiative, Cityzens Giving, is encouraging 
fans to vote for community projects around the world at
cityzensgiving.org/Manchester <http://cityzensgiving.org/Manchester>
 