
The series finale lands right in the middle of National Aboriginal and 
Islander Day Observance Committee (NAIDOC 
<http://www.naidoc.org.au/about/naidoc-history>) week and fittingly it doesn’t 
tread lightly around big issues that remain relevant for First Nations people 
and many other minority groups. At the Zone’s checkpoint, the CA border force 
are setting up for some nasty business. The guards are itching for action, 
livestock panels are being constructed, and Mathews is telling the world that 
the Zone is nothing more than a haven for those who refuse to assimilate. It’s 
all resembling afamiliar form of dispersal 
<http://www.ipsnews.net/1996/02/australia-aborigines-suspect-relocation-plan-linked-to-olympics/>
. Alinta and Latani are among a crowd of anxious residents looking on.

They attract the attention of a couple of surveillance drones and also several 
nearby guards who attempt to entice the girls closer, but they know a sly CA 
ruse when they see one and retreat back inside the Hairy sector, where Maliyan 
continues to add to his cache of makeshift weapons. An announcement soon blasts 
through a PA directing all humans to evacuate the Zone within 24 hours. This 
signals very bad things for our hairy brethren. Consequently, the Hairy sector 
bristles with anticipation. Alinta vows to remain and fight alongside Latani 
(of course she would), but Latani calls her on it. (“This isn’t some bullshit 
political rally. This is my life.”)

Elsewhere inside the Zone, Aunty Linda has helped Koen reconcile with his 
heritage and now he’s ready to return Kora to her supernatural realm. They 
leave a despondent Blair with Aunty and drive to an ancient, sacred fig tree 
with the whisky box containing Ash in tow. Once there, Koen and Kora 
communicate telepathically about place, being and spiritual kinship. She is 
then absorbed (with Ash) back into the Dreaming. Next door, Nerida has punted 
Waruu to the couch, but he’s not as bothered about his collapsing marriage as 
he is about missing out on theCleverman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/cleverman> gig. He tries to impress 
Alinta and Latani at the breakfast table with his big plans for the Zone. 
Nerida recognises it for the self-grandeur and bluster it is and seeks the 
solace of her wise neighbour. Aunty Linda’s had enough of Waruu’s egotism too 
and confronts her son in the Hairy sector. At first, all big-man Waruu can 
manage is to flash his newfound folding stuff. That’s enough confirmation for 
Linda. Waruu has lived up to the nature of his namesake, the crow.

But Waruu returns serve, revealing that Linda contributed to the death of his 
father and spitefully remarks: “I’m glad you’ve got cancer.” Aunt, the boy just 
ain’t no good. Outside the Zone, the Slade’s are still euphoric about their 
pregnancy, and Charlotte is keen to start shopping for all the baby things, but 
thereis one minor matter of the rapid development of the foetus. Sure enough, 
the good doctor suffers a bout of cramps while shopping and desperately tries 
to contact the Ilythia fertility clinic, but the clinic’s number is 
inexplicably disconnected.

In fact, there’s no physical evidence whatsoever that the clinic ever existed, 
which is possibly the most fiendish example ofgaslighting 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaslighting> ever. Meanwhile, her husband is 
reassuring Waruu that he has the frothy Minister Mathews in his pocket. The 
whole invasion of the Zone and dispersal operation is actually about acquiring 
lucrativeinner-city real estate for redevelopment 
<http://www.kooriweb.org/foley/images/history/1970s/1973/block/dt6dec2003.html>
. We’ve noticed all the cranes crowding the urban skyline throughout the 
series, right? Mathew’s is tight with powerful international consortia and they 
want to build acasino on the land 
<http://www.wendybacon.com/investigations/packers-sydney-casino/>, or 
something. But Slade says no. He’s pitting Waruu against Mathews.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fcleverman-recap-season-one-episode-six-terra-nullius%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc74228dd09b3cfe5bbdc1c3add6675517e4b8999%2F582_734_5082_3049%2F5082.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cleverman%20recap%3A%20season%20one%2C%20episode%20six%20%E2%80%93%20Terra%20Nullius&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fcleverman-recap-season-one-episode-six-terra-nullius%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cleverman%20recap%3A%20season%20one%2C%20episode%20six%20%E2%80%93%20Terra%20Nullius&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fcleverman-recap-season-one-episode-six-terra-nullius%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc74228dd09b3cfe5bbdc1c3add6675517e4b8999%2F582_734_5082_3049%2F5082.jpg>
 Koen West isn’t best pleased Photograph: Lisa Tomasetti/SundanceTV 
Waruu takes the compromising footage of the minister straight to Belinda and 
she informs him that he’s being played. The CA belongs to Slade, dimwit! Slade 
always gets what he wants, she says, so ask yourself what he wants from you. 
Outraged, Waruu decides to roll up on Slade with half-bro and stick it to the 
man. He tells Koen about Slade’s involvement in Ash’s death (among other 
things) and that’s enough to incite Koen to seek out immediate retribution.

But when the united force of the two brothers confront Slade at yet another 
secret laboratory, he uses his Hairy Juice strength to knock Cleverman out 
cold. Then he deploys his silver-tongue to win Waruu back to Plan Immortality. 
It’s the Hairy Juice. Just a smidgen is all it takes, but he offers Waruu carte 
blanche to the entire supply. Simply in exchange for helping him unlock the 
mysteries of 50,000 years worth of stories and knowledge. For Waruu it means 
sacrificing his brother and selling out his culture and heritage. Next second, 
Waruu is banging-up an armful of Hairy Juice.

It really is curtains for Mathews though. Araluen finally throttles the life 
out of him after he remarks (drunk on French champagne) that she will be the 
last survivor of her species. He really couldn’t have made a more inappropriate 
comment at the precise moment Araluen recognises her daughter Latani on the 
news facing the impending CA invasion of the Zone.

Araluen escapes and hurries towards the Zone. In the Hairy sector, Djukara and 
the crew are twisting war braids and tooling up. Humans are streaming out in 
droves. Hairies are being gunned down attempting to escape. Aunty Linda is 
razing her past, trying to assuage her guilt over the accident that killed 
Waruu’s father.

Finally we see our beastie (and, well, I would have been happier if more was 
left to the imagination), all teeth and talons and terror. But appearing out of 
nowhere, Koen steps up his Cleverman game and takes our beastie out by plunging 
the nulla nulla through the beastie’s chest. Brutal. But it’s no finale. It’s 
really just the start. Waruu, now juiced up with his own importance, is 
half-mad. Slade is regaining consciousness in his shattered laboratory. 
Charlotte is birthing something surely abominable. The CA is approaching. And a 
united resistance is spoiling for war.
 