
There has arguably not been a US presidential election with so much at stake 
for the rest of the world since the second world war.

 One candidate stands largely for continuity, signalling she would do slightly 
more than her predecessor to shore up the existing liberal world order.

Her opponent is vowing to turn that order on its head, jettisoning alliances 
and free trade agreements, while seeking to cut deals with the world’s 
authoritarian powers.


If Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> is elected 
on Tuesday, it is likely to trigger a foreign policy crisis inside Washington, 
as the diplomatic and security establishments scramble to discover whether he 
meant what he said on the campaign trail. Those who believe that the election 
talk was all bluster and that Trump will tack back to a more traditional 
Republican foreign policy once elected are likely to be disappointed, according 
to Thomas Wright, an analyst at the Brookings Institution in Washington.

US election: Trump and Clinton in tight race on campaign's final day – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/nov/07/us-election-donald-trump-hillary-clinton-live>
 “My view is he is a more ideological candidate than we often appreciate and 
while there is a lot of bluster and a lot of ignorance on a wide number of 
issues, there are certain things that he has been pretty consistent on,”Wright 
said 
<https://www.brookings.edu/events/how-the-next-president-can-impact-the-future-of-u-s-alliances-and-the-international-liberal-order/>
. “I think he is opposed to US alliances ... and I think he would try to 
withdraw the US from security commitments around the world. He is anti-trade 
and he would veer towards a more mercantilist system, and he is pro-Russian – 
he is pro-authoritarian.”

 Some believe that Trump would be confronted with a series of resignations by 
diplomats and generals if he tried to turn these campaign platforms into 
administration policy.

 If, on the other hand, Hillary Clinton wins the electoral college vote, she 
will face the opposite dilemma: how to distinguish her foreign policy from 
Barack Obama’s. She has expressedan inclination toward a tougher stance in 
Syria and in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/23/hillary-clinton-record-secretary-of-state-foreign-policy>
, for example, but the wiggle-room for a change of policy has shrunk with every 
passing week as Vladimir Putin has sought tocreate new facts on the ground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/04/russia-further-bolsters-naval-presence-in-mediterranean>
 in the last stages of the Obama era. More weeks would go by while a new 
Clinton administration dives into an inevitable policy review.

 However, events around the globe may not wait that long. Whoever sits down at 
the desk in the Oval Office on 20 January next year may be forced to take some 
of the toughest decisions any US president has taken, much sooner than he or 
she would want.

US faces host of global threats during transition until next president
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/07/us-global-threats-transition-next-president>
North Korea

US power and influence is being challenged around the world at an accelerating 
rate, and nowhere more so than on the Korean peninsula. The North Korean 
leader, Kim Jong-un, has sped up tests of nuclear weapons and the missiles to 
deliver them. Expert opinion varies on whether his technicians have succeeded 
in making a nuclear warhead small enough to put atop a missile, and there is a 
general consensus that if they have not done so yet, they will soon. It is also 
widely anticipated that in the next few years,North Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/north-korea> will perfect an 
intercontinental ballistic missile capable of reaching the US west coast. 
Former and current US administrations have taken the strategic decision that 
Pyongyang should be prevented from reaching that point, by force if necessary. 
But the ultimate decision will most likely be taken by the next president.


Clinton’s foreign policy advisers have signalled that she would focus on the 
looming Korean crisis early in her term in office, reassuring Japan and South 
Korea that the US will not abandon them, and seeking to put pressure onChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> to enforce UN-mandated trade 
sanctions more effectively. That may well not succeed, leaving a Clinton 
administration with the choice of agreeing to a resumption of dialogue with 
Pyongyang and accepting its nuclear weapons status, as long as it restricts 
missile development. If that were possible, it would alarm US allies who are 
already within North Korean missile range.


American allies are likely to reach that point of alarm far more quickly if 
Trump reaches the Oval Office. He has questioned the value of US alliances in 
the region, and he hasfloated the possibility 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/donald-trump-japan-south-korea-might-need-nuclear-weapons/>
 that countries like Japan or South Korea should develop their own nuclear 
weapons rather than rely on the US strategic umbrella. If he sticks to that 
policy in office, there could be a sudden nuclear arms race in north-east Asia 
and possibly beyond. Ultimately, a Trump administration would have to face the 
direct threat of a North Korean long-range missile. He has said he would put 
more pressure on China to get tough with its neighbour, and he has said he is 
willing to meet Kim in the US, on the grounds “there’s a 10% or a 20% chance 
thatI can talk him out of those damn nukes 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/06/donald-trump-north-korea-nukes-224385>”.


Failing that, he has signalled he is quite willing to contemplate using the US 
nuclear arsenal. If the weapons cannot be used, he asked: “Then why are we 
making them? Why do we make them?”

China 

China tantalized by US election mayhem and prospect of 'thug' Trump as 
president
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/07/china-tantalized-mayhem-us-election-prospect-thug-donald-trump-president>
Within his or her first year in office, a new US president would also face a 
direct challenge to US power in the western Pacific. The Chinese programme of 
laying claim to reefs and rocks in the South China Sea and turning them into 
naval and air bases gives Beijing potential control over some the busiest 
shipping lanes in the world. US influence is under further threat by the rise 
of Rodrigo Duterte in the Philippines, who hasthreatened to eject US troops 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/26/philippine-president-calls-for-removal-of-all-us-troops>
, casting doubt on his predecessor’s agreement to allow new permanent American 
presence.

Clinton’s likely policy will be to continue Obama’s faltering “pivot to Asia”, 
and to prioritise restoring the faith of US allies in the region that 
Washington will help them resist Chinese attempts to dominate the South China 
Sea. It is a policy that is held hostage to some extent by Duterte’s ultimate 
intentions, and it could lead to a rapid escalation of tension in the region.

Trump has pointed to the Chinese reef-building programme as a reflection of US 
weakness but has not said what he would do about it. He has focused more on the 
threat posed to the US by its trade relations with China. In the transactional 
model of foreign relations Trump favours, hecould agree 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-election-china-idUSKCN0ZR2MN> to turn a 
blind eye to creeping Chinese takeover in the South China Sea in exchange for a 
bilateral trade deal with Beijing on better terms.

Syria 

Why Clinton's plans for no-fly zones in Syria could provoke US-Russia conflict
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/25/hillary-clinton-syria-no-fly-zones-russia-us-war>
A new US president will arrive in office at a time of significant military 
advances againstIslamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> in Syria 
and neighbouring Iraq, but diminishing options when it comes to helping shape 
the opposition battle against the Assad regime and its Russian and Iranian 
backers. It is possible that the rebel stand in Aleppo will have fallen by 
then, giving the regime the upper hand and postponing yet again any hopes of a 
political transition.

In the presidential debates, Clinton talked of establishing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/25/hillary-clinton-syria-no-fly-zones-russia-us-war>
 a “no-fly zone” or a “safe zone” inside Syria. However, it is hard to see how 
that would be done without risking a direct clash with Russia, with all the 
risks that entails. The generals at the Pentagon, who have long argued against 
the feasibility of establishing such a zone, would work hard to block such a 
scheme. A Clinton White House is also likely to explore ways of increasing the 
flow of arms to moderate opposition groups.


Trump has indicated that he would seek to work with Assad and Putin in a 
combined fight against Isis, and has not voiced criticism of the bombardment of 
rebel-held areas such as eastern Aleppo. That policy would also have heavy 
costs. The Syrian opposition and the Gulf states would see it as a betrayal, 
and the new administration would have to deal with the reality that neither the 
regime norRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> has much immediate 
interest in fighting Isis.

Russia and Ukraine

A Clinton administration is expected to take a tougher line with Moscow than 
the Obama White House, all the more so because of thesubstantial evidence of 
the Kremlin’s efforts to try to intervene in the US presidential election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/07/us-russia-dnc-hack-interfering-presidential-election>
 in her opponent’s favour. Clinton could well seek to take a leadership role in 
negotiations with Moscow over Ukraine and the stalled Minsk peace process, 
which have hitherto been left to Germany and France. She could also opt to send 
lethal aid to Ukraine as a way of increasing US leverage.


How the world views the US elections, from Israel to North Korea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/31/world-opinion-us-election-russia-china-mexico-europe>
Trump is likely to take the opposite approach. He avoided criticism of Russia 
for its actions in Ukraine, hinted he might accept the annexation of Crimea, 
and ignored US intelligence findings that Moscow was behind the hacking of 
Democratic party’s email. A Trump administration is unlikely to contest Russian 
enforcement of its influence in eastern Ukraine.

Europe and Nato

Clinton aides have signalled consistently that one of her priorities would be 
to show US willingness to shore up EU andNato 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato> cohesion, and will attend summits of 
both organisations in February.


Trump has suggested, by contrast, that Nato is obsolete and questioned whether 
its security commitments in Europe are worth what the US is currently spending 
on them. He said he would check whether US allies “fulfilled their obligation 
to us” beforecoming to their defence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/21/donald-trump-america-automatically-nato-allies-under-attack>
, calling into question the purpose of the defence pact. Later in the campaign, 
he changed tack, saying he would seek to strengthen the alliance, but a win for 
Trump on Tuesday would nonetheless deepen anxiety in eastern European 
countries, such as the Baltic states, that a US-led Nato would come to their 
defence in the face of Russian encroachment.

Trade

The two major free trade projects of the Obama administration, the 
Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership with Europe (TTIP) and the 
Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) with the countries on the Pacific rim, will 
probably still be under negotiation when the new president comes into office, 
giving him or her the option of killing or completing them.


Clinton first supported 
<http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-na-pol-trade-tpp-20160926-snap-story.html> 
the TPP and then criticised it in the face of the primary challenge from Bernie 
Sanders. Her reservations may prolong the negotiations, but she is ultimately 
expected to pursue and seek completion of the ambitious multilateral trade 
deals.

Trump built his campaign on opposition to all such deals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/04/us-election-free-trade-hillary-clinton-tpp-donald-trump-tariffs>
, which he has characterised as inherently unfavourable to the US. He has 
promised to seek bilateral trade deals on better terms and to punish other 
countries deemed to be trading unfairly with sanctions, ignoring the threat of 
retaliation.

Climate change

Trump has promised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/may/27/donald-trump-i-would-end-paris-climate-deal-video>
 to withdraw the US from the Paris climate accord, which comes into force on 
Friday, and to “stop all payments of US tax dollars to UN global warming 
programs”. The Republican presidential nominee has said he’s “not a believer in 
climate change”, describing it as a Chinese-created hoax, and has castigated 
efforts to reduce greenhouse gases as a risk to American jobs.


The prospect of Trump in the Oval Office poses a unique challenge to the Paris 
deal, which was struck last year and ratified in speedy fashion in October. A 
total of94 nations have fully signed up 
<http://unfccc.int/paris_agreement/items/9444.php> to a commitment to keep 
global temperatures below a 2C increase on pre-industrial times, in the hope of 
staving off catastrophic sea level rises, heatwaves and extreme weather.

The emissions cuts pledged by countries currently aren’t enough to avoid 
climate calamity, meaning that recalcitrance from the US, the world’s 
second-largest emitter and the “global leader” in fighting climate change, 
according to Barack Obama, would risk ossifying a process that needs a further 
hefty shove.

American involvement in the Paris deal – which has the support of nearly 200 
other countries – is based upon the presidential scrawl of Obama. The accord 
wasn’t presented to Congress as a formal treaty, meaning that Trump could undo 
it himself.

Extricating the US from the deal, along with its financial support of 
countries particularly vulnerable to climate change, would take some time, 
however. Now the agreement is in force, any signatory nation faces a three-year 
delay before it could opt out, with a further one-year wait as the process 
plays out.

“That means,” said Robert Stavins, an expert at environmental law at Harvard 
University, “it would be impossible for a President Trump to remove the United 
States during what would be his first term.”

But the uncertainty would undoubtably spook countries that rushed to embrace 
the Paris deal after the US and China, the world’s two greenhouse gas 
superpowers, jointly announced they were committed to the process last year. 
Some countries, aware of the dangers of climate change, may redouble their 
efforts to slash emissions but others may use it as a convenient excuse to 
slack off.

Trump’s antipathy to climate action is underscored by fierce support for 
fossil fuels,telling coal miners 
<http://www.pennlive.com/news/2016/07/trumps_three_messages_for_pa_i.html> that 
he will “put you back to work” and that “gas will be a beautiful thing” in his 
administration. It’s also likely that he would scrapObama’s Clean Power Plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/28/clean-power-plan-court-obama-climate-change>
, the centerpiece policy to curb emissions from power plants, and allow 
projects such as the controversial Dakota Access pipeline,in which he is 
indirectly invested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/26/donald-trump-dakota-access-pipeline-investment-energy-transfer-partners>
. US emissions, which have begun tolevel off in recent years 
<https://www3.epa.gov/climatechange/ghgemissions/inventoryexplorer/index.html#allsectors/allgas/gas/all>
, could start climbing again.


 