
Hillary Clinton added yet another first to her résumé on Friday, becoming the 
first presidential candidate to have a campaignpodcast 
<https://www.hillaryclinton.com/page/podcast/>.

The first episode of the free audio broadcast, titled With Her, is a 
conversation between Clinton andLongform cofounder <https://longform.org/about> 
Max Linsky, though it won’t always feature the candidate herself. Future 
episodes will include interviews with other higher-ups in the campaign and, the 
podcasters hope, some staffers and even volunteers out in the states. The next 
episode, with a “very important” campaign staffer, is tentatively scheduled to 
tape next week.

Don’t look for that next episode next Friday, though. “We’re sort of bucking 
one of the traditional rules of podcasting, which is that you come out at the 
same time every week,” said Linsky. “But with a presidential campaign, that’s 
not always possible.”

Hillary Clinton releases 2015 tax return and Tim Kaine unveils 10 years' worth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/12/hillary-clinton-tim-kaine-tax-returns>
Clinton’s is the first podcast launched by startup Pineapple Street Media, a 
collaboration between Linsky and longtime public radio producer and recent 
BuzzFeed podcaster Jenna Weiss-Berman that only opened in May 2016.

Linsky and Weiss-Berman are both supporters of Clinton – Linsky told the 
Guardian she was “a big fan” and Weiss-Berman said: “I really likeHillary 
Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> and want her to 
win” – but the podcast isn’t a labor of love. It’s produced for and with the 
campaign, which had been considering doing a podcast for nearly a year before 
Weiss-Berman approached them.

“It’s not journalism, but that doesn’t mean it’s not true,” said Linsky – 
possibly in response tocriticisms 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2016/08/hillary_clinton_s_podcast_with_her_is_charming_gutless_propaganda.html>
 that the podcast was more like an advertisement for Clinton’s candidacy than a 
more critical exploration of it. “We’re just trying to get a sense of what it 
really feels like to run for president, in every sense.”

Laura Olin, who consults with the Clinton digital team and was the social 
media director for Barack Obama’s 2012 campaign, says that using social media 
is an important way for candidates not just to connect with potential voters 
but to activate supporters to donate money – especially in small dollar 
donations – and eventually make phone calls and knock on doors.

“The way to get people engaged and interested and then take small actions on 
behalf of the campaign is to build relationships with people,” she said. “And 
you have to go to where they are, and connect with them on that level.”

For the 2012 campaign, which pioneered the use of Tumblr, Instagram, Pinterest 
and even Spotify to connect directly with voters, Olin said organizers had to 
be very strategic in which social media they chose to use, because there were 
only 14 staffers involved in the effort. “It was looking at the demographics of 
each platform, and how it would reach the target audiences for the campaign.”

“Podcasts have huge young audiences, and it’s pretty important to the 
campaign, I think, for young people to hear from her as much as possible, so 
we’re psyched that we can help with that,” Weiss-Berman said.

Still, only 21% of Americans 12 and over have listened to a podcast in the 
last year,according 
<http://www.journalism.org/2016/06/15/podcasting-fact-sheet/> to Edison 
Research, and only about half of Americans of those ages have even heard of 
podcasting. Weiss-Berman is right about her audience, though: 35% of Americans 
aged 18-34 are podcast consumers,according to 2015 Edison data 
<http://www.edisonresearch.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/The-Podcast-Consumer-2015-Final.pdf>
. And, like likelyClinton 
<http://www.people-press.org/2016/07/07/2-voter-general-election-preferences/> 
voters 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/politics/articles/2016-08-12/education-level-sharply-divides-clinton-trump-race>
, podcast consumers tend to be wealthy compared to the population at large and 
are more likely to have college or graduate degrees.

Clinton is frequently criticized for failing to connect emotionally with large 
audiences – despite the fact that friends and staffersdescribe her 
<http://www.vox.com/a/hillary-clinton-interview/the-gap-listener-leadership-quality>
 as warm and a great listener. Supporters hope the podcast can help bridge the 
gap between the woman that people find so personable one-on-one and the 
politician who manages to rub a lot of people the wrong way onstage.

“What I was so excited about with this show, I feel like podcasts are such an 
intimate medium,” said Weiss-Berman. “It was a great way to let people in on 
this intimate conversation [between Clinton and Linsky].”


Olin said: “Part of the digital team’s job is to show that [personal] side of 
her ... It’s a bit of a longitudinal look at what it really takes to run for 
the most difficult job in the world.”
 