
Hillary Clinton’s presidential campaign said on Saturday it would help with 
efforts to secure recounts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/25/election-recount-outcome-jill-stein>
 in several states, even as the White House defended the declared results as 
“the will of the American people”.

Bernie Sanders meets Spike Lee: ‘Where do we go? Where is the hope?’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/26/bernie-sanders-spike-lee-conversation-donald-trump-us-politics>
The campaign’s general counsel, Marc Elias, said in an online post 
<https://medium.com/@marceelias/listening-and-responding-to-calls-for-an-audit-and-recount-2a904717ea39>
 that while it had found no evidence of sabotage, the campaign felt “an 
obligation to the more than 64 million Americans who cast ballots for Hillary 
Clinton”.

“We certainly understand the heartbreak felt by so many who worked so hard to 
electHillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>,” 
Elias wrote, “and it is a fundamental principle of our democracy to ensure that 
every vote is properly counted.”

In response, President-elect Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> said in a statement: “The 
people have spoken and the election is over, and as Hillary Clinton herself 
said on election night, in addition to her conceding by congratulating me, ‘We 
must accept this result and then look to the future.’”

Wisconsin began recount proceedings late on Friday after receiving a petition 
fromJill Stein <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/jill-stein>, the Green 
party candidate. Stein claims there are irregularities in results reported by 
Wisconsin as well as Michigan and Pennsylvania, where she plans to request 
recounts next week, having raised millions of dollars from supporters.


Trump called Stein’s effort a “scam” and said it was “just a way … to fill her 
coffers with money, most of which she will never even spend on this ridiculous 
recount”.

“The results of this election should be respected instead of being challenged 
and abused,” he added, “which is exactly what Jill Stein is doing.”

A spokeswoman for Stein did not respond to a request for comment. Speaking to 
CNN, however, Stein said she had “no contact with the Clinton campaign” and 
added: “I have said consistently that if there are questions about the accuracy 
and security I would challenge it, no matter who was the winner.”

The results of this election should be respected instead of being … abused, 
which is exactly what Jill Stein is doing
Donald Trump 
Asked what the recount would do for her or for the Green party, Stein said: 
“We want to know what our vote is, and that our votes are being counted. This 
is not a partisan effort but we need to have confidence, too.

“When evidence emerged the system was being hacked all over the place, my 
conviction only strengthened that this was something we have to do.”

She did not discuss any such evidence for her claims. Earlier in the 
afternoon, she hadused Twitter to say 
<https://twitter.com/DrJillStein/status/802625522316386304>: “Election 
integrity cannot be led by a party w/o integrity, just as a revolution cannot 
happen in a counterrevolutionary party.”


Trump narrowly defeated Clinton in all three states on his way to national 
victory, surprising pollsters. Because Trump’s win followedwarnings from US 
intelligence 
<https://www.dni.gov/index.php/newsroom/press-releases/215-press-releases-2016/1423-joint-dhs-odni-election-security-statement>
 that Russia was trying to interfere with the election, thousands of people who 
opposed Trump now claim he could have had foreign assistance.

In its first public remarks about the election’s security, the Obama 
administration <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> said 
it “did not observe any increased level of malicious cyber-activity aimed at 
disrupting our electoral process on election day”.


A senior administration official told the Guardian: “We believe our elections 
were free and fair from a cybersecurity perspective.”

Stein’s petition to Wisconsin, a copy of which was obtained by the Guardian 
<https://www.dropbox.com/s/9q5o4e3lj8uszu1/Guardian%20US%20%E2%80%93%20Wisconsin%20Recount%20Petition.pdf?dl=0>
, focused on concerns that foreign actors might have copied the state’s voter 
registration database and then filed bogus absentee ballots. No direct evidence 
supporting this claim was cited.

In requesting the recounts, Stein is acting on behalf of a loose coalition of 
academics and election experts. Her Wisconsin petition features an affidavit by 
J Alex Halderman, the director of Michigan University’sCenter for Computer 
Security and Society <http://security.engin.umich.edu/>, who has for years 
detailed vulnerabilities in electronic voting machines used in the US.

One of the leaders of the coalition, John Bonifaz 
<https://twitter.com/JohnBonifaz?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
, founder of the National Voting Rights Institute, expressed frustration that 
critics were accusing Stein of exploiting disappointment over the election 
result to collect money and gather contact details from liberal activists.

“This was all driven by the nonpartisan election integrity community,” said 
Bonifaz, a constitutional attorney, in his first interview about the recount 
effort. “I’m the one who asked Jill Stein to file these petitions.”

Bonifaz also defended Stein’s decision to increase her fundraising target from 
its original $2.5m, which led to more criticism. Bonifaz said the coalition had 
retained the New York law firm Emery Celli Brinckerhoff & Abady, which has 
extensive experience in election disputes and had advised them to budget $7m 
for the effort.

“This is going to be a very costly campaign,” said Bonifaz, adding that the 
average contribution from the tens of thousands of supporters who had donated 
was about $42. “But it is something that a lot of people clearly want.”

By Saturday afternoon, the online fundraising effort 
<https://jillstein.nationbuilder.com/recount> had reached $5.8m.

In addition to lawyers’ fees and state filing fees, the group is anticipating 
that litigation will be needed against opposition to recounts. Michigan’s 
election rules allow a candidate to oppose a request from another for a 
recount, but it is unclear whether the Trump campaign would decide to take 
advantage of this.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fjill-stein-calls-for-recount-in-order-to-verify-us-election-result-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jill%20Stein%20calls%20for%20recount%20in%20order%20to%20verify%20US%20election%20result%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fjill-stein-calls-for-recount-in-order-to-verify-us-election-result-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jill%20Stein%20calls%20for%20recount%20in%20order%20to%20verify%20US%20election%20result%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fjill-stein-calls-for-recount-in-order-to-verify-us-election-result-video&media=>
Jill Stein calls for recount in order to verify US election result 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/25/jill-stein-calls-for-recount-in-order-to-verify-us-election-result-video>
The coalition had approached the Clinton campaign but received no official 
response, according to Bonifaz.

In his online posting, Elias said: “Because we had not uncovered any 
actionable evidence of hacking or outside attempts to alter the voting 
technology, we had not planned to exercise this option ourselves.


“But now that a recount has been initiated in Wisconsin, we intend to 
participate in order to ensure the process proceeds in a manner that is fair to 
all sides.”

Trump received 2m fewer votes than Clinton nationally, but won the presidency 
thanks to the electoral college.More than 7 million Americans voted 
<http://cookpolitical.com/story/10174> for other candidates, including Stein 
and the Libertarian Gary Johnson.

In Wisconsin, Trump beat Clinton by 27,257 votes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/nov/08/us-election-2016-results-live-clinton-trump>
. Stein received 30,980 votes and Johnson 106,442.

Could Jill Stein's vote recount change the outcome of the election?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/25/election-recount-outcome-jill-stein>
Elias wrote: “If Jill Stein follows through as she has promised and pursues 
recounts in Pennsylvania and Michigan, we will take the same approach in those 
states as well.

“We do so fully aware that the number of votes separating Donald Trump and 
Hillary Clinton in the closest of these states” –Michigan 
<http://www.freep.com/story/news/politics/2016/11/23/donald-trump-wins-michigan-votes/94360852/>
, where the Republican leads by 10,704 votes with the result expected to be 
certified on Monday – “well exceeds the largest margin ever overcome in a 
recount.

“But regardless of the potential to change the outcome in any of the states, 
we feel it is important, on principle, to ensure our campaign is legally 
represented in any court proceedings and represented on the ground in order to 
monitor the recount process itself.”
 