
The federal government has opposed a union bid to target the minimum wage at 
60% of average weekly earnings.

In submissions to the Fair Work Commission 
<https://www.fwc.gov.au/documents/sites/wagereview2017/consultations/ausgovsub.pdf>
 the government has argued that what it called a “predetermined formula” is 
inconsistent with the Fair Work Act and could increase unemployment.

In comments to Guardian Australia the United Voice national secretary, Jo-anne 
Schofield, blasted the intervention, saying it was using “legal and technical” 
arguments to depress the wages of the lowest paid.

Coalition asleep at the wheel as household debt warning gets louder | Chris 
Bowen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/19/coalition-asleep-at-the-wheel-as-household-debt-warning-gets-louder>
United Voice, supported by the the Australian Council of Trade Unions, has 
suggested the commission set four-year targets for the minimum wage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/14/poll-finds-most-australians-believe-job-security-and-wage-disparity-are-getting-worse>
 with a target of 60% of the median earnings proposed for 2020.

United Voice said the minimum wage, currently $17.70 an hour, had fallen from 
65% of median earnings in 1985 to 53% in 2015.

If a 60% target were to be achieved the median income would rise from $673 a 
week to $738.

The commission is hearing a case, with a hearing set for Monday, about whether 
it is able to set such targets before the next minimum wage decision in mid 
2017.

In its submissions the federal government said the law required the commission 
to only determine one year’s minimum wage increase at a time.

It said that the national minimum wage must be expressed in a dollar per hour 
rate and “adopting a medium … term target or a predetermined formula for 
arriving at the national minimum wage is inconsistent” with that requirement.

The government said a target may not help address income inequality because a 
future review would be free to disregard it or set an different target.

It noted the UK was able to set a target of 60% of the median wage because its 
government is able to direct the Low Pay Commission, whereas Australia’s Fair 
Work Commission sets the minimum wage independently.

“The government remains of the view ... that the minimum wage is a less 
effective mechanism for addressing inequality than the tax-transfer system,” it 
said.

The government argued many low-paid workers were not in low-income households, 
for example if their partner was a higher income earner.

It also raised the spectre that a higher minimum wage could exacerbate 
unemployment.

Schofield said the recent decline in the value of the minimum wage had “pushed 
too many workers into poverty”.

“The approach of the government to the Fair Work Commission is weak and 
inconsistent: on one hand it is leaving penalty rates to the commission, on the 
other it is opposing lifting the standards of the lowest paid,” she said.

Schofield said the proposed target was not inconsistent with the Fair Work 
Act, because it was a “benchmark” that would still allow the commission to 
consider other factors.

She said the government was using “legal or technical arguments” to oppose the 
interests of the lowest paid, siding with employers.

“[The government] will be involved in any measure to cut pay. There’s been an 
incremental assault on workers’ rights over many years so we’re disappointed 
but not surprised.”

The ACTU secretary, David Oliver, said: “Unless a medium-term target is set, 
Australia’s lowest paid workers are at risk of becoming a US-style underclass 
of working poor who are trapped below the poverty line.”

Reserve Bank governor says business expectations could hold down inflation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/18/reserve-bank-governor-says-business-expectations-could-hold-down-inflation>
Oliver pointed to Reserve Bank of Australia governor Phillip Lowe’s warning 
that low wage growth was contributing to low inflation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/oct/20/interest-rates-are-at-record-lows-dont-expect-them-to-go-any-lower>
.

In August the ABS revealed that, in the past year, wages in the private sector 
grew by just 1.9% in trend terms –marking four years of falling wages growth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/aug/18/wages-growth-is-at-record-lows-unless-youre-a-commonwealth-bank-ceo>
.

“The ACTU fights for a higher minimum wage, year in, year out, and it would be 
a significant boost for low income workers to see the federal government get on 
board to make sure the gap does not widen further,” Oliver said.
 