
With its brightly coloured big wheel, helter-skelter and swing boats, 
Margate’s Dreamland offers visitors a trip back to British seaside holidays of 
yesteryear. But the amusement park offers the local community more than just 
nostalgia. Its 1920s ballroom plays host to a new support group for lesbian, 
gay, bi-sexual and transexual young people, set up by artists who were part of 
the London queer art scene and have moved to the town, part of a burgeoning 
arts scene that has seen it dubbed Shoreditch-on-Sea
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fcoastal-towns-trendy-arts-help-local-community%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62b7a4aa9c2815cc1480c513269787db2954a0a6%2F825_0_2244_2805%2F2244.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Coastal%20towns%20get%20trendy%20but%20will%20it%20help%20the%20locals%3F%20%7C%20David%20Batty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fcoastal-towns-trendy-arts-help-local-community%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Coastal%20towns%20get%20trendy%20but%20will%20it%20help%20the%20locals%3F%20%7C%20David%20Batty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fcoastal-towns-trendy-arts-help-local-community%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62b7a4aa9c2815cc1480c513269787db2954a0a6%2F825_0_2244_2805%2F2244.jpg>
 The helter skelter at the newly reopened Dreamland in Margate. Photograph: 
Dylan Martinez/REUTERS 
Started by artist Amy Redmond, drag name Amy Zing, a member of east London 
club collective Sink the Pink, Out Margate mixes traditional support services 
for young LGBT people, such as advice on coming out, health and online safety, 
with creativity. The group has also taken over the running of the local Pride 
parade. In the run up to the event, last weekend, it put on workshops by London 
fashion labels Shopdoorwhore and 8DIX, who have worked with Lilly Allen, at 
Dreamland, where local youngsters could make crowns, banners and bunting.

One of the group’s organisers Dan Chilcott, a textiles graduate from Central 
Saint Martins who moved to Margate four years ago, says: “We had this idea that 
Pride in Margate could be something really interesting, given the queer artists 
that were based here. It could be a kind of modern, contemporary Pride, quite 
DIY, community and inclusive and it could have year-round reach and impact. 
There are loads of gay people in Margate. It’s actually quite a gay-friendly 
place when you scratch the surface. That challenges the view you may have of 
Margate.”

East London is now a very expensive place but gentrification didn’t solve its 
social problems. They moved elsewhere,”

Chilcott and Redmond are part of the growing art scene in the town’s Northdown 
Road in Cliftonville, which includessome of the poorest streets in Kent 
<https://www.thanet.gov.uk/publications/planning-policy/cliftonville-development-plan-document/deprivation/>
. An influx of east European migrants in the past two decades saw it dubbed 
Kosoville. In the past year, an eclectic mix of hipster shops and businesses 
have sprung up amid the east European grocery stores and second-hand shops. 
They include the Grain Grocer, a wholefood store and café, Cliffs, a café and 
record shop with a hair salon and yoga studio, Transmission, a record shop, and 
Margate Arts Club.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fcoastal-towns-trendy-arts-help-local-community%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff888b0e4ef0d31c7614032e775f8eb4662b35d8c%2F677_783_4885_2931%2F4885.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Coastal%20towns%20get%20trendy%20but%20will%20it%20help%20the%20locals%3F%20%7C%20David%20Batty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fcoastal-towns-trendy-arts-help-local-community%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Coastal%20towns%20get%20trendy%20but%20will%20it%20help%20the%20locals%3F%20%7C%20David%20Batty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fcoastal-towns-trendy-arts-help-local-community%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff888b0e4ef0d31c7614032e775f8eb4662b35d8c%2F677_783_4885_2931%2F4885.jpg>
 The Turner Contemporary gallery in Margate. Photograph: Antonio Zazueta 
Olmos/Antonio Olmos 
But Jonathan Ward, a researcher in cultural labour at Leeds University has 
sounded a note of caution about this transformation, which has been largely 
spurred by the opening of the Turner Contemporary art gallery five years ago. 
The gallery has exhibited internationally renowned artists including Tracey 
Emin and Yinka Shonibare, and last year attracted more than 350,000 visitors. 
Wardargues in a paper published in The International Journal of Cultural Policy 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/10286632.2016.1153080>, that while 
the council’s strategy of arts-led regeneration has stimulated “a local milieu 
of artistic and cultural activity”, it has failed to support local artists, 
which risks undermining the sustainability of the arts scene.

“Margate’s got all the cool people coming in. It might become a very cool 
place to be, a very middle-class place to be, but is that really solving the 
problem of entrenched poverty and social exclusion in the town? East London is 
now a very expensive place to be but the gentrification there didn’t solve its 
social problems. They moved elsewhere,” says Ward. “Margate’s got masses of 
underused, very cheap property, which is the material basis you need for the 
same kind of gentrification as in East London.” But he warns: “The population 
of Northdown Road is still largely east European. Do they want a 
coffee/hair/yoga studio? Those things can live side by side, but they aren’t 
without cost. Let’s make sure the most vulnerable aren’t the ones who pay the 
highest price.”

Sarah Wren, Kent county council’s arts and regeneration officer for east Kent, 
agrees that local government needs to make the local creative sector more 
secure so that artists and local people aren’t priced out. She says: “We need 
to continue to invest in the labour force and their skills and make sure that 
infrastructure is there. We need more workspaces. We have waiting lists.” She 
points to the council’s investment in Resort Studios, a 3,000 square foot arts 
space, as an example of how it is supporting local creative entrepreneurship.

One of the studios’ founders, Heidi Plant, a print-maker and jewellery 
designer, says: “We got £50,000 to bring more of the building into use. We went 
from 25 members to 45 overnight. Now there are 50.”Local artist Dan Thompson 
runs the Empty Shop Network, which repurposes vacant stores into temporary 
shops and projects. He says the town now has more artist’s studios per head of 
population than London. “It is incredible how much space there is in the town 
that’s been given to artists and most of that has been set up and run by 
artists.”

But he also questions how connected this art scene is to indigenous 
population. “I don’t think the mix is huge. The Cliftonville cool community do 
keep to themselves to a large degree.”

Yet Thompson praises the Turner Contemporary’s Art Inspiring Change project, 
in which 80 pupils from four primary schools, including some on the town’s most 
deprived estates, will work with artists, a philosopher and gallery staff to 
transform their local neighbourhoods.

The gallery’s head of exhibitions, Sarah Martin, says: “Children themselves 
are tasked with transforming neglected sites, which they choose, in and around 
the town. [It’s also about] how these children develop leadership skills 
because they have to negotiate the use and permission of these sites, really 
building their confidence.”

Clive Stevens, chairman of the gallery’s trustees, adds that the project will 
also train 40 parents as “creative enablers” to help the pupils, which leads to 
a City and Guilds qualification.

Thompson’s children who attend a primary school on the Millmead council estate 
says: “The parents from that school … on the whole do not go to the Turner. 
They don’t go to the beach. The headmaster said a lot of the kids do not have 
the vocabulary when they take them to the beach. They can’t identify waves and 
horizon. He realised that you’re a mile inland and you don’t go to the beach, 
the poverty is so ingrained.”

Canterbury Christ Church University is set to publish a report in the autumn 
assessing the social impact of Turner Contemporary. And Thanet district council 
is due to publish a survey in November of the impact of the area’s creative 
sector on the local econony in order to help it support this sector’s 
development and to shape Thanet’s new economic development strategy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fcoastal-towns-trendy-arts-help-local-community%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feed25a32053a82482317c7247f4918ce5db4034f%2F255_492_4727_2836%2F4727.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Coastal%20towns%20get%20trendy%20but%20will%20it%20help%20the%20locals%3F%20%7C%20David%20Batty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fcoastal-towns-trendy-arts-help-local-community%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Coastal%20towns%20get%20trendy%20but%20will%20it%20help%20the%20locals%3F%20%7C%20David%20Batty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fcoastal-towns-trendy-arts-help-local-community%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feed25a32053a82482317c7247f4918ce5db4034f%2F255_492_4727_2836%2F4727.jpg>
 Folkestone harbour. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
Ward believes that Margate should follow the approach of the nearby port of 
Folkestone and secure property for the local creative sector to prevent artists 
being pushed out by property speculators. The Creative Foundation, established 
by former Saga Group tycoon Roger de Haan, has bought and refurbished 90 
properties for lease in Folkestone since 2002 in order to create a cultural 
quarter in the centre of the town. Five years ago, much of the Old High St was 
derelict, now it is flourishing with tenants, including textile designers, 
photographers and architects, attracted by cheap rents and the Folkestone 
Triennial, as well as bars, restaurants, cafes and housing. The transformation 
has now spread to adjoining Tontine St, which locals says was once a no-go area 
at night. A £3.5m refurbishment of the previously neglected concrete Harbour 
Arm, also owned by de Haan, which will include seafront housing and shops, has 
begun with cafes and music events.

Adrian Lockwood, manager of the Creative Quarter, says: “We’ve locked our 
buildings into 125 year leases and they can only be rented by creative people. 
It’s future-proofing our buildings. What we’ve been able to do is set the tone 
so there’s a particular sort of person coming down to live here.”

One of the tenants, fashion designer Zoe Holborough, who moved from London 
five years ago, says the foundation’s patronage has fostered a creative ecology 
that has enabled her to source and produce much of her clothing in the region. 
“I’ve found brilliant interns, great graphic designers for my website. There 
are photographers and stylists moving here who I really want to work with. I 
feel I’ve tapped into a really nice pocket of creativity.” She also feels the 
town is now widely recognised as a cultural destination. The costume designer 
for the Absolutely Fabulous movie, which she supplied patterns for, was happy 
to come to Folkestone for half a day to look through her designs.

Some artists in Margate are less enthusiastic about Ward’s proposal that the 
town should adopt Folkestone’s approach, however. Emrys Plant, a designer and 
visual poet, says: “The Creative Foundation does a fantastic job but it’s a 
different way of doing it. I’ve always thought of Margate as a frontier town 
where you had to take a risk. Folkestone felt like there was a huge safety net. 
There’s a DIY attitude [in Margate] to create what you want without being told 
what to do.”

Chilcott adds: “We’re finding more and more people who were born and bred here 
and locally based graduates are deciding to stay in the area and get studios 
here. It’s now an attractive place for locals to stay and grow their practice. 
They’re starting to view Margate as a viable alternative [to London]. That’s 
exciting.”
 