
I always find myself in the centre of a tug of love at this time of year 
because I love fashion, but I also really, really loveChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas>. And fashion and the 
festive season have never really seen eye to eye. Fashion is navy cashmere, 
sleek tailoring and expensively distressed denim; Christmas is novelty 
snowflake knits and glittery antler deeley boppers,Will Ferrell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/willferrell> in yellow elf leggings and 
Mariah Carey <https://www.theguardian.com/music/mariahcarey> in an itsy bitsy 
Santa suit. Christmas is dirty carbs rather than clean eating, rosy cheeks 
instead of Kardashian contouring.

The conflict comes to a head when you have to figure out what to wear for a 
Christmas party. Do you look Christmassy – sparkly, jolly, fun, appropriate – 
or do you look nice and true to yourself? The conventionalChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> party dress (tight, dark, 
sparkly) feels a bit dull, for all its shine. As if it has sequins where its 
personality should be.

“The thing is, we don’t actually dress up all that much, here,” muses Caren 
Downie, co-founder and designer of high-taste-at-high-street-prices online brand
Finery <https://www.finerylondon.com/>, when I ask her what she and her 
colleagues will be wearing for festive nights out. “We go to most parties 
straight from work. It just doesn’t feel modern to be putting your glittery 
dress on any more. And the idea of buying something that’s specifically for 
Christmas feels a bit old-fashioned, doesn’t it? Especially now, when people 
are much more careful with their budgets and would rather buy something 
multifunctional.” She plans to wear a dazzling skirt – the taffeta-lined 
black-and-white stripedSomerford 
<https://www.finerylondon.com/uk/products/somerford-stripe-full-skirt> (£129) – 
over a body; the same skirt can be worn with a white shirt or a knit for 
statement daywear.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fcocktail-skirt-tuxedo-trousers-or-a-jumpsuit-how-to-dress-for-christmas-parties%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F177346515e89de1cf158048476a72ce85ff34b6b%2F373_0_832_1040%2F832.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cocktail%20skirt%2C%20tuxedo%20trousers%20or%20a%20jumpsuit%20%E2%80%93%20how%20to%20dress%20for%20Christmas%20parties&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fcocktail-skirt-tuxedo-trousers-or-a-jumpsuit-how-to-dress-for-christmas-parties%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cocktail%20skirt%2C%20tuxedo%20trousers%20or%20a%20jumpsuit%20%E2%80%93%20how%20to%20dress%20for%20Christmas%20parties&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fcocktail-skirt-tuxedo-trousers-or-a-jumpsuit-how-to-dress-for-christmas-parties%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F177346515e89de1cf158048476a72ce85ff34b6b%2F373_0_832_1040%2F832.jpg>
 Somerford skirt, £129,Finery 
<https://www.finerylondon.com/uk/products/somerford-stripe-full-skirt>. 
Having rung around well-dressed fashion insiders for their seasonal 
party-dressing tips, my topline report is the following: the party dress of 
today is not a party dress – it is a cocktail skirt, tuxedo trousers or a 
jumpsuit. Coco Chan, head of womenswear at online retailerStylebop 
<https://www.stylebop.com/en-us/women/>, says: “Party dressing isn’t about 
sparkly dresses any more. People want to make their own style statements these 
days, and it’s much easier to do that with separates. And no one goes home from 
work to get changed for the evening any more, so separates make way more 
sense.” Chan herself is – surprise surprise – “a separates person. This 
Christmas I’ll be in a pretty Roksanda blouse with a simple bottom half. I’m 
not the type to be floating about in a gown.”

The top half should be sculptural rather than embellished. Minimal decoration, 
no print, definitely no beads or crystals. Instead, you want an interesting 
neckline (off the shoulder, probably) or a tied, ribboned or shaped sleeve. 
(FromVictoria Beckham <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/victoria-beckham> to 
Marks & Spencer <https://www.theguardian.com/business/marksspencer>, one thing 
that everyone in British fashion agrees on right now is that their shopper 
absolutely loves a fluted sleeve.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fcocktail-skirt-tuxedo-trousers-or-a-jumpsuit-how-to-dress-for-christmas-parties%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd44a2872ec97fcccf218460dc11554cb3590941c%2F0_0_1653_2880%2F1653.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cocktail%20skirt%2C%20tuxedo%20trousers%20or%20a%20jumpsuit%20%E2%80%93%20how%20to%20dress%20for%20Christmas%20parties&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fcocktail-skirt-tuxedo-trousers-or-a-jumpsuit-how-to-dress-for-christmas-parties%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cocktail%20skirt%2C%20tuxedo%20trousers%20or%20a%20jumpsuit%20%E2%80%93%20how%20to%20dress%20for%20Christmas%20parties&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fcocktail-skirt-tuxedo-trousers-or-a-jumpsuit-how-to-dress-for-christmas-parties%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd44a2872ec97fcccf218460dc11554cb3590941c%2F0_0_1653_2880%2F1653.jpg>
 Corset jumpsuit, £950,Galvan 
<http://www.galvanlondon.com/shop/jumpsuits/signature-corset-jumpsuit>. 
If the little black dress is in crisis, blame the party jumpsuit. The 
all-in-one is no longer an outre choice – and the latest versions, such as
Galvan’s corsetted style 
<http://www.galvanlondon.com/shop/jumpsuits/signature-corset-jumpsuit>, are 
sexy enough to put an end to the tired jokes about children’s TV presenters. “A 
tuxedo is very chic but, if you’re a woman going out with a man and he’s in 
trousers and a jacket, too, you don’t want to look too matching. A jumpsuit is 
sleek, comfortable, and you don’t have to show too much skin,” says Chan.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fcocktail-skirt-tuxedo-trousers-or-a-jumpsuit-how-to-dress-for-christmas-parties%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e501211049b4ebf7caf312bb559c9213cddfbfc%2F0_0_2601_3811%2F2601.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cocktail%20skirt%2C%20tuxedo%20trousers%20or%20a%20jumpsuit%20%E2%80%93%20how%20to%20dress%20for%20Christmas%20parties&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fcocktail-skirt-tuxedo-trousers-or-a-jumpsuit-how-to-dress-for-christmas-parties%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cocktail%20skirt%2C%20tuxedo%20trousers%20or%20a%20jumpsuit%20%E2%80%93%20how%20to%20dress%20for%20Christmas%20parties&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fcocktail-skirt-tuxedo-trousers-or-a-jumpsuit-how-to-dress-for-christmas-parties%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e501211049b4ebf7caf312bb559c9213cddfbfc%2F0_0_2601_3811%2F2601.jpg>
 Style inspiration: Brigitte Bardot. Photograph: Hulton Deutsch/Corbis via 
Getty Images 
Even more up to the minute on fashion’s mood than the buyers and designers are 
the personal shoppers, who have the latest word from the changing room. At
Selfridges <http://www.selfridges.com/GB/en/>, personal shopper Charlotte 
Bridgens has noticed that “no one wants to be overdressed at parties these 
days. It’s not cool.” Instead, her clients are “looking less for the dress they 
will wear to one party than for separates that will bring more to their 
wardrobe. Victoria Beckham is having a great season for dressed-down partywear 
– the look might be an incredible silver pleated skirt, worn with a sweater.” 
These days, the aesthetic is influenced as much by street style as by catwalk, 
which means quirky details and unusual combinations rather than sleek LBDs. 
“I’ve really noticed that bloggers come up in conversation again and again. 
Street style is definitely on a par with catwalk now.”

The feedback that Lupe Puerta, head of client relations at Net-a-Porter 
<https://www.net-a-porter.com/>, is hearing is that people “love the idea of 
denim teamed with an all-over sequin sweatshirt.” The brilliantly named velvet
“LOL If You Think I’m Walking” 
<https://www.net-a-porter.com/gb/en/product/810203> platform sandals from 
blogger Leandra Medine’s debut shoe collection are going down a storm with this 
look, as are metallic mini bags – the smaller the better, for that defiantly 
impractical after-dark vibe. “What we’ve really noticed is that it’s no longer 
just about the little black dress. Our customers are seeking new and 
alternative ways to style their partywear looks.” Sarah Haymes, personal 
shopping manager atTopshop <http://www.topshop.com/?geoip=home>, reports that 
jeans and a going-out top is back, as a night-time look. Denim with heels and 
an elegant blouse is a look that is going down well among shoppers, as is 
anything in velvet. The icons whose names come up in Topshop inter-shopper chat 
span a surprising time range, she says: from Irish modelStella Maxwell 
<https://www.instagram.com/stellamaxwell/?hl=en> and French Insta-It girl 
Jeanne Damas <https://www.instagram.com/jeannedamas/?hl=en> to Brigitte Bardot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2016/dec/01/brigitte-bardot-the-style-icon-in-pictures>
 andJane Birkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2013/oct/21/jane-birkin-serge-gainsbourg-stylish-couple>
,Christy Turlington <https://www.instagram.com/cturlington/?hl=en> and Amber 
Valetta <https://www.instagram.com/ambervalletta/?hl=en>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fcocktail-skirt-tuxedo-trousers-or-a-jumpsuit-how-to-dress-for-christmas-parties%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef95dc03b229dc2de43d4f6b96d643605e451f4f%2F0_0_4052_4052%2F4052.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cocktail%20skirt%2C%20tuxedo%20trousers%20or%20a%20jumpsuit%20%E2%80%93%20how%20to%20dress%20for%20Christmas%20parties&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fcocktail-skirt-tuxedo-trousers-or-a-jumpsuit-how-to-dress-for-christmas-parties%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cocktail%20skirt%2C%20tuxedo%20trousers%20or%20a%20jumpsuit%20%E2%80%93%20how%20to%20dress%20for%20Christmas%20parties&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fcocktail-skirt-tuxedo-trousers-or-a-jumpsuit-how-to-dress-for-christmas-parties%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef95dc03b229dc2de43d4f6b96d643605e451f4f%2F0_0_4052_4052%2F4052.jpg>
 Dark-red silk pyjamas by Whistles x Yolke. 
Birkin was on the moodboard when Han Chong, founder and designer of 
Self-Portrait <http://www.self-portrait-studio.com/> – partywear central for 
the modern good-time-girl – was creating the current collection. “We tried to 
think about what she would wear today, and designed pieces with that in mind.” 
Her feminine but unfussy vibe fed into “more options in the form of separates 
and jumpsuits”. Coco Chan, who has noticed the avant-garde left-bank chic of
Charlotte Rampling <https://www.theguardian.com/film/charlotte-rampling> and 
Catherine Deneuve <https://www.theguardian.com/film/catherinedeneuve> being 
namechecked in party-dressing circles this season, thinks their images are in 
the ether because “they were louche, decadent and ahead of their time in terms 
of how women live and want to look. And that captures something about how women 
are today.”

A tight, sequinned dress says: “I’ve had the office party circled on the wall 
chart since July because I’m so excited about the free bar.” Which is fine, but 
not always the wavelength you want to broadcast on. While, on the other hand, 
nothing says “I am a liberated modern woman fully cognisant of street-style 
trends” like a pyjama suit.I wore one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/mar/12/fashion-can-you-wear-pyjamas-party-lingerie-jess-cartner-morley>
 for a feature a while ago, and I have never felt more perfectly in sync with 
the martini glass in my hand than I did in those PJs. You need high heels and 
long earrings, just to make it crystal clear you are not a roving sleepwalker, 
but the frisson of daring that comes from wearing something that strays so far 
from the LBD script is liberating.Whistles’s dark-red silk pyjamas, in 
collaboration with Yolke 
<http://www.whistles.com/inspiration/whistles-x-yolke.html>, are the modern 
woman’s chic take on Macaulay Culkin in hisred jammies 
<https://c1.staticflickr.com/5/4043/4400902215_464cb0e102_b.jpg>, in Home 
Alone. The look is a Christmas classic. I’m calling that a happy ending.
 