
Revolving door comedy! The old ones are the best ... sometimes. And this time 
it does involve a wheelie suitcase, which at least adds a modern(ish) twist. 
The suitcase belongs to David, who is checking into a posh hotel until he sees 
the room rates. Robyn’s kicked him out, for good, wants a divorce. I hope this 
doesn’t mean we won’t be seeing any more of Robyn. I really enjoy her 
wonderfully ghastly way.


Next, to video chat humour – you know Skype, FaceTime, that’s more 21st 
century. Adam and Angela (in Singapore) aren’t doing it very well: it keeps 
freezing, or Angela’s distracted, by her phone or the need to work. Plus, as 
they find out later, it’s harder to hide a towel-clad hunk who you (Angela) may 
or may not have slept with.

My favourite moment this week is an exchange between Jenny’s daughter and 
Jenny’s mother. “Do you want to see some cats that look like Hitler?” the 
younger Gifford asks, looking into her phone (of course). “Not really love,” 
replies granny. “Talk to me instead.” Generational, double generational, 
difference is better for a laugh than revolving doors I think.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fcold-feet-recap-episode-four-sir-jack-soffalot-rides-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe1a96fe060db1efdf8b355cfe4abd3b810fa667b%2F0_0_4678_2806%2F4678.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cold%20Feet%20recap%3A%20episode%20four%20%E2%80%93%20Sir%20'Jack%20Soffalot'%20rides%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fcold-feet-recap-episode-four-sir-jack-soffalot-rides-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cold%20Feet%20recap%3A%20episode%20four%20%E2%80%93%20Sir%20%27Jack%20Soffalot%27%20rides%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fcold-feet-recap-episode-four-sir-jack-soffalot-rides-again%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe1a96fe060db1efdf8b355cfe4abd3b810fa667b%2F0_0_4678_2806%2F4678.jpg>
 ‘Want to see some cats that look like Hitler?’ ‘Not really love’ … Jenny’s 
daughter and her mother share a moment of double-generational difference. 
Photograph: Ben Blackall/Big Talk Productions/ITV 
There’s a little punnery too. “Jack Soffalot” reads Pete’s sign, waiting for 
Adam at the airport. Quite funny. And there’s a spa/Spar (as in the shop) 
mix-up, which emphasises the basic rule about puns: that the best thing to do 
with one, once you’ve thought of it, is not to use it.

What else? Old Harry’s dead … not really … no, really! Passed away at 
half-time in the football. Probably out of boredom (a hazard of supporting 
Jose’s United). Unless he persuaded someone to polish him off with a pillow 
over the head. In spite of that Pete seems cheerier; the happy pills must be 
working. Adam and Angela’s long-distance relationship isn’t, in spite of modern 
technology.

ISSUE of the week

Ageing parents, and caring for them. Jenny’s mum specifically, the one who 
doesn’t want to see the little Fur-hers (he says, breaking/proving the pun 
rule).

Classic Cold Feet moment


Adam at the airport, saying goodbye to Angela, having chosen his son over his 
wife, fading into acoustic singer-songwriter (Dan Croll this time).

One more thing
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fcold-feet-recap-episode-four-sir-jack-soffalot-rides-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9971c7aec1fb948cf3822daa82cd73ee2d5705b3%2F0_118_4730_2838%2F4730.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cold%20Feet%20recap%3A%20episode%20four%20%E2%80%93%20Sir%20'Jack%20Soffalot'%20rides%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fcold-feet-recap-episode-four-sir-jack-soffalot-rides-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cold%20Feet%20recap%3A%20episode%20four%20%E2%80%93%20Sir%20%27Jack%20Soffalot%27%20rides%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fcold-feet-recap-episode-four-sir-jack-soffalot-rides-again%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9971c7aec1fb948cf3822daa82cd73ee2d5705b3%2F0_118_4730_2838%2F4730.jpg>
 Did they, didn’t they? Adam with his hot Airbnb landlady. Photograph: Ben 
Blackall/Big Talk Productions/ITV 
Cold Feet does a lot of jumping forward, then going back to fill in the gaps. 
So Adam’s drunken scene with Tina the hot landlady: did they, didn’t they? We 
don’t know, it stops, jumps forward, then later goes back to fill in the space 
(they didn’t, not yet anyhow). Back-stitch drama I believe it is called.
 