
Colin Kaepernick <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/colin-kaepernick> has come 
under fierce scrutiny for refusing to stand during the national anthem as a 
protest against racism and police violence. To some extent, this is expected – 
it is, after all, the national anthem. But what goes beyond the pale is the 
suggestion that Kaepernick – who is an adoptee – was acting out of place given 
that his adoptive parents are white.


Colin Kaepernick's national anthem protest is fundamentally American | Ijeoma 
Oluo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/29/colin-kaepernick-national-anthem-protest-fundamentally-american>
Fox News anchor Brian Kilmeade said: “Let’s be honest, he was adopted by two 
white parents, he was well supported. He is a great athlete, I’m sure he worked 
hard, I also heard his grades were great.”

The underlying assumption – that Kaepernick was being ungrateful to white 
America by protesting against racism – is as troubling as it is offensive. Why 
would the race of his adoptive parents be relevant to his protest? Are we to 
deduce that if a white couple agreed to adopt a black or biracial child, then 
systemic racism isn’t a problem?


Kaepernick, whose white birthmother wasted no time in tweeting her disapproval 
<http://www.theroot.com/blog/the-grapevine/colin-kaepernicks-birth-mother-scolds-him-on-twitter-over-national-anthem/>
 of his activism, continued: “To me, this is bigger than football and it would 
be selfish on my part to look the other way. There are bodies in the street and 
people getting paid leave and getting away with murder.”


In addition to his birthmother, who re-emerged in Kaepernick’s life 
<https://www.good.is/articles/why-it-s-perfectly-acceptable-that-colin-kaepernick-doesn-t-want-to-meet-his-birthmother>
 at the height of his career four years ago, conservative pundits and public 
figures alike have criticized his decision to stay silent during the anthem as 
unpatriotic.


The Star Spangled Banner, which as John Legend pointed out, isn’t even that 
good of a song, concludes with the infamous lyrics: “The star spangled banner / 
In triumph shall wave / O’er the land of the free / And the home of the brave!” 
Land of the free. Home of the brave. I think we all know who ended up free and 
who is still out here trying to be brave.

The funny thing about about being black and also having been raised by white 
parents is that it is doesn’t change the fact that we are black when we are 
born – whether by two black birth parents, or one white and one black – and we 
are black when we are adopted. We are still black when we decide what that 
means to us on a personal, cultural or activist level in America. We are 
children of our adoptive parents, but we are also children of black culture and 
history.

While being light-skinned black or biracial, as Kaepernick is, affords its own 
privileges in a society riddled not just by racism but also by colorism, it 
doesn’t offer full immunity from racism – or anything close to it. Trolls called
Kaepernick racial epithets 
<http://www.totalprosports.com/2016/08/27/kaepernick-attacked-on-social-media-with-ngger-comments-for-not-standing-during-national-anthem/>
, after all. He is a reminder that being black in America, no matter how light 
or dark skinned you are, means shielding yourself against the inevitable 
arbitrary assessment of your worth at the drop of a dime.

That is not understood by everyone. I’m talking to you too, Rodney Harrison, 
who tweeted 
<http://thebiglead.com/2016/08/30/rodney-harrison-says-colin-kaepernick-doesnt-understand-because-hes-not-black/>
 that Kaepernick could not understand what black people face because “he’s not 
black”. Who died and made you King Kunta? But also, as BuzzFeed national editor 
Adam Serwer pointed out: even if Kaepernick were white, shouldn’t he still care 
about racism? Shouldn’t everybody care about racism?


Maybe that’s the lesson here – if we can concede to a lesson or learning 
moment: American racism decimates black livelihood, now and in 1812 when the 
Star Spangled Banner was written, while white people stand around deciding what 
patriotism means.

 * The headline of this piece was amended on 1 September 2016. The original 
said “Colin Kaepernick can protest racism”; it now says “Colin Kaepernick can 
protest against racism.”  