
Colin O’Brien, who has died aged 76, was a self-taught photographer; he was 
inspired by the work ofBert Hardy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2013/mar/24/bert-hardy-photographs-in-pictures>
 andBill Brandt <http://www.billbrandt.com/>, which he saw as a child in 
Picture Post magazine <http://www.gale.com/picture-post-historical-archive/>, 
to begin documenting everyday, working-class life in London in the 1950s.His 
vast photographic archive <http://www.colinobrien.co.uk/> of around half a 
million negatives is a unique visual record of the changing nature of the 
capital over the past 60 years, the highlights of which were collected inthe 
book London Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/26/london-life-review-colin-obrien-photography>
 (2015). He is also known for his series of images of Travellers’ children, 
taken in the 1980s. “I’m fascinated by the ordinary,” he said. “Famous people 
and famous things just don’t interest me. The ordinary is of as much importance 
as the extraordinary.”

The last days of London - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2015/jul/24/last-days-london-in-pictures-colin-obrien-photographs>
O’Brien took what he called his “first real photograph” in 1948, aged eight. 
In it, his two boyhood friends,Raymond Scallionne and Razi Tuffano 
<http://spitalfieldslife.com/2011/05/30/colin-obrien-photographer/>, pose 
moodily, as instructed by him, against a parked car in Hatton Garden, 
Clerkenwell, central London. Soon afterwards, his uncle, Will, a cab driver, 
gave him a basic contact printing set that allowed him to develop his 
photographs without using a darkroom. As a boy, O’Brien shot with a Brownie box 
camera on the bustling, working-class streets of Clerkenwell, his 
neighbourhood, which was then called “Little Italy” because of the Italian 
immigrants who had settled there and opened cafes and food stores.

From the start, he seemed to understand instinctively that his area, with all 
its everyday human dramas, reflected the energy of the surrounding city. He 
photographed his father, Edward, at the breakfast table before a shift at 
nearby Mount Pleasant post office, and his mother, Edith (nee Kelly), a 
housewife, making tea and shopping for hats, as well as neighbours and children 
as they went about their daily lives. One of his black and white photographs of 
a London skyline at night dominated by factory chimneys was used on the cover 
of the first edition of Alfie (1966), a novel by his friend Bill Naughton from 
his earlier play, which wasalso made into two films 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0060086/?ref_=nm_ov_bio_lk2>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Fcolin-o-brien-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F721f7f41dcf6308e30e025c8bc83d66ca0399622%2F0_0_2736_3648%2F2736.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Colin%20O%E2%80%99Brien%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Fcolin-o-brien-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Colin%20O%E2%80%99Brien%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Fcolin-o-brien-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F721f7f41dcf6308e30e025c8bc83d66ca0399622%2F0_0_2736_3648%2F2736.jpg>
 Colin O’Brien on the balcony of the flat in Clerkenwell, which he moved into 
with his parents when it was built in 1966. Photograph: The Gentle Author 
As a teenager, O’Brien was a resourceful and imaginative photographer, 
shooting an extended series of images from the family’s top-floor flat in 
Clerkenwell, which he later called “my first window on the world”. From there, 
he photographed people passing by on the street below as well as Roman Catholic 
religious processions and even the aftermath ofcar accidents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/26/london-life-review-colin-obrien-photography>
. His images show the streets in bright summer sun and covered in winter snow. 
He often shot late into the night, capturing lone stragglers making their way 
home past hoardings advertising Guinness and Batchelors Peas.

Inevitably, his wanderings took him further afield to Soho and the West End, 
where he often photographed at night, using a 1931 Leica purchased by his 
parents from a chauffeur, who claimed to have found it in the back of his car. 
In the 60s he also hung around outside football grounds, intent on capturing 
the faces of supporters pouring into the terraces or perching on walls and 
railings rather than the drama on the pitch. His snatched portrait of West Ham 
and England starBobby Moore 
<http://unitg.london/gallery/product/bobby-moore-at-fulham-football-club-1975/> 
is memorable for the crowd of children that surrounds him, each intent on their 
autographs. It captures a moment when English football began to shed its 
working-class roots for the glamour and riches of today’s global, corporate 
game.

In 1987, O’Brien spent time among a community of Travellers in London Fields 
<http://www.spitalfieldslife.bigcartel.com/product/travellers-children-in-london-fields-by-colin-o-brien/>
, creating a gritty series that was later published as a book to critical 
acclaim. “Those kids were so free,” he said later. “They were impoverished but 
not unhappy. I think they’re tender shots and there’s a real sense of 
togetherness in some.”

The London that O’Brien captured in the 1950s and 60s already looks impossibly 
distant in its mix of street traders, factory workers and scruffy children in 
short trousers and hand-knitted jumpers. The old-fashioned family shops have 
now been replaced by chains and purveyors of artisan goods. In the 
retrospective of his work,London Life 
<http://spitalfieldslife.bigcartel.com/product/london-life-by-colin-o-brien-published-by-spitalfields-life-books-on-june-18th>
, the photographs taken in the 80s and 90s chronicle the beginning of the 
hyper-gentrification of the capital that has rendered swaths of O’Brien’s East 
End virtually unrecognisable.

Born and raised in Clerkenwell, O’Brien rarely moved further afield than 
Hackney, in east London, where he settled in the 80s. His mother even brought 
Colin, an only child, back from evacuation in Cornwall during the Blitz, as she 
hated it so much, saying she’d “rather take a chance”. “I wasn’t Don McCullin 
going off to war or David Bailey photographing celebrities,”O’Brien said 
<http://www.islingtonfacesblog.com/2015/12/02/colin-obrien-photographer/>. “I 
was quite provincial. I didn’t go south of the river and I didn’t travel.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Fcolin-o-brien-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5bd7674a225c34db300b44b4d21e6c7d319926a%2F0_83_3750_2250%2F3750.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Colin%20O%E2%80%99Brien%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Fcolin-o-brien-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Colin%20O%E2%80%99Brien%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Fcolin-o-brien-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5bd7674a225c34db300b44b4d21e6c7d319926a%2F0_83_3750_2250%2F3750.jpg>
 A cobbler in his workshop in Hackney, from Colin O’Brien’s book London Life 
He failed his 11-plus, but after attending Sir John Cass school in the City, 
he found a job in media resources at the City Literary Institute, where he was 
given time off to study and gained a BA in photography at Westminster 
Polytechnic, and an MA in photography and advertisingatLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> College of Printing.

Though his work appeared fitfully in the Guardian and other newspapers, 
O’Brien seems to have evaded the dictates of the commercial world. He funded 
his street photography with various office jobs and by working as a technician 
at St Martin’s School of Art, before he began teaching at the London Institute 
(now University of the Arts London). In the 70s he took photographs of plays 
and actors, including John Hurt and Steven Berkoff, at the King’s Head theatre, 
Islington; theBishopsgate Institute recently restored thousands of those images 
<http://www.bishopsgate.org.uk/content.aspx?CategoryID=1865>. In 1982 he 
married Jan, who survives him.

His publisher at Spitalfields Life Books described him 
<http://spitalfieldslife.com/2016/08/22/so-long-colin-obrien/> as “a purist who 
managed to resist any commercial imperative or editorial intervention … 
resolutely pursuing his own personal interests”.

In his 70s, O’Brien continued to photograph in and around Hackney. “Two things 
will stop me doing street photography,” he saidin a recent interview 
<http://hackneypost.co.uk/2014/03/13/interview-east-london-street-photographer-colin-obrien/>
. “Either I die, or London stops changing.”

• Colin O’Brien, photographer, born 8 May 1940; died 19 August 2016
 