
Title: The Best of Les Dawson <http://www.amazon.co.uk/film-tv/dp/B0001P043M>.

Year: Various, 1970s and 80s.

The set-up: It is sometimes said – and said quite often underneath these 
articles – that something or someone just is or isn't funny. Les Dawson did not 
agree. In 1974,he asked Michael Parkinson 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vdCvhfbhqrA#t=14m30s>: "How can you analyse 
what is funny? What's funny to one isn't funny to another … What's funny to you 
is a personal thing." It's ironic, because Dawson himself was perhaps as close 
to being "just funny" as human beings get.

First, there was the physique: stout but upright, like a provincial mayor. 
Then there'sthat face: absurdly mobile 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gLe1_pnxKV4>, with lips almost capacious enough 
for the rest of it to hide in. The accent: gruff Lancastrian – perhaps an 
ancestor ofPeter Kay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/apr/26/peter-kay-jokes>'s – the 
perfect blunt instrument for bathetic punchlines. He was magnificent with words 
as well, always ready with fresh feats of intricate articulacy, yet he was 
genuine with it, and widely liked. He may have hired others such as Terry 
Ravenscroft and Barry Cryer to write for him, but as a performer Dawson was the 
comic attributes of a whole variety show bound together in one man.

And yet the funniest aspect of this funny man was that he dreamed of higher 
things. When young, he travelled to Paris to lead the life of a struggling 
writer (and managed the struggling part). While there, to make ends meet, he 
played the piano (anther passion for which he'd had great plans) and later, not 
enjoying it, found his grumbling and wrong notes provoked a better reaction 
than anything else he did. From there grew a career as one of the most loved 
comics on British television. He was the fat chap from the north who wore 
dinner jackets and told mother-in-law jokes while forever trying and failing to 
raise the tone. Even in those days he continued writing poetry, and wrote many 
novels.

Funny how? Dawson's comedy divides into two compartments: the monologues and 
music-hall routines he began with, and later the playlets and sketches he 
performed on television. The latter stuff, which includes his famous Cissie and 
Ada drag act with Roy Barraclough, has not aged very well (although I'm sure 
it's still well loved). The standup, on the other hand, whereDawson himself can 
be at the heart of things <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tuFy3iCZ3x8>, remains 
full of wit and charm. It made him, in a meagre field, one of the great 
game-show hosts during his days presiding over Blankety Blank.

And always the premise is the same: Dawson is unhappy, he doesn't want the 
life he's got, so he puts his wasted talent into his complaints. For instance: 
"I'd like to thank the BBC for allowing me to work here. And I'd like to thank 
the wife and kids for making it necessary." Or: "I've just had some bad news. 
Tomorrow is the mother in law's funeral. And she's cancelled it." Wherever 
there is glamour, aspiration, refinement, affection or any other noble feeling, 
he brings a great splat of dun reality.

"It's aggression as a form of defence," he also told Parkinson, when asked to 
describe his style. It was revenge as well. Better to laugh back at life, since 
it seemed determined to laugh at him.

Comic cousins: Frankie Howerd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/may/03/frankie-howerd-on-campus>, Mick 
Miller, Lily Savage, Morecambe and Wise, Peter Kay.

Steal this: "I went to the doctor last week. I said: 'Can I have some sleeping 
pills for the wife?' He said: 'Why?' I said: 'She's woke up.'"
 