
There may be up to 10,000 gay men in prison in England and Wales. Although a 
significant number of prisoners actively engage in consensual or coercive 
sexual relations with fellow prisoners, homophobia prevails. Officially the
Prison Service has said that it “does not condone or facilitate sexual 
relationships between prisoners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/sep/25/homophobia-rife-uk-prisons>”, 
but every prison in the country has a “condom policy”, while staff generally 
follow the tacit “don’t ask, don’t tell” strategy.

This ambiguity and hypocrisy means that insights about the reality of the 
prison experience for gay men and women in prison are hard to come by.

When the Howard League for Penal Reform undertook an independent commission to 
review the nature and scale of sex in prison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/sep/15/sexual-abuse-rape-prison-urgent-investigation>
 earlier this year,requests by researchers to speak to serving prisoners were 
blocked by the Ministry of Justice 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/chris-grayling-under-fire-over-claim-ministry-of-justice-hid-abuse-and-rape-in-jails-9732475.html>
. Instead the evidence was provided by former prisoners. One gay man explained 
how he was forced to live under the “protection” of another prisoner and 
subjected to “sexual torture” over a prolonged period. “I’ve wanted to talk 
about it for a long time,” he told the researcher, “but the means were not 
there. Because nobody wants to know, nobody wants to hear about this 
horrendous, horrendous abuse.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Faug%2F12%2Flgbt-people-prison-struggle-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F10%2F1439201842728%2F8b55b277-b2b0-40b0-b139-832e3d4587a5-1020x813.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Coming%20out%3A%20LGBT%20people%20lift%20the%20lid%20on%20life%20in%20prison%20%7C%20Erwin%20James&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Faug%2F12%2Flgbt-people-prison-struggle-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Coming%20out%3A%20LGBT%20people%20lift%20the%20lid%20on%20life%20in%20prison%20%7C%20Erwin%20James&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Faug%2F12%2Flgbt-people-prison-struggle-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F10%2F1439201842728%2F8b55b277-b2b0-40b0-b139-832e3d4587a5-1020x813.jpeg>
 A prisoner’s drawing depicting his experience in jail. 
Another had no complaints, telling the researcher that, “prison was a fabulous 
sexual experience.”

“I’ve never had so much sex. I was very popular, and I loved it.” Others said 
they had sexual partners who were outwardly “macho” and “anti-gay” and were 
sustaining relationships with wives or girlfriends through letters and visits – 
these were “jail gays”, they said, “gay on the inside”, but apparently straight 
on the outside. The commission reveals that little has changed since my own 
time in prison from 1984 to 2004.

As the years passed I became acutely aware of how painful, destructive and 
damaging the privation of opportunities for healthy sexual expression can be 
for prisoners. For five years I was alistener 
<http://www.samaritans.org/your-community/our-work-prisons/listener-scheme>, 
trained by the Samaritans to offer a non-judgmental ear to fellow prisoners in 
distress. That’s when I learned how prevalent the suppression of sexual 
identity was in prison. Gay men ashamed of being gay, straight men feeling 
forced to pretend to be anti-gay. I saw transgender prisoners, already 
struggling to come to terms with their own complexities, left to the mercy of 
an exaggerated macho culture, trying to cope with being objects both of 
derision and desire. And through those 20 years inside, I never saw a single 
acknowledgment from the system that these were issues that urgently needed 
addressing.

A unique and enlightening new book of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender 
(LGBT) prison experiences, written by prisoners and staff from HMP Parc in 
south Wales, may finally bring about change. The book, Inside and Out 
<http://www.g4s.uk.com/insideandout/>, was the idea of the prison’s arts 
intervention and community inclusion manager, Phil Forder, himself a gay man 
who “came out” at work five years ago.

Forder has been running Parc’s monthly LGBT support group for more than two 
years. He brought in a creative writing teacher for a month, with amazing 
results, he says. “When the group read their pieces aloud at the end, you could 
feel the levels of trust building.”

Forder, along with education and library staff, has been running a 
collaboration with the Hay Literary Festival for seven years, inviting authors 
into the prison. For this year’s Hay in the Parc, Forder invited the LGBT group 
to write about coming out. “I asked them to write their stories in the privacy 
of their cells and bring them to the group. It was incredibly moving to see how 
much similarity there was, and the support and understanding generated as a 
result was obvious. It seemed only natural then to extend the project to 
include staff.” The result was Inside and Out.

Forder’s LGBT work in the prison has led to him being shortlisted from over 
20,000 nominees for the positive role model award at this year’s National 
Diversity Awards.

Officially the Prison Service 'does not condone sexual relationships', but 
every prison has a 'condom policy'

His boss at the privately run Parc prison, director Janet Wallsgrove, 
expresses pride in what Forder and his colleagues have achieved. “This book is 
a statement,” she says. “It’s saying that we at Parc recognise and support 
everyone’s right to be respected as an individual. It’s both about tackling 
homophobia and challenging people who express views that are unacceptable and 
about getting people to feel comfortable with themselves and more motivated to 
buy into a rehabilitative culture in prison and in society.”

In an era when good news stories about our prisons are rare, this courageous, 
pioneering book shines bright.




Anthony’s story Anthony, prisoner

I always knew I was gay – even as a small boy – but I also knew that in the 
Traveller community this was totally not acceptable and was seen as a mental 
problem. As a result I never spoke to anyone about it for fear that they would 
get angry.

Since I have come out there have been several attempts on my life by the 
Traveller community. I have been knifed in the hand (protecting my face), 
stabbed in the back, bottled over the head and hit by a car but, if anything, 
it has made me stronger. I used to think that being gay was wrong and felt 
ashamed of it, but I don’t anymore.

I’ve been inside now for 14 months. When I came into prison I never said 
either way whether I was gay or not. I don’t look camp so could easily pass as 
straight. Also I have photos of my children on my cell wall, so why would 
anyone think differently? My partner visits me every week with his sister. My 
partner’s family have accepted me as one of theirs, so much so that I see them 
as my own family now.

The only thing that does bother me in prison are the other Travellers. They 
tend to stick together in here as there is strength in numbers. The prison puts 
on regular events where my path crosses theirs, such as the Gypsy, Roma, 
Traveller support groups and Sunday mass. I still hold on to my Catholic faith. 
It means a lot to me.

I’d been in here about a year before my past caught up with me. I was walking 
back to my wing and I passed B block. As I did someone shouted out from one of 
the cell windows: “Anthony, you fucking queer”. I couldn’t see who it was but 
everybody in the the houseblock must have heard it. I wasn’t frightened, but 
more angry than anything that someone had the cowardly cheek to shout something 
out about my personal life and judge me for it.

They would never say it to my face. I went back to my cell and decided to put 
on a rainbow wristband I had been given by the equality team, which I’ve worn 
ever since. I’m fed up with having to hide and pretend. Although just a 
wristband, it is a big statement in here. A few people have raised their 
eyebrows but no regular prisoner has challenged me seriously. I guess I can 
hold my own on the wing.

Trans in prison Linda, prisoner

Before arriving here at Parc, it was like being on a motorway, only stuck in 
the slow lane, dragging along at a very slow pace, dodging scraps with others 
around me. It was not the sort of journey you would want to take. But it is 
your inner strength, self-belief and courage that keeps you getting up and 
carrying on, regardless of what other people think. In other prisons I often 
came to blows with men who picked on me. When that happened I never had any 
support from anyone else, not even others who were bisexual or gay. I think 
they were frightened that if they supported me they might get picked on in the 
same way as I was and get bullied. The majority of prisoners felt that gay, 
bisexual or transgender people were sick and as a result you were constantly 
targeted just for being the way you are. Before I came here I did not believe 
that I would be treated the same as the other prisoners because I am a woman 
trapped in a male body. It was a surprise to be treated exactly the same, and 
staff have given me jobs. The support is across the board, be it from the LGBT 
group, healthcare or wing officers. Having settled more into my gender, the 
journey on the motorway is speeding up and I am changing lanes. There are times 
I feel so relaxed and happy I am actually in the fast lane. It’s a lot down to 
the environment you are living in and the attitudes of those around you.

An officer’s view Ginny, prison officer

Maybe it’s because the gay community in the prison is rather small that 
relationships are so cliquey, or maybe it’s because this job is possibly only 
suited to strong individuals, that so many gay women fit in so well. I think 
maybe society expects women working in a prison environment to be gay.

On my first day of entering the prison gates after having been in the 
classroom with new trainnees for three weeks, I was asked by my trainer: “So do 
you fancy men, women or both?” This was said very openly and in front of 
everyone else. My answer was: “It depends what mood I am in”. This same relaxed 
attitude I have found in every department I have worked in.

As for the prisoners we have the pleasure of looking after, well, you get 
comments just like everyone else does. Some people will shout abuse through the 
window like “lezza” and “dyke” … but then a straight woman can walk past and 
they will call them a slag or a tart, so I never take anything to heart. I was 
told the other day by a client: “Leave some women for us will ya,”… news had 
obviously got out that I had a date on the weekend.

Cell relationship Daniel, prisoner

Being gay in prison is difficult. I have spent a lot of my adult life inside 
and although I am gay I never told anyone. As a result I have felt very lonely 
and alone. Other prisoners would crack jokes and say bad things about gay men 
and I would just have to listen. It used to get to me. I just wanted to get up 
on the roof and shout it out, but of course I didn’t because I was scared.

I am not the sort of guy that you would look at and say “he’s gay”, as I look 
like everyone else – a bit rough – and I have a reputation for being quite 
hard. But inside it is a different story.

One day I was working in the servery, dishing out the food, when another 
prisoner said to me “Come on admit it! I know you’re gay.” He was sort of 
messing about but I had had enough and snapped: “Yea! So what? What you gonna 
do about it?”

He replied: “No, it’s cool with me, I’m still your mate.”

But, pretty soon everyone on the wing was talking about it. During break this 
other guy came up to me and asked me directly, he called me “loverboy”. I went 
sorta [sic] nuts and said: “Are you taking the piss?” He backed off and after 
that no one dared confront me though I’m sure they all knew. This made me feel 
very uncomfortable, because if I started talking to anyone I was afraid that 
they would think that I was coming on to them, and make me feel a fool.

Eventually, I got two-ed up with another guy and we started a relationship. We 
thought no one knew but on a wing it’s hard to keep things private for long. I 
was really shocked when my personal officer asked me if I needed condoms and 
that I just had to ask. I was embarrassed. Also, other prisoners started 
asking: “Are you two gay?” I’d always deny it though it was, I guess, common 
knowledge.

We were in a relationship for 18 months. Then my pad mate got moved to another 
wing. I was upset as I cared for him. It was hard for us to stay in contact and 
then I got released.

I wrote to him regularly and got two letters back before I got recalled and 
came back to prison. I was looking forward to seeing him again. We were not on 
the same wing, however, and it wasn’t long before he was released. After that I 
never saw him again.
 Mark’s drawing 
Don’t give up Mark, prisoner

I had a poem sent to me called Don’t Give Up. I find it helpful to anyone 
thinking of wanting to give up in life because of their fear of their 
sexuality. I have read the poem several times and I have done a drawing to go 
with it.

The drawing is about the way you are feeling if you haven’t come out about 
your sexuality, or you are scared and don’t know how to deal with it. It is a 
man stood there in tears not knowing where to turn and the bars are there 
expressing there’s no way out, or so he feels. This drawing could have 
different meanings to different people, but there will always be a way forward 
and a way out of the worries and fears you have in your head.

• A complete copy of the book Inside and Out can be read here 
<http://www.g4s.uk.com/insideandout>
 