
This statement covers all our significant findings regarding issues covered in 
theCommunity <https://www.theguardian.com/sustainability/community> section of 
the Living our Values report to date. As we are using a rolling assurance 
process alongside the rolling publication of sections in the report, we may add 
additional findings that come to light as we investigate each section. All 
significant claims made in this section have been assured. We have not assured 
the data from this section.

When Guardian News and Media (GNM) moved to Kings Place four years ago, it 
made a commitment to staff and the community to deliver positive benefits to 
the local community through an enhanced community programme, reaching more 
community partners. Since then the number of community partners has expanded 
from four to 11 with support also provided through the Guardian Education 
Centre.

This year the community programme faced its biggest challenge with commercial 
pressures meaning financial investment fell by a third compared to last year 
and reduced availability of staff during the restructuring. The sustainability 
team is working even more creatively to continue to support partners and it is 
commendable that the number of regular volunteers and staff volunteering as 
part of team days was roughly the same as last year. However the total amount 
of time staff spent volunteering has fallen.

Given the challenging environment, it is notable that GNM undertook 
independent monitoring and evaluation of the community programme. The review 
identified benefits created by the community programme, particularly from the 
employment of GNM's media expertise.

Among the recommendations, one key finding was that GNM could manage internal 
resources better if there was a clearly articulated programme of support for 
partners agreed upon at the start of each financial year. GNM has started work 
on this by initiating planning meetings with each partner. A key challenge for 
the community programme will be to determine how to prioritise and support 
community partners going forward.

This year saw the conclusion of the Guardian's formal four-year integrated 
development project in the Ugandan rural community of Katine. It is a positive 
development that the Guardian has worked with Amref to agree a further Â£160,000 
to support the existing community structures until the end of 2013, funded by 
continuing reader donations, In addition it has investigated the creation of a 
long-term development fund for the community that will help them to deal with 
shocks, such as extreme weather and climate change.
 