
Slouched out on a sofa in front of the television with a can of lager in one 
hand and a remote control in the other could knock phone and personal computer 
banking on the head.

Or at least that's the hope of banks launching interactive digital TV 
services. Last month, HSBC, formerly Midland Bank, came up with TV Banking. 
This weekend Abbey National launches a lookalike service, while the Woolwich is 
poised to produce a similar offering.

Currently, programmes from both HSBC and the Abbey National allow 
account-holders who sign up to look at the complete range of products such as 
mortgages and savings and to request product brochures. But from the end of 
this month at HSBC and next spring at the Abbey, the interactive phase starts.

This will enable subscribers to check account balances, transfer money between 
accounts, set up and change direct debits and other transfers, pay utility and 
other bills, and apply for a new overdraft limit.

Access to the new service is via the security of a PIN number and Sky digital 
satellite TV equipment. The set top box is free but there is a connection 
charge of Â£40 and, in some cases, the need for a new aerial. There is also a 
monthly Sky fee to pay. The banking services are not currently on cable or 
On-digital, although HSBC expects them to appear on these platforms soon.

Digital TV banking is an alternative to the internet and is designed to appeal 
to those who find the web too difficult, too expensive or too much effort.

The Abbey's Ambrose McGinn says digital TV banking "will be the biggest 
revolution in banking since the cheque book was introduced. Banking through the 
TV will be very attractive for families as it puts them firmly in control of 
their own finances."

But it could also present working families with a dilemma. Digital TV requires 
special wiring and a phone point so most households will only fit it to the 
main set. And unlike the personal computer which is designed for one person at 
a time, the family set can be viewed by all.

Parents will have two decisions to make. They will have to weigh up the 
urgency of their financial screen shopping against their offspring's desire to 
watch the Teletubbies, the Jellabies or Neighbours. You cannot bank while you 
view.

And some may need to shoo their children out of the room so the kids do not 
find out the full extent of parental spending power - or how hard up mum and 
dad are.
 