
Malcolm Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> 
has embraced a plan to strengthen legal protections for small businesses and 
farmers against abuse of market power by big businesses – a change he is 
believed to have previously opposed – in a major win for the small business 
lobby and the National party.


The changes were advocated in a review of competition policy by the economist 
Ian Harper and are backed by the Australian Competition and Consumer 
Commission, but split Tony Abbott’s cabinet to such an extent that they were 
deferred indefinitely.

Turnbull, along with the then treasurer, Joe Hockey, the attorney general, 
George Brandis, the trade minister, Andrew Robb, and the finance minister, 
Mathias Cormann, are understood to have argued against them at that time.

Nationals senators cross floor to back Greens on competition law changes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/15/nationals-senators-cross-floor-to-back-greens-on-competition-law-changes>
But on Wednesday he denied he had ever been opposed, saying he had “always 
taken a thoroughly open mind to this issue” and took a practical rather than 
“theoretical” approach.

While the Council for Small Business Australia welcomed the change, Catherine 
Livingstone, the president of the Business Council of Australia, expressed 
disappointment at the Coalition’s decision.

“If Australia wants to have an innovation-driven economy, this is poor 
policy,” said Livingstone. “We participated in good faith throughout the 
consultation process, and will continue to work with the government to minimise 
the risks and unintended consequences from changes to the law.”

Wesfarmers chief executive Richard Goyder last week warned 
<http://www.afr.com/news/economy/wesfarmers-richard-goyder-says-effects-test-threatens-2b-investment-20160301-gn75hl>
 more than $2bn of annual investment in new Coles, Bunnings and Kmart stores 
was at risk from tougher competition laws.

“It’s a very disappointing decision, it’s bad policy for all the reasons we 
have articulated during course of debate but we will continue to run the 
business, increase competition and provide good outcomes to consumers,” Goyder 
said.

Tony Mahar, National Farmers Federation chief executive, welcomed the 
decision, which he said would provide a more objective measure to assess the 
impacts of the misuse of market powers and anti-competitive behaviours.

“While we do not view this as a silver bullet solution we do see it as an 
important tool to not only improve competitiveness but also to drive 
innovation, productivity and profitability across the sector,” Maher said.

Deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce said the National party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/national-party> held the so-called 
effects test as an “incredibly important” part of the Coalition agreement.

Joyce said while large businesses could drive down costs in the short term, 
competition was the best result for consumers in the long term.

“What is better for consumers over the longer term is competition,” Joyce 
said. “We believe in competition and this brings about the agility and 
ingenuity to drive new people into the business field so that they do compete.

“Otherwise you can have a great position for a short period of time but a very 
much deleterious effect over the longer period of time because you have one 
person offering one price and if you don’t like it, bad luck.”

When Turnbull became prime minister he promised the National party the issue 
would return to cabinet but did not promise it would be adopted.

Intensive lobbying resumed, with companies including Telstra, BlueScope, 
Qantas, Coles, Woolworths, Wesfarmers and the Business Council of Australia 
lobbying to defeat the move, while the Council of Small Business, the 
Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, the National Farmers’ Federation, 
the Australian Hotels Association, the Pharmacy Guild of Australia and the 
Nationals fighting to have it accepted.

On the first day of Turnbull’s leadership, National party senators Bridget 
McKenzie, John Williams and Matt Canavancrossed the floor to support a Greens 
motion advocating the change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/15/nationals-senators-cross-floor-to-back-greens-on-competition-law-changes>
 and two Nationals ministers abstained from the vote – clear signals of the 
depth of the party’s opposition.

The Turnbull government did not announce a stance on the issue when it 
unveiled its response to the rest of the Harper review late last year, instead 
deferring consideration.

The change is opposed by Labor. Instead Labor proposes a mechanism to help 
small businesses which would mean they would not necessarily have to pay an 
opponent’s legal fees if they took unsuccessful legal action. Labor’s plan was 
backed by the BCA.

Under the government’s proposed changes to section 46 
<https://theconversation.com/explainer-what-is-the-competition-effects-test-39424>
 of the Competition and Consumer Act a small business would be required to 
prove that the action of a bigger business had the “effect” of substantially 
lessening competition, instead of being required to prove that the action had 
been done with that “purpose”.

The change would also remove a section forbidding a big business from “taking 
advantage” of its market power. The BCA says this would significantly widen 
activities that might be caught by the act and could push prices up.

Supporters insist the change would encourage, rather than diminish, 
competition and say the claim that it would force price rises is a “furphy”.

“Congratulations to the cabinet for showing gumption,” said the chief 
executive of the Council for Small Business, Peter Strong. “They resisted BCA 
and Wesfarmers and the like.”

Rod Sims, chair of the ACCC, said claims by the BCA and Goyder did not stand 
up to scrutiny.

He said the changes proposed by the government represented good law which had 
been recommended after independent review.

Sims described the BCA’s claims as “exaggerated” and described Goyder’s claim 
that toughercompetition laws risked $2bn investment 
<http://www.afr.com/news/economy/wesfarmers-richard-goyder-says-effects-test-threatens-2b-investment-20160301-gn75hl>
 as “totally and completely wrong” based on “bad advice”.

Labor’s Chris Bowen said an effects test would threaten legitimate competition 
and see higher consumer prices.

“Even the Abbott government thought this was a bad idea, with the former prime 
minister describing the cabinet debate as ‘theological 
<http://www.afr.com/news/politics/tony-abbott-says-effects-test-debate-too-theological-20150908-gjhlak>
’,” Bowen said.

“Joe Hockey and George Brandis, with the support of other senior ministers, 
refused to endorse effects test knowing full-well it would create a lawyers’ 
picnic.”
 