
Fears of a post-referendum recession have receded further after a rise in 
exports and a better month for the struggling construction industry buoyed 
hopes that the UK economy has continue to grow since 23 June.

As the pound tumbled following the Brexit vote, goods exports from the UK to 
other countries rose 3.4% between June and July. Exports to the EU, made 
cheaper by the pound’s decline, rose 9.1%, according toofficial figures 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/nationalaccounts/balanceofpayments/bulletins/uktrade/july2016>
. It was the biggest rise in EU exports since October 2010.

In a separate release 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/businessindustryandtrade/constructionindustry/bulletins/outputintheconstructionindustry/july2016andnewordersquarter2aprtojune2016>
 the Office for National Statistics (ONS) said construction output stabilised 
in July, defying expectations among economists for another drop. Construction 
companies also enjoyed the biggest pick-up in orders for three years in the 
three months leading up to the referendum.

Eurozone ministers: Greece must act faster on reforms - business live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/sep/09/eurozone-ministers-meet-for-key-talks-on-greek-bailout-business-live>
The ONS said a rise in exports and drop in imports in July helped narrow the 
UK’s goods trade deficit with the rest of the world to £11.8bn in July from 
£12.9bn in June, broadly in line with expectations in a Reuters poll of 
economists.

There was also a narrowing in the deficit on the trade in goods and services 
to £4.5bn from £5.6bn in June. That gap is smaller thanks to the UK 
consistently running a surplus in trade in services – an area covering 
businesses such as financial and legal services – which helps make up some of 
the trade deficit in goods.

Britain’s international trade secretary, Liam Fox, said: “This data is very 
encouraging as it shows a major boost for exporters post referendum. However, 
while these statistics are highly encouraging we need to wait for further trade 
data to determine whether this is a clear trend.”

Economists have been revising up their gloomy predictions for the UK economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/05/latest-post-brexit-data-looks-to-dispel-doom-and-gloom-fears>
 in recent days asnews as more positive data rolls in 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/05/uk-services-sector-brexit-rebounds-pmi-eu-referendum>
. Consumer spending appears to have held up well and surveys suggest 
manufacturing and services companies enjoyed a rebound in activity in August 
following an initial post-referendum slump in July.

Howard Archer, economist at the consultancy IHS Global Insight, said the 
improved trade performance in July lifted hopes it would make a positive 
contribution to third-quarter GDP.

“Decent news for UK third-quarter growth prospects as the trade deficit 
narrowed markedly in July helped by improved exports, and construction output 
defied expectations of a drop in output,” he said.

Based on recent business surveys published by financial data company Markit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/05/uk-services-sector-brexit-rebounds-pmi-eu-referendum>
, the economy looks likely to have grown 0.1% in the third quarter. That would 
represent a sharp slowdown from 0.6% in the second quarter.

But Archer also noted the ONS’s warning not to read too much into one month’s 
data. In its report on trade, the ONS said: “As monthly data can often be 
volatile, it is unclear whether this is an impact of the depreciation of 
sterling and it is necessary to look at the trend over the next few months to 
get a clearer picture.”

On construction, the ONS said: “There is very little anecdotal evidence at 
present to suggest that the referendum has had an impact on output. You should 
note that we always warn against overly interpreting one month’s figures.”

Paul Hollingsworth at the consultancy Capital Economics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics> echoed those warnings.

“While we would caution against reading too much into any one month’s figures 
at the best of times, this is particularly true of trade and construction 
figures.

“Indeed, the survey evidence suggests that the near-term outlook for 
construction is poor ... The near-term outlook for trade on the other hand 
looks a little better ... The upshot is that while it is still early days, the 
latest figures give us little reason to alter our view that the immediate 
impact of the vote to leave the EU will be less severe than many had 
anticipated.”


Chiming with recent business surveys showing companies are having to pay more 
for imported materials because of a weaker pound, the ONS trade release showed 
import prices grew by 3.2% on June 2016.

Suren Thiru, head of economics at the British Chambers of Commerce, said the 
UK’s near-term trade prospects would continue to be largely determined by how 
much the benefits of lower sterling for exporters are offset by higher input 
costs.


“Over the long-term, the UK’s trade position will be driven by how successful 
the government is in delivering the best possible terms of trade for the 
future, both with the EU and with markets further afield,” added Thiru.

The ONS construction figures showed output was flat in July, better than 
economists’ expectations for a 0.8% drop. It compared with a 1.0% drop in June. 
Measured against a year ago, output was down 1.5%, the biggest drop since April 
2013 but above expectations for a 3.2% drop in a Reuters poll of economists.

Construction orders rose 8.6% in the second quarter compared with the first 
quarter, primarily boosted by housing.

The figures will reassure Bank of England policymakers meeting to set interest 
rates next week that they can afford to leave policy unchanged for now.

Interest rates were cut to a new record low of 0.25% in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>
 and governor Mark Carney hinted another cut to take rates close to zero could 
follow before the end of the year. But economists expect the monetary policy 
committee to wait until November to cut again.
 