
Denmark <https://www.theguardian.com/football/denmark> secured their passage 
to South Africa with a controversial 1-0 victory over their Scandinavian 
neighbours Sweden in Copenhagen.

The home side won thanks to Jacob Poulsen's first international goal, which 
came in the 78th minute after a period in whichSweden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sweden> had dominated and had a goal 
disallowed due to a debatable offside decision.

The former Celtic and Manchester United striker Henrik Larsson, now 38, 
believed he had struck his first international goal in more than a year when he 
slotted past Thomas Sorensen in the Denmark goal after a backheel from 
Barcelona's Zlatan Ibrahimovic. Swedish celebrations turned to recrimination 
when the Spanish referee ruled the goal out.

Ibrahimovic was terrific throughout, tormenting the Liverpool defender Daniel 
Agger, who was clearly rusty in his first appearance after four months out 
through injury. Denmark have had to deploy a different defence in every 
qualifying match, so being unbeaten group winners is a spectacular achievement 
â€“ as was Poulsen's winner, a powerful drive from 35 yards that bounced just in 
front of the former Manchester City goalkeeper Andreas Isaksson and into the 
net.

The result was also good for Cristiano Ronaldo's Portugal, who beat Hungary 
3-0 to leapfrog the Swedes into second place. Despite their poor start to the 
qualifying campaign, Carlos Queiroz's team now only need to match Sweden's 
result in the final match to be sure of a play-off place.Portugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portugal> face Malta at home while Sweden 
entertain Albania.

Serbia are certain to be in Africa next summer after routing Romania 5-0 in 
Belgrade, while France secured runners-up spot and a place in the play-offs 
with a 5-0 victory over theFaroe Islands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/faroeislands> with Arsenal's William 
Gallas and Chelsea's Nicolas Anelka among the goals. Austria beat Lithuania 2-1.

Two goals from another Arsenal player, Philippe Senderos, helped Switzerland 
to a 3-0 win in Luxembourg that means only a freakish set of results will stop 
the Swiss from qualifying. Two goals in two minutes from the Arsenal defender 
enabledSwitzerland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/switzerland> to plant 
one foot in South Africa as winners of Group Two and simultaneously avenge the 
most humiliating defeat in their history, when they lost 2-1 to Luxembourg in 
their opening group game. Greece look likely to take the a play-off spot after 
they beat Latvia 5-2. Israel beat Moldova 3-1 to keep their slim chance of 
claiming the runners-up spot alive.

In Group Three Slovenia won 2-0 in Slovakia to keep alive their chances of 
topping the group whileCzech Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/czechrepublic> beat Poland 2-0 to keep in 
the hunt for a play-off spot.

Group Five winners Spain were made to work for their victory in Armenia which 
kept their 100% record alive. Cesc Fabregas found the net in a 2-1 win. Bosnia 
secured second spot with a 2-0 win inEstonia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/estonia> while Belgium beat Turkey 2-0.
 