
A spokesman for Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> has hit back after Barack 
Obama appeared to suggest that the Labour party has moved away from “fact and 
reality” and is disintegrating.

The spokesman said the Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> 
leader “stands for what most people want” and suggested that the outgoing 
president’s Democratic party needed to “challenge power if they are going to 
speak for working people”.

Obama had earlier said he was not worried when asked if the Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> could undergo “Corbynisation” 
and “disintegrate” like Labour following Hillary Clinton’s election defeat by 
Donald Trump.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fcorbyn-hits-back-obama-suggests-labour-disintegrating-grounded-fact-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf3852cf7508b2049de98aacbf203d0446c72dc9%2F0_287_3851_2311%2F3851.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Corbyn%20hits%20back%20after%20Obama%20suggests%20Labour%20is%20disintegrating&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fcorbyn-hits-back-obama-suggests-labour-disintegrating-grounded-fact-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Corbyn%20hits%20back%20after%20Obama%20suggests%20Labour%20is%20disintegrating&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fcorbyn-hits-back-obama-suggests-labour-disintegrating-grounded-fact-reality%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf3852cf7508b2049de98aacbf203d0446c72dc9%2F0_287_3851_2311%2F3851.jpg>
 Barack Obama suggested that he would have beaten Donald Trump if he had been 
able to run for a third term. Photograph: Pablo Martinez Monsivais/AP 
The departing US president was giving an in-depth interview, in which he also 
said he would have won 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/26/barack-obama-third-term-president>
 the 8 November contest if he had been able to run for a third term, to David 
Axelrod, formerly an adviser to Ed Miliband, Corbyn’s predecessor as Labour 
leader.

Obama, 55, compared the way Labour and the US Republicans had chosen to move 
from the middle ground and claimed that even the leftwing senator Bernie 
Sanders was a centrist compared with Corbyn.

Asked about a potential Corbynisation of his party, he said: “I don’t worry 
about that, partly because I think that the Democratic party has stayed pretty 
grounded in fact and reality.

“[The Republican party] started filling up with all kinds of conspiracy 
theorising that became kind of common wisdom or conventional wisdom within the 
Republican party base. That hasn’t happened in the Democratic party. I think 
people like the passion that Bernie brought, but Bernie Sanders is a pretty 
centrist politician relative to ... Corbyn or relative to some of the 
Republicans.”

In response, Corbyn’s spokesman said: “Both Labour and US Democrats will have 
to challenge power if they are going to speak for working people and change a 
broken system that isn’t delivering for the majority.

“What Jeremy Corbyn stands for is what most people want: to take on the tax 
cheats, create a fairer economy, fund a fully public NHS, build more homes and 
stop backing illegal wars.

“For the establishment, those ideas are dangerous. For most people in Britain, 
they’re common sense and grounded in reality.”

The Labour leader has been critical of the Democrats’ policies. In February, 
Corbyn said he opposed “dangerous elements” in the negotiations for the 
transatlantic trade and investment partnership (TTIP). The secretive bilateral 
trade deal between the EU and US has been maligned for apparently putting
corporate interests above national sovereignty. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/15/who-really-benefits-from-free-trade-agreements-like-ttip-ceta-and-nafta>

Corbyn, who met Obama in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/23/corporations-and-inequality-on-agenda-as-obama-meets-corbyn>
 for 90 minutes in April, also opposes British military intervention in Syria. 
The meeting, described as “excellent” by the Labour leader, was announced just 
as Obama said the US and Britain were ready to take action to stop Islamic 
State securing a stronghold in Libya.

A Labour spokesman said after the meeting: “They discussed the power of global 
corporations, the impact of globalisation on working people and the need to 
take action to reduce inequality across the world.

“They agreed on the case for Britain to remain a member of the European Union, 
and that there would be further contact between their teams to discuss measures 
to deal with international tax avoidance and evasion.”

Don’t think the sound of silence means the end of Labour’s war | Andrew 
Rawnsley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/11/labour-war-jeremy-corbyn-opponents-control-constituencies>
Despite Obama’s comments, Corbyn is secure in his position leading Labour 
after seeing off achallenge by Owen Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/26/owen-smith-frustrated-and-disappointed-but-hopeful-for-the-future>
 this autumn, which was triggered by amass resignation of his shadow cabinet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/26/labour-shadow-cabinet-resignations-jeremy-corbyn-who-has-gone>
. He has since put together a shadow cabinet withcloser allies in senior roles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/07/labour-reshuffle-jonathan-ashworth-shadow-health-secretary-nec-national-executive-committee>
, such as Diane Abbott as shadow home secretary and Emily Thornberry as shadow 
foreign secretary.

In the new year, strategists are planning to pitch Corbyn as a leftwing 
populist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/15/labour-plans-jeremy-corbyn-relaunch-as-a-leftwing-populist>
 as they prepare for the possibility of an early general election and a tricky 
byelection in themarginal northern seat of Copeland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/22/labour-copeland-byelection-jamie-reed-ukip-tories>
, prompted by theresignation of the Labour MP Jamie Reed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/21/corbyn-critic-jamie-reed-quits-labour-mp-byelection-copeland>
.

On Tuesday, Ken Loach, the filmmaker who set up the Left Unity party, 
described Labour MPs who continue to oppose Corbyn as a “bunch of political 
losers”.In a letter to the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/26/a-brexit-byelection-strategy-for-labour>
, he criticised MPs unhappy with Corbyn’s leadership, suggesting they should be 
labelled rightwing rather than moderate.

“Any disarray or disunity in the party is the responsibility of those MPs. 
They attack Corbyn and John McDonnell day after day, refusing to promote party 
policy on jobs, housing, transport or the NHS, the core concerns of those they 
should represent,” he wrote.

“They offer no support, in parliament or outside. Worst of all, they show 
contempt for the hundreds of thousands of new members, mainly Corbyn 
supporters, who have made Labour the largest political party in Europe. This 
bunch of political losers are intent on the destruction of a Labour party they 
cannot control.”
 