
There are so many things that don’t make sense in Cordon, BBC4’s latest 
Saturday-night subtitled import 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/p02tc97z/cordon-episode-1>, that I barely 
blinked at the idea the authorities would be able to barricade Antwerp’s 
citizens into their own streets, completely unnoticed, by stacking shipping 
containers at the ends of their roads. And yet this is where we ended up last 
weekend, after two hours of the Belgian drama in which the unexplained death of 
a man who had helpfully already been to visit the National Institute of 
Infectious Diseases (NIID) somehow escalated in the shutdown of part of a city.

So Cordon is clearly nonsense. But it’s fairly enjoyable nonsense, in part 
because of the Flemish, an interesting language to listen to if, like me, you 
haven’t been previously much exposed to it, and in part because the drama’s 
apparent disinterest in probability makes its narrative leaps oddly compelling.

The premise is not unfamiliar: something nasty and highly infectious threatens 
to first wipe out the inhabitants of a city, and then presumably everyone else. 
In the case of Cordon, the something is a new variant of bird flu that starts 
innocuously enough – a few sniffles, a bit of a cough – before quickly 
progressing into a fatal fever. It is presumed that infection is only through 
bodily fluids, rather than airborne, although I’m not entirely sure on what 
basis. In any case, so far three people are dead, only one of them officially, 
another two are in isolation, and a small child has been sneezing over his 
friends.

All of which sounds recognisable enough – an apocalyptic drama in which 
scientists must battle against time to find an antidote. The bonkers bits are 
all the things around that central storyline, through which all kinds of issues 
are shoehorned in. So Anwar, our patient zero, is an illegal migrant from 
Afghanistan, smuggled into Belgium via one of those aforementioned shipping 
containers, from which he is freed by his family (obviously); he happens to 
brush past Katja, a schoolteacher, who was at the NIID with a class of 
junior-school kids because … Who knows? Why would anyone would take a load of 
kids, who exist entirely to stickily touch things they shouldn’t, to an 
infectious disease institute of all places?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fcordon-bbc4-brings-a-bonkers-slice-of-belgian-apocalypse-to-saturday-nights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b4241705d0d6cd3773ce52675db32450086d3d0%2F0_63_4287_2576%2F4287.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cordon%3A%20BBC4%20brings%20a%20bonkers%20slice%20of%20Belgian%20apocalypse%20to%20Saturday%20nights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fcordon-bbc4-brings-a-bonkers-slice-of-belgian-apocalypse-to-saturday-nights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cordon%3A%20BBC4%20brings%20a%20bonkers%20slice%20of%20Belgian%20apocalypse%20to%20Saturday%20nights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fcordon-bbc4-brings-a-bonkers-slice-of-belgian-apocalypse-to-saturday-nights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b4241705d0d6cd3773ce52675db32450086d3d0%2F0_63_4287_2576%2F4287.jpg>
 Micheline and Bert: sweet. Photograph: BBC/BBC/Medialaan 
Save, of course, for storylining purposes. Inside the NIID we’ve already had 
Katya wandering down secret corridors while crying balefully for her son, 
Quenten. (I was reminded, entirely wrongly,of the Fenton incident 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bmpONxJ7JSw>). Mr Cannaerts, the boss of the 
institute, is not entirely reassuring, what with his secret bodies and 
everything, and then there’s dear Bert and his wife, Ratty, who has presumably 
been exposed to the disease and passed it on to her pregnant granddaughter who 
is now back serving customers their groceries. Bad news if you get your fruit 
and veg from Ineke’s parents’ dingy minimarket.

All of which would probably be enough for any sane drama to be getting on 
with. But Cordon is not a sane drama. Instead it chucks in a high-stakes 
separation between handsome head cop Lex and beautiful girlfriend Jana, a 
computer scientist who is clearly going to be the key to stopping the virus. 
(If she isn’t, I’ll eat a bowl of manky infected fruit from the corner shop.) 
At some point I’m sure we’ll be told why she needs to wear a full bodysuit to 
recover data from crashed computers, presumably at the same time we find out 
why she wears high heels for cycling.

This is not a vintage BBC4 import, I think we can all agree. The journalists, 
for a start, are not a patch on their Danish and Swedish counterparts (anyone 
else spot Borgen’s Katrine amidthe fierce wildlings in Game of Thrones’ final 
episodes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jun/01/game-of-thrones-recap-season-five-episode-eight-hardhome>
?). They’re far too busy demanding whether policemen will start shooting people 
dead to ask more sensible questions, such as how Antwerp’s Meryl Streep-alike 
has the power to shut down part of the city for five days. Or even how that is 
possible: imagine trying to do the same thing in Sheffield, which has roughly 
the same population.

So Cordon is fatally flawed. Events make little sense even within the dramatic 
world the show has created for itself – let alone the real world. Some of the 
acting is schlocky at best. And yet I’ve set up my series link, settled back 
for the lingering shots of Antwerp, and even enjoyed calculating the likelihood 
of these silent shipping containers being the exact size needed to completely 
block a street. Against the odds, I’m quite looking forward to this weekend’s 
instalments.

Cordon, 9pm, Saturday, BBC4.
 