
December 1960: sweet 16, sugar-starched net underskirts, lime green socks, 
circle-stitched bras, home perms, and O-levels all shook up with Elvis. We were 
besotted with the American dream world across the Atlantic, a world we could 
now welcome into our homes, thanks to the magic of television; and so we 
swooned over JFK, and Kookie combing his hair on Sunset Strip, chewed gum, 
backcombed our lacquered, spray-tinted hair, and, with thickly blackened 
eyelashes under our school boaters, imagined the day when we, too, would leave 
the dingy Lancashire streets of St Helens for the neon city lights.


Amidst the creeping Americanisation and plummy English voices that hogged the 
television screens in those days we were hardly aware ofCoronation Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/coronation-street> making its debut; 
though I do remember my dear father remarking somewhat tartly: “Anyone would 
think we actually spoke like that.” Well… we did and they still do; it’s 20 
years since I left my “street” for greener, southern pastures with little more 
than a few flat vowels to show for it now.

But every Monday and Wednesday, as that tune - a mournful durge to the 
non-converted - floats over the Salford rooftops, I am, as it were, transported 
back to the days of my gilded youth; back to the cobbled street leading up from 
the Town Hall square (a cut above parallel streets, don’t you know) with 
gleaming front doorsteps and polished brickwork, a giant, friendly Co-op on the 
corner, all maroon and off-white tiles and sawdust on the floor, and children 
playing hop-scotch and tin-can-bungoff round the back entries.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fthe-northerner%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fcoronation-street-north-55-years-1985-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc824d72c41713045a1c4f3e7e33905004b9ffbc7%2F0_207_2208_1324%2F2208.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Coronation%20Street%20at%2055%20-%20the%20spice%20of%20northern%20life%3A%20archive%2C%2011%20Dec%201985&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fthe-northerner%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fcoronation-street-north-55-years-1985-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Coronation%20Street%20at%2055%20-%20the%20spice%20of%20northern%20life%3A%20archive%2C%2011%20Dec%201985&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fthe-northerner%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fcoronation-street-north-55-years-1985-archive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc824d72c41713045a1c4f3e7e33905004b9ffbc7%2F0_207_2208_1324%2F2208.jpg>
 Emily Nugent marries Ernest Bishop with Ken Barlow and Bet Lynch in 
attendance, Coronation Street 1972. Photograph: ITV/REX Shutterstock 
Mrs Holt ran the corner shop, pitch black and smelling of everything from 
bacon to shoe polish. We had a Congregational church down the road, a pub up 
the road, a fishmongers in the next street, a school round the corner, and, in 
the distance, the stubbly remains of what had once been Hardshaw fields, now 
fringed with gasometers and belching chimneys.

I never did yearn to go back; but it didn’t take long in those early, heady 
days of the swinging Sixties to realise that being a northerner - especially if 
you’d actually lived down the road from Beatle City - had a certain cachet. It 
was, at the very least, a great party line. I was nicknamed “Liv” and though 
remarks like, “What’s it like living with gas light?”, “Where’s your clogs?” 
and “Been skiing down any slag heaps lately?” made my outer hackles rise, 
inwardly I got a kick out of being provoked.

People wanted me to talk about what it was like “up there”; they were consumed 
with curiosity as to whether or not this strange breed north of Watford really 
did live like it said they did on Coronation Street. Above all, they laughed at 
my jokes.

Nowadays I can see why. The sound of Bet Lynch bellowing at closing time, 
“What’s up? ‘Ave you lot got cloth ears?” is like brass band music to me. And 
Jack Duckworth, whose non-too-polite way of telling Hilda Ogden to get lost is 
to “Go and sort out the graffiti in the bogs” wouldn’t even make Mary 
Whitehouse wince. It’s not crude or offensive, after all, merely that 
delicious, slightly irreverent northern humour. Remember John Lennon invoking 
those in the front stalls to jangle their beads and tiaras?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fthe-northerner%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fcoronation-street-north-55-years-1985-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8818e9cc228601a13f4517c8b72cda7315c5846%2F0_72_1808_1085%2F1808.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Coronation%20Street%20at%2055%20-%20the%20spice%20of%20northern%20life%3A%20archive%2C%2011%20Dec%201985&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fthe-northerner%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fcoronation-street-north-55-years-1985-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Coronation%20Street%20at%2055%20-%20the%20spice%20of%20northern%20life%3A%20archive%2C%2011%20Dec%201985&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fthe-northerner%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fcoronation-street-north-55-years-1985-archive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8818e9cc228601a13f4517c8b72cda7315c5846%2F0_72_1808_1085%2F1808.jpg>
 Alf weds Audrey Roberts, Coronation Street 1985. Photograph: ITV/Rex Features 
Coronation Street, a saga of births, marriages and deaths, with a few affairs, 
divorces and reconciliations along the way, is the spice of real life without 
tinsel wrapping. Who says it’s banal and boring? Who says it’s unreal and 
doesn’t come to grips with life in the Eighties? It may well be true - to quote 
Ken Barlow, one of the longest-standing residents - that certain things like 
quiche and pencil-slim umbrellas haven’t yet reached the Street. But it’s had 
to face baby snatching, bigamy, schoolgirl pregnancies and wife battering to 
name but a few of life’s little problems.

So what if sex isn’t explicit - though Gail and Brian Tilsley get quite 
steamy; being a fly on the wall in the living room is quite titillating enough. 
We all knew what Deidre Barlow and Mike Baldwin were doing behind locked doors, 
and we all know that Annie Walker would be turning cartwheels if she could see 
what’s going on these days in the boudoir at the Rovers. As for Elsie Tanner 
with her cheap, cotton blouse unbuttoned one more than it should have been, she 
oozed more sex appeal than any diamante-clad Alexis or Krystle will ever do.

This is an edited extract, read on 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2015/11/6/1446814275525/11-December-1985-Coronati-001.jpg>
 