
Bill Cosby’s latest move in his one-man war against women is to once again 
render them shapeless, meager, unresponsive, this time through the courts. He is
countersuing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/14/bill-cosby-defamation-lawsuit-women-sexual-assault>
 seven of his rape accusers for defamation, ostensibly in response to the 
defamation suit filed against him last year by Tamara Green, Therese Serignese, 
Linda Traitz, Louisa Moritz, Barbara Bowman, Joan Tarshis and Angela Leslie.

But more than just a last-ditch effort to salvage his legacy, the countersuit 
strikes me as more misogyny – perhaps the same hatred that might have driven 
him, as the accusers allege, to rape and sexually assaultmore than 50 of them 
<http://time.com/4056054/bill-cosby-sexual-assault-rape-accusers/> over the 
past 30 years. There is something so brutally primal, so exquisitely perverted, 
about someone using all they have to take everything you are without consent.

Cosby’s lawyer, Monique Pressley, has said 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/life/people/2015/12/14/bill-cosby-countersues-accusers-in-massachusetts/77298438/>
 that these seven women are working an angle that involves “multidecade-old, 
false, uncorroborated, opportunistic allegations of sexual assault” that has 
caused irreparable damage to his legacy and reputation, the same legacy and 
reputation he believed to be inviolable as he was allegedly drugging women in 
order to have sex with them (he actually admittedto doing  
<http://www.cnn.com/2015/07/24/us/cosby-deposition-quaaludes/>this 
<http://www.cnn.com/2015/07/24/us/cosby-deposition-quaaludes/> while under oath 
during a 2005 deposition).

More than blurring their ability to consent, rendering them unintelligible 
would also blur their humanity.


Cosby’s conduct throughout has reflected this disregard for women as people, 
and his own sense of inviolability. Cosby has not been charged with a crime and
denies all allegations 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/life/people/2015/12/10/temple-faculty-votes-condemn-cosby-urges-his-honorary-degree-yanked/77118370/>
. He said of their claims: “I won’t dignify [this] with a response 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/davidmack/bill-cosby-wont-dignify-rape-allegations-with-a-response#.mn6l5KVEaw>
.” He bullied an AP interviewer whom he suggested should “scuttle” footage of 
him refusing to answer questions about the charges:“If you want to consider 
yourself to be serious, it will not appear anywhere 
<http://mashable.com/2014/11/20/bill-cosby-ap-interview-rape/#OiMm2LytjZqp>,” 
and now this countersuit.

How dare these and all women who sought his help to get jobs, his moral 
guidance to navigate the world, step out of his denigrating gaze and into their 
own strength?


Cosby’s misogyny is extreme, but he isn’t operating in a societal vacuum. 
Former Oklahoma police officer Daniel Holtzclaw, convicted last week of rape 
and 18 other charges of sexual assault 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/13/daniel-holtzclaw-rape-convictions-oklahoma-city-police-officer>
 he used his position of power, too, to exploit, take advantage of and to strip 
women of their dignity – to put an extra fine and gratifying point on his own 
sexism. Holtzclaw also didn’t believe he would get caught.

But he did, and when he did, he openly wept. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/13/daniel-holtzclaw-rape-convictions-oklahoma-city-police-officer>
 Wept, I’d argue, for his guilt, for his delusional sense of significance and 
for the freedom of the women that he violated.

If not yet legally, at the very least by public consensus, Cosby too has been 
caught. But rather than weep, he is grasping at straws, like a coward, in a 
pathetic effort to turn the tables against women who have stood by their 
unwavering truths.

His countersuit also claims that the women who have come forward with 
allegations against Cosby have caused him “shame, mortification, [and] hurt 
feelings.” He has no idea from hurt feelings – so he continues to hide, bask in 
his silence and pretend not to recognize that the emperor has no clothes – that 
he has no defense card to play. That if, as alleged, he oncetold the young 
actress Louisa Moritz 
<http://www.tmz.com/2014/11/20/bill-cosby-forced-oral-sex-victim-jonny-carson-louisa-moritz/>
, after forcing his penis in her mouth, “now you don’t want to upset me and the 
plans for your future, do you?” then his latest actions are just more of the 
same old, heinous thing.

For rape and sexual assault survivors, there is no luxury or ease in trying to 
remember, dredge up or clarify the details of an assault – there is seldom even 
any catharsis involved. It feels shameful and disjointed, and you feel wrong 
until you finally realize you are right.


Although public allegations were made by victims starting in 2005 – and 
consistently for the following decade – it wasn’t until 2014, when comedian 
Hannibal Buressdid a bit <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dzB8dTVALQI> during a 
show in Philadelphia about Cosby’s rape charges that people really started to 
pay attention: “Bill Cosby has the fucking smuggest old black man public 
persona that I hate,” Buress said. “‘Pull your pants up, black people. I was on 
TV in the 80s. I can talk down to you because I had a successful sitcom.’ Yeah, 
but you raped women, Bill Cosby. So, brings you down a couple notches.”

Because, evidently, it’s not rape until a man says it is, but that’s another 
opinion for another time. Ultimately, Buress’s sketch and calling out of 
Cosby’s sexual assault was useful and necessary, and prompted Barbara Bowman, 
one of his early accusers,to write a piece 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/posteverything/wp/2014/11/13/bill-cosby-raped-me-why-did-it-take-30-years-for-people-to-believe-my-story/>
 in the Washington Post, followed by a watershed of other alleged Cosby victims 
coming forward to tell their stories. It’s hard not to hope on some level that 
these allegations and the collective strength of these women will ultimately 
bring him sobbing to his knees.
 