
As the European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> begins to 
disintegrate, who can provide the leadership to save it? German chancellor 
Angela Merkel is widely credited with finally answering Henry Kissinger’s 
famous question about the Western alliance: “What is the phone number for 
Europe?” But if Europe’s phone number has a German dialling code, it goes 
through to an automated answer: “Nein zu Allem.”

This phrase – “No to everything” – is how Mario Draghi 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/columnist/mario-draghi>, the European 
Central Bank president,recently described 
<https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pressconf/2016/html/is160310.en.html> the 
standard German response to all economic initiatives aimed at strengthening 
Europe. A classic case wasMerkel’s veto 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/dfe66cbe-0625-11e6-9b51-0fb5e65703ce.html#axzz46NduYs3T>
 of a proposal by Italian prime minister Matteo Renzi to fund refugee 
programmes in Europe, North Africa, and Turkey through an issue of EU bonds, an 
efficient and low-cost idea also advanced by leading financiers such asGeorge 
Soros 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/surge-funding-european-refugeee-crisis-by-george-soros-2016-04>
.

Merkel’s high-handed refusal even to consider broader European interests if 
these threaten her domestic popularity has become a recurring nightmare for 
other EU leaders. This refusal underpins not only her economic and immigration 
policies, but also her bullying of Greece, her support for coal subsidies, her
backing of German carmakers over diesel emissions 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/f54880d4-0638-11e6-9b51-0fb5e65703ce.html>, her 
kowtowing to Turkey on press freedom, and her mismanagement of the Minsk 
agreement in Ukraine. In short, Merkel has done more to damage the EU than any 
living politician, while constantly proclaiming her passion for “the European 
project”.

But where can a Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> 
disillusioned with German leadership now turn? The obvious candidates will not 
or cannot take on the role: Britain has excluded itself; France is paralysed 
until next year’s presidential election and possibly beyond; and Spain cannot 
even form a government.

That leaves Italy, a country that, having dominated Europe’s politics and 
culture for most of its history, is now treated as “peripheral”. ButItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> is resuming its historic role as a 
source of Europe’s best ideas and leadership in politics, and also, most 
surprisingly, in economics.

Draghi’s transformation of the ECB into the world’s most creative and 
proactive central bank is the clearest example of this. The enormous programme 
of quantitative easing that Draghi pushed through, against German opposition, 
has saved the euro by circumventing the Maastricht Treaty’s rules against 
monetising or mutualising government debts.

Last month, Draghi became the first central banker to take seriously the idea 
ofhelicopter money 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/ecb-policy-germany-idUKL5N17E1N3?feedType%3DRSS%26feedName%3DrbssFinancialServicesAndRealEstateNews>
 – the direct distribution of newly created money from the central bank to 
eurozone residents. Germany’s leaders have reacted furiously and are now 
subjecting Draghi tonationalistic personal attacks 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/73bd1d6e-06dc-11e6-9b51-0fb5e65703ce.html?ftcamp=crm/email//nbe/MarketsAfternoon/product#axzz46NduYs3T>
.

Less visibly, Italy has also led a quiet rebellion against the pre-Keynesian 
economics of the German government and the European commission. InEU councils 
<http://www.politico.eu/article/eurozone-needs-finance-minister-padoan-economic-banking/>
 and again at this month’s International Monetary Fund meeting in Washington, 
DC, Pier Carlo Padoan, Italy’s finance minister, presented the case for fiscal 
stimulus more strongly and coherently than any other EU leader.

More important, Padoan has started to implement fiscal stimulus by cutting 
taxes and maintaining public spending plans, in defiance of German and EU 
commission demands to tighten his budget. As a result, consumer and business 
confidence in Italy have rebounded to the highest level in 15 years, credit 
conditions have improved, and Italy is the only G7 country expected by the IMF 
to grow faster in 2016 than 2015 (albeit still at an inadequate 1% rate).

Padoan has more recently created an imaginative public-private partnership  
<http://www.italy24.ilsole24ore.com/art/government-policies/2016-04-12/padoan-170953.php?uuid=AC23rD6C>
to finance a desperately needed recapitalization of Italy’s banks. And he has 
launched his initiative without waiting for approval from ECB and EU officials, 
whoblocked an earlier “bad bank” plan 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/38cacbb4-fff9-11e5-99cb-83242733f755.html#axzz46NduYs3T>
 under German pressure. Financial markets immediately rewarded Italy for its 
defiance, with the share price of the country’s biggest bank, Unicredit, 
jumping by 25% in three days.

Italy’s increasingly assertive resistance to German economic dogmas may not be 
surprising: The country has suffered from almost continuous recession since 
joining the euro. Moreover, Padoan, who was formerly the OECD’s chief 
economist, is the only G-7 finance minister with professional economics 
training. He understands better than anyone that misguided fiscal and monetary 
policies have been the underlying cause of Europe’s economic underperformance, 
and are largely responsible for the political tensions threatening to destroy 
the EU.

The renaissance of Italian self-confidence and leadership can also be observed 
in domestic and international politics. Renzi was the only European leader to 
increase his party’s vote share in the 2014 European Parliament election, and 
his dominance of Italian politics has since grown. While populist politics now 
threatensGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>, France, Spain, 
and Britain, Italy has turned its back on Silvio Berlusconi, and Renzi has 
squeezed support for the Northern League and the Five Star Movement. As a 
result, Italy has started implementing labour, pension, and administrative 
reforms that were unthinkable in the past.

In foreign affairs, too, Italy has become more assertive. The Italian foreign 
minister, Paolo Gentiloni, is collaborating with his predecessor, Federica 
Mogherini, now the EU’s high representative for foreign affairs, to create more 
pragmatic and effective European policies on Libya and the refugee crisis. Most 
significantly, Italy is leading an effort to repair relations with Russia after 
the Ukraine confrontation and to strengthen cooperation over Syria. This 
campaign appears to be bearing fruit with a gradual lifting of EU sanctions 
against Russia, starting this summer.

Given the failures of German leadership in Europe and the political vacuum 
elsewhere in the EU, Italy’s decision to raise its profile is surely right. As 
Renzi put it in arecent interview 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/29/world/europe/matteo-renzi-italian-premier-pushes-for-a-place-at-europes-power-table.html?_r=0>
: “After two years listening, now I speak.”

It remains to be seen whether Italy can assemble a coalition of economically 
progressive and politically pragmatic countries to overcome German conservatism 
and dogmatism. But one way or another, Europe’s political economy will have to 
adapt to thenew type of global capitalism 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/next-phase-for-democratic-capitalism-by-anatole-kaletsky-2016-03>
 evolving out of the 2008 crisis. With luck, a new breed of wily and agile 
Italian leaders will out-manoeuvre the blundering German dinosaurs, whose 
outdated rules and doctrines are leading the EU toward extinction.
 