
Verdant green fields and a streaming river give way to houses of golden 
Cotswold stone, glowing photogenically as their owners, busy with village life, 
are rudely interrupted by an unexpected death. The forthcoming BBC/HBO 
adaptation ofJK Rowling’s bestseller for adults 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/oct/02/jk-rowling-casual-vacancy-fiction-charts>
, The Casual Vacancy, has a definite ring of MidsomerMugglemarch 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2012/10/01/mugglemarch> about it.

Rowling’s study of life in a small English town dominated by small-minded folk 
seemingly determined to exclude poor people from their perfectly-kept streets 
was published todecidedly mixed reviews 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/sep/28/casual-vacancy-jk-rowling-review>
 – but perhaps makes for better viewing than it did reading.

Adapted by Sarah Phelps 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/writersroom/be-inspired/sarah-phelps>, the plot is 
streamlined into three hours of television – the mini-series will be broadcast 
in weekly one-hour chunks from February 15 in the UK, and this spring in the US 
– and the inhabitants of perfect English village Pagford,at times quite 
unremittingly awful on the page 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/09/27/books/book-review-the-casual-vacancy-by-j-k-rowling.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0>
, are rendered more bearable.

Phelps’ storytelling is assisted by some excellent casting including Michael 
Gambon (who has a prior association with Rowling’s work through his 
performances as Dumbledore in the later Harry Potter films) as power-hungry 
parish-council chairman Howard Mollison. His wife, Shirley, is portrayed with 
wicked, joyful malice by Miss Marple actor Julia McKenzie, while Keeley Hawes,
much admired for her performance in BBC2 drama Line of Duty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2014/mar/02/line-of-duty-lindsay-denton-gripping-police-drama-women>
, plays against type as their brilliantly frustrated daughter-in-law, 
lingerie-shop owner, Samantha.

Rowling’s book can be quite relentlessly bleak. Phelps has also injected more 
humour and, by allowing The Casual Vacancy’s hero to survive for longer than 
the scant few pages Rowling permitted in the novel, brought some much-needed 
warmth to the screen.

A boundary line dispute – not the most televisual of arguments – has become a 
tussle over the conversion of a community centre into a “wellness spa” in a 
story that confronts changing attitudes towards redistribution of wealth and 
those living in poverty. The story of teenager, Krystal Weedon, struggling to 
manage an addict mother and look after a baby brother, is at the heart of the 
adaptation. Nodding to a dramatic vision that sees echoes of 19th-century 
fiction in Rowling’s tale of Pagford’s residents, Phelps described the 
apparently tough girl as Tess of the d’Urbervilles.

The author was relaxed about her work being adapted, Phelps said at a London 
screening of the drama earlier this week, admitting that the process could 
potentially have been very difficult. “There was a great deal of freedom for 
me. [Rowling] read the scripts that came in and commented appropriately.” Any 
tough notes? “No not at all. She’s a writer, she understands what that’s like.”

But not all the real-life residents of the half-a-dozen Cotswold villages that 
together created picturesque Pagford were quite so understanding. Samantha’s 
lingerie boutique, with its racy window-displays, resulted in complaints to the 
council. (Others, however, were apparently disappointed at its fictional 
nature, heading inside to rummage through the red-satin corsets. “We had a 
couple of old ladies, white hair, stick, walking past and looking in the 
window,” said director Jonny Campbell. “We were saying: ‘Please excuse us.’ 
[They said] ‘Oh no, I’ve got all that stuff at home.’”)

Pagford’s timeless good looks are underlined by the blessing of a balmy 
English summer. And in terms of British village life translating to American 
audiences,who also bought the book in droves 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/jk-rowling-casual-vacancy-sales-first-week-376202>
, it is hoped that the relationships and stories will prove universal. “You’re 
just watching people’s behaviour, marriages, relationships, and how hard it is 
to stay sane in one of those tiny little places,” said Phelps. “They’re 
beautiful these villages, but I’ve got to say if I lived in one I’d run amok.”
 