
It was less than three years ago that the failure of Lehman Brothers  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lehmanbrothers>sent tremors through the 
global financial system, threatening the existence of every major bank and 
triggering the most severe economic crisis since theGreat Depression 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_Depression>. As Europe's policy elite met 
for fresh crisis talks today, the dark fear that haunted everyone around the 
table was this: if the bankruptcy of a middling-sized Wall Street investment 
bank with no retail customers could have such dire consequences, what would 
happen if the Greeks decide they have had enough andrenege on their debts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece>?

Could Greece, in other words, be the new Lehmans? Given the structure of 
modern financial markets, with their chains of derivative trades and their 
pyramids of debt, there is only one answer. Greece could certainly be the next 
Lehmans. The likelihood that a Greek default would pose a threat to the future 
of theeurozone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/may/11/greece-and-the-eurozone> 
as well as to the health of the world economy means it has the potential to be 
worse than Lehmans. Much worse.

Given that gloomy prognosis, the European Union and the currently rudderless 
International Monetary Fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/may/16/imf-bailout-greece-eurozone-portugal>
 know something has to be done but are not quite sure what.

To be fair, it's a tough one. A single currency that involved a hard core of 
European countries that were broadly similar in terms of economic development 
and industrial structure might just have worked. Bolting together a group of 17 
disparate economies with different levels of productivity growth, different 
languages and different business cultures was an accident waiting to happen, 
and so it has proved.

The weaker countries, on the fringes of the single currency area, have not 
been able to cope with the disciplines involved in giving up control of their 
interest rates and their currencies, with the problem going much wider than the 
three countries – Greece, Ireland andPortugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/portugal> – that have sought bailouts. 
Spain's housing boom and bust was the result of the pan-European interest rate 
being too low; Italy's increasing lack of competitiveness stems from a lack of 
exchange-rate flexibility.

It was also clear from the outset that the structure of monetary union would 
result in struggling countries being subjected to deflationary policies. Since 
the eurozone is not a sovereign state there is no formal mechanism for 
transferring resources from rich parts of the monetary union to the poor parts. 
Nor, given language barriers and bureaucratic impediments, is it easy for 
someone made unemployed in Athens to get a job in Amsterdam. Instead those 
countries seeking to match Germany's hyper-competitive economy have to cut 
costs, through stringent curbs on wage increases and fiscal austerity.

This was the plan A that was wheeled out for Greece last spring, when it 
became the first eurozone country to run into trouble, andit has been repeated 
for Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ireland-bailout> and Portugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/may/04/portugal-bailout-euro-rises-bond-markets>
. Plan A involved providing Athens with a bridging loan so that it could 
continue to meet its debt obligations, while at the same time insisting on 
draconian steps to cut Greece's budget deficit. Pain plus procrastination: the 
traditional recourse for policymakers who lack imagination, as Europe's have 
done throughout thesovereign debt crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/debt-crisis>. Clearly, plan A has not 
worked, as anyone who has piled up too much debt on their credit card could 
have predicted.

Just like an individual who can't stop interest charges going up and up, 
despite trading down to a budget supermarket, cancelling the gym membership and 
abandoning the holiday,Greece <https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> has 
found that the belt-tightening has left it with a bigger central government 
budget deficit in the first four months of 2011 than it had in the first four 
months of 2010.

It's not difficult to see why this has happened. Those who put together 
Greece's programme underestimated the extent to which public spending cuts and 
tax increases would hamper the growth potential of the economy, particularly 
given the lack of scope for the currency to fall. Historically the IMF's 
structural programmes for troubled developing countries have involved 
devaluation, so exports became cheaper; but Greece's membership of the single 
currency has meant there has been no external safety valve to compensate for 
the domestic squeeze.

Greece needs to have the scope to grow its way out of its debt crisis. Failing 
that, the rest of the eurozone has to be prepared to stomach not just a second, 
but a third and perhaps even a fourth bailout so Athens can keep up with its 
debt repayments. Hence the drumbeat of speculation that Greece would be better 
off defaulting, or leaving the eurozone altogether.

There is no suggestion that the Greek government is planning anything of this 
nature. Default and devaluation pose big risks, particularly since the debts 
would have to be in a redenominated currency (like thedrachma 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greek_drachma>) that creditors would deem to have 
junk status. In the short term, Greece's economic and financial crisis would 
almost certainly deepen. Athens would prefer the EU to provide a second 
bridging loan and to reschedule its debts over a longer period so the interest 
payments become less onerous.

But that is at best a stopgap solution, because it does nothing to address the 
structural weaknesses of the eurozone. For this, there are really only two 
solutions. The first is to turn monetary union into political union, creating 
the budgetary mechanisms to transfer resources across a single fiscal space. 
That would fulfil the ambitions of those who designed the euro, and would 
recognise that the current halfway house arrangement is inherently unstable.

The second would be to admit defeat by announcing carefully crafted plans for 
a two-tierEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, in which the 
outer part would be linked to the core through fixed but adjustable exchange 
rates. Neither option, it has to be said, looks remotely likely, although the 
collapse of Lehmans shows the limitations of the current muddling-through 
approach.

The eurozone's future will not be decided in Athens or Lisbon but in Paris and 
inGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>. Both the big beasts have 
invested vast stocks of political capital in "the Project", and insist that 
there will be no defaults and no departures from the club.

Yet German public opinion was sniffy about the Greek bailout in May 2010, 
kicked up a fuss at being asked to pick up the tab forIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> last November, and is positively 
furious about having to sort out the mess in Portugal. Despite the strength of 
the German economy, Angela Merkel is facing strong political resistance to more 
bailouts. The political calculus is clear: cutting Greece and the other weaker 
euro-area economies adrift would end the dream of monetary union as a club 
where European countries, big and small, weak and strong, could rub along 
together with a single economic policy. But failing to cut them adrift could 
cost Merkel her job.
 