
When Nicolas Sarkozy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nicolas-sarkozy> held 
his first comeback rally, he sweated profusely on a small stage in a stuffy and 
spartan gymnasium in the south of France.

The rightwinger’s modest choice of venue last month to launch his campaign to 
become his party’s 2017 presidential nominee contrasted strikingly with the 
glitzy, US-style stadium gigs that became a trademark of the man once known as 
President Bling Bling.

In 2012, when Sarkozy ran for re-election and lost to the Socialist François 
Hollande 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/may/06/francois-hollande-becomes-french-president>
, his rallies weretheatrical mega-productions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/14/fraud-claims-nicolas-sarkozy-2012-campaign>
, slickly coordinated by dedicated film directors, with specially laid carpet 
for his luxury dressing rooms and tens of thousands of euros spent on French 
flags to be waved by a sea of adoring fans.

Those mega-rallies came back to haunt him this week when the French state 
prosecutor recommended Sarkozyshould face a criminal trial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/05/nicolas-sarkozy-may-face-trial-alleged-illegal-campaign-funding-france>
 over alleged illegal campaign funding.

Le comeback kid? Sarkozy shapes up for presidential run on hardline platform
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/19/le-comeback-kid-sarkozy-shapes-up-for-presidential-run-on-hardline-platform>
The case centres on an alleged system of false accounting used by Sarkozy’s 
office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/14/fraud-claims-nicolas-sarkozy-2012-campaign>
 to conceal an enormous campaign overspend – namely on lavish rallies – in 
2012. The limit on presidential campaign spending in France is €22.5m (£19m), 
and investigators suspect Sarkozy’s campaign spent €23m on top of that. Sarkozy 
has always denied any wrongdoing in the case, or even any knowledge of 
Bygmalion, an events company that allegedly concealed the overspend.

The prosecutor’s recommendation that Sarkozy face trial is a serious knock to 
his attempt to win back power next year on a platform ofhardline identity 
politics and a security crackdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/19/le-comeback-kid-sarkozy-shapes-up-for-presidential-run-on-hardline-platform>
. The man presenting himself as a model of “French authority” is suddenly 
facing the possibility of standing in the dock.

But Sarkozy is defiant. He has hit back with the same argument he has used 
about a string of legal investigations that have dogged him since 2012: that he 
is innocent of any wrongdoing and that he is the victim of a plot against him 
by political enemies in cahoots with the justice system.

“No controversy, no manoeuvring, no manipulation – however shameful it may be 
– will deter me from my absolute determination to bring about a change in 
power,” Sarkozy told a rally west of Paris on Tuesday night. “I love France!” 
he thundered. “Trying to discourage me from my passion is inhuman – it’s not 
possible!” The crowd cheered and applauded. “I like people who have their ups 
and downs, who don’t complain, who grit their teeth,” he told supporters.

Sarkozy’s strategy of presenting himself as a victim is likely to comfort his 
unfailing support base inside his own Les Républicains party. The news that the 
state prosecutor wanted Sarkozy to stand trial came on the same day as a major 
fraud trial opened against Hollande’s onetime senior lieutenant and budget 
ministerJérôme Cahuzac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/apr/03/french-tax-fraud-hollande>, who 
is accused of tax evasion and money-laundering – raising eyebrows on the right 
about the timing of the announcement.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fhow-nicolas-sarkozys-presidential-days-came-back-to-haunt-him%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b33e77082d0636a678a40564b9d016a56f86932%2F0_95_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Could%20Nicolas%20Sarkozy's%20legal%20woes%20scupper%20his%20presidential%20ambitions%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fhow-nicolas-sarkozys-presidential-days-came-back-to-haunt-him%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Could%20Nicolas%20Sarkozy%27s%20legal%20woes%20scupper%20his%20presidential%20ambitions%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fhow-nicolas-sarkozys-presidential-days-came-back-to-haunt-him%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b33e77082d0636a678a40564b9d016a56f86932%2F0_95_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 A Sarkozy election rally in 2012. Photograph: Eric Feferberg/AFP/Getty Images 
But outside this devoted, narrow support base, Sarkozy’s legal woes could 
prove a slow poison that permeates the right’s primary campaign. Voters on the 
broader right and centre who will nominate their presidential candidate in 
November might decide that the spectre of a court case is too damaging to 
Sarkozy’s chances of winning back the presidency.Fabrice Arfi 
<https://www.mediapart.fr/journal/france/060916/corruption-les-yeux-grand-fermes>
, the investigative journalist for Mediapart, described Sarkozy’s claims he was 
being victimised by the justice system as a “Berlusconian gesture”. It will be 
difficult to have to keep answering questions on this during the primary race 
TV debates.

And yet, as has often been shown, legal investigations are not necessarily a 
mortal blow in French politics. Other political figures have happily skipped up 
the French ladder of power unburdened by hefty legal baggage that might have 
pulled them down in other countries – not least the former presidentJacques 
Chirac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/dec/15/jacques-chirac-guilty-corruption>
.

Nothing prevents Sarkozy from continuing to run to be his party’s presidential 
candidate. He is innocent until proven guilty. It is now up to an investigating 
magistrate to decide whether to put Sarkozy on trial. This decision may or may 
not come before the right’s primary vote. Any trial is unlikely to happen 
before the presidential race next spring. In any case, if Sarkozy were to be 
chosen as the right’s candidate, then ran for president and won, he would have 
presidential immunity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fhow-nicolas-sarkozys-presidential-days-came-back-to-haunt-him%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7fc934f5ad58b588e120d196716ce4af39eebb0a%2F0_127_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Could%20Nicolas%20Sarkozy's%20legal%20woes%20scupper%20his%20presidential%20ambitions%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fhow-nicolas-sarkozys-presidential-days-came-back-to-haunt-him%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Could%20Nicolas%20Sarkozy%27s%20legal%20woes%20scupper%20his%20presidential%20ambitions%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fhow-nicolas-sarkozys-presidential-days-came-back-to-haunt-him%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7fc934f5ad58b588e120d196716ce4af39eebb0a%2F0_127_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Sarkozy supporters wave flags at 2012 campaign event. Photograph: Pascal 
Parrot/Reuters 
Sarkozy’s name has been cited in such a bewildering array of legal 
investigations – from allegations of illicit campaign funding from the late
Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/apr/19/french-inquiry-gaddafi-sarkozy-2007-campaign>
 toalleged kickbacks from arms sales to Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/nov/18/sarkozy-kickbacks-pakistan-arms-sales>
 used to fund an earlier campaign – that voters have almost lost count. Sarkozy 
is under investigation for corruption and influence-peddling in a case based on 
phone-taps about an alleged bid by him to get information from a judge ahead of 
a legal decision. Sarkozy denies any wrongdoing in all the cases. Some other 
key investigations against him have been dropped, including allegations he 
accepted campaign donations from the L’Oréal shampoo heiressLiliane Bettencourt 
<http://.theguardian.com/world/2012/jul/03/loreal-nicolas-sarkozy-bettencourt> 
when she was too frail to know what she was doing.

It’s not clear how much political capital will be made out of Sarkozy’s legal 
difficulties by his opponents. Alain Juppé, the former prime minister and mayor 
of Bordeaux, who remains favourite to win the right’s nomination, has vowed to 
avoid the issue and “refrain from making personal attacks”. For good reason. In 
2004, he himselfreceived a 14-month suspended sentence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2004/feb/04/france.jonhenley> and was barred 
from holding elected office for a year over a corrupt 1980s scheme that 
illegally put workers for Chirac’s political party on the payroll of Paris’s 
town hall.The conviction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2004/oct/14/france.jonhenley>, however, has 
not damaged him. It is accepted that he did not profit personally and instead 
he is seen as having selflessly taken the flak for Chirac.

But another opponent, Sarkozy’s former prime minister, François Fillon, shows 
no sign of letting up. Even before the state prosecutor’s recommendation, he 
warned in a scathing speech: “Those who don’t respect the laws of the Republic 
should not be allowed to run. There’s no point in talking about authority when 
one is not beyond reproach. Who can imagine for a moment General de Gaulle 
being under criminal investigation?”
 