
Although it passed almost unnoticed at the time, a city council last week 
passed a motion calling on newsagents in its area to stop selling the Sun.

Members of Derry City and Strabane district council also voted to throw their 
support behind the group known asTotal Eclipse of the S*n 
<https://www.facebook.com/groups/1576357575995356/>, which wants every shop to 
boycott the newspaper.

The motion, proposed by an independent councillor, was supported by Sinn Féin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein>, SDLP and other independent 
members. There was only one vote against. Seven unionists, members of the DUP 
and UUP, abstained.

It was proposed as a way of showing support and respect for the families of 
the 1989 Hillsborough football stadium disaster. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/26/hillsborough-disaster-deadly-mistakes-and-lies-that-lasted-decades>
 Independent councillor Paul Gallagher said: “In the aftermath of the 
Hillsborough inquiry, we wanted to show solidarity with the families, just as 
they showed solidarity with the families of Bloody Sunday.”

The Derry vote came two weeks Liverpool councillors unanimously backed a 
motion calling on retailers in their city to stop selling the Sun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/15/liverpool-councillors-call-on-shops-to-stop-selling-the-sun-newspaper>
.

And it followed claims by the Total Eclipse of the S*n campaigners in July, as 
reported in the Liverpool Echo 
<http://www.liverpoolecho.co.uk/news/liverpool-news/100-liverpool-shops-stopped-selling-11644835>
, that the Sun had been pulled from the shelves of more than 100 shops on 
Merseyside, including newsagents, supermarkets and petrol stations.

A Sun spokesperson, quoted by the BBC 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-northern-ireland-foyle-west-37516436>, described 
the Derry decision as “extreme censorship”. But is it?

The resolution does not demand, it requests. Nor does it have any legal 
authority. At face value, it amounts to little more than a protest.

However, it’s possible to argue that it could encourage community action 
against shopkeepers who defy the council’s wishes.

Interestingly, a newsagent who spoke to the Derry News did not wish to be 
identified 
<http://www.derrynow.com/news/derry-newsagent-hits-out-at-call-to-boycott-the-sun/120367>
 and referred to being “pressured” by the council.

He said he didn’t think it was the council’s place to tell stockists what 
titles they should sell, adding: “People vote with their feet, and they do.

“I only sell about 10 copies of The Sun <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sun>
 a day, but what would happen if I went against the wishes of the council and 
stocked it?”

I don’t think the charge of censorship (or denial of press freedom) really 
sticks because the vote didn’t involve compulsion. The councillors were surely 
exercising their own freedom of expression by calling for a boycott.

It is, of course, galling for the current staff of the Sun given that few, if 
any, of them were there in 1989. But they happen to work for a paper that with 
a single ill-judged headline, “The Truth”, insulted theLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> fans and besmirched the memory 
of the 96 who perished in the Hillsborough crush.

Sure, the Sun editor was taken in by what we now know to have been a South 
Yorkshire police spin operation. The Sun’s problem, however, was its gung-ho 
acceptance of the lies and its continued peddling of them when other papers had 
resiled.

So the people of Merseyside will never forget the Sun’s coverage. Nor will 
they forgive. And the concern for the paper’s publisher, News UK, is that the 
Derry council vote could start a ball rolling, with other cities deciding to 
find common cause with the bereaved ofLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool>.

 