
What is it? A musical romantic comedy. No, wait, come back. I promise it’s 
good.

Why you’ll love it: After a chance encounter with a childhood sweetheart, New 
York lawyer Rebecca Bunch decides to quit her job and move to the middle of 
nowhere to win him back. This is the plot of a million romcom movies, and they 
always play out in exactly the same way. There are meet cutes and hijinks and 
adorable quirks aplenty, and everything culminates in a big climactic moment at 
a wedding or an airport, and everyone ends up happy forever.

This is also the plot of Crazy Ex-Girlfriend 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Od9mD6JmYHo>. However, this is an 18-episode 
television series, so nothing can be quite that neat. All the usual behaviour 
that tends to propel a romcom – the obsessions, the rash decisions, the 
disregard for other people’s feelings – cannot simply be brushed aside. 
Instead, Crazy Ex-Girlfriend goes in deep on them.

Bunch is in no way a well woman. On the surface she’s funny and pretty and a 
shade away from being aManic Pixie Dream Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/16/manic-pixie-dream-girls-writer-apologises>
, but deep down she’s lost and traumatised. She leaps from empty epiphany to 
empty epiphany, and lies relentlessly to herself as she ruins scores of lives 
in her pursuit of a hopeless dream. It would be tragic if it weren’t so funny.

It’s almost miraculous to see how well Crazy Ex-Girlfriend combines knockabout 
comedy and full-blown melodrama. The juxtaposition is never jarring, and the 
contrasting styles never detract from each other. This is almost entirely 
thanks to creator, writer and star Rachel Bloom, for whom this is undoubtedly a 
star-making vehicle. She is never anything short of electrifying; manic when 
she needs to be, subtle when she needs to be and filling every song with a 
full-beam, show-pony, stage-school commitment that isn’t often seen on TV.

About those songs. Yes, there are songs in this show. Yes, I was suspicious of 
them at first too, on the basis that all musicals are the work of the devil 
himself. But they’re actuallypretty good genre pastiches 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mHU1EYeug4M> that almost always hit their 
intended targets. They are slightly reminiscent ofFlight of the Conchords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/flight-of-the-conchords>, and a 
comparison to Flight of the Conchords can never be a bad thing.

Crazy Ex-Girlfriend is already appearing on Best Of lists, and it’s not hard 
to see why. It’s a spiritual cousin to Netflix’sStranger Things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/15/stranger-things-review-a-shot-of-80s-nostalgia-right-to-your-heart-winona-ryder>
, in that it enjoys taking its time to unpack some of the knottiest tropes and 
conventions of genre cinema. Where Stranger Things concerns itself solely with 
1980s horror, Crazy Ex-Girlfriend is fixated on romantic comedies. And the 
whole thing is executed beautifully. It feels like a very authentic exploration 
of depression and anxiety, which isn’t something you’d normally say about a 
day-glo musical TV show with animated opening titles.

This is the time to get in, because Crazy Ex-Girlfriend has already won awards.
Bloom has won a Golden Globe <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vgj0hq7NavY> and 
a Critics’ Choice award for her powerhouse portrayal of Bunch and, while the 
show has been shut out of all the major Emmy categories this year, it still 
feels like the start of something. Everyone else loves Crazy Ex-Girlfriend. You 
should too.

Where: Netflix.

Length: One series of 18 40-minute episodes.

Stand-out episode: Episode 11, That Text Was Not Meant for Josh!, which 
contains a laceratingly brutal ode to self entitledYou Stupid Bitch. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zgUKQCVieWM>

If you liked Crazy Ex-Girlfriend, watch: Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/mar/10/unbreakable-kimmy-schmidt-tina-fey-triumphs-again>
,Lady Dynamite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/20/lady-dynamite-maria-bamford-netflix-comedy>
 (both Netflix).
 