
When the first season of Amazon’s The Man in the High Castle arrived last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/nov/20/the-man-in-the-high-castle-amazon-prime-nazis-philip-k-dick>
 neither the Democrats nor the Republicans were close to selecting a 
presidential candidate. Although there was a sense of impending upheaval 
following two terms of Barack Obama, the show’s alternative history didn’t feel 
quite as relevant as its second season does now. The series, based on the 1962 
novel by Philip K Dick, imagines America in the years following second world 
war under the premise that the Allies lost. Germany holds control of the 
eastern half of the US and Japan holds the west. Fascism, based largely on 
racial discrimination and repression of free thought, reigns. As season two 
arrives 16 December, there is a sense that this fictional world may adhere more 
closely to our own than we initially suspected.

From The Man In The High Castle to Mozart In The Jungle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/10/catch-up-and-download-from-the-man-in-the-high-castle-to-mozart-in-the-jungle>
“The book is decidedly anti-fascist,” says Isa Hackett Dick, an executive 
producer on the series (and the daughter of the author). “It’s a cautionary 
tale of sorts. My father was famously known for being vocal about needing to 
always be vigilant about fascism and looking out for it. It’s interesting in 
the time that we’re in, particularly hearing rhetoric that sounds fascist, that 
we’re making this show.”

Season one set up the world of The Man in the High Castle, one where Hitler is 
still in power and everyday citizens are executed for being Jewish. There are 
those who follow the rigidity of the system and play by the rules, and those 
who oppose the fascist regimes. Censorship, particularly of the news media, is 
at play. Information is controlled by the government. As the writers began work 
on season two last December, the primary campaigns were heating up. Production 
on the second season wrapped at the end of the September, just before the shock 
election result.


It’s hard to imagine that Donald Trump and his rhetoric, which often panders 
to far-right views, wasn’t on the writers’ minds as the episodes unfolded. 
Since his election to office, Trump has attempted to undermine and control the 
news media, and has attacked and criticized those who don’t agree with him or 
depict him in a positive light. That all sounds familiar. The producers won’t 
comment on Trump specifically, but they do feel the show is reflecting America 
today in some ways.

It’s interesting in the time that we’re in, hearing rhetoric that sounds 
fascist, that we’re making this show
Isa Hackett Dick, executive producer of the show 
“It’s undeniable,” executive producer David W Zucker says. “You can look at so 
many components globally or quite specifically that are profoundly resonant 
with things we’re struggling with today. There’s deeply disturbing parts of the 
normalization racism and repression and injustice and torture and things we’re 
seeing domestically and internationally on the show. Those are very much part 
of the world we’re dramatizing.”

For Zucker, as well as the rest of the producers and writers, The Man in the 
High Castle isn’t simply about power. It’s about whether people are capable of 
resisting the evils that come along with that power. In other words, is our 
desire to control others inherent? “This show is something that is all about 
exploring human existence,” Zucker notes. “Part of what this story is exploring 
is how much of this is endemic to who we are as human beings.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYekQIyZdmVo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYekQIyZdmVo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYekQIyZdmVo&media=>
Season two grapples with this idea even further. Now that the stage is set, 
the writers have been able to give each character new places to go. They can 
deal with new challenges and explore new facets of this alternative reality. 
Will they resist the fascist powers and find a way to the freedom that America 
actually achieved following the war? And is that sort of liberty possible at 
all?

It’s through these very human characters that we, as viewers, are able to 
uncover what it might be like to live in a time where the Nazis were still in 
power. Amazon has yet to announce a third season, although Zucker and Dick are 
hopeful, and it seems inevitable that the Trump ascension of power will impact 
the storyline and its themes in some way – especially if he continues to 
display behavior that has fascist tendencies. But, of course, those at the helm 
of The Man in the High Castle have found themselves making these sorts of 
relevant comparisons almost accidentally.

The Man In The High Castle: Philip K Dick's chilling counterfactual fantasy 
comes to TV
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/nov/20/the-man-in-the-high-castle>
“You can never predict those things and you certainly don’t write toward that 
end, but it was a bit staggering to see how things were evolving while we were 
dealing with some of the stories that we were aiming to tell,” Zucker says of 
the show’s themes, which stay as true as possible to its source material. “Some 
of the firsthand experiences and the intensity of feeling that arising by 
what’s transpiring in our world today will undoubtedly affect some of the 
insights that the writers bring to these stories. It has emotional effect, not 
to mention an informative one, as we’re living through some aspects of what 
we’re exploring on the show.”

The Man in the High Castle doesn’t necessarily have any easy answers. It looks 
at why and how people acquire power, and what they do to retain it. It pushes 
the viewer to consider whether it’s essential to act against fascism and stand 
up for freedom. Now, as the freedoms of some Americans feel threatened, that is 
especially poignant. It means you are not simply entertained by television, but 
instead encouraged to find your own ideas and voice. If we continue down the 
current path, where will it lead us? Do you have the potential to change 
anything? Do you want to?


“When you’re telling a piece that’s historically set, even as an alternative 
history, you’re always looking for material that has modern day relevance and 
can help us with that perspective,” Zucker says. “It can help us understand who 
we are and how we got to this place that we’re in and what possibly we could do 
to affect our own futures going forward.”
 