
‘Your mum knows all about match-fixing’

Least among the many insights provided by Jonathan Trott’s autobiography, 
Unguarded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/03/jonathan-trott-mental-health-england-ashes>
, comes this contender for the canon of classic sledges. The scene was Lord’s, 
late September 2010. Popular Pakistani stand-up Ijaz Butt, two years into his 
comic turn as the chairman of the Pakistan Cricket Board, had just accused 
England of “taking enormous amounts of money” to throw the third ODI. England’s 
players, unamused, spent the night debating whether or not to withdraw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/sep/21/giles-clark-icc-oval> from the 
series. And came within a single vote of doing it, too.At nets the next morning 
Trott met Wahab Riaz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/sep/21/pakistan-charge-trott-afridi>. 
“You going to accuse us of match-fixing again?” Trott asked. And Wahab shot 
back: “Your mum knows all about match-fixing.”

Trott, displaying his characteristic lack of intensity, whacked Riaz around 
the head with his batting pads (“they made a great sound”), then grabbed him by 
the throat. He had to be dragged away by Graham Gooch. All of which explains 
both why Shahid Afridi said at the time Trott had “committed a crime”, and how 
Wahab came to be known as the Dorothy Parker of the Punjab. The man has blown 
fresh life into what some still insist on calling the “art” of sledging, a 
medium which, even ardent devotees will admit, was beginning to seem just a 
touch moribund after three decades of listening to cricketers find new ways to 
say “you’re fat”, “you’re shit”, and “I slept with your wife”.

Sign up to the Spin
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/sign-up-to-the-spin>
“Your mum knows all about match-fixing” will slip right in to all those online 
lists of the “best-ever sledges”, alongside all those other deathless quips, 
their punchlines as wearily familiar as the oldest Christmas cracker jokes. 
“Tickets please!”, “She gives me a biscuit!”, “Why don’t you ask your wife?”. 
Those who defend it say sledging has been around as long as the game has been 
played. As if,as Alan Tyers had it in his history 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/blogs/content/story/822929.html>, Richard Nyren 
used to shout “Bowle hymme a harpsichord, see if he can playeth that,” when he 
was playing for Hambledon on Broadhalfpenny Down.

Sledging is rather more modern than that. The best guess is the word was 
coined in the mid-60s. According to Graham Seal’s book The Lingo, Ian Chappell 
has pinned its minting right down to “Adelaide during either the 1963-64 or 
1964-65 Sheffield Shield Season”. There’s an unlikely story about it having 
something to do with Percy Sledge’s hit When a Man Loves a Woman, but it most 
likely derives from the phrase “subtle as a sledgehammer”. Which already 
distinguishes it from those occasional instances of genuine wit: Andrew 
Flintoff advising Tino Best to “mind the windows”, Ian Healy telling a fielder 
to get “right under Nasser Hussain’s nose” and then ordering him to short extra 
cover.

Chappell is an authoritative source. The first time “sledging” appeared in The 
Guardian it was in a report about his behaviour (“swearing and shouting”) in a 
Shield match between South Australia and Tasmania. Likewise the first time it 
appeared in The Times, when John Woodcock wrote “sheer boorishness seems to be 
being mistaken for manliness”, which is a mistake many still make. Just last 
month Steve Smith decided his team had too many “quiet characters”, and said 
even if they weren’t “making noise verbally” they needed to rediscover the “old 
Australian way of puffing your chest out and making your presence felt”. And 
there were the rest of us thinking their 3-0 shellacking in Sri Lanka was 
because they couldn’t get their heads around Rangana Herath’s finger spin.

Australia have just been battered again, whitewashed in a ODI series in South 
Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/13/australias-series-loss-in-south-africa-reflects-downtrodden-fate-of-odis>
. This time their behaviour was so bad Kepler Wessels called it “embarrassing”. 
Wessels, who played for both teams,wrote 
<http://www.supersport.com/cricket/blogs/kepler-wessels/Reserve_bowlers_expose_feeble_Aussies>
: “There was a time when Australia teams used sledging cleverly as a strategy. 
The mindless babble that this group have resorted to is both embarrassing and 
totally ineffective.”

Wessels isn’t the only one to call Australia out. So has Trent Woodhill, who 
is a coach with the Royal Challengers Bangalore and the Melbourne Stars. 
“Australia’s fascination with playing a noisy, aggressive cricket as some sort 
of testament to the past is preventing growth,” Woodhill wrote on Twitter.In an 
interview with Fox 
<http://www.foxsports.com.au/cricket/australia/sledging-is-hurting-australian-cricket-says-trent-woodhill/news-story/be24af12e885f40fa3d0090a7ccc105c>
, he added: “We need to get away from this mentality of ‘we’ve all played the 
game, you’ve got to be tougher, you’ve got to be harder, you’ve got be noisier, 
you’ve got to be louder’, because it’s basically bullshit.”

How cricket (almost) made me a Tory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/99-94-cricket-blog/2016/oct/18/cricket-tory-thatcher-culture-conservative-party>
It’s not just Australia. This England team talk a lot too. A couple of weeks 
ago Ben Stokes said umpires should give the players “more leeway” for sledging 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/cricket/37562840>, on the grounds “we’re trying to 
win a game here playing for our country”. As if you can’t but insult the batsman
when you’re trying to take his wicket 
<http://www.pakpassion.net/ppforum/showthread.php?233001-VIDEO-Ben-Stokes-abusing-Misbah-after-getting-owned-fair-play>
. This was before the one-day series in Bangladesh, when bad feeling escalated 
into physical confrontation.Something similar happened in South Africa 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/south-africa-v-australia-2016-17/content/story/1061202.html>
, when Matthew Wade collided with Tabraiz Shamsi in the middle of the pitch.

If it wasn’t already apparent, the idiocy of all this was laid bare at the 
inquest into the death of Phillip Hughes, where there was much discussion about
whether or not Doug Bollinger told Hughes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/12/philllip-hughes-inquest-new-claim-over-doug-bollinger-i-am-going-to-kill-you-sledge>
 “I’m going to kill you”. Bollinger denied it but he wouldn’t have been the 
first to use those words. Vic Marks has a similar story from his playing days. 
He was told exactly that by one of Bollinger’s predecessors at New South Wales. 
“What confused me even more was that within an hour he was in our dressing room 
cracking cans of lager and greeting me like a long lost friend,” Vic wrote. 
“That’s the Australian way.”

So they say. But the words sound perfectly absurd as soon as they’re put in 
another context, whether it’s a court, inquest or a cricketer’s memoir. And 
reading them back you can’t but ask, if you wouldn’t carry on like this in any 
other walk of life, why do it on the cricket pitch?

This is an extract taken from The Spin, the Guardian’s weekly cricket email. 
To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/sign-up-to-the-spin>.
 