
"Stephen Hawking has written a short, occasionally facetious, but generally 
reliable and informative history of classical and quantum mechanics. That is 
all. That he has adverted to it as an answer to the ultimate question of life 
is both annoying and inaccurate, but no doubt commercially sensible." An 
irritatedAlexander Waugh <http://www.spectator.co.uk/books/6257813/ 
a-plague-of-infinities.thtml> in the Spectator went on to say about The Grand 
Design: "With a little less chutzpah he might also have realised that things of 
which we cannot see the bottom are not necessarily profound."Roger Penrose 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/bdf3ae28-b6e9-11df-b3dd-00144feabdc0.html> in the 
Financial Times believed the abstruse subject matter to be "made accessible to 
general readers via apposite analogies" but proceeded to throw complicated 
doubt on Hawking's "strange-sounding philosophical standpoint of 
theory-dependent realism". According toJohn Cornwell 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/bookreviews/8006738/The-Grand-Design-New-Answers-to-the-Ultimate-Questions-of-Life-by-Stephen-Hawking-review.html>
 in the Daily Telegraph, "Stephen Hawking's reputation as an oracle perhaps has 
to do with the iconography of his predicament: the unfettered brain ranging 
across time and space . . .The Grand Design is a speculative book about an 
exceedingly arcane area of theoretical physics. So what's all this about God?"

"He has aimed as high as it is possible to do in a novel which deals with the 
great questions of love, intimacy, war, memory and fear of personal and 
national annihilation – and has overwhelmingly achieved everything."Linda Grant 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/reviews/to-the-end-of-the-land-by-david-grossman-trans-jessica-cohen-2063011.html>
 in the Independent was in awe of David Grossman's new novelTo the End of the 
Land, which "will have to be read and re-read to begin to scratch the surface 
of its ambitions to scrape raw the human heart". The observations of Ora, the 
protagonist, wroteJustin Cartwright 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/a31d5df4-b169-11df-b899-00144feabdc0.html> in the 
Financial Times, "are often moving and sharp, but can also be repetitive and 
banal . . . Ora herself sums up the problem with the whole book: 'You don't 
have to pour out a live broadcast of your whole stream of consciousness, 
right?'" ForTheo Tait in the Sunday Times, the novel "is also not only 
sentimental – often in the best sense of that word – but at times positively 
gaudy: the Yom Kippur war sections definitely tip over into melodrama . . . 
Nevertheless, this is a powerful and memorable novel, which movingly evokes the 
strains of war and peace in one household".

"Bright and breezy in tone, this must rank as the most informal memoir ever 
produced by an ex-prime minister,"Anthony Howard in the Evening Standard noted 
of Tony Blair'sA Journey. "But its various demotic touches – 'you know 
something?', 'don't get me wrong', 'anyway, you get the point' – should not be 
allowed to mislead. In terms of full disclosure this is just about as 
unrewarding as Harold Wilson's far more ponderous account of his first two 
administrations."Peter Stothard 
<http://entertainment.timesonline.co.uk/tol/arts_and_entertainment/the_tls/article7166156.ece>
 in the Times Literary Supplement judged the book "striking for Blair's 
powerful sense of himself and his central significance, a confidence 
comfortingly undimmed by those parts of the past three years spent making money 
from motivational speeches". According toRoy Hattersley 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/books/2010/09/blair-labour-brown-journey> in the 
New Statesman, "the moral certainty that bursts out of every page makes it more 
than the usual attempt to justify the unjustifiable . . . The messianic tone is 
confirmed and intensified by the occasional admission of guilt." What's more, 
"the public comments on what should remain private matters are written in the 
style of cheap romantic fiction, and it is so embarrassing to read them that 
their inclusion in the book raises grave questions about the author's judgment."

• This article was amended on 28 September 2010. The original referred to 
Anthony Hilton's review ofA Journey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/a-journey> for the Scotsman. This has been 
corrected.
 