
More than 400 arrests and four stabbings marred an otherwise good-natured and 
sun-drenchedNotting Hill carnival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/nottinghillcarnival>. According to the 
Metropolitan police, who had 7,000 officers on the streets of west London, 
there were a total of 156 arrests on Sunday and a further 284 by midnight on 
Monday.


The crime figures were comparable with last year’s celebration, during which 
police also made around 400 arrests. According to the Met, who had covered the 
entire event with asection 60 order 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1994/33/part/IV/crossheading/powers-of-police-to-stop-and-search>
, allowing officers to conduct random searches, the majority of the offences 
were drug-related, but dozens were held on charges relating to the possession 
of offensive weapons.

Five people were wounded in four separate knife attacks over the two days of 
the carnival. One of them, a 15-year-old boy stabbed in Ladbroke Grove on 
Sunday afternoon, was taken to hospital in a critical condition, but was later 
said to be out of danger.


London’s ambulance service was also kept busy, with revellers suffering from 
dehydration and problems related to alcohol consumption.

London Ambulance (@Ldn_Ambulance) 
Today at #NHC2016 <https://twitter.com/hashtag/NHC2016?src=hash> with 
@stjohnambulance <https://twitter.com/stjohnambulance> we treated 411 patients 
and 74 were taken to hospital.pic.twitter.com/x14cACeywT 
<https://t.co/x14cACeywT>
 <https://twitter.com/Ldn_Ambulance/status/770018513964662785> August 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Ldn_Ambulance/status/770018513964662785> 
The second and final day of the annual street party in west London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> marked the grand finale of the event’s 
50th anniversary, which hosted 60 bands and 38 sound systems this year.

Hundreds of thousands of people attended the carnival, which regulars spoke of 
as a “vintage event”. Lina Caicedo, 30, from south-east London, who was 
partying near the Aba Shanti-I sound system, said she was on her second day of 
carnival. She had been coming for the past 23 years. “It’s such an important 
thing to support and celebrate,” she said. “The West Indian community is such 
an important community to London.”

Theo Taylor, 27, from Walthamstow, north-east London, said: “The most 
important thing about carnival is we come together and remind ourselves that we 
own the streets.”


Dan Glass, 32, from Barnet, said he felt it was clear that people needed to 
party: “Carnival doesn’t happen in a vacuum, and with everything that’s going 
on just now, people need it.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Fa-million-people-gather-for-notting-hill-carnival-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20million%20people%20gather%20for%20Notting%20Hill%20Carnival%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Fa-million-people-gather-for-notting-hill-carnival-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20million%20people%20gather%20for%20Notting%20Hill%20Carnival%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Fa-million-people-gather-for-notting-hill-carnival-video&media=>
A million people gather for Notting Hill Carnival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2016/aug/29/a-million-people-gather-for-notting-hill-carnival-video>
Lindsay Walker, 32, from Brixton, said her grandfather had come over on the 
Empire Windrush passenger ship and had been to every carnival for the past 50 
years. “He came from Grenada and he used to dance with the Grenadian floats. 
Nowadays he stands on Grenada Corner.


“I’ve been to carnival for about the last 26 or 27 years. It’s a link to 
heritage, but also it’s a really, really fun party. You never see London like 
this – it’s usually so constrained. You normally wouldn’t have people from all 
different paths of life together, it’s such an amazing energy.”

Notting Hill carnival, day two - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2016/aug/29/notting-hill-carnival-day-two-in-pictures>
As ever, the partying was accompanied by complaints from local politicians and 
residents about the impact the carnival has on the area. Many locals board up 
homes and businesses for the bank holiday weekend and Kensington’s MP, Victoria 
Borwick, has raised questions over whether the event is worth the cost. The 
Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea said it spends approximately £500,000 
each year on clean-up, licensing, toilets, enforcement of street trading 
regulations, food hygiene and other regulatory functions.


However, some locals have accused the authorities of strangling the carnival 
in red tape. Jay Hirano, owner of the Mau Mau Bar, which had its own sound 
system entertaining crowds on Portobello Road, said: “It’s a benefit for us. 
Every year, it’s getting more and more strict; the police and council are 
killing our businesses. This year between 7pm and 9pm, none can come to any 
businesses – we have to stop people coming in at 7 and can only start letting 
them in at nine.


“Rent is so expensive at Portobello, so many businesses are depending on 
carnival for survival, and police and council are just killing it.”


The sound systems were wound down at about 7pm on Monday, although the revelry 
continued in the street for some time. According to reports on Twitter, police 
in riot gear were seen moving towards the People’s Sound System stand on All 
Saints Road late on Monday night. A 60-year-old man standing nearby, who gave 
his name only as the Dread, denied claims that the music was shut down by 
police. However, he accused officers of intimidation. “They came about 6.15 and 
surrounded the sound [system], you know.”

Asked why he thought the People’s Sound had been singled out, he replied: “For 
some reason, they have their targets. This sound here is the peaceful sound 
that’s been going on for the past 30 years. All the vibes are good and still we 
get this intimidation.”


 