
Monday’s long queues outside Belfast’s Simply Crispy 
<http://www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk/news/local-national/northern-ireland/crisp-sandwich-shop-sells-out-30899682.html>
, the world’s first crisp sandwich shop, made me smile. We spent part of our 
summer holidays in Ireland with my mum’s large and riotous family, so I have 
fond childhood memories of ravenously devouring floury baps, thick with 
margarine, a solitary slice of ham and stuffed withTayto crisps 
<https://www.taytogroup.com/new/images/stories/virtuemart/product/salt-and-vinegar.jpg>
. I hear the cafe was offering 35 types ofcrisps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2014/jul/25/how-to-eat-crisps>
, and that cheese and onion sold out first: rightly so – the strong flavours 
perfectly accompany a slice of ham.

The child in me would also have been glad to see that the cafe was offering 
Monster Munch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/14/sophie-ellis-bextor-monster-munch-pregnant>
– some people say it’s not a conventional crisp sandwich contender. I disagree 
– the crunchy texture perfectly accompanied myBilly Bear 
<https://twitter.com/billy_bear_ham> meat sandwich, and the monstrous size of 
each crisp only added to the thrill of crushing them down to fit more in. I 
would get stern letters home from school if I sent my kids in with the lunches 
I had (thanks to the school food expertHenry Dimbleby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/henry-dimbleby>, we got our new “lunchbox 
guidelines” in the children’s school bags yesterday evening). But carbs in 
carbs with carbs (and fat!) didn’t seem to do the slim seven-year-old running 
fanatic I was then too much harm – and what joyful memories I have. Food should 
be fun, sometimes, as well as nutritious, and there’s nothing wrong with the 
occasional treat.

On the Greek side of the family, my wonderful Aunty Helen 
<http://agirlcalledjack.com/2012/06/17/in-memoriam-helen-constantine/> had her 
own homemade take on the crisp sandwich. After the six-hour drive down the 
coast to Plymouth to visit her, we’d be greeted by her two great big geese, 
Charlie and Geraldine, chasing us shrieking and honking around the garden. But 
the highlight of that trip was always the potato sandwiches that were hot and 
ready for us on our arrival, just in time for us small ones to go to bed. Oh, 
and in case of any doubt – we had ours with themuch-maligned brown sauce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2015/jan/05/-sp-brown-sauce-sales-are-falling-has-britain-finally-come-to-its-senses>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2015%2Fjan%2F13%2Fjack-monroe-presents-aunty-helens-potato-sandwiches%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F13%2F1421152019066%2F43736e5e-cdbc-485c-878c-e18ef5a70ac8-1361x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crunch%20time%3A%20the%20art%20of%20the%20crisp%20sandwich&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2015%2Fjan%2F13%2Fjack-monroe-presents-aunty-helens-potato-sandwiches%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crunch%20time%3A%20the%20art%20of%20the%20crisp%20sandwich&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2015%2Fjan%2F13%2Fjack-monroe-presents-aunty-helens-potato-sandwiches%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F13%2F1421152019066%2F43736e5e-cdbc-485c-878c-e18ef5a70ac8-1361x2040.jpeg>
 Frying tonight … turning potatoes into crisps. Photograph: Susan Bell 
Aunty Helen’s potato sandwiches


(Serves 2)

1 large potato
Salt and pepper
1–2 tbsp oil
4 slices thick white farmhouse bread
Softened butter, to spread


Thinly slice the potato, with its skin, and season with salt and pepper. Heat 
the oil in a large frying pan, and fry the potato slices for 6–8 minutes on 
each side over a medium–high heat, in batches if necessary, until crisp and 
cooked through. Remove from the pan and pat dry with kitchen towel. Wedge 
between the well-buttered bread slices. Add some brown sauce or pickle for 
added tang.

Recipe from Jack Monroe’s A Year in 120 Recipes. Order from 
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/year-in-120-recipes.html>
 