
It is hard to look at Mark Ruffalo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mark-ruffalo>’s face – that rumpled, 
beautiful thing – and not feel immediately more relaxed. He oozes calm, as well 
as an easy charm that draws you in. He gives the impression of stable 
rootedness, unusual for a man who has been working in the realm of the 
Hollywood A-list for the past 15 years. How does he do it?

Maybe it’s because his ascent has been the classic slow-and-steady tale. I 
first saw him inKenneth Lonergan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2002/jun/16/features.review>’s You Can Count 
On Me <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001/mar/25/philipfrench> (2000), as 
Laura Linney <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/laura-linney>’s feckless but 
charming younger brother – a commanding but unshowy performance, propelled by 
that inner calm. (His characters always seem to know and understand themselves 
on a deeper, quieter level.) A pop psychologist might suggest it’s also this 
quality that has made him such an outspoken environmental activist: he has
campaigned against fracking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cifamerica/2011/nov/30/new-york-hydrofracking-hearings-mark-ruffalo>
 for years, and for access to clean water via his charity,Water Defense 
<http://waterdefense.org/content/about-us>; he is also vocally pro-choice. His 
Twitter feed <https://twitter.com/markruffalo> is a delight: as well as giving 
excellent book recommendations 
<https://twitter.com/markruffalo/status/592670500607918080>, he recently made a 
noise about the lack of merchandise for Black Widow, Marvel’s main female 
character, when there was plenty for the men.Is he perfect? 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VH87lb_gc5U> He might be.

Ruffalo stood out in frothy romcoms 13 Going On 30 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0337563/> and Just Like Heaven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2005/dec/30/1>, and was Oscar-nominated 
for bothThe Kids Are All Right 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/28/the-kids-are-all-right-review> 
and, more recently,Foxcatcher <https://www.theguardian.com/film/foxcatcher>. 
That he gets to play mild-mannered Bruce Banner (and his alter ego, the Hulk) 
in Marvel’s multimillion-dollarAvengers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-avengers> movies is a treat, after years 
of gloss-free projects. Naturally, he carries it off. I can’t wait to see what 
he does next.
 