
Leading Republicans condemned Fidel Castro on Sunday but uncertainty remained 
over whether the incoming Trump administration would make good oncampaign 
promises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/donald-trump-fidel-castro-cuba-embargo>
 to reverse the normalization of relations instigated by Barack Obama.

Trump unlikely to reinstate embargo after death of Fidel Castro, analysts say
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/donald-trump-fidel-castro-cuba-embargo>
“You wouldn’t go to Pol Pot’s funeral,” Texas senator Ted Cruz told ABC’s This 
Week. “You shouldn’t be doing what Obama and [Canadian prime minister Justin] 
Trudeau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/27/justin-trudeau-ridiculed-over-praise-of-remarkable-fidel-castro>
 are doing, celebrating Castro.”

In response to news of Castro’s death on Saturday, aged 90, Obama released a 
carefully worded statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/fidel-castro-death-obama-trump-response>
 that did not criticise or praise the leader, instead saying: “The Cuban people 
must know that they have a friend and partner in the United States of America.”

Trudeau attracted widespread criticism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/27/justin-trudeau-ridiculed-over-praise-of-remarkable-fidel-castro>
 for a statement that many saw as too laudatory.

Cruz, who is of Cuban descent, said Castro had been “a murderous dictator” and 
said: “This tyrannical regime has gotten stronger because of a weak president, 
weak foreign policy.”

Cruz’s criticism of policy under Obama and Castro’s brother Raúl, the current 
Cuban president, was echoed by Florida senatorMarco Rubio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/marco-rubio>, another former presidential 
candidate of Cuban descent.

Rubio, who has long been one of the harshest critics of Obama’s efforts and 
has links to Cuban Americans in Miamiwho celebrated news of Castro’s death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/the-old-man-is-dead-fidel-castros-death-sparks-celebrations-on-streets-of-miami>
, said the president’s comments were “pathetic 
<http://thehill.com/blogs/blog-briefing-room/news/307562-rubio-blasts-obamas-pathetic-castro-statement>
”.

Asked on CNN’s State of the Union about Obama’s statement and that issued by 
Pope Francis, who expressed sorrow regarding Castro’s death, Rubio said that as 
a Catholic he looked to the pope for spiritual guidance, not political.

“Barack Obama is the president of the most powerful country in the world,” he 
said. “And what I called pathetic is not mentioning whatsoever in that 
statement the reality that there are thousands upon thousands of people who 
suffered brutally under the Castro regime.


“He executed people. He jailed people for 20 to 30 years. [In] the Florida 
Straits … thousands of people … lost their lives fleeing his dictatorship. And 
not to acknowledge any of that in the statement, I felt was pathetic, 
absolutely.”

Obama began normalizing relations with the island in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2014/dec/17/alan-gross-cuba-prisoner-freed-obama?page=with:block-5491b895e4b0919fd47e8623#block-5491b895e4b0919fd47e8623>
, with the help of Pope Francis, after what many viewed as a failed embargo and 
50 years of harsh sanctions. This year he became the first president tovisit 
the island since 1928 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/20/barack-obama-cuba-visit-us-politics-shift-public-opinion-diplomacy>
.


The embargo is still formally in place 
<http://www.rawstory.com/2014/12/what-do-improved-us-cuba-relations-mean-for-the-average-american/>
 butnormalization 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/18/cuba-sanctions-engagement-obama-castro-communist>
 allowed the island nation greater access to the internet, the export of some 
goods, direct flights from the US and a likely boost to the Cuban middle class.

Critics have argued that the US conceded too much. On Sunday, Trump adviser 
Kellyanne Conway focused on the “deal”, telling ABC the US got “nothing in 
return”. She did not, however, give many clues to likely Trump policy.

“[Trump] is open to any number of possibilities,” she said. “He is open to 
researching and, in fact, resetting relations withCuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba>.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fcuban-americans-celebrate-in-miami-following-death-of-fidel-castro-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cuban%20Americans%20celebrate%20in%20Miami%20following%20death%20of%20Fidel%20Castro%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fcuban-americans-celebrate-in-miami-following-death-of-fidel-castro-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cuban%20Americans%20celebrate%20in%20Miami%20following%20death%20of%20Fidel%20Castro%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fcuban-americans-celebrate-in-miami-following-death-of-fidel-castro-video&media=>
Cuban Americans celebrate in Miami following death of Fidel Castro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/nov/26/cuban-americans-celebrate-in-miami-following-death-of-fidel-castro-video>
On Fox News Sunday, Trump chief of staff Reince Priebus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/stephen-bannon-reince-priebus-donald-trump-white-house-staff>
 discussed Trump’s wish for reforms by the Raúl Castro government, for “some 
movement or some schedule of movement” on Cuba’s part that would be necessary 
to “then schedule some kind of relationship” the country.

The president-elect was “absolutely” willing to reverse diplomatic openness, 
Priebus said, but before any decision was taken “there has to be something, and 
what that something is … is yet to be determined”.

Fidel Castro's fake news: did claim he tricked the New York Times dupe us all?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/27/castro-claimed-he-tricked-the-new-york-times-but-we-may-be-the-real-dupes>
Following Castro’s death, Trump issued a statement that called Castro a “
brutal dictator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/nov/26/fidel-castro-death-cuban-leader-live-updates>
 who oppressed his own people for nearly six decades”. Over more than a year of 
campaigning, he said both that expanded diplomatic relations were“fine” 
<http://dailycaller.com/2015/09/07/donald-trump-on-his-nuclear-doctrine-democracy-promotion-and-why-he-refuses-to-use-term-supreme-leader/#ixzz3l9Obgeml>
 and that he wouldreverse Obama’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/16/trump-miami-clinton-disarm-security-obama-birther>
 policy.

In interviews with the Guardian on Saturday, academics cited growing US 
business interest in Cuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/donald-trump-fidel-castro-cuba-embargo>
 as one indicator that Trump would not put relations into reverse.


“He’s a businessman,” said Gregory Weeks 
<https://clas-pages.uncc.edu/gregory-weeks/>, of the University of North 
Carolina in Charlotte. “He’s been interested in doing business in Cuba.”

Trump has been accused of investigating a business deal in Cuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/29/donald-trump-cuba-embargo-violation-clinton-allegation>
 while sanctions were in place, in the Clinton era.

Weeks added: “There is not a whole lot of interest in rolling back Cuba 
policy. The business side of the Republican party is very much in favour of it.”
 