
Following a few glasses of wine, John’s inhibitions had dropped when he went 
online to talk to a woman he had met through an internet dating site. Although 
they hadn’t met in person, they had been exchanging messages for about a week 
and a half.

Because of the familiarity built up through previous messages, and the effects 
of the alcohol, when she suggested that she would remove some of her clothes if 
he did the same, he agreed. Straight away he realised he had been scammed.

Passwords, phones and privacy settings: how to protect yourself online
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/19/how-to-protect-yourself-online-passwords-phones-privacy-settings>
“They said ‘Now I’ve recorded you. If you don’t pay me I’ll put the video all 
over Facebook and YouTube.’ My instant thought was that I had no choice and 
that I’d pay anything, because I thought that if they posted the video it would 
ruin my business and family relationships,” says the 60-year-old.

John is one of almost 900 people who have reported to the police that they’ve 
been the victim of “sextortion” cybercrime rackets – a growing trend among 
criminals to dupe men into performing sex acts on camera and then demanding 
money, threatening that the footage will be put online if they don’t pay up.

Victims are typically targeted on social media where criminals, posing as 
young women, engage them in conversation before eventually coaxing them into 
sexual chat aimed at making them expose themselves. The number of crimes 
reported has doubled since last year, throwing light on how social media users 
frequently apply much more lax security rules in their online life than they 
would offline or even when using things such as email. Not limited to 
“sexploitation” scams, criminals can also target people for bank passwords and 
in property transactions.

“When we are publishing on social media, we don’t see that as being public 
because we are at home working at a laptop. It does not feel like it is outside 
so the indicators we are getting are that we are in a safe space,” says Prof 
Tim Watson, director of the Cybersecurity Centre at the University of Warwick.

It won’t be a random email. It will be mentioning people you know. It will be 
mentioning things you are interested in
Prof Tim Watson, security expert 
Spotting the spear

Many people would consider themselves able to spot a “phishing” attempt, 
whereby emails are sent which appear genuine but instead contain links aimed at 
gathering information such as bank details. There is less awareness around 
“spear phishing”, where specific people or groups of people are targeted by 
fraudsters, sometimes with information gleaned from social media, such as what 
football team or music they like.

Research in Germany showed this was a particular problem on social media. 
Zinaida Benenson from the University of Erlangen-Nuremberg measured how many 
people would click on a potentially malicious link in an email, then compared 
this with how many did the same with a message received on Facebook. The 
results were that one in five clicked a link from a stranger in an email; more 
than twice as many did so on Facebook. “It especially goes for sharing 
pictures, because this is something that is done a lot via Facebook. That is 
what some of the participants told us,” says Benenson.

Before sending a friend request or a message inviting users to link to them, 
the criminals build up information about people which is publicly available, 
Watson says. “They know what football team you support, they know what sort of 
food you like. They can see your pattern of life from what you have publicly 
made available. What that does is show them very cheaply and quickly on that 
scale who the likely, most productive victims are going to be,” he says. “It 
won’t be a random email. It will be mentioning people you know. It will be 
mentioning things you are interested in. It will be capturing you late at night 
when you are tired. It is building on the confidence indicators you have given 
away.”

It’s not just you

The National Crime Agency (NCA), which revealed the extent of sexploitation, 
hopes the publicity around the cases will reveal other victims – which could 
number in the thousands. Over the past 12 months, four men have killed 
themselves after being convinced to perform sex acts and then blackmailed. Last 
year, 17-year-old Ronan Hughes from County Tyrone, Northern Ireland, is 
believed to have taken his own life after he was tricked into posting intimate 
photos. In Romania in October a man was subsequently charged with producing and 
distributing indecent images of children and blackmail.

“Previously people have been hesitant to come forward because of that 
embarrassment factor, this idea that it could affect them personally or 
career-wise. So they don’t come forward and they pay,” says Roy Sinclair, from 
the NCA’s anti-kidnap and extortion unit.

This new type of sophisticated online scam, whether through dating sites or 
set up to extract bank information, can affect anyone, Watson says. In the same 
way a scam may happen on someone’s doorstep, confidence tricks have now been 
transferred online.

“People should not feel embarrassed for falling for these. Everybody falls for 
them. Computer security professionals will fall for them. And it is not fair to 
turn around to someone who has become a victim and say ‘Why did you click on 
that link? Don’t click on a friend request from strangers’. These people are 
not strangers because they may have already become friends with some of your 
friends. How do you protect yourself against this? It is quite difficult, you 
just have to have that sceptical voice inside your head and there are other 
ways of contacting people,” Watson says.

In an era when people are constantly bombarded with correspondence, awareness 
can be difficult, Benenson says. “In real life, being vigilant is extremely 
difficult and people make mistakes even if they try,” she said.

Staying safe

How do you protect yourself? It is difficult, you just have to have that 
sceptical voice inside your head
Prof Tim Watson, security expert 
The solutions to avoiding this next generation of online scams appear simple, 
yet clearly are often not observed.

“If someone presents you with a friend request and five minutes later gets 
very intimate with you , if someone is remarkably out of your league… just have 
that sceptical voice in your head saying ‘Is this the truth or am I being 
scammed here?,” Watson says. “These are people who have a great ability to pick 
on victims through the internet, picking on them using very strong human 
emotions.”

Mark James, a security specialist with IT security firm ESET, says you should 
research people before you deal with them online. “If it’s via social media 
check their background or history, see how long they’ve been active and try 
searching other services – chances are they will be active on different 
platforms if they are legitimate,” he says. “Be very wary of requests for 
photos or videos and always remember, once you post something you have no 
control on what others do with it – regardless of if you think it’s secure and 
safe, it’s never 100% private.

“The best approach is never do it, no matter how safe you feel. Always take a 
few minutes and think about the worst-case scenario if something goes wrong, 
and remember if it looks too good to be true, it often is.”

HOW TO AVOID BEING SCAMMED

■ If you are approached with an online friend request, pause and ask yourself 
the question of how you know them. “It involves looking at it and saying, ‘Do I 
remember meeting this person? Are they friends with anyone else I know? Why 
have they suddenly chosen to ask me for a friend request?’,” says Roy Sinclair 
from the National Crime Agency.

■ Even if you do end up talking to someone you met online who you think is 
authentic, beware that all may not be as it seems. Fraudsters can use 
pre-programmed footage so it appears that someone is responding to you on video.

■ In the event that a scam happens, don’t pay money online. Claims that it 
will be a one-off payment are no guarantee. Contact the police and don’t delete 
your account, so that any evidence can be preserved for investigation.
 