
It’s not exactly Brexit. It’s the opposite really, more an Anglicisation of 
Europe. And this takeover comes with a makeover, for it offers contrasting 
shades of new England. There is variety in the approaches of Wasps, Saracens and
Leicester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers>. If there is a 
constant it is only that they are all part of England’s joyous rugby revolution 
since the World Cup.

Racing 92 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/racing-metro-92> of Paris 
complete the quartet of Champions Cup semi-finalists. They offer a contrast of 
their own, being anything but typical representatives of the Top 14. To be a 
Parisian club is to be viewed with nothing short of grave suspicion by the 
dozen of that 14 that lie in the southern half of France, and with envy by 
their neighbours in the capital, Stade Français, as they go about the 
competitive business of tapping into Paris’s not altogether steadfast passion 
for rugby.

What makes Racing 92 a threat at the City Ground, Nottingham, on Sunday 24 
April is that they are well accustomed to playing in a hostile environment, 
even in their own land. And inDan Carter they have a player 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/12/racing-92-northampton-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
 who is immune to the pressures of playing anywhere. The great No10 finished 
the quarter-final against Toulon limping on a “tweaked knee,” as he called it, 
and having handed the kicking duties – not without the scare of a miss in front 
of the posts – to Maxime Machenaud.

Eddie Jones has little leeway for England changes on Australia tour | Dean Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/apr/14/eddie-jones-england-australia-tour>
It seems he is very keen to play against Leicester. It’s not clear if Freddie 
Burns and Owen Williams are quite so keen to play against him, but they should 
be. It is a treat to pit yourself against one of the best of all time – and no 
less of a treat for us to watch him perhaps for the last time on these shores.

Even if there is this Carter factor, Leicester are in a good place to make it 
to their sixth European final. They hammered Stade Français in the quarters and 
even if Racing are much more resilient than the eccentric but reigning 
champions of the Top 14, Leicester seem to be on one of those late-season 
surges, beloved once ofWasps <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps>.

Manu Tuilagi is playing again, obviously delighted to be able to take out his 
frustrations of the past year – groins can do that to the best – on an opponent 
or seven. His preciseposition in the England team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/apr/14/eddie-jones-england-australia-tour>
 will remain undetermined until the tour to Australia in the summer but for the 
moment with Leicester he is at 12, alongside the very influential Australian in 
exile, Peter Betham.

It is one of three combinations in midfield that help explain why England is 
suddenly the place to be for adventure. Elliot Daly, vying for a place of his 
own in the England team, and Siale Piutau are the most daring. At Wasps they 
are consistently fed by Jimmy Gopperth at 10 and, on theone occasion against 
Exeter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/09/wasps-exeter-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
, by the efforts of Thomas Young, who stole a turnover on his own goalline, a 
theft and delivery to Daly that turned defeat spellbindingly into victory.

Young, incidentally, has suddenly become the talk of the hour, and not just 
for being, like Harry Mallinder, George Ford and Owen Farrell, the son of a 
coach – of David in his case. Young Jr is a seven, a couple of rows back from 
the specialist position occupied by his father, but he can also play across the 
rest of the back row. He is a Welsh player in England, the mirror of Sam 
Underhill, an Englishman at the Ospreys in Wales. The art of the 7 seemed to 
have been buried but suddenly it is back, all part of Europe’s rugby 
resurrection.

It helps, obviously, if the chaser has something to chase. Even Saracens, so 
long considered to be a little light on colour in attack, have added width to 
their game. Brad Barritt, never knowingly described as creative in an England 
shirt, is a vital part of his club’s quest for excellence – and prizes.Saracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> tend not to glide but their 
wraparounds, involving Farrell, Barritt and one of the players of the season, 
Duncan Taylor, are an effective way to evade a blitzing defence.

Saracens were far from their efficient best to begin with against Northampton 
in the quarter-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/09/saracens-northampton-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
, but they did what they always do well – stick together – and ran out winners. 
But Wasps will not be as afflicted by injury as the Saints were and, if their 
start against Exeter was anything to go by, they will punish any Saracens 
sluggishness more tellingly.

Form in the last round favours Wasps but does it not often happen that a game 
so wondrous is impossible to recreate? That the opposite happens and players on 
fire one week cannot be as hot the next? Equally, is it not often the case that 
a side who labour through to the next round may use that very scare to be much 
improved? Saracens will be telling themselves it is so.

Either way, from Wasps-Saracens at the Madejski in Reading on Saturday to 
Leicester-Racing and Dan Carter’s valedictory Sunday at the City Ground, this 
promises to be what rugby across England is at the moment, a feast.
 