
The former Labour chancellor Alistair Darling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alistairdarling> has urged Jeremy Corbyn 
to outline his position on the economy in the next few days to try to regain 
ground after a summer in which the party “chose to blow itself up”.

Darling, who has just been nominated for a peerage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/27/david-cameron-now-backs-limits-to-peers-time-in-house>
, said the new Labour leader could fail to “get off the ground” unless he 
quickly reassured people where he stood.

“Jeremy Corbyn has won. He won overwhelmingly and he has a mandate,” he told 
BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “I know what he’s against but I’m not actually 
sure what he is for. And what I would say to him is that he must know first 
impressions gained by the electorate, especially of a party leader, tend not to 
go away.

“Less than a week after he’s been elected he needs to spell out where he 
stands on key issues like the economy. And if he doesn’t, frankly, he’s never 
going to get off the ground.”

Corbyn has released a series of policy documents and made clear that on the 
economy he wants a financial transaction tax, an end to independence for the 
Bank of England, and quantitative easing to fund national infrastructure 
projects.

His shadow chancellor, John McDonnell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/14/john-mcdonnell-corbyn-shadow-chancellor-profile>
, has emphasised that the new leadership team are “not deficit deniers” but 
would want to reduce it gradually without resorting to the billions of pounds 
in cuts proposed by the chancellor, George Osborne.

Throughout the leadership contest, Corbyn clearly defined himself as the 
anti-austerity candidate, who wanted to invest more in public services. 
However, Darling, a supporter of Liz Kendall who came fourth with 5% of the 
vote, said he wanted more detail.

“So far this week I just do not know where he’s going and what he stands for. 
From the leader’s point of view he really does need, frankly, in the next 
couple of days or so to say what exactly he’s going to do and how he’s going to 
do it ... if he wants to make a go of this he’s got to actually do this.”

Asked about the party’s dire poll ratings in Scotland after the independence 
referendum, Darling said: “After the result, which was decisive, my party chose 
to blow itself up ... we abandoned the field for three months until we had 
another leader.”

He said it would be difficult to see McDonnell as chancellor of the exchequer, 
adding: “I am sure all clouds have a silver lining but I haven’t seen the 
silver lining here yet.”

Darling is one of many former Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> politicians who have been 
horrified by Corbyn’s win but the leader has the overwhelming backing of party 
members and supporters. Corbyn had already come under pressure from his own MPs 
to clarify policy positions earlier this week.

He ended uncertainty over Labour’s position on the EU on Thursday, declaring 
that the party would campaign for the UK to remain in the union during the 
forthcoming referendum.

In a joint statement with the shadow foreign secretary, Hilary Benn, Corbyn 
said Labour would make the case forcontinued British membership of the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/17/jeremy-corbyn-labour-campaign-for-uk-stay-in-eu>
, whatever the outcome of the renegotiation being sought by David Cameron.
 