
Last week a proud, beautiful, beloved African creature, who’d lived the last 
years of his life in a fenced compound, waskilled by a train 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/07/migrant-dies-uk-bound-freight-shuttle-near-calais-france>
 in theChannel tunnel <https://www.theguardian.com/travel/channeltunnel>. 
That’s the British for you: criticising people fleeing genocide for pushing 
their children over a perimeter fence, when we’d do it for a 40% discount off 
an Asda telly.

If you feel more emotion looking at a picture of queuing lorries than a 
picture of desperate humans living in a lay-by, you need to check your bedtime 
routine for someone beating you round the head with a meat tenderiser. Only the 
British could experience great pain at the thought of a traffic jam – a place 
where you can sit alone with your radio on without being expected to do any 
work. Aren’t traffic jams unbearable? By the time you get home, you need to sit 
alone in a comfy chair with your favourite music on just to calm down.

Can you think how desperate these refugees must be? I appeal to women to 
understand this – not because they are more compassionate, but they’ll 
understand that getting into a van driven by a bloke from Kent is something 
you’d never do by choice. Can you imagine stowing away in the back of a van? To 
survive cholera, genocide and starvation, only to be killed by a sleeping bag 
covered in chlamydia. Migrants are desperately fighting to get into the backs 
of vans that drowsy nightclub goers are desperately fighting to get out of.

We can't stop the flow of migrants to Europe. Rehousing them is our only 
option | Patrick Kingsley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/31/migrants-calais-resettlement-europe>
David Cameron has offered France dogs, fences, and car parks – dealing with a 
humanitarian crisis like a primary school kid emptying his pockets for the 
bullies.I’ve mused before about whether he might be a psychopath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/01/david-cameron-moriarty-downing-street-radical-thatcher>
 and it’s worth noting that he has left reassessing the processing and 
treatment of genuine asylum applications until after his three-week holiday in 
Portugal. Cameron used the phrase “promiscuous swarm of foreign peoples”. Oops, 
my mistake, that was Hitler – but you get the general idea. Cameron’s use of 
the word “swarm” was carefully thought out; he avoided the word “plague” in 
case it implied God had sent them.

The Daily Mail (catchphrase circa 1938: “German Jews Pouring Into This Country 
<https://twitter.com/eurocrat/status/383958584843067392>”) has revelled in the 
kind of reporting that can only be the sign of a decadent society in freefall 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3183668/Riot-police-pelted-stones-2-100-migrants-storm-Channel-Tunnel-Calais-weekend-chanting-Open-borders.html>
. No doubt Rome, in its later days, was also full of people who held very firm 
opinions based on little evidence, I simply can’t be bothered to find out.One 
headline reported on terrible food shortages 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3182131/Food-shortages-loom-Calais-chaos-hauliers-warn-Operation-Stack-queue-Kent-hits-36-MILES.html>
. You might think: “How wonderful to see the Mail reporting on one of the 
driving forces for people leaving their countries,” but, of course, they meant 
no frankfurters for Hampshire. At least Calais has replaced the Mail’s hideous 
stories about how drowning migrants are ruining British people’s holidays, 
presumably because it’s now impossible for Brits to lay their bloated, burnt 
bodies down on the beach without locals trying to give them the kiss of life.

Of course, these poor migrants are being used as a distraction by a media and 
political class (I now use this term instead of government, because the 
government and opposition seem to be in consensus) that know Calais is an 
insignificant element of illegal immigration, and suspect that many of the 
refugees have a good claim to asylum. It’s silly season and they want to spin 
out a story that is essentially about aggressive hitch-hiking until the bread 
and circuses of the new football season andThe Great British Bake Off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-great-british-bake-off> get into 
their stride.

Church attacks David Cameron’s lack of compassion over asylum crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/01/church-attacks-david-cameron-language-asylum-crisis>
That’s not to say it isn’t hellish for the people living it. We invade their 
countries and justify it by saying that our way of life is better, then boggle 
at the idea they might think living here is great. We pay no attention to how 
our actions in other countries have precipitated this situation. There has to 
be something wrong with a world where the best employment option for a farmer 
in sub-Saharan Africa isn’t being a farmer in sub-Saharan Africa, but crossing 
the Mediterranean on a punctured lilo, only to spend days dangling under a 
lorry so that he can end up selling lollipops in a nightclub toilet. Our 
indifference is staggering. For a lot of these people, their best chance of 
survival may be to dress up as a leopard and hope to get Twitter onside.

Of course, the true existential threat to us might come from ourselves. If we 
can look at another human being and categorise them as “illegal”, or that 
chilling American word “alien”, then what has become of our own humanity? To 
support policies that dehumanise others is to dehumanise yourself. I think most 
people resist that, but are pressed towards it by an increasingly sadistic 
elite. If you’re worried about threats to your way of life, look to the people 
who are selling your public services out from under you. The people who will 
destroy this society are already here: printing their own money, printing their 
own newspapers, and responding to undesirables at the gates by releasing the 
hounds.
 