

David Dimbleby wants to continue to present BBC1’s Question Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/question-time> after his current BBC 
deal runs out in the summer, saying he has “never really taken much notice of 
contracts”.

Dimbleby, who will front BBC1’s coverage of the EU referendum next week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/14/bbc-eu-referendum-david-dimbleby>
, said he would “always [be] up for anything” after playing akey role for the 
BBC at last year’s general election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/may/08/bbc1-tops-tv-election-coverage-with-43-million-viewers-as-dimbleby-bows-out>
 alongside the man tipped to replace him, Huw Edwards.

Speculation has grown in recent months that Dimbleby, who has hosted the 
programme since 1994, would step down from Question Time when his current 
contract runs out.

But Dimbleby, one of the BBC’s most recognisable faces and authoritative 
voices, told the new issue of Radio Times that he wanted to continue in the 
role if theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> would have him.

“I turn up if they want me,” said Dimbleby. “I’ve never really taken much 
notice of contracts,” he said. “I enjoy it very much. As long as I can do it 
well – it’s getting big audiences. It’s far and away the most popular political 
programme.”

Asked whether the EU referendum would be his last big results show for the 
BBC, Dimbleby said: “Well, erm. Ah-erm. I always assume that every one is my 
last – and so far, I’ve been proved wrong.

“I don’t decide these things, I’m always up for anything. They’ve already 
announced that Huw’s doing the [2020] general election. I can’t do it forever. 
If asked, I wouldn’t say no, put it like that.

“I don’t see myself as a kind of crumbling institution. I broadcast because I 
enjoy broadcasting, and I’m asked to do it. I love it.”

Dimbleby will also present the BBC’s EU debate programme live from the SSE 
Arena at Wembley on 21 June.

BBC rejects fears EU referendum debate could be hijacked
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/11/bbc-eu-referendum-debate-wembley>
“It is the kind that Gladstone used to have, or Lloyd George,” he told Radio 
Times.

“I don’t know what the questions will be, but what I’ve noticed so far with 
Question Time is that, while political commentators are very interested in the 
in-fighting in the Tory Party, and the apparent argument within Labour on the 
whole, the general public are more interested in immigration and the economy.”

Looking ahead to the 11-hour referendum results show on 23 June, which he will 
front with Emily Maitlis and Laura Kuenssberg, Dimbleby said: “You have to have 
a sort of stamina that gets you through the night. The whole team has that. 
Just … keep going.

“After about 100 results, we should be able to build up a picture of which way 
the wind is blowing,” he added.

“We’re there to report the facts, not to report speculative interpretations. 
If one side was a million votes ahead, and we only had another 30 counts to 
come in, we might be able to say, yes, they’ve won.

“But the closer it is, the more distant that moment becomes. And the more 
perilous the decision to call it.”

“The remain camp and the leave camp have their own flow of information,” he 
said. “You look at their faces, as much as anything else. To see whether 
they’re looking a bit downcast, or whether they go a little bit silent, or 
puzzled.”



 