
Six matches into Antonio Conte’s 3-4-3 system, and opposition managers are no 
closer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/05/chelsea-everton-premier-league-match-report>
 to working out how to defeat Chelsea – or indeed, even score against them. It 
is now a cumulative score of 17-0 since Conte switched to that formation in the 
aftermathof the 3-0 defeat at Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/24/arsenal-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
, and they have risen from eighth to top in that period. Whilethis was not an 
overwhelmingly impressive attacking display 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/nov/20/middlesbrough-chelsea-premier-league-live>
, Chelsea had very few problems defensively.

Whereas other managers have reorganised dramatically in an attempt to cope 
with Chelsea’s formation, Aitor Karanka stuck to his usual template. This was a 
narrow, defensive‑minded 4-1-4-1 system that left the somewhat immobile Álvaro 
Negredo desperately isolated up front, althoughMiddlesbrough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/middlesbrough> got numbers back to cope 
with Chelsea’s overlapping wing-backs, and the back four remained close 
together, preventing dangerous through-balls penetrating their defence.

Diego Costa, usually so menacing when prowling the channels, rarely got the 
better of Calum Chambers and Ben Gibson in open play, although his quick 
reactions to hook the ball into the net at a corner underlined his predatory 
instincts in the box.

Middlesbrough 0-1 Chelsea: Premier League – as it happened!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/nov/20/middlesbrough-chelsea-premier-league-live>
This was essentially a performance about structure and organisation from 
Conte’s players, however, and their outstanding performer was probably David 
Luiz, playing between Gary Cahill and César Azpilicueta. The defender in that 
position is often considered the “spare man”, but here David Luiz was generally 
battling against Negredo, sticking extremely tight and conceding a couple of 
free-kicks when moving high up the pitch, but ultimately preventing the 
Spaniard from turning or linking play. On a couple of occasions his 
anticipation directly led toChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> attacks, with one incident in 
the second half their best move of the game: the Brazilian won the ball 
quickly, advanced down the right and played a wonderful diagonal ball to Costa, 
whose knockdown allowed Pedro a shot, which hit the bar.

It was a typical demonstration of David Luiz’s quality in possession, and it 
was notable Karanka had instructed Negredo to close him down when Chelsea were 
trying to build passing moves, denying him time on the ball. Notably, while 
Azpilicueta played 83 passes and Cahill 60, David Luiz managed just 40. He is 
essentially Chelsea’s deep-lying playmaker in this system, and opposition 
managers are giving him special attention.

The rest of the side continue to function impressively. Marcos Alonso and 
Victor Moses spring forward quickly, allowing the front three to narrow and 
combine in central positions, which often means Chelsea are effectively 
attacking with five players. That is a particular problem for a side like 
Middlesbrough in this 4-1-4-1 system, as the wingers are forced to retreat into 
extremely deep positions, a disastrous situation considering they are the 
players supposed to offer closest support to Negredo.

Their transitions were occasionally impressive but they lacked composure in 
the final third, summarised by Adama Traoré’s game – he completed 12 of his 13 
attempted dribbles past Chelsea players, but all eight of his crosses were 
unsuccessful. Negredo and Gastón Ramírez, meanwhile, were wasteful in front of 
goal. Marten De Roon, the right-of-centre midfielder, was arguably 
Middlesbrough’s brightest player in the final third, and there were moments 
when they threatened to exploit the space on the outside of Chelsea’s back 
three. One early left-to-right pass from Ramírez to De Roon should have been 
met with better control. In the second half, a dummy from Negredo found Ramírez 
in space, but he again blazed over. Chelsea’s only problem here was not putting 
the game to bed on the counterattack in the second half, especially when 
Karanka removed the holding midfielder Adam Clayton, and the game opened up. 
Hazard, Pedro and Costa are a fine counterattacking trio but Chelsea rarely 
found them in space.

Chelsea top the Premier League as Eden Hazard inspires Everton thrashing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/05/chelsea-everton-premier-league-match-report>
Nevertheless, this 3-4-3 formation really appears to have flummoxed opposition 
managers, particularly the movement of Hazard and Pedro from the flanks, 
combined with the overlapping of Alonso and Moses. In Chelsea’s last three 
matches, they have come up against Southampton’s 4-3-1-2, Everton’s 3-4-3 and 
now Middlesbrough’s 4-1-4-1 – three different systems in terms of wide 
positions, and yet Chelsea always seem to have an advantage down the flanks. 
With fixtures against Tottenham and Manchester City next, we are about to 
discover how Chelsea cope against heavy pressing.
 