
A leaked copy of the final draft of the blueprint for Britain’s new terms of 
EU membership suggests thatDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> heads to Brussels with no 
certainty over one of his key demands – and signs that differences are widening.

The series of documents, which were circulated in Brussels early on Thursday 
morning, confirm that the European council president,Donald Tusk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/donald-tusk>, has failed to win agreement 
among EU leaders to cement some of the reforms in a change to the Lisbon treaty.

In the drafts, which were sent to EU capitals late on Wednesday and which have 
been seen by the Guardian, any mention of revising the treaty appears between 
square brackets – the device used in international negotiations to show there 
is no agreement on that issue.

A prisoner to his party: David Cameron and his battle with the Tory right
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/17/prisoner-party-david-cameron-battle-tory-right>
The drafts also show that differences in some areas are widening rather than 
narrowing. The unease in France that Britain is seeking to secure special 
protections for the City of London, by givingnon-eurozone members a greater 
ability to stall financial regulation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/11/david-cameron-european-union-referendum>
, is highlighted by the appearance of square brackets in an early section in 
the first document on a proposed new rulebook for eurozone and non-eurozone 
countries.

The influence of east European countries, which have grave concerns about 
proposed restrictions to child benefits and in-work benefits, is highlighted by 
a section on the welfare changes. A key sentence that would have restricted the 
child benefit curbs to Britain has been taken out, suggesting that the new 
rules will apply across the EU uniformly. This will be very poorly received by 
the Visegrad group of countries in eastern and centralEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> – Poland, Hungary, the Czech 
Republic and Slovakia.

The documents were circulated as British officials conceded that the prime 
minister may fail in his original demand to cement the reforms in a change to 
the EU treaty and EU diplomats said a “war room of ­lawyers” had been brought 
in to assist all 28 national leaders. British officials said that securing 
treaty change headed a list of “outstanding things” that the prime minister had 
yet to secure in his negotiations, which he launched soon after the 
Conservatives’ general election victory last year.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fdavid-cameron-im-battling-for-britain-to-get-a-good-eu-deal-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F18%2F1455803783205%2FKP_1801244_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Cameron%3A%20I'm%20battling%20for%20Britain%20to%20get%20a%20good%20EU%20deal%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fdavid-cameron-im-battling-for-britain-to-get-a-good-eu-deal-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Cameron%3A%20I%27m%20battling%20for%20Britain%20to%20get%20a%20good%20EU%20deal%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fdavid-cameron-im-battling-for-britain-to-get-a-good-eu-deal-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F18%2F1455803783205%2FKP_1801244_crop_640x480.jpg>
David Cameron tells reporters in Brussels on Thursday he will not agree to an 
EU deal that does not meet British needs. A leaked final draft of the prime 
minister’s proposals suggests Europe still has no agreement on large areas of 
his renegotiation package 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/feb/18/david-cameron-im-battling-for-britain-to-get-a-good-eu-deal-video>
Failure to reach consensus

Tusk, who is chairing the summit, has failed to win consensus among EU leaders 
for treaty change in two key areas. These are the prime minister’s call to give 
the UK anopt-out from the EU’s commitment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/17/david-cameron-eu-mission-ever-closer-union-doomed-failure-martin-schulz>
 to create an “ever closer union of the peoples of Europe”, and to guarantee 
protections for non-eurozone member states.

A failure to underpin the reforms would represent a setback for Cameron, who 
pledged last year tosecure “full-on treaty change” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/25/core-eu-values-are-not-negotiable-donald-tusk-tells-cameron>
. Downing Street insists that an agreement among the EU’s 28 leaders would be 
“legally binding” and would be lodged at the UN regardless of whether treaty 
change is agreed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fdavid-cameron-european-union-summit-brussels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8254fcc46984ed3d815bc18382ad252f54f99e3b%2F0_39_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Cameron%20faces%20growing%20rift%20at%20EU%20summit%20in%20Brussels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fdavid-cameron-european-union-summit-brussels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Cameron%20faces%20growing%20rift%20at%20EU%20summit%20in%20Brussels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fdavid-cameron-european-union-summit-brussels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8254fcc46984ed3d815bc18382ad252f54f99e3b%2F0_39_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 Angela Merkel speaks to the German parliament. Photograph: 
Xinhua/REX/Shutterstock 
But there will be nerves among pro-EU Tories that Cameron could enter a 
referendum campaign with Eurosceptics claiming there was uncertainty over 
whether his reform package could be challenged in the European court of justice.

If Cameron loses the referendum, he would face immediate pressure to resign. 
If he wins, his supporters will say he deserves a place among the list of 
transformational prime ministers after securingScotland’s place in the UK in 
one referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/sep/19/scotland-independence-no-vote-victory-alex-salmond>
 and settling Britain’s membership of the EU in another.

The uncertainty over treaty change came amid quiet confidence in Whitehall 
that Cameron will secure agreement from the EU’s 27 other leaders for his new 
terms for Britain’s EU membership. The German chancellor,Angela Merkel, said on 
Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/17/merkel-eu-uk-germany-national-interest-cameron-justified>
 that Cameron’s demands were “comprehensible and justified”.

As well as the two demands on ever closer union and protections for 
non-eurozone countries that require treaty change, Cameron is seeking toimpose 
restrictions on child benefit and in-work benefits for EU migrants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/02/eu-renogotiaion-tusk-proposes-migrant-worker-benefit-cap>
. On Wednesday it was announced that the total number of workers in the UK from 
the rest of the EU had risen above two million for the first time.

Johnson keeps Cameron waiting

Downing Street has made plans for Cameron to return to London immediately if 
the summit concludes on Friday lunchtime with an agreement. The prime minister 
would chair a cabinet meeting at which the government would formally endorse a 
deal. But the meeting would also lead to the lifting of collective cabinet 
responsibility, allowing a group of ministers, currently headed by the work and 
pensions secretary,Iain Duncan Smith, to campaign to leave the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/20/iain-duncan-smith-to-go-it-alone-in-campaign-to-leave-eu>
.

The mayor of London, Boris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/17/eu-referendum-david-cameron-boris-johnson-talks-downing-street>
, has kept the prime minister waiting about whether he intends to support the 
campaign to keep Britain in a reformed EU. He told Cameron at a meeting in 
Downing Street that he had not yet been won round to a plan to reassert the 
sovereignty of parliament in a process that will take place outside the formal 
EU negotiations.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fdavid-cameron-european-union-summit-brussels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04bc945c3b38abb0cdcc64df5cb7b94ea7767877%2F0_119_2346_1408%2F2346.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Cameron%20faces%20growing%20rift%20at%20EU%20summit%20in%20Brussels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fdavid-cameron-european-union-summit-brussels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Cameron%20faces%20growing%20rift%20at%20EU%20summit%20in%20Brussels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fdavid-cameron-european-union-summit-brussels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04bc945c3b38abb0cdcc64df5cb7b94ea7767877%2F0_119_2346_1408%2F2346.jpg>
 Boris Johnson leaves Downing Street after talks with David Cameron. 
Photograph: Frank Augstein/AP 
Tusk will open the formal part of the summit at 5.45pm with a round table 
discussion about the UK’s demands. Tusk will then park the UK negotiations to 
allow EU leaders to turn to the other main item on the agenda over dinner – the 
migration crisis.

The summit will reconvene at 10am on Friday as an informal European council. 
This will allow Martin Schulz, the president of the European parliament, to 
attend. The parliament has to agree to the welfare changes in secondary 
legislation.

In addition to the concerns about treaty change British officials said that 
the outstanding issues boiled down to:


 * Making sure all leaders agree to the demand to protect non-eurozone 
countries, essentially ensuring that the eurozone cannot change the regulations 
for the City of London without UK agreement. 
 * Ensuring that Britain is allowed to restrict in-work benefits to EU 
migrants through an emergency brake. The prime minister wants this to last for 
four years, though Tusk has said this should be phased out after one year. 
 * Upholding restrictions to child ­benefit to ensure that it is paid at a 
rate linked to indices in the migrant’s home country. Cameron concedes that 
this will not apply retrospectively. 
This EU referendum doesn’t matter. But the next one will | Simon Jenkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/17/eu-referendum-no-vote-reform-europe-crying-out-for>
‘English breakfast’

According to officials and diplomats involved in preparing and attending the 
summit, the expectations are of a tense eveningon Thursday. The ­summit is 
expected to run through the night until Friday morning, when leaders might 
assemble to finalise a deal over an “English breakfast”.

Others talked of it running into the weekend. “There’s an appetite to try to 
get there and take as long as it takes,” said one diplomat. Tusk said he wanted 
to resolve the British question conclusively at the summit: “It is my goal to 
do the deal this week.”

The east Europeans have rejected the proposed terms of how child benefits are 
paid to their citizens working in Britain while their children reside at home. 
They want the new rules to apply only to new arrivals in Britain, an idea to 
which Cameron is resistant, and they want the new regime ringfenced so that it 
applies solely to Britain. This is generally viewed, even by the Britons, as 
legally impossible.

The restriction on child benefits, by way of indexing payments to where a 
child is based, would appear to be optional and at the discretion of the member 
state paying the benefit. The measure would only apply to child benefits, with 
the document explicitly stating it would not be used for other payments such as 
old-age pensions.

Another sticking point, the graduated payment of in-work benefits once an 
emergency brake is in place, also remains in the draft although precise terms 
have yet to be agreed.

The documents confirm that Britain meets the criteria to request the emergency 
brake immediately. In particular one of the documents notes that the UK “has 
not made full use of the transitional periods on free movement of workers which 
were provided for in recent Accession Acts”, leading to the government’s 
concerns over an “exceptional inflow of workers from elsewhere in the EU over 
the last years”.

The triggering of the four-year safeguard mechanism, which can be requested by 
a member state when its public services and welfare system are under 
exceptional pressure due to high migration, is assessed by the European 
commission and approved by other member states through the council.

All the measures in the agreement would be implemented if the UK voted to 
remain in the EU.













 