
Deadpool was the hottest superhero movie of 2012, right up until it wasn’t. A 
toned-down version of the cult Marvel character had appeared in the stodgy 
X-Men Origins: Wolverine, played byRyan Reynolds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ryan-reynolds>, but the proposed standalone 
movie, scripted by the writers of Zombieland, promised to be faithful to the 
source material: violent, sexy, nutty. Who wouldn’t want to see the adventures 
of a motormouth mercenary who gets aroused by chimichangas, katanas and Bea 
Arthur? No envelope would go unpushed, or unlicked. The in-demand Reynolds was 
signed up and visual effects specialist Tim Miller was announced as director.


Deadpool director: Ryan Reynolds' character will be first pansexual superhero
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/06/deadpool-ryan-reynolds-character-pansexual-superhero-tim-miller-director-marvel>
Then: ring sting. Green Lantern, Martin Campbell’s 2011 blockbuster that was 
supposed to rubber-stamp Reynolds as a franchise-leading superhero, flopped 
hard. The strapping RyRey was suddenly comic-book Kryptonite. Panicky studio 
executives pulled the plug.Deadpool <https://www.theguardian.com/film/deadpool> 
was dead.

For Miller, preparing to make his transition to feature directing after years 
running his own successful VFX studio, watching his dream project implode was 
some majorly bad juju. “I was so disappointed when we couldn’t do it five years 
ago,” he says. “I was thinking: ‘These people don’t know what the fuck they’re 
talking about.’ I was angry and traumatised. But with hindsight, I can see why 
now is a much better time. Back then it perhaps hadn’t reached the point where 
audiences were familiar enough with the genre that we could riff on it. The 
public wasn’t really ready.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFyKWUTwSYAs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFyKWUTwSYAs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFyKWUTwSYAs&media=>
Warning: trailer contains explicit content 
A small percentage of scuttled movies get retooled or rebooted. With Deadpool, 
it was more like defibrillation. A sizzle reel that Miller created in 2011 – a 
spandex ballet of Reynolds, in a skin-tight red costume, quipping and killing 
his way through a carload of heavies – leaked in summer 2014. The online 
response was so enthusiastic that Deadpool abruptly had traction again. 
Executives didn’t even question how the footage had escaped. (Miller, while 
denying he had any responsibility for the leak, does seem tickled that his 
movie’s origin story will always have a certain outlaw element.) Within weeks 
of the footage appearing online, Miller was back in production, with the script 
dusted off and Reynolds reattached.

During a break from editing, Miller, an X-Men superfan who has been collecting 
comics since 1980, sounds a little tired and a lot less guarded than your 
average Hollywood interviewee. “I’ve always had a reputation in my small little 
industry for being honest, but a little dickish, too,” he says. “Most effects 
companies, they print up company T-shirts with mottos like ‘Excellence in 
visual imagery’ or something like that. Our first studio T-shirt said ‘Fuck 
you’ on the back. The second year of our company, we changed it to ‘Fuck 
everybody’. So Deadpool was always the perfect project for me.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fdeadpool-ryan-reynolds-tim-miller-gina-carano%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4c4ba1e52718de7d07eb46daff1537d2ffda31f%2F630_130_4266_2558%2F4266.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Deadpool%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20think%20my%20mom%20is%20going%20to%20be%20able%20to%20watch%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fdeadpool-ryan-reynolds-tim-miller-gina-carano%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Deadpool%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20think%20my%20mom%20is%20going%20to%20be%20able%20to%20watch%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fdeadpool-ryan-reynolds-tim-miller-gina-carano%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4c4ba1e52718de7d07eb46daff1537d2ffda31f%2F630_130_4266_2558%2F4266.jpg>
 Tim Miller and Reynolds. Photograph: Joe Lederer 
“A little dickish” could be on Deadpool’s business cards. Not long after his 
first appearance in 1991, Deadpool became theMarvel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marvel> universe’s cheerfully obnoxious 
court jester, infuriating both heroes and villains with a stream of pop-culture 
references and constant fourth-wall breaking. There is a teardrop of tragedy 
behind the red face mask, teased out in the movie in the relationship between 
loyal soldier Wade Wilson and his girlfriend Vanessa (Morena Baccarin). Wade 
only becomes Deadpool to combat his terminal cancer, undergoing experimental 
superhero surgery organised by shady powerbroker Ajax (Ed Skrein). The 
treatments result in accelerated internal super-healing, making the so-called 
Merc With A Mouth essentially unkillable, though Deadpool’s face and body are 
left horribly scarred and covered with lesions (“Like a cross between Ryan 
Reynolds and a Shar-Pei,” quipped the character, with unexpected clairvoyance, 
in a 2004 issue).

I never saw anyone else apart from Ryan. In real life, he pretty much is 
Deadpool
Tim Miller 
For years, Ryan Reynolds has been acting in romcoms and thrillers as if 
sarcasm is his innate superpower, and with his lean athleticism – more radbod 
than dadbod – he bears more than a passing physical resemblance to the 
character. Did Miller ever imagine his movie happening without him? “That 
question came up,” he says. “But I just never saw anyone else apart from Ryan. 
In real life, he pretty muchis Deadpool. I couldn’t think of anyone else who 
had the combination of good looks, athleticism, dramatic chops – because he’s a 
great dramatic actor – and, more importantly, comedy on top. He’s got that same 
smart, offbeat sense of humour. He’s fucking raunchy.”

While Deadpool is motivated to start slicing up bad guys when his girlfriend 
is kidnapped by Ajax,Miller described him as “pansexual” late last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/06/deadpool-ryan-reynolds-character-pansexual-superhero-tim-miller-director-marvel>
, which generated some heated debate about whether Deadpool was the first gay 
superhero to make it to the screen. “I think that was a result of me not being 
that experienced with the way that the media worked,” says Miller. “We really 
explore his relationship with Vanessa in the movie but there’s nothing that 
says he wouldn’t explore other relationships. In my mind, he’s always been 
pansexual and I wanted to be true to the way he is in the comics.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fdeadpool-ryan-reynolds-tim-miller-gina-carano%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9635b879e911830899c6ba8e781e69ae0381e80b%2F690_0_4473_2685%2F4473.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Deadpool%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20think%20my%20mom%20is%20going%20to%20be%20able%20to%20watch%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fdeadpool-ryan-reynolds-tim-miller-gina-carano%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Deadpool%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20think%20my%20mom%20is%20going%20to%20be%20able%20to%20watch%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fdeadpool-ryan-reynolds-tim-miller-gina-carano%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9635b879e911830899c6ba8e781e69ae0381e80b%2F690_0_4473_2685%2F4473.jpg>
 Reynolds and Morena Baccarin. Photograph: REX 
More complex backstories like these mean that Deadpool has carved a path into 
distinctly more adult territory. The raunch, the sexualunstereotypes – it’s 
certainly divergent from the current cookie-cutter production line of 
comic-book blockbusters. For Gina Carano, the fierce former MMA fighter turned 
fluid, convincing action star, the film also offered something different. 
Carano cracked heads in Steven Soderbergh’s Haywire and Fast & Furious 6, but 
playing Angel Dust – Ajax’s near-mute, all-business enforcer with swept-up hair 
and piercing eyes – has taken her to a new level of outsized villainy. She 
embraced the chance to play “one of the strongest characters in a comic-book 
movie”, she says. “I’ve maybe shied away from that kind of appearance in the 
past so to know that the whole point of Angel Dust was to be this formidable 
presence made me accept it and own it a bit more.”

Ryan Reynolds: from buff buffoon to Hollywood heavyweight
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/20/ryan-reynolds-mississippi-grind> 
When she was a pro fighter, Carano had to assess the physical condition of her 
opponents in the ring with just a glance. What did she make of Reynolds and 
Skrein? “They worked their butts off to look the way they do in their fight 
scenes,” she says. “There will be no shading of their abs. I actually think 
this movie is going to be fascinating for women because they get to see two 
guys who genuinely look that good. The eye candy is the men not the women. 
We’ve got a little Magic Mike fight scene that I think people are going to 
love.”

As well as getting to grips with CGI-assisted acting, Deadpool was also 
Carano’s first experience of comedy. “It’s refreshing,” she says. “All those 
jokes we make when we watch movies – cue the shirtless guy scene, cue the naked 
girl scene – Deadpool makes fun of all of it, he’s just calling it out all the 
time. I think it brings the audience into the movie and the character more than 
they ever have before. He’s a next-level, more modern-day superhero.” When 
pressed, she will admit that the cocktail of ultraviolence and playground 
humour might not be for everyone. “I don’t think my mom is going to be able to 
watch it,” she admits.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fdeadpool-ryan-reynolds-tim-miller-gina-carano%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7f4b5f75ff641d0a2e3ffe7da1273c69e111735%2F0_417_5686_3412%2F5686.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Deadpool%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20think%20my%20mom%20is%20going%20to%20be%20able%20to%20watch%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fdeadpool-ryan-reynolds-tim-miller-gina-carano%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Deadpool%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20think%20my%20mom%20is%20going%20to%20be%20able%20to%20watch%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fdeadpool-ryan-reynolds-tim-miller-gina-carano%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7f4b5f75ff641d0a2e3ffe7da1273c69e111735%2F0_417_5686_3412%2F5686.jpg>
 Gina Carrano. Photograph: Joe Lederer 
Still, in a year groaning with star-jammed comic-book movies – including 
Captain America: Civil War, Batman v Superman and X-Men Apocalypse – the 
squirrelly Deadpool risks being squeezed out. “We shot on a third of the budget 
of most superhero movies but, y’know, you just make it happen,” says Miller. 
The Merc With A Mouth does have the advantage of being first out of the gate in 
2016, crucially arriving ahead of Suicide Squad, DC’s broadly similar mob of 
volatile antiheroes. Where does Miller think Deadpool slots into such a crowded 
field?

“Deadpool’s story is very personal. He’s not the guy fighting against someone 
who’s trying to take over the world; he’s the guy taking down the crack dealers 
in the street. I think there’s a place for that up against the bigger, shinier 
X-Men scenes. Don’t get me wrong, I love those things, too, but I think there’s 
room for both. Just like Blazing Saddles is a great western and so is 
Unforgiven. I don’t think the genre should be limited to one tone.”

We shot on a third of the budget of most superhero movies
Tim Miller 
Comic-book movies that have enthusiastically embraced sex and/or violence have 
traditionally been a hard sell. Will Smith’s Hancock, about a boozy, 
misanthropic Superman analogue, failed to take flight, while even the widely 
admired Dredd, acknowledged by fans as being supremely faithful to the 2000AD 
source material, couldn’t muster a sequel.

Producer Simon Kinberg, currently overseeing the continued expansion of the 
X-Men movie universe, has likened Deadpool to Borat, a confrontational outlier 
that surprised audiences to become a genuine box-office smash. Conversely, it 
might crash and burn like Borat follow-up Brüno. But it still feels like a 
breath of transgressive fresh air to see a headline hero shoot three baddies 
through the head with the same bullet while bopping to Salt-N-Pepa. (The 
soundtrack also contains DMX, Wham! and Neal Sedaka.)

“We’re going in and out of comedy and action at the drop of a hat,” says 
Miller. “It’s tricky but I think it works. That’s one of the first things Simon 
Kinberg said when he saw the movie; he said: ‘Dude, fuck, it’s tonally all over 
the place, but it works. I’m not sure why it works, but it works.’”

Deadpool is in cinemas on 10 Feb
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYayLKjA0280&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYayLKjA0280>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYayLKjA0280&media=> 