
This week sees the opening of Tom Courtenay's Pretending to Be Me at the West 
Yorkshire Playhouse, the third play to be presented aboutPhilip Larkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/philiplarkin> since the poet's death in 
1985. According to my perception and arithmetic - both of them, admittedly, 
fallible - this is three more than John Betjeman, WH Auden and Ted Hughes put 
together, a fair achievement for an intensely shy and private man, and a bald 
librarian into the bargain.

I have to declare an interest here. I wrote the first of these plays, Sweet 
Sorrow, for Hull TruckTheatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> at 
the behest of John Godber. He telephoned one day in 1990 with the message: 
"It's time we did a play about Philip Larkin, and we think you're clever enough 
to do it."

As a springboard I used the memorial service in Westminster Abbey on February 
14 1986. It was a remarkable occasion, not least because Larkin himself was a 
devout agnostic. Ted Hughes spoke eloquently (possibly unaware that Larkin used 
to call him "The Incredible Hulk") and there was sublime jazz trumpet from Alan 
Elsdon, who later told me it was the scariest gig he had ever played. The place 
was packed with people united by nothing more complicated than a love of the 
poems - a perverse attitude in Thatcherite times, when we were all supposed to 
worship wealth.

My play is about love of poems. Four characters who met in the Abbey at the 
memorial service get together every year on February 14 for a celebration of 
Larkin's work. This time they meet in Hull and Larkin shows up unexpectedly and 
posthumously to attend his own party. They tell him how their lives have been 
transformed by his poems, for good or ill, or a bit of each.

It's fanciful, as plays are supposed to be, and it's a chamber piece. Indeed, 
Jack Shepherd, who later took part in a rehearsed reading alongside Paul 
Copley, Josie Lawrence, Barbara Flynn and Ben Whitrow as Larkin, made the point 
that it was constructed like a jazz number, with a central theme on which each 
character plays a solo, ending with a bluesy coda. There was no reason to 
disagree.

My fictional Larkin is delighted when his poems have brought joy, amused when 
they have made trouble (a teacher loses her job because of This be the Verse, 
then finds a new career as a presenter on local radio), but in the end is 
devastated when he hears from a cleric who has lost his religious faith having 
read Church Going. Larkin quietly leaves the party.

The play was seen at the Edinburgh festival, then in Hull, London and, 
weirdly, in Los Angeles. In Hull, an old campus colleague of Larkin's said: 
"You got everything right except for one thing. He should have been wearing 
pink socks."

Regardless of the play's content and quality, its tone - wry and affectionate 
- was, give or take a nuance, exactly the attitude people had towards Larkin at 
the time. Jean Hartley's lovely 1989 memoir, Philip Larkin, the Marvell Press 
and Me, shared this spirit. Within a couple of years, however, everything 
changed. Publication of the collected letters in 1992 and Andrew Motion's 
biography the following year sent the pendulum swinging violently in the 
opposite direction. The gentle, shy librarian with hearing difficulties turned 
out to be apparently racist, sexist, a de facto womaniser, a worshipper at the 
Thatcher shrine, a connoisseur of dirty books and generally unfit to be 
considered a decent human being. The night skies echoed to the sound of 
Larkin's work dropping off syllabuses across the length and breadth of the land.

The row caused great distress and confusion among Larkin's friends and 
colleagues in Hull. One of them said, with impeccable logic: "How can anyone be 
a womaniser and a misogynist?" At the inaugural meeting of the Philip Larkin 
Society soon afterwards, I said one of our primary aims should be to reclaim 
the man from his official biographer, a statement greeted with enthusiastic 
applause.

As counsel for the defence, it's obviously incumbent to offer a few morsels of 
evidence, mostly anecdotal - that being the only sort I trust. On the subject 
of racism, for instance, I can now report that in the 1970s, I was on a 
selection panel with Larkin and a man from the Arts Council, given the task of 
selecting a poet-in-residence for a college in Hull. One of the applicants was 
black. After the interviews the man from the Arts Council said: "What did we 
think of our coloured cousin?" To which Larkin and I replied, in synch: "We 
give him the job." Which we did, to the splendid Archie Markham.

Larkin was capable of extreme tenderness and compassion. Read the letters he 
wrote to Douglas Dunn, following the death of his wife, or to Andrew Motion, 
after the break-up of his first marriage. Then cast the first stone. And while 
it's sad that any man needs to find lonely comfort in pornography, there's 
little evidence Larkin ever wrecked any lives, which is more than can be said 
of several of his illustrious contemporaries - not to mention Lord Byron.

In this context, it is heartening to see the theatre taking on the 
responsibility of seeing fair play. Ben Brown's play Larkin with Women, which 
was first seen in Scarborough before its recent run in Leeds, has been given a 
seal of approval from Maeve Brennan, one of the women in the title, which is 
roughly equivalent to The Three Sisters getting a good notice from Olga, Masha 
or Irena. Tom Courtenay's play, a one-man show based solely on Larkin's 
assorted writings, should also help the pendulum to swing in the other 
direction.

In some ways it is odd that Courtenay and I should share this love of Larkin, 
since we have both gone public in stating categorically that we were not fucked 
up by our parents, Courtenay in his wonderful book about his mother, Dear Tom, 
and me in Tales from the Backyard, a play produced last year at Live Theatre, 
Newcastle - an uncompromising love letter to my parents, grandparents and the 
town of Jarrow. But we acknowledge that Larkin wrote near-perfect poems about, 
among many other things, jazz and the city of Hull, key elements in both our 
lives. I read an early draft of Pretending to be Me and we subsequently talked 
a little about the man, the music and the logistics of putting the story on 
stage.

No minutes were kept but I probably mentioned that Larkin's Thatcherism had to 
be seen in the context of a left-wing university and a common-room with a 
significant population of neo-Marxist academics proclaiming solidarity with the 
proletariat. Larkin would instinctively adopt the opposite point of view out of 
sheer devilry. After all, Kingsley Amis was his oldest and best friend. I might 
also have pointed out that in his librarian role, he authorised and encouraged 
the development of one of the finest archives of socialist history, written and 
oral, anywhere in the business. (I also offered Courtenay advice on going bald, 
which he firmly but politely declined.) I admit, I haven't the faintest idea 
what is in the final version of the play. I'm just a mate who talks too much.

It's axiomatic that drama thrives on conflict and Philip Larkin is a mass 
(unfriendly critics would say a mess) of contradictions. That's why playwrights 
can't leave him alone. He was a flawed and fallible human being who wrote like 
a fallen angel. I expressed my own summation, in 1990, at the end of my play. 
Larkin runs away from the party but leaves a scribbled fragment that ends:

Gatecrashers crash, both day and night, 

But having crashed, move on. They're right. 

It doesn't do to overstay 

A welcome; go before the day 

break sears your ears with early birds. 

But what survives of us is words. 

It's reassuring to discover that 12 years later I still agree with myself. 

Â© Alan Plater <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alanplater>. Pretending to be 
Me is at the West Yorkshire Playhouse, Leeds, until December 21. Box office: 
0113-213 7700.
 