
There have always been forgotten areas of cities, regardless of location or 
time in history. They are parts of the urban fabric where many people wouldn’t 
want to live if they had a choice: the inner city, the dead-end street, the 
favela, the shanty town, the sink estate, the slum, the pits. All different 
names for those areas that have been forgotten and left behind.


Between September 2011 and August 2012, I lived with my wife and daughter in 
Gorton, southManchester <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester> – a 
neighbourhood in true decline, despite many years of local regeneration 
programmes.

We moved to Gorton because we couldn’t afford to live in more affluent areas 
of town; we were not destitute but we were not far from it. It was a tough time 
in my life as a father, trying to support my family.

We lived in a small terraced house just off a main thoroughfare out of the 
city towards the leafy suburbs of Didsbury and the Heatons – areas that are a 
world away from everyday life in Gorton. For most of the time we had to live 
upstairs as the property suffered from rising damp, which was at least six feet 
up the side wall of the house by the time we left. In truth, the house was 
probably 20 years past its knock-down date.

It had very limited heating and, like most houses on our street, we had to pay 
for gas and electricity on a prepayment card – the modern-day version of 
putting money in the meter. I fear that utility companies purposely put 
prepayment meters in poor parts of cities to ensure the utilities are paid for, 
yet prepayment gas and electricity is always more expensive compared with 
paying quarterly in arrears by direct debit. It is a classic sign of living in 
a poor area, and it never helps anyone get out of poverty.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2Fthe-northerner%2F2016%2Fjun%2F20%2Fforgotten-neighbourhood-gorton-manchester-decline-urban-regeneration%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1db325b2fdfa2c2327a94f1f03e148ef340781c4%2F0_0_5616_3726%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dead-end%20street%3F%20Hard%20truths%20about%20life%20in%20a%20'forgotten'%20Manchester%20neighbourhood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2Fthe-northerner%2F2016%2Fjun%2F20%2Fforgotten-neighbourhood-gorton-manchester-decline-urban-regeneration%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dead-end%20street%3F%20Hard%20truths%20about%20life%20in%20a%20%27forgotten%27%20Manchester%20neighbourhood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2Fthe-northerner%2F2016%2Fjun%2F20%2Fforgotten-neighbourhood-gorton-manchester-decline-urban-regeneration%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1db325b2fdfa2c2327a94f1f03e148ef340781c4%2F0_0_5616_3726%2F5616.jpg>
 Gorton has suffered massive economic decline, causing thousands of job losses. 
Photograph: Christopher Furlong/Getty Images 
Soon after moving to Gorton, we noticed a number of signs suggesting this was 
not a good neighbourhood. It was a forgotten part of town. This isn’t an attack 
on the good people of Gorton – far from it – but it is a series of observations 
of local neighbourhood decline and urban malaise.

Firstly, there was a lot of dog fouling in the streets and open spaces. It 
looked awful and was a potential danger to children playing nearby. Urban 
regeneration professionals and statisticians have a range of indicators that 
show a neighbourhood in decline: employment levels, GCSE pass rates and so on. 
However, I have always thought that levels of dog fouling are a sign of decline 
across forgotten areas of town; a sign of some residents having lost the desire 
to take care of their local neighbourhood.

There was also the constant smell of people smoking marijuana in public, 
suggesting normal civic codes had been abandoned. You could argue that this 
makes Gorton a more liberal and tolerant neighbourhood. However, I see it as a 
sign that local people are not paying due regard to the accepted norms of 
society. Usually, someone who wants ‘a smoke’ would do this in the privacy of 
their own home, away from prying eyes.

Thirdly (and one that affected our house as an end terrace), local people 
didn’t recycle their goods in the usual manner, but simply dumped them at the 
end of the terrace. It would be collected once a month by the council or picked 
off by the local rag-and-bone men, who toured the area regularly. But if you 
cared for the future of your neighbourhood why would you do such a thing, as it 
can only contribute to making it have a grotty, down-at-heel feel?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2Fthe-northerner%2F2016%2Fjun%2F20%2Fforgotten-neighbourhood-gorton-manchester-decline-urban-regeneration%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44de1776921f8b9accbc068f63d406c713edeb6c%2F0_266_4064_2438%2F4064.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dead-end%20street%3F%20Hard%20truths%20about%20life%20in%20a%20'forgotten'%20Manchester%20neighbourhood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2Fthe-northerner%2F2016%2Fjun%2F20%2Fforgotten-neighbourhood-gorton-manchester-decline-urban-regeneration%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dead-end%20street%3F%20Hard%20truths%20about%20life%20in%20a%20%27forgotten%27%20Manchester%20neighbourhood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2Fthe-northerner%2F2016%2Fjun%2F20%2Fforgotten-neighbourhood-gorton-manchester-decline-urban-regeneration%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44de1776921f8b9accbc068f63d406c713edeb6c%2F0_266_4064_2438%2F4064.jpg>
 Manchester has seen strong economic growth alongside Reading and London, but 
certain neighbourhoods have been left behind. Photograph: Don McPhee for the 
Guardian 
From day one, my family and I also noticed that no one talked to each other in 
the street, and rarely even bothered to look at each other to give a cursory 
nod. Residents simply saw no benefit in engaging with their neighbours.

For someone who grew up in Liverpool with a community that chatted a lot, this 
worried and upset me. Also, for someone who now lives in London,a city renowned 
for unfriendliness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/06/london-is-an-unfriendly-city>
 (which I find often not to be the case), the lack of neighbourhood chat across 
Gorton was stunning.

People appeared to have lost their sense of what it was like to be a 
community. Instead, they had become a collection of individuals who didn’t wish 
to form community cohesion to help develop the local neighbourhood.

Right in the heart of Gorton, there is an area of open space on the corner of 
Mount Road and Matthews Lane which has effectively been returned to nature – 
the practice sometimes referred to as “smart decline” – as part of a recent 
local urban regeneration programme. Indeed, there are large unused areas of 
land across the neighbourhood, which seems odd when Manchester is predicted to 
experience significant population growth over the next 10 years. One would 
think that land would be at a premium.


The programme, called the “Mersey Forest <http://www.merseyforest.org.uk/>”, 
plans to green former derelict sites across the conurbations of Manchester and 
Liverpool to bring nature closer to city dwellers. Unplanned nature reserves 
have since sprung up that support a burgeoning new urban ecology and ecosystem. 
While it is good to see such urban green space in a densely populated area, it 
is more likely a reflection of the fact that no housing developers were willing 
to work on the site.

To most Mancunians, Gorton is a passing place to and from work. Some aspiring 
residents may even feel embarrassed to live in this forgotten part of the city. 
While we were living in Gorton, at least six of the 28 families in the street 
moved out – a sure sign of a transient population. This haunted me until we 
were able to get the money together to move south, to Reading in Berkshire, for 
a better place to live and grow up.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2Fthe-northerner%2F2016%2Fjun%2F20%2Fforgotten-neighbourhood-gorton-manchester-decline-urban-regeneration%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0cf838d462cb3d6830909d9a0939269b43549f53%2F0_0_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dead-end%20street%3F%20Hard%20truths%20about%20life%20in%20a%20'forgotten'%20Manchester%20neighbourhood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2Fthe-northerner%2F2016%2Fjun%2F20%2Fforgotten-neighbourhood-gorton-manchester-decline-urban-regeneration%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dead-end%20street%3F%20Hard%20truths%20about%20life%20in%20a%20%27forgotten%27%20Manchester%20neighbourhood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2Fthe-northerner%2F2016%2Fjun%2F20%2Fforgotten-neighbourhood-gorton-manchester-decline-urban-regeneration%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0cf838d462cb3d6830909d9a0939269b43549f53%2F0_0_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
 Community recycling in Mount Road, Gorton. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
Yet there are some fine examples of recent urban regeneration in Gorton, 
including the restoration of the monastery into a new conference centre. These 
projects are stimulated by theNew East Manchester Regeneration initiative 
<http://www.manchester.gov.uk/info/500106/east_manchester_regeneration/2414/new_east_manchester_strategic_regeneration_framework>
, which received massive funding from central government and other sources.

What I find intriguing about such initiatives are the phrases of positivity 
that get used, the promises of hope and rebirth for the local community. Yet in 
truth, some of the promises made in strategy documents can never be realised, 
as the problems are much wider and run deeper than the resources and remit of a 
local regeneration scheme.

Although it sounds like a lot of money, a £50m urban regeneration programme 
spread over a five-year period can never hope to turn around the economic 
fortunes of a neighbourhood lain waste by uneven capitalist development.

Manchester's second coming – but are developers destroying its industrial soul?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jun/08/manchester-second-coming-heritage-developers-destroying-industrial-soul>
Perhaps the best hope for the rebirth of Gorton is for some of the economic 
wealth generated by a growing Manchester city centre and other local economies 
to somehow permeate into this community. For example, in between Burnage and 
Gorton are the thriving centres of Levenshulme and Longsight, which are home to 
the growing Asian immigrant communities who live along this part of the A6 
between Manchester and Stockport. These neighbourhoods are beginning to grow 
without any form of urban regeneration programme.

Local communities and residents in and around Gorton have every right to feel 
isolated and left out from Manchester’s city-wide economic growth. They have 
every right to ask why the city council and a range of economic development 
agencies seem to be leaving them behind, while other areas continue on a path 
of prosperity.

The key here is how the city council seeks to engage with the communities of 
Gorton to ensure that they are fully integrated into the economic growth of 
Manchester. Is it possible to ensure that forgotten areas of cities benefit 
from wider city growth?

If this cannot be achieved, then I worry that neighbourhoods such as Gorton 
will find themselves stuck in a never-ending spiral of urban and economic 
decline, with a transient population and limited community spirit – a forgotten 
area where nobody really cares.

Nobody Cares, Forgotten Parts of British Cities by Raymond Holden is available 
as anebook on Amazon 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Nobody-Cares-Forgotten-British-Cities-ebook/dp/B01G736VYW>
 for £2.06. For a hard copy (£10 + p&p) emailraymond.hpr@gmail.com 
<mailto:Raymond.hpr@gmail.com>

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 