
American democracy is tortuously indirect. On Tuesday, citizens will not 
exactly cast their ballots for the first female nominee of a major party or a 
real estate developer turned reality TV star, but for generally unknown 
candidates who are members of the electoral college: the people who will cast 
votes for president sometime in December.

But when it comes to the really important issues – life, death, marijuana and 
condoms – direct democracy rules the day. There are more than 150 statewide 
measures on the ballot on 8 November, and scores more city- and countywide 
initiatives for voters to decide on.

Here are some of the key issues that voters will address on election day.

Marijuana
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Famericans-voting-ballot-initiatives-marijuana-death-penalty-condoms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe15bbf03b7823ee277699c1a709c3f17272b28e1%2F0_278_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Death%2C%20marijuana%20and%20condoms%3A%20a%20complete%20guide%20to%20US%20ballot%20questions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Famericans-voting-ballot-initiatives-marijuana-death-penalty-condoms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Death%2C%20marijuana%20and%20condoms%3A%20a%20complete%20guide%20to%20US%20ballot%20questions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Famericans-voting-ballot-initiatives-marijuana-death-penalty-condoms%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe15bbf03b7823ee277699c1a709c3f17272b28e1%2F0_278_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Nine states will vote on legalizing pot on election day. Photograph: Jason 
Connolly/AFP/Getty Images 
We talk a lot about red states and blue states, but come Tuesday, the entire 
west coast could go green. California, Arizona and Nevada will vote on whether 
to join Washington, Oregon, Colorado and Alaska in legalizing recreational 
marijuana use. Maine and Massachusetts are also voting on recreational 
marijuana measures. Four other states will vote on whether to join the 25 
states that have legalized medical marijuana.


California, the world’s sixth-largest economy 
<http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-pol-sac-essential-politics-california-s-economy-maybe-moves-to-1465940673-htmlstory.html>
, is thereal prize here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/01/how-to-survive-californias-epic-ballot-with-a-party-a-pizza-and-a-haiku>
. Analysts already put the size of the state’slegal marijuana market 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2016/06/30/theres-a-new-gold-rush-in-california-as-investors-prep-for-pot-legalization-vote.html>
 at $2.7bn and project it could grow to $6.4bn by 2020.

Solar power and carbon tax

Two key climate-related ballot measures with wildly different objectives will 
take place on the east and west coasts of the US on Tuesday.

In Florida, a proposition called Amendment 1 would change the state’s 
constitution to restrict the ability of homeowners to sell electricity they 
create through rooftop solar panels to the grid. The measure, backed by 
Florida’s large utilities, has been attacked as “fundamentally dishonest” by 
green groups because it appears to be superficially pro-solar. Energy experts 
have predicted a severe downturn in Florida’s already struggling solar 
industry, should the measure pass.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhow-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20does%20the%20US%20electoral%20college%20work%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhow-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20does%20the%20US%20electoral%20college%20work%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhow-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video&media=>
How does the US electoral college work? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/31/how-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video>
The idea of a national price on carbon was shot down early in Barack Obama’s 
presidency, but the state of Washington may follow a different path. A measure 
called I-732 calls for the establishment of the first carbon tax in the US, 
which would cost emitters $25 for each ton of carbon dioxide from 2018, rising 
gradually over the course of 40 years to $100 a ton. The revenue-neutral idea 
has, however, split the environmental movement, with some activists unhappy 
that it does not funnel money to clean energy projects.

Slavery

The 13th amendment of the US constitution abolished slavery – for the most 
part. As Ava DuVernay showed in hernew documentary 13th 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/29/the-13th-review-ava-duvernay-new-york-film-festival-prisons-plantations-race-law-us>
, the ban on involuntary servitude does not apply to convicts.

Colorado’s state constitution includes a ban on slavery that mirrors the 
federal language: “There shall never be in this state either slavery or 
involuntary servitude, except as a punishment for crime, whereof the party 
shall have been duly convicted.”Amendment T 
<http://www.leg.state.co.us/clics/clics2016a/csl.nsf/fsbillcont3/2FB3B2DFD1B1FF6A87257F240064FAC2?Open&file=SCR006_rr2.pdf>
 would remove that key exception.

It’s a timely, if symbolic, measure that comes in a year that saw a prison 
strike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/22/inside-us-prison-strike-labor-protest>
 spread across 22 states.

Progressive experiments

Bernie Sanders may have lost the Democratic nomination, but the spirit of his 
political revolution lives on – to an extent.
Colorado <https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/08/state-factboxes/?id=CO> 
In Colorado, proponents of a single-payer healthcare system gathered 100,000 
signatures to place Amendment 69, dubbed “ColoradoCare”, on the ballot. The 
measure would create a $36bn health system to insure every resident of the 
state, paid for by a new 10% payroll tax. ColoradoCare would be designed to 
replace private health insurance. Opponents, including private medical 
providers such as Anthem and Kaiser, have spentmore than $4m 
<http://www.denverpost.com/2016/09/23/colorado-amendment-69-coloradocare/> 
trying to defeat it.

As with Sanders’ campaign, the liberal reforms have faced considerable 
opposition from mainstream Democratic politicians, in addition to the big 
business interests they challenge.

Death penalty
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Famericans-voting-ballot-initiatives-marijuana-death-penalty-condoms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F465d1288551cdd0625fa28dfe16957203f658adb%2F0_194_3832_2300%2F3832.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Death%2C%20marijuana%20and%20condoms%3A%20a%20complete%20guide%20to%20US%20ballot%20questions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Famericans-voting-ballot-initiatives-marijuana-death-penalty-condoms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Death%2C%20marijuana%20and%20condoms%3A%20a%20complete%20guide%20to%20US%20ballot%20questions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Famericans-voting-ballot-initiatives-marijuana-death-penalty-condoms%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F465d1288551cdd0625fa28dfe16957203f658adb%2F0_194_3832_2300%2F3832.jpg>
 Connie Johnson urges a voter to choose ‘no’ on a referendum that would 
enshrine the death penalty in Oklahoma’s state constitution. Photograph: Bobby 
Ross Jr/AFP/Getty Images 
A quarter of United States’ death row prisoners are in California. On election 
day, voters will choose between executing them more quickly – or mandating that 
they die of other causes in prison.

Man on death row 38 years fears trouble as California death penalty vote looms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/06/california-death-penalty-vote-douglas-stankewitz>
Two competing ballot measures will address the fate of the state’s 741 death 
row inmates. Proposition 62 would abolish the death penalty in the state and 
make life in prison without possibility of parole the maximum punishment for 
murder – a sentence that would be applied retroactively to current death row 
inmates. Proposition 66 would keep the death penalty, and speed up the 
notoriously slow appeals process.

Going against the tide of the rest of the western world, Nebraska will vote on 
whether to reinstate the death penalty, which was repealed by the state 
legislature in 2015.

Oklahoma is also voting on the death penalty – to reaffirm the state’s 
commitment to it. In 2015, the state’s attorney general suspended executions 
following a botched attempt at a lethal injection.State Question 776 
<http://newsok.com/article/5512634> would enshrine the state legislature’s 
power to carry out executions by any method “not prohibited by the United 
States constitution”.

Minimum wage
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Famericans-voting-ballot-initiatives-marijuana-death-penalty-condoms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb4ab1bb31f75ba73659efa5fea177137f2f59e0%2F0_114_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Death%2C%20marijuana%20and%20condoms%3A%20a%20complete%20guide%20to%20US%20ballot%20questions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Famericans-voting-ballot-initiatives-marijuana-death-penalty-condoms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Death%2C%20marijuana%20and%20condoms%3A%20a%20complete%20guide%20to%20US%20ballot%20questions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Famericans-voting-ballot-initiatives-marijuana-death-penalty-condoms%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb4ab1bb31f75ba73659efa5fea177137f2f59e0%2F0_114_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Workers with Living United for Change in Arizona canvas in Phoenix to advocate 
for the passage of Proposition 206, which would increase the state’s minimum 
wage. Photograph: Astrid Galvan/AP 
The series of work stoppages and protests known as the Fight for $15 movement 
set off a wave of minimum wage increases around the country – either through 
legislatures or ballot initiatives. The movement faces decisions on election 
day, when Arizona, Colorado, Maine and Washington will vote on whether to 
increase minimum wages above the $7.25 federal rate.

An outlier is South Dakota, where voters will hold a referendum on whether to 
lower the minimum wage for workers under age 18. In November 2014, South 
Dakotans voted to increase the minimum wage from $7.25 to $8.50, with an annual 
cost-of-living increase. State legislators then decided to pass a law taking 
away the wage increase for youth under 18. Opponents of the two-tiered system 
gathered signatures to place it on the ballot, and now voters will have another 
shot at addressing the question.

Of course, everyone who votes on the minimum wage is eligible for the higher 
one. South Dakotans under the age of 18 will not have a say on the matter.

Homelessness
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Famericans-voting-ballot-initiatives-marijuana-death-penalty-condoms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c6d07a20298878bdbb6180ff62cf6d34d18cd17%2F0_220_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Death%2C%20marijuana%20and%20condoms%3A%20a%20complete%20guide%20to%20US%20ballot%20questions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Famericans-voting-ballot-initiatives-marijuana-death-penalty-condoms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Death%2C%20marijuana%20and%20condoms%3A%20a%20complete%20guide%20to%20US%20ballot%20questions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Famericans-voting-ballot-initiatives-marijuana-death-penalty-condoms%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c6d07a20298878bdbb6180ff62cf6d34d18cd17%2F0_220_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 A man stands outside his tent on Division Street in San Francisco. Photograph: 
Eric Risberg/AP 
Homelessness is crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/10/san-francisco-state-of-emergency-homelessness-crisis>
 in many west coast cities, and some are taking to the ballot to try to make a 
difference.

Los Angeles is hoping to make a $1.2bn investment over 10 years in support of 
housing units and programs through the issuance of bonds. The measure will 
require a two-thirds super-majority to pass and is being supported by Mayor 
Eric Garcetti,who has called homelessness 
<http://www.latimes.com/local/lanow/la-me-ln-homeless-tax-measure-20160913-snap-story.html>
 “the greatest moral crisis we face”.

Meanwhile, San Francisco, a city that has long prided itself on being the 
progressive counterpart to LA’s Hollywood superficiality, has a ballot measure 
that would outlaw the tents that many homeless people sleep in. A group oftech 
billionaires and millionaires 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/12/san-francisco-homeless-proposition-q-tech-investors>
 – venture capitalist Michael Moritz, angel investor Ron Conway, and hedge fund 
manager William Oberndorf – have each donated $49,999 to the anti-tent campaign.

Though its backers refer to the proposition as “Housing not Tents”, the 
measure does not include any additional funding for housing or services.

Miscellany

California’s Proposition 60 would require pornography performers to wear 
condoms during film shoots. The proposal is broadlyopposed by the performers 
themselves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/18/porn-tasha-reign-california-condom-law-proposition-60>
, who argue thatindustry testing protocols 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/18/california-porn-industry-safety-regulations-rejected-condoms>
 keep them safe and that a government mandate would push production underground 
– or into Nevada.


Then there’s the movement to enshrine a constitutional right to hunt and fish. 
Since 1996,18 states <https://ballotpedia.org/Right_to_hunt_and_fish_movement> 
have amended their constitutions to elevate hunting and fishing to the level of 
life and liberty, as far as inalienable rights go.

Indiana and Kansas hope to join their ranks this November, though many local 
editorial boards have advised otherwise. “No sentient human being can believe 
that the state of Indiana would actually ban hunting and fishing,”wrote 
<http://www.journalgazette.net/opinion/editorials/Exercise-your-right-to-vote – 
no – 15628014> the editorial board of the Fort Wayne Journal Gazette.

The measures appear politically popular. Indiana’s right to hunt and fish 
amendment wasendorsed by governor 
<http://www.greensburgdailynews.com/opinion/nra-backed-amendment-heading-to-indiana-ballot/article_267965d0-420d-5725-8059-0529ec3b12a9.html>
 and vice-presidential candidate Mike Pence.
 