
The daffodils are out in Reykjavik. It must be summer. Walking into Ragnar 
Kjartansson <http://www.luhringaugustine.com/artists/ragnar-kjartansson>’s 
studio, one of a long terrace of low concrete units lining the harbour, there’s 
an upright piano by the door, a guitar against the wall, and a drumkit and 
amplifiers set up on a patch of carpet. Originally built for net-mending and 
for fishermen to store their gear, the studio looks more like a rehearsal room 
than artist’s atelier.

When I arrive the artist has been working on a big watercolour of gloomy, 
purplish skies and wondering whether to give the painting a German title. “
Cheesy stuff gets an evil edge when you use German in the title,” he explains.

The last time I saw Ragnar (Kjartansson is a patronymic, not a surname), he 
was stripped to the waist and doing something unseemly with his man-boobs, 
while fronting a band at the Vinyl Factory in Soho, where his nine-channel film 
The Visitors was having its London premiere. Today, he’s wearing a three-piece 
suit and a raffish neckerchief.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fragnar-kjartansson-interview-iceland-barbican-the-visitors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F545e0bd7fe2eafad4ecbf082144551b9732b257c%2F0_0_3425_2292%2F3425.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Death%2C%20volcanoes%20and%20Nazis%20in%20the%20family%3A%20Ragnar%20Kjartansson%2C%20wild%20man%20of%20Icelandic%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fragnar-kjartansson-interview-iceland-barbican-the-visitors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Death%2C%20volcanoes%20and%20Nazis%20in%20the%20family%3A%20Ragnar%20Kjartansson%2C%20wild%20man%20of%20Icelandic%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fragnar-kjartansson-interview-iceland-barbican-the-visitors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F545e0bd7fe2eafad4ecbf082144551b9732b257c%2F0_0_3425_2292%2F3425.jpg>
 God, 2007. Photograph: Rafael Pinho/Courtesy of the artist, Luhring Augustine, 
New York and i8 Gallery, Reykjavík 
I consider myself a bit of a rococo man. I'm so inspired by Mozart and Watteau.

In The Visitors <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xUVh2SE0NFA>, whose title is 
a homage toAbba’s final album 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/the-visitors-import-bonus-tracks-mw0000188860>, 
the artist lies naked in the bath, singing the refrain “Once again I fall into 
my feminine ways”, a bearded bloke strumming a guitar in the suds. I tell him 
that one of the things I envy young people for is their freedom to think about 
gender in different ways. In fact, he tells me, the lyric was taken from a 
performance piece by his ex-wife,Ásdís Sif Gunnarsdóttir 
<http://icelandicartcenter.is/people/artists/asdis-sif-gunnarsdottir/>. “I 
always love it when people don’t change the gender in a song,” Ragnar says, and 
also understood her lyrics as a commentary on what he calls the “common defeat” 
of their marriage.

Next month, his mid-career survey opens at London’s Barbican 
<http://www.barbican.org.uk/artgallery/event-detail.asp?ID=18747>, where The 
Visitors is one of the highlights. In every room of a dilapidated mansion owned 
by the Astors in upstate New York, Ragnar’s friends (some from Icelandic group
Sigur Rós <http://sigur-ros.co.uk>) play different parts of the same song, 
which repeats, over and over for almost an hour, shot in real time. “There was 
a week of rehearsing,” he says, “and then we just shot once, at sunset”, all 
the musicians audible to one another in the different rooms through headphones.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fragnar-kjartansson-interview-iceland-barbican-the-visitors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c74b112ff20a405656009637421ff2a0c41c9f8%2F0_0_5967_3978%2F5967.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Death%2C%20volcanoes%20and%20Nazis%20in%20the%20family%3A%20Ragnar%20Kjartansson%2C%20wild%20man%20of%20Icelandic%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fragnar-kjartansson-interview-iceland-barbican-the-visitors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Death%2C%20volcanoes%20and%20Nazis%20in%20the%20family%3A%20Ragnar%20Kjartansson%2C%20wild%20man%20of%20Icelandic%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fragnar-kjartansson-interview-iceland-barbican-the-visitors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c74b112ff20a405656009637421ff2a0c41c9f8%2F0_0_5967_3978%2F5967.jpg>
 A still from the nine-channel video The Visitors, 2012. Photograph: Elisabet 
Davidsdottir/Courtesy of the artist, Luhring Augustine, New York and i8 
Gallery, Reykjavík 
The Visitors feels exhilarating, but has a tugging plangent melancholy, a 
feeling constant in his work. “There is a German word for it,” he says, “
sehnsucht <https://tylerhuckabee.com/2013/10/23/sehnsucht/>. A bigger word than 
longing.” No wonder that, in 2013, he chose to work with American bandthe 
National 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/nov/05/the-national-10-of-the-best>
, and had them play their songSorrow <http://www.alotofsorrow.com>, live, over 
and over againfor six hours at MoMA’s PSI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jul/11/national-six-hours-one-song-performance>
 in Brooklyn. “They are the kings of nihilistic melancholy,” he announces, 
gleefully.

Even in the piece where your mother spits on you, there’s a lightness to your 
art, I observe. Every five years since leaving art school in 2000, Ragnar gets 
together with his mother Guðrún Àsmundsdóttir, an actor, and she spits on him, 
on camera, trying her best to act angry as the spittle flies. It is a very 
theatrical catharsis. “I consider myself a bit of arococo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2001/feb/12/artsfeatures1> man, really. I 
am so inspired byMozart <https://www.theguardian.com/music/mozart> and Watteau 
<http://www.britannica.com/biography/Antoine-Watteau>. On the surface they look 
lovely, but they were really kicking ass, emotionally and politically.” Ragnar 
believes this is also an Icelandic thing. “Probably because there was so much 
suffering here, the art that was born out of this suffering was kind of light, 
in the same way as jazz was born in the US.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F130528262&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F130528262>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F130528262&media=>
Me and My Mother 2015 <https://vimeo.com/130528262>, latest in Ragnar 
Kjartansson’s series in which his mother spits at him 
Behind the drumkit in the studio, painted orange and yellow flames disguise a 
doorway, like a cartoonish portal to hell. “A lot of texts, written by 
Icelandic priests in the 18th century, had the idea that the Hekla volcano was 
the entrance to hell,” Ragnar tells me. As I write this,the volcano is 
predicted to blow again 
<http://icelandmonitor.mbl.is/news/nature_and_travel/2016/06/20/iceland_s_hekla_volcano_ready_to_blow/>
. Iceland is elemental. In an eruption just before the French revolution, so 
much ash blew over that it provoked the famine in France.

“Life here was brutal until quite recently. My grandmother, who is still 
alive, was born in a mud hut, and her insane grandfather was kept in a cage in 
the room where they all slept.”

My grandmother was born in a mud hut, and her insane grandfather was kept in a 
cage in the room where they all slept

This takes a moment to digest. A cage? 

“You couldn’t send him to an institution. He was just in his bed.” Ragnar 
grimaces. “But all her memories of that time are wonderful. She was lucky. Her 
parents were good people.” Elsewhere, farmworkers were beaten and raped and 
there was a lot of family abuse on isolated farms. “It is a horrible dark 
story. I was raised with this idea thatIceland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iceland> is the end of the world. Now 
everyone wants to come, and go on hikes. I’m scared of Icelandic nature. The 
older generations think nature is death here. But now the Icelandic government 
makes videos of hipsters jumping into the sea.”

Recovering from the banking crisis, and promoting tourism, Iceland is on the 
up again. I called Ragnar afterIceland’s Euro 2016 win against England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/jun/27/england-v-iceland-euro-2016-live>
. “Reykjavik has gone crazy. No one can believe it. We just caught your country 
at its worst possible time. But I had a moment of pure joy imaginingNigel 
Farage watching the game. He’s got such a punchable face 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/27/john-oliver-brexit-vote-hbo-last-week-tonight>
.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fragnar-kjartansson-interview-iceland-barbican-the-visitors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F241afb90dffe37dbeba4c703a904d7b458b74ffc%2F0_0_4212_2808%2F4212.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Death%2C%20volcanoes%20and%20Nazis%20in%20the%20family%3A%20Ragnar%20Kjartansson%2C%20wild%20man%20of%20Icelandic%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fragnar-kjartansson-interview-iceland-barbican-the-visitors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Death%2C%20volcanoes%20and%20Nazis%20in%20the%20family%3A%20Ragnar%20Kjartansson%2C%20wild%20man%20of%20Icelandic%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fragnar-kjartansson-interview-iceland-barbican-the-visitors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F241afb90dffe37dbeba4c703a904d7b458b74ffc%2F0_0_4212_2808%2F4212.jpg>
 Take Me Here by the Dishwasher, 2011 and Memorial for a Marriage at New 
Museum, New York. Photograph: Benoit Pailley/Courtesy the artist, Luhring 
Augustine, New York, and i8 Gallery, Reykjavik 
Still he has no illusions about his own country. “Iceland is profoundly 
corrupt,” he explains. “That’s why it’s in thePanama Papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/may/02/iceland-presidents-wife-linked-to-offshore-tax-havens-in-leaked-files 
http://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/may/02/iceland-presidents-wife-linked-to-offshore-tax-havens-in-leaked-files>
. We are like Sicily, with volcanic activity and huge family bonds, and a 
really strong mafia. The Sicilian mafia by comparison is totally amateur, so 
resorts to violence. Ours just rules. Iceland got one of the best deals out of 
the second world war and gained its independence from Denmark. Old people would 
arrogantly call it ‘the blessed war’, because the economy started booming. Two 
generations ago, we were the total scum of the earth. Now you go to every 
border control, and you are white, and from a cute country, with so much 
privilege.”


Being a successful artist is a privileged and conflicted position, wherever 
you are from. Lots of swanky dinners, hotels, aeroplanes.“It’s like life at the 
court of the 1%. You really feel like a court jester. Then you go home and take 
the kids to the kindergarten on the bus.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fragnar-kjartansson-interview-iceland-barbican-the-visitors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff08ec5465df8eb63becb0554839236b33179e737%2F0_0_3840_2160%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Death%2C%20volcanoes%20and%20Nazis%20in%20the%20family%3A%20Ragnar%20Kjartansson%2C%20wild%20man%20of%20Icelandic%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fragnar-kjartansson-interview-iceland-barbican-the-visitors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Death%2C%20volcanoes%20and%20Nazis%20in%20the%20family%3A%20Ragnar%20Kjartansson%2C%20wild%20man%20of%20Icelandic%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fragnar-kjartansson-interview-iceland-barbican-the-visitors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff08ec5465df8eb63becb0554839236b33179e737%2F0_0_3840_2160%2F3840.jpg>
 A still from the video Scenes from Western Culture, Rich German Children, 
2015, by Ragnar Kjartansson. Photograph: Courtesy the artist, Luhring 
Augustine, New York and i8 Gallery, Reykjavík 
Ragnar’s grandfather was a ceramicist, who became a great friend of Swiss 
fluxus artistDieter Roth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/aug/01/dieter-roth-video-diary-rembrandt>
, who moved to Iceland in 1960. “My father’s best friend was also a conceptual 
artist. But I was a total twat at art school. I wanted to be a proper painter 
and learn how to become a pop star. Then I discovered Duchamp and the power of 
the conceptual. People respect the poet here, and think that artists are cool.” 
I’m never sure when Ragnar is being serious. Everything he says comes with a 
smile or a gleam in the eye.


“It’s not a visual culture here. It’s a culture of stories. That’s why when 
Fluxus and Roth came, they got it. They really got it.” Conceptual art is 
really the last redoubt of romanticism, he thinks. For London, he’s working on 
a new piece, with two young women in Edwardian clothes, kissing in a boat 
floating about the Barbican lake. The watercolour he later emails me bears the 
caption: “Helena Bonham Carter Kissing Helena Bonham Carter.”


“I really like to toy with romanticism, because I find romanticism so wrong.” 
I tell him he has a cheeky look on his face, saying that. “I think I am a very 
critical, good-thinking political person, or try to be. But art is a slippery, 
devilish thing.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fragnar-kjartansson-interview-iceland-barbican-the-visitors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a76ac801739880fd325104aa0c531cb9ab9d9ad%2F0_0_3056_2003%2F3056.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Death%2C%20volcanoes%20and%20Nazis%20in%20the%20family%3A%20Ragnar%20Kjartansson%2C%20wild%20man%20of%20Icelandic%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fragnar-kjartansson-interview-iceland-barbican-the-visitors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Death%2C%20volcanoes%20and%20Nazis%20in%20the%20family%3A%20Ragnar%20Kjartansson%2C%20wild%20man%20of%20Icelandic%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fragnar-kjartansson-interview-iceland-barbican-the-visitors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a76ac801739880fd325104aa0c531cb9ab9d9ad%2F0_0_3056_2003%2F3056.jpg>
 The neon sculpture Scandinavian Pain , 2006-2012. Photograph: Courtesy of the 
artist, Luhring Augustine, New York and i8 Gallery, Reykjavík 
I think I am a very critical, good-thinking person, or try to be. But art is a 
slippery, devilish thing

Both Ragnar’s parents are actors, and his father worked as director at 
Reykjavik City theatre <http://www.visitreykjavik.is/reykjavik-city-theatre>. 
His elder sister played in the claustrophobic Icelandic TV thrillerTrapped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/mar/07/trapped-icelandic-thriller-tv-hit-of-the-year>
, now going into its second series. He was also strongly influenced by his 
godmother, a singer who, when invited to perform for Hitler, sent a telegram 
simply saying NEIN, and skedaddled out of Germany. Retired, she also becameBjörk
 <https://www.theguardian.com/music/bjork>’s music teacher. There was also a 
benign old relative Ragnar remembers as a boy, who had been the only Icelander 
in the SS. He got away with it because he was the son of the first Icelandic 
president after independence from Denmark.


You’re really a performer, I suggest. “I just feel that everything is putting 
on a show. I never change. I just put on a different suit.” His parents also 
inspiredTake Me Here by the Dishwasher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/may/12/ragnar-kjartansson-exhibition-review-new-museum>
, a kind of family romance first performed at New York’s New Museum in 2014. 
The live troubadours, wandering around and singing in the gallery, were 
captivating. I hung around for hours. “I take it as a total compliment if my 
artworks are entertaining. I always have the ambition to create a painting – 
you can look for as long as you like, or you can walk by. It’s always amazing 
when people want to stay.”


I had a moment of pure joy imagining Nigel Farage watching Iceland beat 
England. He’s got such a punchable face

And now, at 40, you are having a retrospective. So what’s next, I ask. “I just 
want to continue being in this most fabulous con-man business on earth.” Coming 
from Iceland keeps Ragnar grounded, he says: “It’s like all the Icelandic 
adventures, when someone gets really lucky and walks into an elf stone.” An elf 
stone?

“People really believe in elves here. Someone is working on the farm, being 
beaten and abused, and suddenly a stone in the cliff just opens to the elf 
world where everything is fabulous. It was really a lucky strike that I became 
an artist who can work all over the world. It’s ridiculously fantastic. I don’t 
take it for granted. One day you have to get out of the cliff and go back to 
work.”


 * Ragnar Kjartansson is at the Barbican, London, from 14 July to 4 September 
<http://www.barbican.org.uk/artgallery/event-detail.asp?ID=18747>, then travels 
to theHirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden 
<http://hirshhorn.si.edu/collection/home/> in Washington, DC from 14 October to 
8 January, 2017.  