
When Debbie Reynolds <https://www.theguardian.com/film/debbie-reynolds>, 
wearing a skimpy pink flapper’s dress, burst out of an enormous cake at a 
Hollywood party in Singin’ in the Rain (1952), she simultaneously burst into 
screen stardom.

 In fact, it was the sixth film appearance of Reynolds, who has died aged 84, 
but her first starring role. The casting of the inexperienced 19-year-old was a 
risk taken by Gene Kelly and Stanley Donen, the co-directors of the classic MGM 
musical about the early days of talkies. The gamble paid off, but not without 
some sweat and strain.

Debbie Reynolds: her life and career – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gallery/2016/dec/29/debbie-reynolds-her-life-and-career-in-pictures>
“There were times when Debbie was more interested in playing the French horn 
somewhere in the San Fernando Valley or attending a Girl Scout meeting,” Kelly 
recalled. “She didn’t realise she was a movie star all of a sudden.” Reynolds 
herself admitted later: “I was so confused. It seemed dumb to me ... reporting 
to the studio at 6am, six days a week and shooting till midnight. I didn’t know 
anything about show business.

“I learned a lot from Gene,” she added. “He is a perfectionist and a 
disciplinarian – the most exacting director I’ve ever worked for … Every so 
often, he would yell at me and make me cry. But it took a lot of patience for 
him to work with someone who had never danced before. It’s amazing that I could 
keep up with him andDonald O’Connor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/sep/29/guardianobituaries.film1>. This 
little girl from Burbank sure had a lot of spirit.”

Daughter of Maxene (nee Harmon) and Ray Reynolds, she was born Mary Frances 
Reynolds in El Paso, Texas. Her father was a railroad mechanic and carpenter, 
who lost his job at the height of the Great Depression. After living from hand 
to mouth for a while, the family moved to Burbank, California when her father 
got a job with the Southern Pacific railroad. While at high school, Reynolds 
entered and won the Miss Burbank beauty contest. One of the requirements was 
“talent”, which she fulfilled by lip-syncing to a record ofBetty Hutton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/mar/14/guardianobituaries.obituaries1> 
singing I’m a Square in the Social Circle, which earned her a Warner Bros 
contract. (It was Jack Warner who gave her the name of Debbie.) But after a bit 
part in the Bette Davis comedy June Bride (1948), and playingJune Haver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/aug/04/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>
’s bubbly young sister in The Daughter of Rosie O’Grady (1950), she took up a 
contract with MGM, where she flourished, on and off, throughout the 50s and 
early 60s.


Prior to Singin’ in the Rain, Reynolds was noticed, in what amounted to a 
cameo, lip-syncing I Wanna Be Loved By You to the singer Helen Kane’s voice in 
Three Little Words (1950). In Two Weeks with Love (1950), as a younger sister 
again, this time Jane Powell’s, the cute 5 ft 2in Reynolds stopped the show 
with the 6ft 3in Carleton Carpenter in two numbers: Abba Dabba Honeymoon and 
Row, Row, Row, with her nifty tap dancing belying her statements of never 
having danced before Singin’ in the Rain.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLN8parxJtkc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLN8parxJtkc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLN8parxJtkc&media=>
 Video: Debbie Reynolds, Gene Kelly and Donald O’Connor perform Good Mornin’ in 
Singin’ in the Rain, 1952 
Reynolds’s lively opening Charleston number in her breakthrough film has her 
singing and dancing All I Do Is Dream of You with a dozen other chorus girls; 
she keeps up brilliantly with Kelly and O’Connor in the cheery matinal greeting
Good Mornin’ <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LN8parxJtkc>, danced and sung 
around a living room – even though during some of the more challenging steps, 
she stands by and lets the two men dance around her – and she is touching in 
the lyrical duet You Were Meant For Me with Kelly, who switches on coloured 
lights and a gentle wind machine on a sound stage to create a make-believe 
atmosphere.

In the plot, a silent screen star, Lina Lamont (Jean Hagen, unforgettable), 
has a risibly squeaky voice for sound movies and, unknown to the public, is 
dubbed by Kathy Selden (Reynolds). In reality, however, Debbie’s singing voice 
was dubbed by the uncredited Betty Noyes, and Hagen herself provided the 
speaking voice for Debbie, dubbing her on screen because Reynolds was then 
handicapped by what Donen called “that terrible western noise”.

An effervescent Reynolds went on to star in a series of charming youthful 
musicals, this time using her own pleasant singing voice. I Love Melvin (1953) 
was one of the best, with Reynolds paired again with O’Connor. The film opens 
with A Lady Loves, a musical dream sequence in which Debbie sees herself as a 
big movie star courted by Robert Taylor. This gives her a chance to be classy, 
in a tongue-in-cheek manner. Later she features in a witty acrobatic number 
entitled Saturday Afternoon Before the Game in which she is dressed as a ball 
being tossed around by a football team.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdebbie-reynolds-obituary-singin-in-the-rain-actor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F058aa03d3c55a65185a6c1e2b1931cd48c6e98f2%2F0_304_2336_1402%2F2336.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Debbie%20Reynolds%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdebbie-reynolds-obituary-singin-in-the-rain-actor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Debbie%20Reynolds%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdebbie-reynolds-obituary-singin-in-the-rain-actor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F058aa03d3c55a65185a6c1e2b1931cd48c6e98f2%2F0_304_2336_1402%2F2336.jpg>
 Debbie Reynolds and Eddie Fisher cutting their wedding cake, 1955. Photograph: 
Everett/Rex/Shutterstock 
There followed The Affairs of Dobie Gillis, Give a Girl a Break (both 1953), 
Susan Slept Here, Athena (both 1954), Hit the Deck and The Tender Trap (both 
1955). In the latter, a romantic comedy, Frank Sinatra is a confirmed bachelor 
and Reynolds is determined to trap him into marriage. In the same year, 
23-year-old Reynolds married the 27-year-old croonerEddie Fisher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/sep/24/eddie-fisher-obituary>. They 
became the darlings of the fan magazines, and co-starred in Bundle of Joy 
(1956), a feeble musical remake of the 1939Ginger Rogers 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-ginger-rogers-1617100.html>
-David Niven comedy, which capitalised on their personalities as a happy young 
couple and the rumours of her pregnancy. (Reynolds gave birth to a daughter,
Carrie <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/carrie-fisher>, in October 1956.)

Meanwhile with the film musical in a moribund state, Reynolds showed that she 
could get by in straight acting roles, the first proof being in The Catered 
Affair (1956), a slice of Hollywood realism, with Reynolds as the daughter of 
working-class parents (Bette Davis and Ernest Borgnine). This failed at the box 
office, unlike Tammy and the Bachelor (1957), which was one of Reynolds’s 
greatest successes, the theme song of which (“I hear the cottonwoods whisp’rin’ 
above, Tammy! Tammy! Tammy’s in love!”) remained high in the hit parade for 
months. This entertaining piece of whimsy gave Reynolds, as a backwoods girl in 
love with a wealthy man (Leslie Nielsen), what was an archetypal role – a naive 
girl thrust into a sophisticated world … and triumphing.

Debbie Reynolds and Carrie Fisher – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2016/dec/29/debbie-reynolds-and-carrie-fisher-in-pictures>
In 1957, Eddie and Debbie were best man and matron of honour at the wedding in 
Acapulco of Fisher’s lifelong friend the impresario Mike Todd to Elizabeth 
Taylor. A little over a year later, Todd was killed in a plane crash, and 
Taylor sought solace in Fisher’s arms, causing a huge Hollywood scandal. 
Taylor, who had been cast as the Grieving Widow, now found herself in the role 
of the Vamp, while Reynolds was widely and sympathetically portrayed as the 
Wronged Woman. However, the outraged moralistic public was unaware that the 
Fisher-Reynolds marriage was already in tatters, although they continued to 
play America’s sweethearts in public, mainly because Debbie was pregnant with 
their son Todd (named after Mike) and they were worried that divorce would 
damage their popularity ratings. But divorce was inevitable and, on 12 May 
1959, Taylor, who had converted to Judaism when she married Todd, married 
Fisher at a synagogue in Las Vegas.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdebbie-reynolds-obituary-singin-in-the-rain-actor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b20695df5fcba4351862f669d0ef55051f7c733%2F0_322_1913_1148%2F1913.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Debbie%20Reynolds%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdebbie-reynolds-obituary-singin-in-the-rain-actor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Debbie%20Reynolds%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdebbie-reynolds-obituary-singin-in-the-rain-actor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b20695df5fcba4351862f669d0ef55051f7c733%2F0_322_1913_1148%2F1913.jpg>
 Debbie Reynolds and Gene Kelly in a publicity shot for Singin’ in the Rain, 
1952. Photograph: Allstar/MGM 
Despite being the divorced mother of two small children, Reynolds was never 
more active. In 1959, she was among the top 10 Hollywood box-office stars and 
appeared four movies that year: The Mating Game, Say One for Me, The Gazebo and 
It Started With a Kiss. None were world-beaters, but they got by on her 
effortless charm.

In November 1960, Reynolds married the millionaire shoe-store magnate Harry 
Karl, and pursued her career with added vigour, though her roles hardly varied, 
whether she was playing Fred Astaire’s nubile daughter in The Pleasure of His 
Company or a feisty young widow with two children in The Second Time Around 
(both 1961) or a pioneer woman in the sprawling Cinerama western How the West 
Was Won (1962), in which she is the only character who makes it through from 
the first reel to the last, ageing from 16 to 90.

In The Unsinkable Molly Brown (1964), for which she was Oscar-nominated, 
Reynolds throws herself around energetically in the title role of the backwoods 
girl (shades of Tammy, but with added robustness) who enters high society and 
survives the Titanic, displaying everything she had learned from past musicals, 
especially in the dance numbers Belly Up to the Bar, Boys and I Ain’t Down Yet.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdebbie-reynolds-obituary-singin-in-the-rain-actor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9af07b46b9494c8432c47a810d359f4bf66716fa%2F0_101_2304_1603%2F2304.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Debbie%20Reynolds%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdebbie-reynolds-obituary-singin-in-the-rain-actor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Debbie%20Reynolds%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdebbie-reynolds-obituary-singin-in-the-rain-actor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9af07b46b9494c8432c47a810d359f4bf66716fa%2F0_101_2304_1603%2F2304.jpg>
 Debbie Reynolds and Harve Presnell in The Unsinkable Molly Brown, 1964. 
Photograph: Everett/Rex/Shutterstock 
After playing a man resurrected as a woman in the tiresome Goodbye Charlie 
(1964), and the title role in The Singing Nun (1966), the mawkish biopic of the 
guitar-strumming Belgian nun who composed the hit song Dominique, she finally 
managed to bid farewell to her ingenue “tomboy” persona and portray a mature 
adult in Divorce American Style (1967). A rare Hollywood comedy with teeth, it 
cast Reynolds and Dick Van Dyke against type as a squabbling couple, who utter 
not a word as they prepare for bed in the best sequence. “That was a really 
hard part to get,” Reynolds commented. “The producer didn’t want me. He didn’t 
think I could play an ordinary married woman. I think he thought I had to be 
all ‘diva’d up’ and in a musical.”

When Reynolds, now in her mid-30s, saw her film career gradually slowing to a 
virtual halt, she reinvented herself as a cabaret performer, appearing most 
frequently on stage in Las Vegas. Reynolds also shifted her attention to US 
television starting with 18 episodes of The Debbie Reynolds Show (1969-70), a 
sitcom resembling I Love Lucy, in which she played a suburban housewife with 
ambitions to become a newspaper reporter. She continued to appear regularly on 
TV for the next four decades. What’s the Matter With Helen? (1971), a campy 
murder tale set in 1930s Hollywood in which Reynolds andShelley Winters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/jan/16/guardianobituaries.obituaries> 
run a school for budding Shirley Temples, would be her last feature film for 20 
years.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdebbie-reynolds-obituary-singin-in-the-rain-actor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec66a061e469e286ba273768fd5b30dc9272bcca%2F0_33_1792_1075%2F1792.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Debbie%20Reynolds%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdebbie-reynolds-obituary-singin-in-the-rain-actor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Debbie%20Reynolds%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdebbie-reynolds-obituary-singin-in-the-rain-actor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec66a061e469e286ba273768fd5b30dc9272bcca%2F0_33_1792_1075%2F1792.jpg>
 Debbie Reynolds receives a lifetime achievement award from her daughter, 
Carrie Fisher, at the Screen Actors Guild awards, Los Angeles, 2015. 
Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
By the early 1970s, her marriage to Karl was heading for the rocks, mainly 
because of his infidelities but also because he had gambled away both their 
fortunes. Luckily, Reynolds was still bankable and, immediately after her 
divorce in 1973, she made her Broadway debut in a revival of the 1919 musical 
hit Irene. The show, which ran for 18 months, gained Reynolds a Tony 
nomination, and was the first of several stage musicals she would appear in 
over the years: Annie Get Your Gun, The Unsinkable Molly Brown and Woman of the 
Year among them.

Reynolds returned to the big screen in the 90s, where she showed that she had 
lost none of her comic timing playing a number of sweet-voiced monster mums, 
having maintained her doll-like looks. These included Albert Brooks’s Mother 
(1996), her first leading film role for 27 years, In & Out (1997) and Zack and 
Reba (1998), as well as appearing in 10 episodes of Will and Grace on TV, 
portraying Grace’s mother, a would-be star whose propensity for breaking out 
into show tunes and impressions dismays her daughter. Reynolds was also known 
as Princess Leia’s mother, afterCarrie Fisher found fame 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/27/carrie-fisher-obituary-star-wars-actor-writer>
 in the Star Wars movies.

Aside from performing, Reynolds had many other interests. In 1991, she bought 
a hotel and casino in Las Vegas, where she displayed part of her extensive 
collection of vintage Hollywood props, sets and costumes. But after her 
marriage to the real-estate developer Richard Hamlett ended in 1996, she was 
forced to declare bankruptcy the following year. She later reopened her museum 
in Hollywood. Reynolds was also an indefatigable fund-raiser for The Thalians 
(a charitable organisation that provides mental health services from pediatrics 
to geriatrics in Los Angeles).

Carrie Fisher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/27/carrie-fisher-obituary-star-wars-actor-writer>
 died the day before her mother, after a suspected heart attack on a flight 
from London to Los Angeles. Reynolds is survived by her son, Todd.

 * Debbie Reynolds (Mary Frances Reynolds), actor and singer, born 1 April 
1932; died 28 December 2016
 