
Government ministers should examine the decision to transfer part of the 
collection of Bradford’s National Media Museum (NMM) to London, former cabinet 
ministerEric Pickles <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eric-pickles> has 
said, adding that the decision had been taken by “southern elites”.

Plans to relocate more than 400,000 objects from the Bradford museum to a new “
international photography resource centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/feb/01/va-worlds-largest-collection-art-of-photography>
” at the Victoria and Albert museum in Kensington were announced by the Science 
Museum Group – which owns the NMM –in February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/feb/01/va-worlds-largest-collection-art-of-photography>
, promptingaccusations of “cultural vandalism” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/02/bradford-photography-collection-move-vanda-reviled-vandalism>
 from local politicians.

Most of the items to be moved, which include hundreds of thousands of images, 
books, periodicals and camera equipment, are part of a Royal Photographic 
Society (RPS) collection that charts the development of photography over 200 
years.

Pickles, who was communities and local government secretary between 2010 and 
2015, was a councillor inBradford <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/bradford> 
when the museum was first established in 1983.

“I remember it very vividly,” he said. “It was an attempt to show that the 
north of England was a place that you could visit for touristic reasons. It was 
one of the best museums of its kind in the world and to me this just sounds 
like a southern elite deciding ‘well, it’s Bradford, it’s just too far away’.”

“I would hope that ministers would examine closely this decision and talk to 
the Science Museum and the V&A about their priorities,” he said, adding: “You 
might as well put a closed sign above Bradford. This is a ridiculous thing to 
do.”

“If there are things that you can see in Bradford and you can’t see in London, 
then my response to that is ‘good’. That was actually the idea. Everything 
can’t be in London,” said Pickles, who has been Conservative MP for Brentwood 
and Ongar since 1992.

Pickles’s comments come after artist David Hockney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/nov/16/david-hockney-interview-i-feel-like-picasso>
, film directorMike Leigh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/15/mike-leigh-interview> and 
photographerDon McCullin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/nov/27/don-mccullin-war-photographer-digital-images>
 were among more than 80 leading cultural figures to call for the reversing of 
the decision.

“Moving the majority of the museum’s photography collection away from 
Yorkshire goes against government policy [in 1983] when the museum was opened – 
to put such facilities outside London – and against the present government’s 
claimed ‘northern powerhouse’ strategy,” they said ina letter published in the 
Guardian on Monday. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/06/bradford-photography-collection-national-media-museum-letter>

“A number of us who have deposited our photographs in the museum did so 
specifically because we wanted our work to be preserved in the north.”

Marie Eagle, shadow secretary for culture, media and sport, has added her 
voice to the debate. She said: “The government must start showing the real 
leadership on arts and culture in the regions that they have hitherto failed to 
do: starting with the National Media Museum in Bradford.


“To move the photography collection, against the wishes of those who wanted 
their work preserved and accessible in the north, would be a huge backward step 
for Bradford.

“Ministers must now listen to the anger that has been expressed by leading 
cultural figures and others and take action to prevent the hollowing out of 
this important cultural venue.”

A source at the culture department said that the decision to move the 
collection had been made by the Science Museum Group alone. “How they house 
their collection is a decision for them to make without political and 
government interference,” they said. The Science Museum Group receives £40m a 
year from the department of culture, media and sport.

The proposal to move the images and change the museum’s name were first mooted 
in 2013 as part of plans to “re-vision” the National Media Museum.

At a meeting in March 2015 
<http://group.sciencemuseum.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/board-minutes-4-march-2015.pdf>
 Lord Grade, the former BBC chair and then chair of the NMM advisory board, 
supported the plan. Minutes from that meeting warn that “the collections moves 
might be seen as removing the ‘best’ part from Bradford to London, but also 
offered opportunities to shine a light on equally important, but less 
well-known, elements.”

Suggestions for a new name for the museum were also discussed at that meeting. 
The favoured name back then, understood to be Science Museum North, “made no 
reference to the museum’s content, nor ‘national’ status”, the minutes reveal, 
but by capitalising on the ‘science museum’ name “had the potential to attract 
significant funding and was flexible enough to cover a range of topics.”

On Monday an NMM spokesman said that the name Science Museum North was no 
longer under consideration. No reason was given, but there has been much public 
disquiet about both the “downgrading” of the Bradford museum and a potential 
clash with the Museum of Science and Industry 40 miles away in Manchester, 
which is also part of the Science Museum Group.

None of the 270,000 photographs destined for London have been on display in 
Bradford for almost nine months. The last exhibition devoted to the collection 
was Drawn By Light, shown between March and June 2015.

Publicity for the exhibition 
<http://www.nationalmediamuseum.org.uk/planavisit/exhibitions/drawn-by-light/about>
 described it as containing “iconic images taken by some of the greatest names 
in photography”. The marketing blurb boasted that the Bradford-housedRoyal 
Photographic Society 
<http://www.nationalmediamuseum.org.uk/planavisit/exhibitions/drawn-by-light/history-of-the-rps>
 collection was “one of the most important and comprehensive photographic 
collections in the world.”
 