
The Museum of British Transport at Clapham is probably lost. The Government 
intends to close it and move most of the relics toYork 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/york>, where they will be inaccessible to 
thousands of people who might otherwise see them.

It is a weird decision. The main reason is said to be economy, because the 
Clapham museum has been losing £30,000 a year. But it is strange that a 
beneficent Government which can find about £2 millions in annual subsidy for 
two opera companies cannot find £30,000 for a museum to commemorate the 
development of the railways, which was at first peculiarly an English 
achievement.

Nor is it necessary that such a museum, properly run, should lose money at 
all. In a recent attempt to save the museum, the Transport Trust - a private 
body which sets out to do for industrial relics what the National Trust does 
for stately homes - approached Madame Tussauds and asked if they would be 
interested in running the museum.

Tussauds, who, like the Transport Trust, had no standing in the matter, did 
approach the Minister responsible, Miss Jennie Lee, asking if they could see 
the museum’s account books and discuss the matter. Miss Lee replied that the 
proposals to close the museum were now settled policy and that she did not 
think further meetings or consideration would be very profitable.

But it is not only a matter of money. The Government’s decision is so perverse 
that it must surely have been taken on principle. That principle, I think, and 
it is one close to Miss Lee’s heart, is that London should not have all the 
good things and that the provinces should have their share. She often says that
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> should not be “advantaged”: it 
is a word I have never heard anyone else use.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fthe-northerner%2F2016%2Fmay%2F03%2Frailway-museum-transport-york-london-1969-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e62da6f9d7b7b62d3da30a1b2e2b3353d43abe6%2F0_0_5200_3442%2F5200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Decision%20to%20move%20museum%20north%20angers%20Londoners%3A%20archive%2C%203%20May%201969&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fthe-northerner%2F2016%2Fmay%2F03%2Frailway-museum-transport-york-london-1969-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Decision%20to%20move%20museum%20north%20angers%20Londoners%3A%20archive%2C%203%20May%201969&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fthe-northerner%2F2016%2Fmay%2F03%2Frailway-museum-transport-york-london-1969-archive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e62da6f9d7b7b62d3da30a1b2e2b3353d43abe6%2F0_0_5200_3442%2F5200.jpg>
 The restored Flying Scotsman leaves London Kings Cross for York, February 
2016. Photograph: Dan Kitwood/Getty Images 
There is a lot to be said for this principle, but here we have a false 
application of it. There already is a transport museum at York, and it will be 
enlarged and improved. But this will be done at the cost of having no such 
museum in London at all. York is 196 miles from London. It may not be congenial 
to Miss Lee and her principle, but it is certainly true that, for whatever 
reasons, good or bad, London does attract visitors and is, for most people, a 
great deal more accessible than York.


Mr John Letts, a London publisher, has been the most vigorous protester 
against the move, and has made some telling comparisons. According to his 
calculations, the Clapham museum has achieved in only seven years almost half 
the attendance which the Imperial War Museum has achieved in 40. On behalf of 
the Clapham Society he tried to prevent the closure and says that prolonged 
study of the way this decision was reached has made him think that just as the 
countryside and old houses needed a strong National Trust to protect them, so 
now the museums need a similar organisation to protect them against an 
arbitrary Government.

He suggests a body called the National Heritage, which should form and present 
the views of its members on the future not only of the transport museum but 
also of the Tate Gallery and British Museum extensions, and of the London 
Museum. It would, among other things, help to mount touring exhibitions in the 
provinces of the great number of objects at present stored away in the vaults 
of national museums and galleries, but its principal object would be to lobby 
the Government and ensure that such decisions as that to close the Transport 
Museum were made only after public discussion.


He is approaching Lord Goodman, chairman of the Arts Council, and Mr John 
Smith, Conservative MP for the Cities of London and Westminster and a great 
collector of steam engines. What he is proposing is really a consumer 
association for the arts: if he can set it up, something good may have come out 
of the wretched business of the Clapham museum – a wrong decision taken for the 
wrong reasons and wrongly persisted in.

 