
The family of Denis Donaldson, a British spy inside the IRA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ira> who was murdered in 2006 after he was 
exposed as being a secret agent, have said they do not believe his former 
comrades in the Provisionals killed him.

Donaldson’s relatives also rejected claims broadcast on a BBC investigation 
earlier this week thatGerry Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gerryadams> sanctioned the killing of his 
former colleague at a remote cottage in Donegal a decade ago.

Gerry Adams considers legal action over claims he sanctioned killing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/21/gerry-adams-denis-donaldson-legal-action-claims-sanctioned-killing-spotlight>
A lawyer for the Donaldson family met the deputy head of the Garda Síochána on 
Friday to discuss the allegations contained in the Spotlight investigation onBBC
 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> One.

Following that meeting, solicitor Ciaran Shiels, speaking on behalf of the 
Donaldson family, said: “The one theme that has come of today’s meeting is that 
the theory that was being advanced by BBC Spotlight earlier this week, that 
this was in some way carried out by the Provisional IRA or authorised by Gerry 
Adams, I think it’s absolute nonsense.

“It does not marry in any way with the lines of inquiry that have been 
progressed by the [Garda] or by the police ombudsman.”

Army spied on Sinn​​ Féin years after IRA ceasefire, soldier claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/23/army-bugged-sinn-fein-members-ira-ceasefire-soldier-northern-ireland>
The BBC has consistently defended the integrity of the programme and also 
rejected calls on Friday from theSinn Féin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein> deputy leader, Mary Lou 
McDonald, that the Spotlight team pass on the name of an informant who made the 
claims about Adams to the Garda.

A BBC spokesman said: “As stated in the programme, the source’s identity must 
be protected for reasons of safety.”

The Real IRA admitted responsibility for killing Donaldson at his cottage in 
Glenties shortly after the former senior republican was exposed as a long-term 
British agent.

Gerry Adams has categorically denied having any involvement in the Donaldson 
murder and has indicated that he might issue legal proceedings over the 
allegations.
 