
What is it? Another welcome chance (post-24 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/24>) to watch Kiefer Sutherland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/feb/02/kiefer-sutherland-interview-tv-film>
 coping under pressure.

Why you’ll love it: As the US teeters on the brink of possible Trump-led doom, 
this high-energy thriller seems a comparative picnic, depicting as it does a 
terrifying attack on Washington that blows up Capitol Hill, killing the 
president and his entire cabinet, save for one man;the Designated Survivor 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Designated_survivor>. Before the State of the 
Union address, one cabinet member is always taken to a secret location, just in 
case anything bad should happen. Tom Kirkman (Sutherland) is that man, an 
out-of-favour housing minister whose career is on the wane. Now he’s leader of 
the free world and, despite the love of a good woman (Natasha McElhone is 
superb as his first lady) and two lovely children, his confidence levels are 
low.

As a secret service detail hurriedly escorts him to the Oval Office muttering 
“Phoenix is on the move” into their sleeves, Kirkman asks what his code name 
used to be when he was just a cabinet grunt. “Glasses,” comes the deadpan 
response.

On the way to the scary underground situation room, he pops to the John to 
puke, quite understandably. He’s been handed the nuclear codes, which he 
assumes will require some kind of retinal scan or fingerprint recognition. When 
he asks, the White House staff roll their eyes in a nice moment of 
self-reference to Sutherland’s former incarnation asJack Bauer 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7lxDREJ4vTo>. That’s the great thing about 
Designated Survivor: it has a whole heap of fun with an unthinkable scenario 
and somehow gets away with it.

It’s also a classic tale of a small man, bursting with good intentions, trying 
to step into shoes so big he could live quite comfortably in just one of them. 
But if anyone’s up to it, Sutherland is. He’s no longer the gritty hard-man of 
24 and has grown splendidly into his creased face (obviously because men are 
allowed to) and cardigan body. When he does hit a seam of pure fury it has all 
the more impact as he tries to go about his duties with good grace and even 
temperament. When the script allows him a (very sparing) “God dammit!” it 
really catches you unawares.

Kirkman’s task seems insurmountable as the House of Representatives is a 
smoking ruin, racial tensions are on the rise and the police start to turn on 
Muslims or anyone who might be one. Meanwhile, the FBI can’t agree on a culprit 
for the attacks and Kevin McNally’s General Harris Cochran decides the new 
president is a woolly whelp with no backbone and starts a plot to unseat him. 
Never mind the Republican Designated Survivor who extends the hand of 
friendship while secretly Googling Kirkman, looking for weakness.

Above all, Tom Kirkman is a good man and he plans to win this thing with his 
compassion and humanity, like an under-confidentJed Bartlet 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CTG5p4wEAAM>. There’s no doubt who we’re 
rooting for here. Vote Kirkman.

Where: Netflix.

Length: Two episodes to date, with a new one released every Wednesday.

Stand-out episode (so far): Episode one can’t be beaten for thrilling pace and 
full Kiefer commitment from the off.

Also watch: Hostages <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8thzMN2jj6c> (Amazon 
Prime),Homeland <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KyFmS3wRPCQ> (Amazon Prime), 
House of Cards <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ULwUzF1q5w4> (Netflix).
 