
Spoiler alert: this recap is for viewers of Deutschland 83 on Channel 4 and 
Walter Presents.Catch up on episode six here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/07/deutschland-83-recap-episode-six-brandy-station>

Events came to a head with a double bill in which questions were answered, 
secrets exposed and nuclear armageddon averted. Over the course of two hours, 
the show’s strengths (a steadily creeping unease, good twists and some solid 
acting, particularly from Jonas Nay as Martin) and weaknesses (odd plot holes, 
occasional unevenness of tone) were brought to the fore. Overall, I enjoyed 
Deutschland 83 for what it was – a fast and furious adventure story about loss 
of innocence in an uneasy time, with some good jokes and a willingness to take 
risks. I do, however, understand those who felt that it lacked depth, and would 
add thatThe Americans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/apr/24/the-americans-box-set-review>
 covers similar ground in a more complex way.

That said, the two final episodes were the strongest of the season, and I 
particularly enjoyed the bittersweet climax, which left Martin back East facing 
a compromised future with the manipulative Annett, even as the Edel family fell 
apart horribly. It was clearly written in the hope of a second season (a wish 
that is yet to be granted), and there will be viewers who were left frustrated 
by the lack of closure in the final minutes, although I rather liked the hints 
of yet more terrible things to come. It had a gloomy charm.

The West

Poor Martin got the biggest wake-up call of his life as he realised that Able 
Archer was just a training exercise, but that the East’s refusal to believe 
this was likely to topple the situation into all-out war. Let down by everyone 
from Lenora to Tobias, he finally did the only thing he could and told General 
Edel the truth in an awful, beautifully acted scene. You could see the joy 
draining from Edel’s eyes as he realised that his substitute son was as flawed 
as the real one, and his rejection of Martin’s story was horribly believable. 
It wasn’t a good couple of hours for anyone in the Edel family (except possibly 
Ursula, who left the family home to live with her sister Renate. May they spend 
the rest of their lives swilling champagne and plotting further revenge against 
the fish population). Yvonne started the episode enjoying life on the road and 
ended it with her certainties stripped away – the scene in which she said 
goodbye to Martin was quietly heartbreaking, thanks to the slow-dawning 
revelation about how much she had been used.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fdeutschland-83-the-finale-bold-guard-and-able-archer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5490681450f901e1c54ba6281a9314a227aed1d%2F0_51_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Deutschland%2083%2C%20the%20finale%20%E2%80%93%20Bold%20Guard%20and%20Able%20Archer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fdeutschland-83-the-finale-bold-guard-and-able-archer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Deutschland%2083%2C%20the%20finale%20%E2%80%93%20Bold%20Guard%20and%20Able%20Archer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fdeutschland-83-the-finale-bold-guard-and-able-archer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5490681450f901e1c54ba6281a9314a227aed1d%2F0_51_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Photograph: Nik Konietzny 

Still, she had it easy next to the male members of the Edel family. Alex freed 
himself from military tyranny to stand shoulder-to-shoulder with the peace 
protesters, only to be dumped by Tobias and told to get an Aids test. As if one 
moment of disillusionment wasn’t bad enough, he then had to sit through an 
interview with the military police who, after listening to his heartbreaking 
description of Martin – “He’s a natural-born soldier like my father. He’s 
everything I’m not: loyal, understanding, honest” – shattered his illusions and 
left him weeping. We last saw him entering the Edel home having just had the 
test, result unknown.

As for General Edel, he lost everything: his wife, his standing in the 
military, his relationship with his children, his second son, Stamm, who was 
never more than a dream. While the show left it vague about which of the Edel 
men ended up blowing their brains out (a decision I found rather manipulative), 
I incline towards it being the general. There was such a sense of terrible 
loneliness emanating from him in those final scenes – plus, Alex had only just 
entered the house, which makes me feel that we hear the shot from his point of 
view.

The East

There were big revelations in the East as well, not least that Lenora had a 
secret lover from Mozambique and skipped the country to be with him. Lenora is 
such a survivor; of course she had a contingency plan. The final episode really 
belonged to Ingrid, however, as she confirmed what we’ve all suspected – Walter 
Schweppenstette is Martin’s father – then promptly secured Thomas’s release and 
exile to the West. Her showdown with Annett was glorious – “You think I didn’t 
know [about the books]?”; “Did you want Thomas to rot in prison for the rest of 
his life … or maybe you wanted to protect yourself from your feelings for 
him?”; “Walter would never have arrested me and he would have made sure no one 
else did either” – as was the steel she showed in confronting Schweppenstette.

As for Annett, I almost felt sorry for her. Her setting up of Thomas was 
terrible, and she was lucky Ingrid could pull strings on his behalf – but in 
the end she was more pitiable than evil; a lost, naive girl caught up in a game 
she didn’t really seem to understand. “You can move around, but you still have 
to deal with yourself.” Indeed.

At the same time, I found the suggestion that Martin and Annett will somehow 
muddle through interesting, given that he tied her to a chair and she kidnapped 
his western girlfriend. It’s possible that he won’t stay with her, but I felt 
the show strongly implied that he would – if only for their unborn child. It 
made for a grim ending for our once wide-eyed hero.

Things weren’t looking much better for Schweppenstette, whose machinations 
were finally revealed, thanks to Martin and – more surprisingly – the suddenly 
alert Fuchs, who tracked down the doctored Nato report and realised just how 
many lies were being told. By the end, Schweppenstette almost looked chagrined, 
although I suspect he survived to weasel through another day.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fdeutschland-83-the-finale-bold-guard-and-able-archer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d5be6d0db05a615124d39944c7807f90e441e24%2F0_21_2000_1202%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Deutschland%2083%2C%20the%20finale%20%E2%80%93%20Bold%20Guard%20and%20Able%20Archer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fdeutschland-83-the-finale-bold-guard-and-able-archer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Deutschland%2083%2C%20the%20finale%20%E2%80%93%20Bold%20Guard%20and%20Able%20Archer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fdeutschland-83-the-finale-bold-guard-and-able-archer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d5be6d0db05a615124d39944c7807f90e441e24%2F0_21_2000_1202%2F2000.jpg>
 Photograph: Nik Konietzny 
Stasi files

Poor old Karl Kramer – you served your country, but were forgotten within six 
weeks.

I thought the sense of panic was very well done here; as I’ve mentioned 
before, it’s hard to remember just how paranoid this era was. Both episodes 
perfectly captured the rising tension and sense that anything could happen.

As a fan of an awkward dinner scene 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-8-Yzn3Yw-s>, I loved Ingrid, Schweppenstette 
and Annett’s Terrible Meal of Hidden Secrets and Outright Lies.

I haven’t celebrated the show’s fashion enough over the past seven weeks, so 
I’d like to raise a belated cheer for Lenora’s entire wardrobe, especially the 
red-and-black shirt she wore while talking to Martin on the phone.

In all honesty, Fuchs should have started doubting Schweppenstette the moment 
he unveiled his war wall.I’ve watched Homeland 
<http://www.baltimoresun.com/entertainment/tv/z-on-tv-blog/bal-homeland-showtime-dc-dystopia-20130927-001-photo.html>
, I know that a big wall of paranoia never ends well.

I’m glad Thomas made it to the West, although I doubt his future was that 
rosy, given that he was met by Tobias as he walked to “freedom”.

Talking of Tobias, did he genuinely care for Felix? That tender parting seemed 
as though he might, but he also had to go East without anyone tagging along, so 
... Ah, Tobias, a mystery to the end.

Not sure that Martin really would have got away with that car-boot escape, but 
I like him so I went with it.

If I had a band, it would be called The Library of Forbidden Books. 

Finally, nothing in the entire seven weeks of the show was better than 
Schweppenstette’s attempt at dancing. The second-best dance scene of the year – 
afterthis one from Ex Machina <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hGY44DIQb-A>, of 
course.

Song of the week

Tempted as I was by Under Pressure, which played us out, I’m giving this week 
to Billy Idol’s White Wedding used to great effect in episode seven as Martin 
drove through the night from his demons.

Quote of the week

“They’re not crazy, they’re scrupulous. What’s up on this wall is totally 
insane” – finally someone tells Schweppenstette the truth.

So what did you think? Did it work for you or were the flaws too great? What 
about the ending – bittersweet and downbeat, or an annoying amount of loose 
ends? Would you tune in if there were a second series? As ever, all speculation 
is welcome below … 
 