
The family that turned a Harrow taxi firm into a postal company competing with 
theRoyal Mail <https://www.theguardian.com/business/royal-mail> are in line for 
a £120m windfall after an agreed bid from Deutsche Post.

UK Mail was founded by chairman Peter Kane in 1971 but he himself will get no 
direct benefit from the £243mtakeover offer, since he recently passed on his 
remaining stake to his family. Kane is notoriously publicity-shy but uses his 
wealth to invest in West End Musicals, including Breakfast at Tiffany’s which 
starred Pixie Lott.

The biggest winner from the takeover will be Kane’s son John, who will receive 
£60m. His brother Michael, who used to be involved in the business, is set for 
£23m, his ex-wife Ghislaine £14m and his daughter Joanna Bailey and her husband 
£13m. With other family members including a young son, the Kanes own just over 
50% of the business between them.

The deal is likely to intensify competition in Britain’s postal market, 
putting further pressure on Royal Mail by allowing UK Mail to capitalise on the 
German group’s greater financial and operational firepower.

 News of the bid sent UK Mail’s shares up by 43%, as investors welcomed the 
deal. .

It comes after a difficult period for UK Mail, in which problems at its 
automated sorting facility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/18/uk-mail-first-half-profits-more-than-halve-delays-delivery-centre-coventry>
 led to two profit warnings last year and thedeparture of the then chief 
executive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/25/uk-mail-boss-guy-buswell-departs-second-profits-warning>
, Guy Buswell.



Peter Kane said the offer from Deutsche Post, which is listed publicly and 
also owns logistics company DHL, gave shareholders the opportunity to cash in 
at a significant premium to the levels at which the share price had traded in 
recent months.

“The board believes that UK Mail will benefit significantly from becoming part 
of Deutsche Post DHL, and will be better positioned to continue to develop our 
parcels and mail businesses with the benefit of Deutsche Post DHL’s greater 
financial and operational resources,” he said.

”There will be significant synergies including additional volumes flowing 
through our network from Deutsche Post DHL’s global operations.” UK Mail 
delivers parcels and mail from 50 sites, using 2,440 vehicles.

Jürgen Gerdes, a board member at Deutsche Post DHL, said the deal would help 
the company satisfy increasing demand for cross-border parcel deliveries, 
driven by growth in e-commerce.


“With this acquisition, we will further extend our network and have a strong 
foothold in Europe’s three largest e-commerce markets – the UK, Germany and 
France – which account for more than 60% of online retail in the continent,” he 
said.

The postal market is undergoing a period of change, with declining volumes of 
letters and an increase in parcels as shopping moves online. This has led to 
fierce competition in the UK market, threatening the dominance of Royal Mail.


The now privatised Royal Mail is the biggest parcel operator, but UK Mail, 
says it is the next largest group in the market, delivering for businesses such 
as O2 and TalkTalk.

George Salmon, equity analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, said: “If competition 
weren’t already tough enough in the UK postal market, the big boy of European 
mail has just dived into the mix.

“Deutsche Post’s decision to buy struggling UK Mail adds a new player to the 
market with a meaningful UK footprint and lots of fire power. That has hit 
Royal Mail today, on fears that pricing pressure, that looked to be easing, 
might be about to enter a second round.”

Royal Mail shares were down 3.3%. 
 