
There is simply no stopping Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea>. Antonio Conte’s side equalled a 
club record here, muscling their way to an 11th win in succession to establish 
a nine-point advantage to hold overnight and leave the chasing pack struggling 
to spy them at the summit. They had already proved they can dazzle on this run. 
This derby demanded more brawn, but the outcome was still the same. They are 
steeled by an air of invincibility at present.

Alan Pardew, head bowed almost in resignation as he trudged down the touchline 
at the final whistle, will have taken no pleasure in being proved right with 
his pre-match assessment that these opponents can appear unbeatable. Here they 
proved impenetrable. What was impressive was the visitors’ ability to scrap for 
the points, beating the hosts at their own game while forever retaining that 
lively threat on the counterattack and feverishly suffocating Palace’s attempts 
at revival. The home side have been prolific this season, with only four teams 
having scored more, but they were blunted virtually throughout.

Antonio Conte wants ‘special future’ after Chelsea beat Crystal Palace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/antonio-conte-chelsea-future-crystal-palace-diego-costa-ngolo-kante-football>
That included the final exchanges, when Palace might normally have expected to 
whip up frenzied late pressure in pursuit of parity only for the leaders to 
hold them at arm’s length. That sequence of victories has included nine clean 
sheets. The rest of the division may have forgotten how to defend, butChelsea 
under Conte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/antonio-conte-chelsea-future-crystal-palace-diego-costa-ngolo-kante-football>
 continue to prove it is an art form.

“Starting this season, I said the manager must be a tailor and try and find 
the right fit for the team,” he said, resisting the temptation to name the 
club’s “fashion partners” in his metaphor. “For sure, it wasn’t easy for me to 
arrive here and understand very quickly the characteristics of my players. I 
needed a bit of time.

“I tried a different solution before changing the formation, but the most 
important thing is the mentality, our strong mentality. That and hard work 
during the week: tactical work, physical work, analysis work, diet ... we 
touched different aspects to try and improve.

“You can bring your idea of football with you, but if you don’t have players 
who follow you it doesn’t matter.”

Antonio Conte wants ‘special future’ after Chelsea beat Crystal Palace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/antonio-conte-chelsea-future-crystal-palace-diego-costa-ngolo-kante-football>
His players needed some convincing at first but have now bought into his 
methods, convinced as soon as the defence was tightened up and the results 
began to flow. There are no doubters in the ranks these days.

Bournemouth on Boxing Day will provide their own test now that Diego Costa and 
N’Golo Kanté have succumbed to their fifth cautions of term to grant them 
Christmas off. They have been integral to this team’s sprint clear of the pack 
and will be missed. Kanté was as busy as ever in central midfield, denying 
Palace time to settle, and it was Costa who secured the points.

There was a simplicity to his 50th goal for Chelsea that rather damned the 
home side’s attempt at defence. Eden Hazard had retreated into midfield in 
possession before urging the outstanding César Azpilicueta up from centre-half 
duties on the opposite flank. The Spaniard ambled forward untracked and lofted 
a centre towards the far post where Costa, finding space away from Scott Dann 
and Martin Kelly, was permitted a free header that he eased over Wayne 
Hennessey. The goalkeeper was poorly positioned, caught between a desire to 
intercept the cross or defend his line. The concession felt soft.

“We didn’t get enough pressure on the centre-half, but then again you don’t 
expect him to the centre-forward with a pass of that quality” said Pardew. 
“Azpilicueta’s was the perfect pass. But my team tried everything. We threw 
everything we could at them, but they were just too good defensively for us.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fcrystal-palace-chelsea-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed7bf75c5605ae4054fc37533fcf05c071cc4d3e%2F0_246_3943_2366%2F3943.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Diego%20Costa%20sends%20Chelsea%20soaring%20at%20Palace%20with%2011th%20straight%20league%20win&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fcrystal-palace-chelsea-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Diego%20Costa%20sends%20Chelsea%20soaring%20at%20Palace%20with%2011th%20straight%20league%20win&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fcrystal-palace-chelsea-premier-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed7bf75c5605ae4054fc37533fcf05c071cc4d3e%2F0_246_3943_2366%2F3943.jpg>
 Victor Moses fouls Jason Puncheon. Photograph: Dan Mullan/Getty Images 
Jason Puncheon and James McArthur missed the home side’s best opportunities, 
but the more presentable opportunities were passed up by the visitors on the 
break. Hennessey did well to deny Kanté and Marcos Alonso, with the Spaniard 
curling a late free-kick on to the underside of the crossbar. The margin of 
their victory probably should have been greater.

That left Palace deflated as they contemplated an eighth defeat in 10 league 
games and a 22nd of the calendar year. Pardew knows his position is under 
scrutiny, but if the board are unlikely to act after successive narrow home 
defeats to Manchester United and Chelsea this team cannot contemplate 
succumbing at Vicarage Road on Boxing Day. Or, even more critically, at home to 
Swansea City in the new year.

“The positives are there for everyone to see,” said Dann. “We came up against 
a top team, a side who are top of the league, and we deserved to get something 
out of the game. We showed togetherness and commitment and if we continue that 
we will start picking up points.”

That needs to happen sooner rather than later or Pardew, with Sam Allardyce 
waiting in the wings, will find his time is up. Palace have had a wretched 12 
months. Chelsea’s, in contrast, has been an untouchable 11 matches. ThePremier 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> record of 14 is 
looming ever larger and could be equalled at White Hart Lane next month. At 
present, nothing seems beyond this side.
 