
One-nil down at a place that does not feel like home on the back of four heavy 
Premier League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> losses, 
West Ham were in a predicament and there was only one man capable of sprinkling 
magic dust to ease it. Dimitri Payet picked up the ball wide on the left and 
began to sashay round opponent after opponent. It was mesmerising. He took out 
more than half of Middlebrough’s team, gliding past five outfield players 
before sliding the ball past Víctor Valdés. It was a virtuoso goal, notes from 
a Stradivarius when everyone else seemed to be stuck in an oompah band. For all 
those who have found this new stadium experience hard, it was a moment to lose 
themselves in, to forget their travails.

It might not have been enough to inspire that craved-for victory but it was a 
heck of a way to stop the rot. Slaven Bilic felt compelled to compare it to the 
best around. “It reminded me of Messi’s goals,” he said. “I didn’t see many 
players scoring these kinds of goals. You get crackers, free-kicks, volleys, 
scissor kicks, 30-yard screamers. This was a brilliant moment of magic. That 
gave us a point, brought us back into the situation where we could win the game 
with half an hour to go.”

That they did not left Bilic with mixed emotions. “In terms of character and 
work rate I couldn’t ask for more. On the other hand it wasn’t the result we 
were looking for. With greatest respect toMiddlesbrough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/middlesbrough> we wanted to beat them.”

Bilic was left mulling over his bittersweet afternoon in the context of the 
bigger picture. Could Payet’s goal be the kind that proves a game changer – for 
the club, for the season, for the stadium, and, arguably, for his own sake? “It 
can,” he said. “But we can’t rely on doing that every time. We have to add 
quality in the front line which is the most difficult to do.

“I know my situation. I know how it works. I am not thinking about my future, 
I am thinking about my job and I don’t like where we are in the table. I really 
don’t like it. I am putting myself under pressure.”

West Ham are still chasing their first Premier League win since 21 August. 
Bilic picked an experimental lineup in an attempt to shake things up. It might 
have seemed counterintuitive when you are desperate for a win to start without 
a recognisable striker, but Bilic chose to push Michail Antonio to a 
centre-forward post. Cutting edge was hard to find.

Complications never feel too far away at the moment and Bilic was disappointed 
to see Sam Byram injure his hamstring early in the game.

The match took a while to warm up, with Mark Noble’s sweet strike against the 
underside of the bar the best of a humdrum first half.

In a half-time rejig, Simone Zaza replaced the ineffectual Göhkan Töre in an 
attempt to give West Ham more of an attacking focus. But it was a hoiked ball 
up the other end to Jordan Rhodes that brought the first decisive moment. 
Adrián raced out to meet him and saved well. From the resulting corner 
Cristhian Stuani met Viktor Fischer’s delivery with a thumping header. Noble 
was positioned on the line but cleared from just behind it. The goal was given.

Payet’s response was heaven sent. There are questions about the quality of 
Boro’s bewildered defending, but Aitor Karanka accepted it as a stroke of pure 
talent. “He had an amazing Euros, so it’s nothing new,” he said. “We showed the 
players a lot of videos and reports. Sometimes you don’t know – is it better to 
be closer to him or give him one or two metres?” In this case, nothing worked.

As an atmosphere changer for West Ham it certainly did the trick. Try as they 
might, a winner would not follow, however. Payet was at it again before Zaza 
and Antonio slashed at a couple of other presentable chances.

Karanka was pleased with the point for Middlesbrough, which he felt indicated 
an improving sense of handling the demands of the Premier League. “I am happy 
because the performance was good. We knew West Ham wasn’t in their best moment 
but when you have players like Payet who can turn a game we knew we could have 
problems.

“We are in the position I expected at the beginning. Fighting a lot, knowing 
that every single point will be really, really tough. The main thing was to 
recover confidence and I could feel the changing room after the game, it was 
completely different to after Tottenham or Everton.”

All in all, for both teams, an important corner half turned.

Watford rescue point against Bournemouth thanks to Isaac Success
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/01/watford-bournemouth-premier-league-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fwest-ham-united-middlesbrough-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdca6f988e00a26cace358ac13018b5c23dd58fa5%2F73_190_4179_2508%2F4179.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dimitri%20Payet%20magic%20earns%20West%20Ham%20a%20point%20against%20Middlesbrough&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fwest-ham-united-middlesbrough-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dimitri%20Payet%20magic%20earns%20West%20Ham%20a%20point%20against%20Middlesbrough&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fwest-ham-united-middlesbrough-premier-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdca6f988e00a26cace358ac13018b5c23dd58fa5%2F73_190_4179_2508%2F4179.jpg>
 Cristhian Stuani opens the scoring for Middlesbrough. Photograph: Mike 
Hewitt/Getty Images 
Chelsea get back on track as Willian and Diego Costa seal routine win at Hull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/01/hull-city-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
West Ham's night out helped team end losing streak, says James Collins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/01/west-hams-night-out-helped-team-end-losing-streak-says-james-collins> 