
Greetings. I come in peace and, thanks to a few days at a spa, I've got my 
mojo back. Welcome to a longer and stronger Divine Dispatches.

✤ Few people would praise pastor Eddie Long <http://www.newbirth.org/> right 
now, but he deserves credit for inspiring the emergence of the phrase 
"Elongate" to describethe scandal 
<http://abcnews.go.com/US/wireStory?id=11693887> engulfing him. The senior 
religious leader denies allegations of coercing three young men from his 25,000 
strong congregation into a sexual relationship. But this brush with the law – 
and the spotlight – is not the first.

According to NPR 
<http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=130159112>, Long's church 
and personal life are manifestations of the "name it and claim it" gospel – a 
style of preaching that states "riches are a sign of God's blessing". It notes 
that Long drives a $350,000 (£220,000) Bentley, bought a $1.1m home in 2005 and 
favours gold necklaces and Rolex watches. "When the Atlanta 
Journal-Constitution asked him about the $3m he received from the church and 
its charities between 1997 and 2000, Long was defiant." NPR notes the irony – 
it's not actually irony, it's more of a contradiction or hypocrisy but I'll let 
it go – between the pastor's anti-homosexuality stance and the sexual nature of 
the allegations, drawing on the tale of televangelistTed Haggard 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/news/national/2010/01/27/2010-01-27_gayle_haggard_ted_is_free_from_homosexual_compulsions__for_real_this_time.html>
 who repeatedly denounced homosexuality only to admit having sex with a male 
prostitute.

Adding some light relief to an otherwise murky affair is the Huffington Post 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/zandile-blay/bishop-eddie-long-a-wolf_b_741058.html>
, which offers a fashion take on Elongate.Zandile Blay 
<http://twitter.com/#!/zandile> writes: "Dressed in a pristine, floor-skimming, 
figure-hugging, light-hued pastoral gown, Long looked every inch the part of a 
strong and pure man of God. The ensemble, from cut to colour, was a classic one 
in Long's formal wear lineup. From professional milestones (officiating the 
funeral of Coretta Scott King, with three former and one sitting president in 
the audience) to personal ones (a commemorative portrait of Long and his wife) 
he clearly favours pastel tones and formal shapes." She concludes by saying 
that Long is a showoff, albeit one with "an amazing, if top-heavy physique".

The Christian Science Monitor 
<http://www.csmonitor.com/USA/Society/2010/0927/Bishop-Eddie-Long-Will-case-force-open-talk-in-black-church-about-sexuality>
 says the scandal may force the church to talk about its don't ask, don't tell 
policy "where outwardly stated condemnations inhibit frank discussions about 
sexuality of any sort". It adds: "The case isn't just of interest because of 
Long's alleged hypocrisy, with a large and influential church empire hanging in 
the balance, but because it's taking place in Atlanta, home to a number of 
conservative black mega-churches as well as the largest population of gay 
blacks in the US."

Leaving his sickbed, Christopher Hitchens is in fine fettle at Slate 
<http://www.slate.com/id/2268796/> and takes aim at the man who is responsible 
"for the steady erosion of the real memory of the civil rights movement, which 
is not safe when left in the keeping of God's bigmouths and tree-shakers." I 
can feel his ire from here – and it's keeping me warm.

✤ The US really know how to do God – or not. Pew Forum 
<http://newsfeed.time.com/2010/09/28/survey-atheists-know-more-about-religion-than-believers/>
 has a survey out that says atheists and agnostics know more about religion 
than, er, religious people. How can this possibly be true? And has anyone told 
the archbishops and bishops of the world? TheLA Times 
<http://www.latimes.com/news/nationworld/nation/wire/sns-religion-survey,0,7375137.story>
 also carries a report. It uses punctuation in its headlines. Why do US 
newspapers use punctuation in headlines? Sorry, pet hate intruding there …

So, back to the story. "American atheists and agnostics tend to be people who 
grew up in a religious tradition and consciously gave it up, often after a 
great deal of reflection and study," says Alan Cooperman, associate director 
for research at the Pew Forum. "These are people who thought a lot about 
religion. They're not indifferent. They care about it." The article says 
atheists and agnostics also tend to be "relatively well educated, and the 
survey found, not surprisingly, that the most knowledgeable people were also 
the best educated. However, it said atheists and agnostics also outperformed 
believers who had a similar level of education." Interesting *strokes chin*.

✤ The BBC reports <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-south-asia-11425834> that 
an Indian court will this week decide who owns the land where Hindus razed a 
16th-century mosque in 1992, claiming the site in Ayodhya to be the birthplace 
of their god, Rama. The destruction of the mosque led to rioting between Hindus 
and Muslims – some of the worst since partition – with around 2,000 people 
dying in the chaos and violence.India Today 
<http://indiatoday.intoday.in/site/Story/114318/India/timeline-of-ayodhya-dispute-and-slew-of-legal-suits-.html>
 has a timeline – stretching back to 1528 – andthe Times 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/Ayodhya-verdict-Citizens-pledge-to-maintain-peace/articleshow/6638576.cms>
 (no, not that one) says there are promises on all sides to maintain law and 
order before, during and after the court delivers its verdict.Sify 
<http://sify.com/news/ayodhya/> has a roundup of articles and comment.
 