
How do I find room for another Sharon Horgan-scripted relationship tragicomedy 
in my heart? I had a huge crush on Pulling (BBC3), took Catastrophe (Channel 4) 
to be my lawfully wedded favourite sitcom of last year, and I’ve watched and 
rewatched last month’s exceptional pilot for Motherland (BBC2), co-written with 
Graham and Helen Linehan and Holly Walsh, while I wait fora recently confirmed 
full series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/06/bbc-motherland-series-sharon-horgan-graham-linehan-bbc2>
. I feel like a 1980s Crackerjack contestant, running out of arm space for the 
huge pile of Horgan-penned prizes I’m trying to cuddle all at once, and now 
she’s made Divorce and I’ve got sore arms.

Sharon Horgan: Queen of difficult women
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/oct/09/sharon-horgan-queen-of-difficult-women>
Sarah Jessica Parker plays Frances and Thomas Haden Church her husband Robert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/07/thomas-haden-church-interview-divorce-sarah-jessica-parker>
 in this brilliantly frustrating tale of connubial rot. Horgan’s dialogue, 
complete with staccato swears and well-measured vulgarity, has more than 
survived the journey across the Atlantic. She hasn’t had to adjust her tone; 
crucial when someone writing for British TV tries to take their essence to the 
US. It always gets diluted somehow, but, apart from the odd “asshole”, that’s 
not the case here.

As a Sex And The City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/23/cynthia-nixon-sex-and-the-city> 
fan, the combination of that HBO sting and Parker’s name in the credits gets my 
fingers tingling. Way to make your high-profile US debut, casting an actor who 
carries with her (that was an unintentional pun) the huge weight of audience 
expectation, when her last TV character was Carrie Bradshaw and most potential 
viewers are in a state of strung-out anticipointment, waiting to see what she 
can do to top it.

Horgan’s exploration of marital disharmony, that sometimes casual cruelty 
sprung from a mid-life panic, sees Parker step into a more mature role. Or at 
least that’s how it seems in the beginning. Frances is intelligent, a caring 
mum and sympathetic friend, who dreams of opening a gallery and who also finds 
time to maintain her appearance. She wants the world to like her. In turn, 
Robert is a pass-agg jobsworth with a burgeoning resentment for the world 
around him. If this marriage is going down the crapper, we know whose fault it 
is. Doesn’t he realise what a tremendous woman he’s married to?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoIGYQi6p8f4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoIGYQi6p8f4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoIGYQi6p8f4&media=>
But it’s not long before Frances’s imperfections surface. Beneath those 
autumnal separates and cashmere wrist-warmers beats the heart of a selfish 
prick. Like all of Horgan’s antiheroes, Frances is out for number one. She’s 
having an affair with an academic played by Jemaine Clement. She full-stops 
most conversations with Robert by way of a turned back. He changes the locks, 
she emasculates him during therapy. Peck, peck, peck.

Parker’s character is encapsulated the first time we see her inspecting her 
neck flesh in the bathroom mirror while Robert huffs in the doorway, 
complaining he’s had to defecate in a tin. If I’m making him sound like a 
doofus, he’s not. Just as the cracks appear in Frances, the softer side of 
Robert is revealed in the neatly structured first episode. You’ll change teams 
five times before the credits roll.

“I want a divorce,” says Frances in the fallout from a 50th birthday party the 
two attend. As a viewer, it puts you in a novel position because you’ll want a 
divorce, too – theirs. I hope it continues to be a messy breakup, because I 
could uncomfortably wallow in the hot tub of their mutual unpleasantness for a 
good couple of series yet.

 * Divorce airs tonight, 10.10pm, on Sky Atlantic  