
Sarah Marsh: ‘No matter how much you want to show them affection they give 
nothing back’

I vividly remember my first encounter with a hamster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/oct/16/pets-ticking-clock-in-cage>
. I was six years old, and went to visit a friend who had recently purchased 
one. I wasso excited. But as I peered into the cage to touch its fluffy little 
head, I had a nasty surprise: it bit me.

I can see why. To it, I must have appeared like a giant monster invading its 
home. But in that moment, as blood spilled from my finger, I realised the 
perils of owning one of these animals as a pet.

Pets are just ticking clocks in cages | Darragh McManus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/oct/16/pets-ticking-clock-in-cage>
I should say now that I am a huge animal lover. When I was younger I wanted a 
home filled withpets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2008/oct/07/children.health.pets>, and 
begged my mum for everything from ferrets to goldfish. I even built my own 
snail hotel in the garden. I have always had cats, and am now the proud owner 
of a tortoise.

However, hamsters are a big no-no because (other than being surprisingly 
aggressive) they are also impossible to look after. They never seem to last 
much longer than a few months, and always seem to die in horrible ways. I 
remember one friend whose hamster excreted a strange pus before passing away a 
few days later.

What’s more, every hamster I have ever encountered seems to hate being touched 
or played with. Whenever you go near them they run into the edges of the cage, 
hiding behind whatever they can. No matter how much you want to show them 
affection, they give nothing back, and even if you rear it from birth some 
breeds of hamsters (despite how cute they are) will never really want to be 
petted or cuddled.

I cannot fathom parents giving hamsters to children as pets. They hate being 
played with during the day. And, just when it’s time for your child to go to 
sleep, it’s time for a hamster to wake up. Cue scratching sounds all night.

Hamsters also require a gentle touch and are easily startled by sudden 
movement and loud noises. It’s a big ask for children, who lack fine motor 
control and self-restraint, to look after them in the right way. I had one 
friend who used to constantly pick up and drop her hamsters, even once 
squeezing them through the cage bars to get them out – an image that still 
haunts me.

Maybe they work for some people. But I cannot think of anything worse than 
owning an animal whose urine can corrode plastic (fact!). And don’t even get me 
started on the smell.

Heidi Stephens: ‘It was perfectly normal to watch telly with a hamster 
trundling around like a tiny rodent Gladiator’

Daytime napping, infinite fluffy cuteness and expandable cheeks for storing 
food – what’s not to love about hamsters? I was given one for my eighth 
birthday, giftwrapped in a stern parental lecture that he was all mine to look 
after, and if I managed to keep it alive we might one day get a dog. I was an 
imaginative child, so I called him Hamm.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmay%2F05%2Fhamsters-pets-princess-charlotte-marvin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84b46450959857473cbed132487e458c4f061ee0%2F0_353_5616_3368%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Do%20hamsters%20make%20pets%20fit%20for%20a%20princess%3F%20%7C%20Sarah%20Marsh%20and%20Heidi%20Stephens&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmay%2F05%2Fhamsters-pets-princess-charlotte-marvin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Do%20hamsters%20make%20pets%20fit%20for%20a%20princess%3F%20%7C%20Sarah%20Marsh%20and%20Heidi%20Stephens&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmay%2F05%2Fhamsters-pets-princess-charlotte-marvin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84b46450959857473cbed132487e458c4f061ee0%2F0_353_5616_3368%2F5616.jpg>
 Princess Charlotte (Marvin the hamster not pictured). Photograph: Getty Images 
It turned out that hamsters are pretty low-maintenance – Hamm required enough 
daily sunflower seeds, carrots and apples to stuff his cheeks to capacity, 
plenty of water and a weekly clean-out of his cage. This was a multilevel 
Rotastak maze of crawling tubes, exercise wheels and hidey holes, but Hamm 
quickly learned that he could push the sprung door open, so we popped a clothes 
peg on it to keep him safe.

Each evening we would let Hamm pootle around the house in a clear plastic 
ball, occasionally nudging him out when he got wedged under the sideboard. 
Apparently hamster balls aren’t recommended any more, but in the 80s it was 
perfectly normal to watch telly with a hamster trundling through the shagpile 
like a tiny rodent Gladiator.

Hamsters only live for two or three years, so they’re an excellent way to 
teach children about pet mortality. Alas, Hamm died peacefully in his sleep 
while I was away on a school trip, and Mum buried him in the garden. Of course 
I later found out that Mum had left the peg off his cage door and, while trying 
to mount an escape, Hamm managed to sever one of his back legs in the spring 
mechanism and had to be put down.

Many important childhood lessons were learned that day – that Hamm was a brave 
and intrepid explorer who died a hero, and that my mum could absolutely not be 
trusted. Kate, we’re watching you.
 