
“How are you doing? It’s nice to see you again.”


“OK,” she replies, unusually tersely.

“How was your daughter’s wedding? I thought of you when the sun came out.”

“Yeah, it was good.” 

And then, she burst into tears.

“Is everything OK?”

“Look love, I don’t mean to be rude but can you just tell me what my test 
showed? I haven’t slept all week and am nauseous with worry. I can’t take this 
anymore.”

“You had a test? But I didn’t order one. Your breast cancer has been stable 
for some years.”

“My GP did, and said you’d have the results. You mean you don’t know?”

Chemotherapy mortality study could help improve cancer care in England
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/31/chemotherapy-mortality-study-cancer-care-england-patients-dying-palliative>
Conventional medical training teaches doctors to start with perfunctory 
questions and build rapport before delivering significant news. After all, 
patients, especially in the public health system, don’t always see the same 
doctor and it’s important to cover or recap important details.

I used to greet patients at the door, ensure they were comfortably seated with 
phone turned off, hearing aid tuned in and notebook ready. I’d exchange a few 
pleasantries to humanise the interaction. But frankly, I am surprised it has 
taken me so long to appreciate that no oncology consultation goes far without 
first relaying the news of “the test”. “The test” is an umbrella term 
encompassing all manner of bloods and x-rays – haemoglobin, biochemistry, liver 
function, tumour markers, CT scans, PET scans and the rest. From the moment of 
their cancer diagnosis, patients are wedded to “the test”.

It’s different for brand new patients who are resigned to repeating their 
story multiple times to multiple doctors but when long-term patients return for 
their regular check-up they have one thing on their mind. So I have learnt to 
get to the point fast.

If the news is good, I tell the patient as soon as we’re out of earshot: “Your 
tests were fine, come and sit down.” Grips loosen, shoulders relax and some 
days you can feel the hiss of dissipating tension. When the news is bad, I 
escort the patient to a chair, make eye contact, and say, “I’m afraid the scans 
found a problem – we’ll have plenty of time to discuss this.”

Everyone does it differently but over time, I have decided this is kinder 
than, “How are you? Let’s go over any symptoms before we get to your results.”

Every patient has a story about spending sleepless nights and nail-biting 
days, fearing the worst but praying for a reprieve. When someone cries with 
relief at a scan that I’d always expected to be normal, I can’t help reflecting 
on how automatically scribbled test slips have the power to govern people’s 
lives.

“Your bone scan was normal again. There was no sign of cancer in your spine, 
only arthritis,” I recently reassured an elderly man with prostate cancer. He 
suffered from chronic back pain but the moment he mentioned it to a new 
provider, he scored himself another test. This time, a chiropractor had 
encouraged him to ask his GP for a scan.

Tests crowded his life – he rued that there wasn’t an event in recent times 
that hadn’t been disrupted by an appointment or a test, from his nephew’s 
wedding to his sister’s funeral. Knowing that I’d played a part in his misery, 
I suggested, giving him a break from tests. “They don’t really help nearly as 
much as talking to you and seeing how you are doing,” I said. But his wife was 
quick to squash his glee, “Oh no, I’d go mad not knowing! You must do a blood 
test at least.”

As cancer patients are living longer, they are seeing their oncologists more 
and many visits are accompanied by some sort of test. In the case of breast 
cancer, but also others such as prostate and colon cancer, blood tumour markers 
are used to track tumour activity, with changing markers often triggering 
costly scans. Patients regard painful and inconvenient tests as the cross to 
bear if they are to stay alive. After all, without tests how will their 
oncologist know what’s going on inside their body? For oncologists, writing 
test slips is as routine as breathing.

But the evidence suggests that cancer patients who are not receiving 
chemotherapy and are not enrolled in clinical trials do not need frequent 
testing. Depending on the disease, professional guidelines have long 
recommended against so-called “routine” testing in cancer surveillance but 
patients continue to receive them. Not all tests are ordered by oncologists – 
in a fragmented environment, patients see multiple providers. They order a test 
hoping it will reveal something that a good history won’t but this is seldom 
the case.

Tumour marker measurements in a range of advanced cancers altered management 
in a mere 2% of patients.

Pathology and radiology tests have grown by around 10% each year. The Grattan 
Institute estimates the overall cost of wasteful healthcare spending 
<http://grattan.edu.au/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/806-costly-care.pdf> to be as 
much as a billion dollars.

It might seem intuitive that early detection of disease progression through 
tests might be helpful in instituting or switching therapies, avoiding 
unnecessary toxicity and guiding therapeutic choices but there is no evidence 
that a particular test done at a particular interval alone determines a change 
in course.

On the other hand, there is evidence that more tests cause more anxiety. Up to 
65% of patients with advanced cancer are said to suffer some form of 
psychological distress. Undergoing frequent tests, not clearly understanding 
why and waiting weeks, even months, for results traps them in an unenviable 
situation. Patients who are preoccupied by test results have been shown to have 
a worse quality of life.

A recent study of more than 2,000 American women with metastatic breast cancer 
published in the Journal of Clinical Oncology found that more than a third of 
their providers were “extreme users” of blood tests and scans. (Here, extreme 
use was defined as more than 12 tumour marker tests and more than four scans 
per year.) Patients who were cared for by these providers had a 60% higher cost 
of care, more hospital-based care and later use of palliative care. A previous 
study found that tumour marker measurements in a range of advanced cancers 
altered management in a mere 2% of patients.

The overuse of pathology and radiology tests is by no means a problem specific 
to oncology but cancer patients are among the most heavily investigated, with 
the direct cost of cancer care in Australia reaching over $4.5bn.

HPV infection rates plummet after vaccine with China the next frontier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/05/hpv-infection-rates-plummet-after-vaccine-with-china-the-next-frontier>
Entrenched physician practice is hard to change through guidelines alone. In 
one study, over 90% of oncologists reported that repeat tests were ordered by 
someone simply copying the previous order. Without being constrained by rigid 
rules, doctors must be accountable for the tests they order. Making doctors 
aware, individually where possible, of the cost of tests, has been shown to 
influence practice, at least in the short-term. Awareness of the myriad costs 
of over-investigation must begin early in a doctor’s career. Good clinical 
practice means asking with every test ordered, “How will the results change my 
management?”

Patient expectations play a role in the prescribing habits of doctors. 
Comparisons in cancer are rife. “My neighbour with the same cancer gets a test 
every time, why don’t I?” is a common question posed to oncologists. The answer 
is not to order the test, rather to educate the patient. Patient surveys show a 
willingness to understand and avoid the harmful effects of indiscriminate 
testing. A key motivation for enduring tests is a feeling of security but 
patients need to understand that a good doctor-patient relationship, where 
concerns are promptly heeded, is no match for a battery of tests.

When I tell patients I’d rather not order tests that don’t provide meaningful 
results in their clinical context, they often ask what else they can do to look 
after themselves, as if submitting to tests were a proxy for self-care. I tell 
them that there is growing evidence that they should maintain a healthy weight, 
eat everything but in moderation, get some form of regular exercise, stop 
smoking and nurture good relationships.

Frequent testing improves neither quality nor quantity of life but these other 
recommendations nod to the foremost tenet of medicine, first do no harm.
 