
Struggling with your mathematics homework? Sudoku proving too hard? 
Depression? ADHD? Post-traumatic stress disorder?

There’s a solution: it involves strapping electrodes to your head and feeding 
a current through your brain. Sound good?

There’s an increasingly active community of amateur brain hackers, two 
neuroscientists toldSXSW <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sxsw>, with all 
the relevant electrical parts available to buy online for less than $100 and 
delivered to the privacy and, theoretically, safety of your own home.

When Canadian neuroscientist Wilder Penfield practiced pioneering brain 
surgery and research from the 1930s to the 50s, it involved poking or 
electrically stimulating the brain directly. Cameron Craddock, director at the 
Nathan S Kline Institute For Psychiatric Research in New York, showed a video 
of a patient in the early 60s who had an electrode attached to her brain’s 
nucleus accumbens, or pleasure center.

She repeatedly pressed a button on the control panel resting on her lap that 
connected directly to her brain, and when asked what it felt like she whispered 
“sex button”.

If you’ve ever licked a battery you’ve probably done transcranial direct 
current stimulation
Cameron Craddock, Nathan S Kline Institute For Psychiatric Research 
Brain stimulation is a little more sophisticated now, and non-invasive. 
Transcranial direct current stimulation (TDCS), Cameron explains, involves 
running a current through your brain and can be self-applied. There’s already 
an active community of “citizen scientists” experimenting with this and sharing 
their experiences online.

“If you’ve ever licked a battery you’ve probably done TDCS,” he quips. All the 
equipment to do this is readily available online. The red part goes near the 
part of the brain you want to stimulate, the the black pad goes on the opposite 
side and you just hope that things work that way.” There is some evidence, he 
said, that using this technique helps improve the rate of learning, encouraging 
neurons and synapses to do the right thing while the brain is processing 
information.

Another technique is transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), which stimulates 
a relatively localized area of a few square centimeters. That can interfere 
(and therefore hopefully improve) the ability to speak, move and count, 
depending where on the brain it is applied. And some of these techniques are 
nearing FDA approval for treatment of conditions such as depression, Cameron 
says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fsxsw-neuroscientists-home-hacking-your-brain-with-electronics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F385ed00d1ed8231f18479c35e6cbf7fdaf67d79b%2F0_34_3600_2159%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Do%20not%20try%20this%20at%20home%3A%20hacking%20your%20brain%20with%20electronics&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fsxsw-neuroscientists-home-hacking-your-brain-with-electronics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Do%20not%20try%20this%20at%20home%3A%20hacking%20your%20brain%20with%20electronics&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fsxsw-neuroscientists-home-hacking-your-brain-with-electronics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F385ed00d1ed8231f18479c35e6cbf7fdaf67d79b%2F0_34_3600_2159%2F3600.jpg>
 SXSW observer, probably not with a hacked brain. Photograph: Larry W Smith/EPA 
There’s a significant variation in results depending on where on the brain the 
stimulation is applied, what oscillation and what voltage, and increasing the 
amount of current to the brain doesn’t necessarily produce better results; it 
can trigger inhibitory effect on the nervous system rather than an “excitory” 
one, he says.

While some startups are focusing on meditation, sleep and nutrition to improve 
mental performance, others are looking at electric brain stimulation. Thync’s 
$199 device uses transdermal electrical neurosignalling; the user applies one 
patch to their temple and another to the back of their neck, and can either set 
it to trigger energy or calm. The stimulation, Cameron says, tigers nerve 
responses in the face, so the “nervous periphery” rather than direct brain 
stimulation.

Are there side effects? TMS can damage hearing, cause scalp discomfort, spasms 
and headaches. TDCS can cause a slight itching on the skin during stimulation, 
dizziness and fatigue.

Do we need to be skeptical? Cameron said that for every piece of scientific 
research that shows positive effects of brain stimulation, there’s one that 
shows little or no effect. It’s still a contentious scientific area. But if you 
still really want to try it, ask the internet.
 