
If man-heavy “I’m funnier than you” panel shows leave your comedy palate in 
need of a cleanse, try feasting onDo the Right Thing 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/podcast/do-the-right-thing/id453737551?mt=2>.

Soft-voiced but sweary host Danielle Ward 
<https://twitter.com/captainward?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 describes it as “the podcast panel show that wants to do the right thing in 
any situation”, with funny guests responding to life’s common dilemmas. OK, not 
all of them are common. Or, indeed, real. “You cry Creme Egg filling. What’s 
the wrong thing to do?” is neither.

Furious vegan Michael Legge <https://twitter.com/michaellegge?lang=en-gb> and 
the more measured – but just as deadly –Margaret Cabourn-Smith 
<https://twitter.com/MCabournSmith?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 are team captains and neither is afraid to insult members of the public who 
seek advice. “My boyfriend saw the dentist for the first time in 12 years today 
for his rubbish teeth. When he came back, he told me how she kept resting her 
breasts on his face,” says one woman. “Should I be concerned?” It transpires 
that he doesn’t brush his teeth at night. “You don’t deserve tits in your 
face!” storms Legge.

Their latest guests are gently bickering couple Sara Pascoe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/sara-pascoe> and John Robins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jonrobins>, plus bomb-disposal expert 
Steve, who, they learn, has never had the urge to diffuse his alarm clock. He 
was once shot at in Bosnia, but he didn’t notice. “We weren’t aware of it 
’cause we were listening toPhil Collins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/phil-collins> on repeat.”.

Some jokes cause mild hysteria, while others flop, which is half the fun when 
you’re firing off gag upon gag. Moments of joyous bad taste and penis-based 
quips separate it fromNicholas Parsons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/10/in-praise-of-nicholas-parsons-just-a-minute>
 territory. That and the liberal sprinkling of C-bombs. Random points are 
awarded and useful facts emerge occasionally, but the true appeal is its 
useless waffle masquerading as sound advice. Yes, vegans can kill wasps.

Do the Right Thing has a great back catalogue: the episode with Rufus Hound 
and Diane “Philomena Cunk” Morgan 
<https://soundcloud.com/britishcomedyguide/do-the-right-thing-episode-06-03> is 
a jewel. While conversation turns to gambling on how far you can get when your 
car’s running on empty and the pain of a school reunion, Morgan cuts through 
with understated bafflement. “Oh my God, this is awful,” she says. “I thought 
it was going to be likeLoose Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2011/jan/26/loose-women-national-award>
.”

If you like this, try … International Waters: a UK vs US trivia quiz
 