
Ray Huang’s book on the decline of the Ming dynasty focused on a year when 
nothing much happened. 1587 wasA Year of No Significance 
<http://www.amazon.com/1587-Year-No-Significance-Dynasty/dp/0300028849> – 
pretty much a non-year – but beneath the surface, signs of deep tectonic shifts 
could be found, ones that would lead to the dynasty’s collapse.


'Jobs and growth' 2016 budget pitch costs wealthy retirees, smokers and 
multinationals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/03/budget-2016-jobs-and-growth-pitch-costs-wealthy-retirees-smokers-and-multinationals>
Nothing much happened in this budget either; it was pretty much a non-budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/ng-interactive/2016/may/03/if-this-budget-was-a-tomato-in-a-shop-you-would-leave-it-there-it-is-a-bad-tomato>
. The arts presshas identified 
<http://www.artshub.com.au/news-article/news/grants-and-funding/richard-watts/arts-budget-2016-doesnt-hurt-much-but-doesnt-heal-251192>
 snips here and there but the damage was done in the previous two years, with 
about $42m each year chopped from the Australia Council. This sat alongside 
cuts to Screen Australia, and the ongoing diminishing of the public 
broadcasting system. This is the year the culture cuts didn’t happen, in a 
budget of no significance – other than as an election spruik.

Yet look carefully and you can see the cracks. Let us leave aside “jobs and 
growth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/04/the-budget-is-full-of-old-ideas-but-at-least-we-get-new-slogan>
” (now there’s a surprise) and look at those ideas of innovation and 
transition, agility and enterprise that are to set us on course, belatedly, for 
the 21st century. Arts and culture are absent. So too are those “creative 
industries” which, we have been told for nearly two decades, are the growth and 
jobs sector of the future. STEM refuses to turn into STEAM. Education – 
creative or otherwise – remains in the “to cut” basket.

Whatever bright future lies ahead, “culture and creativity” are not, as far as 
this government is concerned, central to it.

This has come as a shock to those in the arts and culture sector who, since 
Paul Keating’s Creative Nation document of 1994, looked to the new information 
economy to change them from welfare recipients into investment opportunities. 
Information-rich economies were turning culture and creativity into the iron 
and coal of the 21st century. The cultural sector was the fastest growing. 
Those who worked in it, we were told, possessed a pure form of creativity that 
could catalyse the rest of the economy. The arts were the jewel in the crown of 
a cultural tourism sector that was displacing beaches and barbeques in a 
globally imagined Australia.

Much of this was undoubtedly true. Which is why there has been universal 
<http://www.artshub.com.au/news-article/opinions-and-analysis/public-policy/rupert-myer/why-the-innovation-agenda-needs-the-arts-251185>
head scratching 
<http://dailyreview.com.au/why-is-arts-a-dirty-word-in-politics/41373> as to 
why an industry that employs more than agriculture and construction – and that 
repeatedly over-performs on value-for-money, return on investment, and the rest 
– is so utterly ignored by government.

What Australia needs to learn from Victoria's arts funding push
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/21/what-australia-needs-to-learn-from-victorias-arts-funding-push>
And not just the Coalition. The Victorian government’s announcement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/21/what-australia-needs-to-learn-from-victorias-arts-funding-push>
 of a coherent, well-funded strategy for culture shines out across a sea of 
gloom, when in fact (without sounding churlish) it should be par for the 
course. Perhaps we have not nailed down the impact metrics? Maybe we have used 
soft cultural consultants, when we should have gone to Goldman Sachs? Maybe we 
should rebrand the cultural sector as “creative tech”?

The problem lies deeper than finding the right metric. It can be glimpsed in 
one of those “beware geeks” sections of the budget, hiding a 25% cut in the 
cost of access to the public broadcast spectrum.As David Tilly put it 
<http://screen.artshub.com.au/news-article/features/television/david-tiley/budget-2016-offers-no-mercy-to-public-screen-sector-251193>
: “Savaged by poverty, desperate for any relief, the Australian free-to-air 
commercial broadcasters will pay even less for their licence to use the 
spectrum so inconveniently owned by the people of Australia”.

This reduction of $160m to the public purse will undoubtedly be born by the 
ABC and SBS. More head scratching, and of the sort common in the UK where the 
BBC isbeing similarly savaged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/29/bbc-news-cuts-news-channel>. Why 
would a government systematically debilitate a highly successful and popular 
public broadcaster? The answer lies in the word “public”. For it is a truth 
universally acknowledged that the market is the best and only source of value; 
and if it is not, then that’s because it is being distorted by the public 
sector.

In part this is related to the kinds of constituencies represented by the 
current government, for whom anything public is a restriction on their profits. 
But that is not all of it. The reason why art and culture – including the media 
– are left out is not because they have failed to make the economic case for 
culture, but because they still hold on to values which cannot be encapsulated 
by economic reason alone. They stand, fundamentally, for values of individual 
and collective wellbeing and development, which are at odds with the dominant 
values of current economic reasoning: that only market transactions can hold a 
society together and provide for their collective wellbeing; and that cultural 
consumption must be organised and judged as all other kinds of consumption are 
– the economically efficient delivery of ever-proliferating goods and services 
to an infinitely expandable set of wants, whose merit (other than pornography, 
defamation and terrorism) is a question only for the consumer and his or her 
credit card.

This is the bind that a budget of no importance reveals to the arts and 
culture sector. Government does not have a place for the kinds of value you 
bring. Two decades of trying to show thatreally, our value is your value have 
come to nothing. This sounds gloomy, but does not need to be. Because 
increasingly, the value that the cultural sector represents – a truthful 
account of individual change and becoming, a celebration and enhancement of 
collective belonging – is exactly what is lacking in the utterly degraded 
wasteland of “jobs and growth”.

The cultural sector has been through a lot in the past 20 years. Maybe it has 
grown up, become more responsible, less precious. But the values it represents 
are needed now more than ever, much more than impact statements that no 
minister ever reads.

Times are going to be hard for those who make a living in culture, but please: 
don’t give up your day job.

• Justin O’Connor’s Platform Paper – After the Creative Industries: Why We 
Need a Cultural Economy – is published this week byCurrency House 
<https://currencyhouse.org.au/>
 