
As a teenaged feminist in the 2000s trying to educate myself using the 
internet, my favourite material to read wasn’t written with me in mind. After 
churning through virtually all the mainstream feminist blogs and websites 
(there weren’t many in 2006), I learned that the most interesting and radical 
writing was generally done by people that the white, liberal feminist 
establishment considered crazy.

Lena Dunham to launch Lenny email newsletter for 'like-minded' women
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jul/15/lena-dunham-to-launch-lenny-email-newsletter-for-young-women>
It’s not that separatist black womanists, the small and besieged contingent of 
trans activist bloggers, or the female feral communist contingent were always 
right about everything, although they were (and are) right about a lot of 
things. Or that there weren’t thoughtful and challenging feminist writers from 
white, privileged or academic backgrounds.

Rather, it was that the tone and political viewpoint of professional or 
gatekeeper-approved feminist media at the time was simplistic, anodyne and 
self-centred.

Times have changed a lot since then, and mainstream feminism is not as hostile 
to the ideas ofintersectionality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/dec/23/in-defence-of-intersectionality>
 orstructural analysis 
<http://www.newrepublic.com/article/121249/sheryl-sandbergs-lean-feminism-puts-women-issues-risk>
 as it once was. But still, I found myself groaning internally when I 
discovered that Lena Dunham is launching afeminist lifestyle newsletter for 
young women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jul/15/lena-dunham-to-launch-lenny-email-newsletter-for-young-women>
.

We are now drowning in an ocean of feminist-inflected, professionally produced 
entertainment made to appeal to the sensibilities of young women. On one level, 
this is good: engaging with pop culture shouldn’t have to involve being exposed 
to a constant barrage of sexism.

For both men and women, engaging with women as narrators and protagonists 
rather than clumsy male fantasy objects means acknowledging that female 
perspectives are both different and valuable.

The increasing diversity of voices in feminist media is also worth applauding.
Dunham says her newsletter, Lenny <http://lennyletter.com/>, will be for 

an army of like-minded intellectually curious women and the people who love 
them, who want to bring change but also want to know, like, where to buy the 
best tube top for summer that isn’t going to cost your entire paycheck.

It will be self-funded at first, but eventually be profitable through 
advertising and affiliate linking. Goop meets Grantland, she says.

But taking a broader view, who needs that? 

Do young, intellectually curious women really require another friendly, 
middlebrow publication that centres their existing concerns and interests? Fun 
content of this kind is already everywhere. Dunham mentions that Lenny will 
involve “radical politics,” but given there’s little available evidence to 
suggest that she herself has engaged with ideas that are particularly 
challenging, I’m not sure where those ideas will come from.

Gwyneth Paltrow's guide to yawning
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jul/13/gwyneth-paltrows-guide-to-yawning>
Mainstream individualist feminism has itself been absorbed into the cultural 
status quo: this is the state of affairs that allowed Dunham’s particular 
endeavours to become so popular.

Characterising another product in this vein as new or exciting suggests that 
Dunham has drunk her own Kool-Aid, and believes that her ideas, and those she 
finds interesting, are what is missing from the offerings currently available. 
The truth is they’re not, they’re everywhere; the “Dunhamisation” of popular 
culture is progressing at a rapid clip.

Combined with the increasing homogenisation of internet culture and the 
dominance of a fewpowerful online content aggregators 
<http://www.theawl.com/2015/02/the-next-internet-is-tv>, it’s more important 
than ever to seek out and amplify points of view that speak harsh truths. It’s 
time to put down the curated feminist content and go exploring in the 
wilderness.
 