

SPOILER ALERT: This weekly blog is for those who have been watching the new 
series ofDoctor Who <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who>. 
Don’t read ahead if you haven’t seen episode six – The Caretaker

• Read Dan Martin’s episode five blog here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/sep/20/doctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-five-time-heist>

“I don’t know anything – because you haven’t told me anything. Which means I 
wouldn’t approve. Which means you’re endangering this school”



The one where the Doctor has to pass himself off as a normal person and makes 
a dreadful fist of it is fast becoming a sub-genre of its own. These episodes 
have become writer Gareth Roberts’ “thing” – he penned the James Corden 
specials for Matt Smith (The Lodger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2010/jun/12/doctor-who-television>
 andClosing Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2011/sep/24/doctor-who-closing-time-episode-12>
). So The Caretaker might run the risk of repeating itself, except for the fact 
that both of those episodes amounted to slight curios, sidesteps from the main 
narrative when they were giving Karen Gillan a week off. This, on the other 
hand, is so steeped in continuity and “arc-ness” that it’s practically a soap. 
In a good way.


Ofsted would be plunged into crisis if the true nature of Shoreditch’s Coal 
Hill school ever became apparent. We’ve yet to discover whether Clara’s 
employment there is for some big plot reason, but it’s no surprise that trouble 
has found its way there. It’s also telling that the Doctor has yet to inform 
Clara of his own long history with the place – this was where his granddaughter 
Susan tried to pass herself off as a normal Earth girl and he inadvertently 
picked up Ian and Barbara (the last big office romance among the teaching 
staff) as travelling companions way back in 1963. Times have changed; the place 
now has a life-sized chessboard and the humanities teachers all dress like 
hipsters, but the artron emissions emanating from the school’s troubled 
timeline have made it easy bait.

In truth, the alien incursion part of this story is its weakest element, but 
basing itself in story and character as it does, you barely notice the joins. 
Jenna Coleman gets her best ever comedy here, doing incredible work with a 
simple widening of her eyes, while Capaldi continues to imbue his supposedly 
“Dark Doctor” with levity and empathy. When he mistakes Adrian for Clara’s 
boyfriend on account of the bow tie, who wasn’t cheering on the fool? And as 
annoying children in Doctor Who go, Ellis George’s Courtney Woods is what we 
call “one to watch”.

And yet, fancy this – we’re halfway through the series and there is yet to be 
a duff episode. And, even more remarkably, most people seem to actually agree 
on that. Extraordinary scenes.

“Never mind that some of us are trying to save the planet, there’s only room 
in my head for cross-country and the offside rule!”
 Danny: alpha male. Photograph: Adrian Rogers/BBC 
As awkward moments to first use the L-word go, having just been outed to your 
boyfriend as a secret time-traveller is going to take some beating. But as 
Clara’s carefully constructed house of cards collapses around her, the deftness 
of this series begins to play out. As crazy as I went over the timey-wimey 
River Song arc back in Matt’s era, this more grounded, emotional story is 
paying off hugely. Here, nobody is completely right and everyone is a little 
bit wrong.

For all his bravery and humility, Danny is still showing signs of being the 
alpha male whose insecurity leads him to make things all about him. Clara is 
living in a fool’s paradise, thinking she can get away with living both these 
lives at once. And this Doctor, once again, is proving himself to be needy and 
tempestuous behind the bravado. It’s a brave version of Doctor Who, where 
everybody is written so honestly and as brutally flawed, and we’re only halfway 
through. The Doctor and Danny’s rivalry is an absolute dead heat as to who is 
right and who is wrong, and if either of these male egos were to make her 
choose (something which I doubt she would stand for anyway) I couldn’t call 
which way she would go.

Courtney Woods might wish to check herself if she decides she really does want 
to follow her English teacher off out into space.

Fear factor
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F27%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-six-the-caretaker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F26%2F1411727070578%2F65f33ac4-19ff-4149-ab27-44b18fb08f92-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20recap%3A%20series%2034%2C%20episode%20six%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Caretaker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F27%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-six-the-caretaker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20recap%3A%20series%2034%2C%20episode%20six%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Caretaker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F27%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-six-the-caretaker%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F26%2F1411727070578%2F65f33ac4-19ff-4149-ab27-44b18fb08f92-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The not-so terrifying Skovox Blitzer. Photograph: Adrian Rogers/BBC 
For all that the Doctor talks it up, the Skovox Blitzer isn’t exactly the most 
menacing killing machine the universe has ever known. It made me laugh more 
than anything, trundling along looking like a robot Silurian on a mobility 
scooter – which may or may not have been the point. Did it matter that the 
world never felt under much of a threat? Maybe, but also maybe best to chalk 
this up to being another of the “funny ones”. That said, the policeman’s 
severed hand almost made me vomit a little.


Mysteries and questions

As is becoming more and more obvious, the big storyline this year looks to be 
the complicated Doctor-Clara-Danny triangle, and it may not end particularly 
well. But we also got a welcome dose of the other arc, as that policeman finds 
himself joining Half Face Man and Gretchen in the Promised Land named for the 
first time as “the Nethersphere”. And its pen-pusher is Chris Addison as Seb. 
They clearly have good people skills up in heaven, even when the management are 
having an off-day. Michelle Gomez’s Missy does not look happy. What can have 
gone wrong?

Time-space debris
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F27%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-six-the-caretaker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F26%2F1411727125357%2Fdc3fefc6-4eaf-421b-af5b-cb8ccc090b3a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20recap%3A%20series%2034%2C%20episode%20six%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Caretaker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F27%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-six-the-caretaker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20recap%3A%20series%2034%2C%20episode%20six%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Caretaker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F27%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-six-the-caretaker%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F26%2F1411727125357%2Fdc3fefc6-4eaf-421b-af5b-cb8ccc090b3a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Doctor: levity and empathy. Photograph: Adrian Rogers/BBC 
• Clara’s jealousy issues now extend not only to all her predecessors but to 
Jane Austen too. “Oh what, I suppose she was your bezzie mate was she, and you 
went on holidays together and then you got kidnapped by boggans from space and 
then you all formed a band and met Buddy Holly!”

• Nice to see River has not been forgotten completely.

• We all know there are few things in the world more malevolent than the PE 
teacher. I’ll share my horror stories if you’ll share yours …

• Danny’s inability understand the “different” way that Clara might love the 
Doctor has become my only real problem with him. So much that I almost get the 
Doctor’s antipathy toward him. What sort of person really believes there’s only 
one, sexual, kind of love?

• “It’s funny, you only really know what someone thinks of you when you know 
what lies they’ve told you.”

Next week!

Courtney Woods gets her big moment as the first woman on the moon. But there 
are bigger challenges ahead, and by the end of Kill the Moon, the Doctor and 
Clara’s relationship might never be the same again …

 