
‘You did not save my life, Doctor. You trapped me inside it.’

Just like its titular guest star, The Woman Who Lived should not work. On one 
hand, writer Catherine Tregenna delivers a bawdy historical romp, all 
housebreaking and comedic highwaymen. At exactly the same time, it’s an 
unutterably bleak, sometimes stagey, meditation on the nature of (im)mortality, 
the consequences of his “saving” of Viking woman Ashildr last week coming home 
to roost.

And perhaps it wouldn’t work if it were not for guest star Maisie Williams’s 
remarkable ability to do what’s demanded in the script, to turn on a pin 
between those two genres, a style which, in other hands, might jar horribly.

She inhabits the contradiction with considerable poise. There isn’t exactly a 
lot of material available with which to research a Restoration-period lady who 
doubles up by night as a feared highwayman, who 800 years before was a Viking 
girl, turned by an eternity of watching everyone around her die. It’s a niche 
role, but Willams sells it, as the amusing montage of her journey through 
history gives brutal way to the memory of watching her children die, and we 
hear the story of her unusual name. “All the other names I chose died with 
whoever knew me, Me is who I am now. Nobody’s daughter, sister or mother, just 
Me.”

Much like last week, the adventure itself feels like the “B-story” backdrop to 
the big series-arc stuff that Williams is clearly central to, which will likely 
frustrate exactly the same people it did last week; things also feel like they 
hold together better here.

Capaldi once again proves that he’s a lot better as “Funny Doctor” than he was 
as “Dark Doctor” last year; overcoming his aversion to punning in order to buy 
valuable time. And as his verbal sparring partner Sam Swift the Quick, Rufus 
Hound brings the same infectious glow of an actor clearly having the time of 
his life thatFrank Skinner did last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/oct/11/doctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-eight-mummy-on-the-orient-express>
. And since he may or not now be Me’s immortal companion, there’s plenty of 
scope for a return.

Ultimately, whether you think it has worked or not, this loose two-part story 
has certainly come up with a novel way of bringing some heft to the fun, frothy 
ones.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F24%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-25-episode-six-the-woman-who-lived%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0e66cbda4da0c7722e3bd752f1c5db03eb877d1%2F0_333_3887_2334%2F3887.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20recap%20series%2035%2C%20episode%20six%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Woman%20Who%20Lived&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F24%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-25-episode-six-the-woman-who-lived%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20recap%20series%2035%2C%20episode%20six%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Woman%20Who%20Lived&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F24%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-25-episode-six-the-woman-who-lived%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0e66cbda4da0c7722e3bd752f1c5db03eb877d1%2F0_333_3887_2334%2F3887.jpg>
 Fun in the dark: the Doctor lightens up. Photograph: Simon Ridgway/BBC 
‘How many Claras have you lost?’

Ms Oswald was off teaching the year sevens Tae Kwondo this week, giving Maisie 
more room to shine in this “Clara-lite” episode. But it also adds to the 
feeling that Jenna Coleman has been somewhat underused this year. Between Missy 
and Me, the companion has been upstaged, especially after her roller-coaster 
story arc last year. And with fan favourite Osgood back next week, that looks 
set to continue.

I suppose, given that the rhythm of this series is how famously the pair are 
getting on this year, there’s inevitably going to be less story to mine as 
Clara just gets on with being great at the hero job. Presumably, that means 
that her big story will be all about her exit. The foreshadowing of Clara’s 
certain doom is getting alittle bit heavy-handed; so much so that death is 
maybe too obvious.Doctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who> has specialised in 
inflicting on its companions fatesworse than death, and Russell T Davies once 
said that it just isn’t the sort of show where you kill off your leading lady. 
But could this gritty urban iteration be the one to do the unthinkable?

Fear factor

This week’s monster, a louche lion-man called Leandro, isn’t going to be 
topping many scariest-ever lists, fun though he was. Amid all of the riotous 
comedy, the tone was bleak rather than scary. Quizzed by the Doctor as to why 
she has ripped pages from her diaries, Me reveals that when things get really 
bad, she tears them out. “What could be worse than losing your children?” he 
asks her. “I keep that entry to remind me not to have any more.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F24%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-25-episode-six-the-woman-who-lived%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7082ef1a192f9ae4896ae24466ed86fe54f92a48%2F0_197_4281_2571%2F4281.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20recap%20series%2035%2C%20episode%20six%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Woman%20Who%20Lived&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F24%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-25-episode-six-the-woman-who-lived%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20recap%20series%2035%2C%20episode%20six%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Woman%20Who%20Lived&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F24%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-25-episode-six-the-woman-who-lived%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7082ef1a192f9ae4896ae24466ed86fe54f92a48%2F0_197_4281_2571%2F4281.jpg>
 It’s all about Me: Maisie Williams and louche lion-man Leandro. Photograph: 
Simon Ridgway/BBC 
Mysteries and questions

At the end, Me remarks to the Doctor: “Enemies are never a problem. It’s your 
friends you have to watch out for.” Which normally might just be so much stagey 
dialogue, if it did not echo Missy’s “a friend inside an enemy, an enemy inside 
a friend”. Which clearly brings us back to the Clara question. If thereis a 
theme developing here to foreshadow Clara’s exit, then it’s maybe worth 
considering that next week’s story concerns those shapeshifting aliens the 
Zygons, with duplicate insurgents apparently walking among us (as established 
in the 50th).

Meanwhile, when Me shows up at the back of Clara’s pupil’s selfie, she is as 
difficult to read as ever …

Continuity 106

A niche reference even for us, but the Great Fire of London was indeed within 
the Whoniverse, started by the Terileptils, in the 1982 story The Visitation. A 
reptilian, fish-like race, their invasion plot to wipe out life on Earth by 
releasing rats infected with an advanced strain of the great plague went 
haywire when one of their weapons overpowered inside a bakery on Pudding Lane.

Deeper into the vortex

 * Life as a medieval Queen? “Mainly paperwork and backgammon, as I recall.”

 * Whether this is relevant or not is a conversation for another day, but it’s 
worth pointing out that Catherine Tregenna is the first woman to write for 
Doctor Who since Helen Raynor pennedThe Sontaran Stratagem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2010/apr/23/doctor-who-the-monster-off>
 / The Poison Sky in 2008; and only the second since the show’s revival.

 * But it was a woman who helped end the 100 years war.

 * The hanging of Sam Swift was played for laughs, but there are accurate 
historical roots here. These highwaymen were the celebrities of their day, and 
people would turn out to watch their hangings.

 * “I have waited longer than I should ever have lived. I’ve lost more than I 
can even remember.”

 * Me knows what she’s talking about when she says it takes 10,000 hours to 
perfect any skill. The so-called “10,000-hour rule” is central toMalcolm 
Gladwell’s book Outliers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/nov/23/outliers-story-success-malcolm-gladwell>
, which looks into the factors behind expertise, and takes as its premise the 
results of a study by K Anders Ericsson which found that to be the optimum 
period of practice needed to perfect any skill to top levels.

 * If “purple is the colour of death” then is there maybe more than meets the 
eye to that purple velvet jacket which, yes, I am still going to keep banging 
on about?

 * The whole of Greek mythology having alien origins? Well, that is certainly 
something to explore.

Next week

It’s the return of an all-time design classic, as Earth faces The Zygon 
Invasion.
 