
Spoiler alert: this blog contains details of the Doctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who> Christmas special, The 
Husbands of River Song

‘The man who gave me this was the sort of man who would know exactly how long 
a diary you were going to need’

Before we say anything else, and with no apology for being excited, there’s 
Alex Kingston on the opening credits! If this really is the last we will see of 
River Song (more of which later), then, as much as anything else, how lovely to 
see her finally get her credit as leading lady.


When news broke that Kingston would be returning to Doctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who> for Christmas, reaction 
was predictably split between the two camps who had made up their minds about 
the character long ago. While firmly in the “adore” camp, even I was given to 
think that her Song had ended. By the time of her last couple of appearances 
opposite Matt Smith, the hot, gun-toting mess was giving way to some kind of 
moon-eyed groupie. She just wasn’t as much fun.

So, it’s a wonderful Christmas gift from Moffat to see the old River return, 
with a glimpse of her naughty ways when she’s having adventures without the 
Doctor. Meanwhile, however bleak things might have got towards the end of the 
recent series, it’s faintly hilarious now to remember how Peter Capaldi was
initially touted as a “dark Doctor” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/nov/05/doctor-who-storyline-bbc>. His 
bravura form here, dancing between comedy and romance, just fizzes opposite 
Kingston. And notwithstanding that she is far closer in age to Capaldi than she 
ever was to Matt Smith, this is the most sexualised pairing of River with a 
Doctor that we’ve seen. Meanwhile, it’s great fun to see him turn her 
catchphrases back at her. If you found the whole thing just too knowing, I’m 
sure you’ll let us know below the line.

It barely matters that the jewel heist plot is as light as a Christmas 
blancmange; it’s actually a relief after all that business in the Confession 
Dial. And I’m sticking to the theory that the Doctor doesn’t remember any of 
it. His PTSD would surely be too severe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2Fdoctor-who-christmas-special-2015-the-husbands-of-river-song%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45ea0709e4aa9beece04e57750525e1c8e4df87d%2F0_157_4139_2484%2F4139.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20Christmas%20special%202015%3A%20The%20Husbands%20of%20River%20Song&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2Fdoctor-who-christmas-special-2015-the-husbands-of-river-song%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20Christmas%20special%202015%3A%20The%20Husbands%20of%20River%20Song&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2Fdoctor-who-christmas-special-2015-the-husbands-of-river-song%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45ea0709e4aa9beece04e57750525e1c8e4df87d%2F0_157_4139_2484%2F4139.jpg>
 Nardole (Matt Lucas) in The Husbands of River Song. Photograph: Simon 
Ridgway/BBC 
‘He is the Doctor, he doesn’t go around falling in love with people, and if 
you think he’s somebody that small or that ordinary, you don’t have the 
faintest idea what you’re dealing with’

Being Christmas, we got 45 minutes of funny, with some feelings tagged on the 
end. The ingenuity of River’s character was always as a romantic counterpoint 
to a protagonist who, across 13 actors, has rarely veered far from the 
original, 1963 conception of a socially awkward, probably asexual alien man 
faced with a revolving door of mostly human friends whom he cares for 
enormously, but usually misunderstands completely. River could always see 
through his attempts at front, even when they were dealing with the tragic ends 
of their reverse-timeline relationship.

Why does River Song divide Doctor Who fans?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/may/31/doctor-who-river-song-divide-fans>
Blessed and cursed with extraordinary lives, they’re two very different, 
flawed heroes who only stop making mistakes and grow to their best when they 
arrive together (with both implicitly knowing that they might need to push 
certain buttons to get each other there). The sad thing is, they both know 
those moments can only be fleeting. In those senses, and to those who always 
resented Moffat giving him a wife, River and the Doctor’s story has less to do 
with gender or sex than it has to do with love. Or rather, that thing that is 
finally no longer a tool of discrimination in this country: marriage.


Funny factor

They say television acting is all in the eyes. As King Hydroflax, Greg Davies 
spent most of the episode portraying a disembodied head. Even then, it’s no 
insult to say that his best moment came as he shouted bloody revenge from the 
inside of a holdall. With all that going on, and River’s one-liners sassier 
than ever, it’s just a shame Matt Lucas didn’t get much to do on his turn in 
the Whoniverse.


As for the Doctor finally getting his bigger-on-the-inside moment, it was 
surely a toss-up who was having the more fun: Moffat in writing it or Capaldi 
in playing it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2Fdoctor-who-christmas-special-2015-the-husbands-of-river-song%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F852390bb0fa459fd6678700b17618a47b8621e1e%2F0_0_4281_2569%2F4281.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20Christmas%20special%202015%3A%20The%20Husbands%20of%20River%20Song&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2Fdoctor-who-christmas-special-2015-the-husbands-of-river-song%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20Christmas%20special%202015%3A%20The%20Husbands%20of%20River%20Song&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2Fdoctor-who-christmas-special-2015-the-husbands-of-river-song%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F852390bb0fa459fd6678700b17618a47b8621e1e%2F0_0_4281_2569%2F4281.jpg>
 King Hydroflax (Greg Davies) in The Husbands of River Song. Photograph: Simon 
Ridgway/BBC 
Mysteries and questions

We’re now left to contemplate, after definitely-apparently/definitely-maybe 
witnessing the end of River’s story, whether this is really the last we’ll see 
of Kingston in Doctor Who. Moffat addressed the question at last week’s BFI 
screening of the episode, quipping to the audience: “I killed her off in her 
first adventure, I wrote her as a ghost in another adventure, I wrote some 
minisodes for a DVD which were definitely her last appearance. There is no way 
to kill off River, she started dead!”


The greatest moment from that Q&A, though, came when a child asked Capaldi: 
“Is River going to be your new assistant?” To which Kingston retorted: “I’m not 
an assistant, I’m a wife!”

“You have just learned a great lesson in life,” winked Moffat at the child.

Easter eggs at Christmas

Credit to the YouTube user who correctly predicted that this episode would 
feature the night at the Singing Towers of Darillium, the night that the Doctor 
knew River would soon be going to her death. And credit to Moffat for stitching 
back so many references from that heartbreaking final sequence from Forest of 
the Dead: the new face and the new suit, him giving her his screwdriver, even 
the same model of screwdriver we saw back then. The tragedy of the moment is, 
of course, leavened by the revelation that their final night together involved 
24 years of goodness-knows-what.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DElfmZ8pmM3U&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DElfmZ8pmM3U>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DElfmZ8pmM3U&media=>
But the continuity love-in doesn’t end there. It’s also suggested that, in 
River’s timeline, this takes place directly afterThe Angels Take Manhattan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/sep/29/doctor-who-angels-take-manhattan>
, and she’s clearly still in league with the headless monks fromA Good Man Goes 
to War 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2011/jun/04/doctor-who-a-good-man-goes-to-war>
. Meanwhile, I can never find out enough about what went on with Jim the Fish, 
but he was clearly trouble. And I’m fairly certain that Flemming the evil 
waiter was of a similar species to Chantho the Malmooth, Chipo Chung’s 
character from Utopia.


Deeper into the vortex

 * Capaldi channels Corbyn in refusing to bow before King Hydroflax, he of an 
“entirely pointless stratum of society who contribute nothing of worth to the 
world and crush the hopes and dreams of working people!”

 * It’s probably best not to dwell too long on what might be going on between 
Ramon and Nadal in the Hydroflax suit at the end.

 * As for Ramon, River has excellent taste in man candy when her proper 
husband is off gallivanting with other women.

 * You don’t expect a sunset to admire you back.

 * “I’m an archeologist from from the future. I dug you up!”

 * “Do you remember that time when there were two of you?”

 * River will have a multi-Doctor adventure, which could be Kingston’s next 
appearance.

 * River has hidden a bar in the Tardis roundels and got herself a sonic 
trowel. And why not? The Doctor has kept his sonic shades, though.

Next time!

The Doctor will return with a new friend, but we don’t know who or when yet. 
Happy New Year, you crazy people.













 