
In its 53 years, Doctor Who has taken us to the farthest reaches of the 
universe to the end of time itself. But now it finds somewhere genuinely new to 
go: a Shoreditch sixth-form. This week sees the launch of Class, the latest 
spinoff and an exercise in “Young Adult”, the bogglingly successful sub-genre 
that gave the world Twilight and The Hunger Games, and of which the show’s 
creatorPatrick Ness <https://www.theguardian.com/books/patrick-ness> is a 
leading light. It’s also the most high-profile offering from BBC3 since the 
channel’s move online. Doctor Who has been many things – epic, scary, 
life-affirming, naff – but up to this point, not many would have called it 
especially cool. Stay with me…

Class is familiar territory seen through new eyes. We are talking about a 
youth-oriented spinoff from a children’s show that grown adults enjoy getting 
angry about online, and that comes with a built-in warning that its adult 
themes make it “unsuitable for younger viewers”. Certainly, there are swears 
aplenty. One of the leads evensmokes. And it doesn’t flinch from being 
gruesome. Such is the way with YA. But if Class carries itself with swagger and 
style, the young characters themselves don’t necessarily – yet.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fclass-bbc3-doctor-who-goes-back-to-school-make-the-whoniverse-cool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d828fdb46825c294afac89985c0d9bf5ed65612%2F0_99_4228_2537%2F4228.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20goes%20back%20to%20school%20%E2%80%93%20but%20will%20Class%20finally%20make%20the%20Whoniverse%20cool%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fclass-bbc3-doctor-who-goes-back-to-school-make-the-whoniverse-cool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20goes%20back%20to%20school%20%E2%80%93%20but%20will%20Class%20finally%20make%20the%20Whoniverse%20cool%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fclass-bbc3-doctor-who-goes-back-to-school-make-the-whoniverse-cool%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d828fdb46825c294afac89985c0d9bf5ed65612%2F0_99_4228_2537%2F4228.jpg>
 The Coal Hill gang must add ‘reluctant protectors of humanity’ to their list 
of teenage travails. Photograph: BBC/Simon Ridgeway 
We first meet April, an earnest Head Girl type, as she plans the sixth-form 
prom at Coal Hill Academy and moons hopelessly over Charlie, a newcomer from 
Sheffield who is quite clearly, both to himself and the rest of the school, 
gay. Charlie is taunted by school jock Ram, who in turn shares a Skype rapport 
with Tanya that has the obvious potential to develop into something more. (This 
points to a future scandalous storyline in itself, since Tanya is a 14-year-old 
advanced learner, shifted ahead into a peer-group of sixth-formers.)

Aside from exams and doomed crushes, the biggest challenge for the nascent 
gang is their physics teacher Miss Quill, played with gleeful spite by 
Coronation Street alum and Sarah-Lancashire-in-waiting Katherine Kelly. “The 
cream of the crop?” she withers in one classroom scene. “No wonder all this 
country exports is Downton Abbey.” Miss Quill isincredibly cool, though it’s 
soon clear that she has as many secrets as her charges – and things are only 
going to get messier.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fclass-bbc3-doctor-who-goes-back-to-school-make-the-whoniverse-cool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3645e928d2b93727b620360987987c3763dd6ec9%2F0_0_4284_2570%2F4284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20goes%20back%20to%20school%20%E2%80%93%20but%20will%20Class%20finally%20make%20the%20Whoniverse%20cool%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fclass-bbc3-doctor-who-goes-back-to-school-make-the-whoniverse-cool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20goes%20back%20to%20school%20%E2%80%93%20but%20will%20Class%20finally%20make%20the%20Whoniverse%20cool%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fclass-bbc3-doctor-who-goes-back-to-school-make-the-whoniverse-cool%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3645e928d2b93727b620360987987c3763dd6ec9%2F0_0_4284_2570%2F4284.jpg>
 Incredibly cool … Miss Quill (Katherine Kelly) with The Doctor (Peter 
Capaldi). Photograph: BBC/Simon Ridgeway 
Because as every fan knows, Coal Hill school is a longtime cornerstone of the 
Whoniverse. Here was the place where, back in the very first episode, teachers 
Ian and Barbara were so unnerved for the welfare of unearthly child Susan 
Foreman that they followed her home and straight into the space-time machine 
she occupied with her irascible “grandfather”. 25 Earth years later, the 
seventh Doctor returned to Coal Hill to retrieve fabled Timelord artefact the 
Hand of Omega, which had become bait for an invading Dalek fleet. The twelfth 
Doctor posed as the school caretaker in 2014, to chase down a murderous robot 
called the Skovox Blitzer, much to the consternation of his travelling 
companion Clara Oswald, who was holding down a job there as an English teacher.

Doctor Who's new companion Pearl Mackie: 'I have no time-travelling 
experience!'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/05/doctor-who-pearl-mackie-new-series-companion-interview>
By this point, too much timey-wimey nonsense has gone on at Coal Hill. The 
walls of time are being stretched, and now all manner of horrors might seep 
through to threaten those who walk its corridors. So it’s hardly a spoiler to 
reveal that by the end of the pilot, the gang have to add “reluctant protectors 
of humanity” to their list of teenage travails. Bereft Who fans craving a 2016 
fix but who might be reticent about a “yoof” spinoff would do well to watch the 
pilot to the end.

UK TV drama has never really tackled the YA genre before, and of the many 
questions posed by the Class opener, perhaps the most pertinent is: “why the 
hell not?” This already feels more mature than Torchwood, the previousDoctor Who
 <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who> spinoff whose first 
series seemed to spend most weeks featuring a different alien that went round 
sexing people to death. And the inevitable comparison with Buffy is deftly 
hat-tipped in a scene where the gang liken Coal Hill’s predicament to a 
“Hellmouth”. Without getting too ahead of ourselves, it looks like Class will 
stand up handsomely beside its predecessor. And as for coolness – a certain 
somebody shan’t be needing those sonic shades any more.

Class will be available on iPlayer from 21 October. 
 