
Well, to use the Twelfth Doctor’s favourite phrase, that was definitely a 
“thing”. Cybermen running amok across every corner of Earth, all of humanity’s 
dead repurposed as the Master’s army, the redemption of Danny Pink, UNIT being 
fierceand a cameo of sorts from Brigadier Lethbridge-Stewart. If last week’s 
opening act suffered just slightly by indulging its esoteric high concept at 
the expense of action, this is what a high-stakesDoctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who> finale is supposed to 
look like.


And yet it was also brutal, laden with emotions and consequences – even the 
lovely UNIT fangirl Osgood didn’t get saved. This was brutal stuff. If the 
resolution of last week’s Who is Missy mystery might have threatened to suck 
the tension out of this episode, it was made up for by how brilliant Michelle 
Gomez is in the role. This is how an instant classic is created; she preens 
with a perfect combination of madness and malevolence that is just so Master. 
It underlines Moffat’s assertion that there should only be a female Doctor if a 
female actor emerged who simply and undeniablywas the Doctor. I’m still 
recovering from that Mary Poppins moment. Her scheme was suitably high-stakes 
to suit the character, and, in a nod back to what would always happen in the 
Roger Delgado era, she was finally betrayed by her own army.

Definitely more Missy, please.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F08%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-12-death-in-heaven%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F7%2F1415362559139%2F7706d239-4aab-4cb5-8e7c-bb81dd1ab985-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20recap%3A%20series%2034%2C%20episode%2012%20%E2%80%93%20Death%20in%20Heaven&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F08%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-12-death-in-heaven%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20recap%3A%20series%2034%2C%20episode%2012%20%E2%80%93%20Death%20in%20Heaven&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F08%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-12-death-in-heaven%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F7%2F1415362559139%2F7706d239-4aab-4cb5-8e7c-bb81dd1ab985-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Michelle Gomez was fantastic to watch as Missy. Photograph: Adrian Rogers/BBC 
“I am not Clara Oswald. Clara Oswald has never existed”

One of the more hilarious aspects of the fandom’s critique this year has been 
the idea that things have become overly fixated on Clara, as if the whole 
success of the show’s revival had not been predicated on the companion being 
the main character. Yet even though it turned out to be a classic fake-out, 
when Clara declared herself to be the Doctor and Jenna’s eyes flashing in the 
opening credits, it did feel a little uncomfortable. Were theyreally going to 
go there? In the end it was Clara’s increasingly Doctor-ish nature needed in 
order to survive, and it was further proof of quite how much the character has 
changed. The revelation that Missy had selected Clara, picked her to be the 
Doctor’s undoing, might have felt a little bit forced, but she’s still been on 
the most complete journey of probably any companion.


Yet as she completes that arc, Steven Moffat, the king of the happy ending, 
does not allow her one. Cybernised Danny doesn’t get saved, and even though his 
love sort of saves the day, he declines the opportunity to return, instead 
giving it to the boy he killed. Clara leaves Tardis life somewhat worse off 
than when she started. It’s all rather bleak in the end. But with Jenna 
confirmed to appear at Christmas, maybe that isn’t the end of the story.

Fear factor

The BBC was moved to defend the storyline following complaints 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/nov/05/doctor-who-storyline-bbc>. And, 
in fact, the implications of Missy’s plot actually become much worse the more 
than you think about them playing into fears of being burned and buried alive. 
Nothing about this is nice.

Mysteries and questions

Can we handle any more revelations? After last year’s game-changing twist that 
Gallifrey is still out there, Moffat throws even more plot at us by revealing 
that the place has been found. And it was the Master who told the Doctor where 
it was. Heaven knows what that is going mean going forward ...

Time-space debris

• Here’s director Rachel Talalay on the Clara question. 
<http://www.digitalspy.co.uk/tv/s7/doctor-who/news/a607788/doctor-who-director-hits-back-at-clara-critics-shes-strong-flawed.html#~oUQWEmfMr6NIy5>

• The Thick of It fans were denied an on-screen reunion between Capaldi and 
Chris Addison’s Seb. Probably for the best.


• More classic Cyber-iconography with the old-school severed head. Lovely.


• We still haven’t forgotten that we got one fewer episode than normal this 
time round, though.


• See you all at Christmas!

 