
‘They’re from a universe with only two dimensions, and yes that is a thing! 
It’s long been theorised of course, but nobody could go there and prove its 
existence without going on a heck of a diet’

Aside from the obvious, the most impressive addition to the Doctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who> family this year has to 
be writer Jamie Mathieson. After masterfully pulling off Hinchcliffe-era horror 
with his debut Mummy on the Orient Express last week (one of the more popular 
in the comments, too), his second effort swerves the show into tense urban 
thriller territory, and is one of the more effective demonstrations of how to 
do the “cheap one”.

Flatline is funny and it’s scary but most of all, it’s very, very strange. Is 
it too much to call this Lynchian? Very probably. But it had the vintage 
surrealism of a classic Sapphire and Steel. Or, and I mean this in a good way, 
it felt a lot like an episode of early Torchwood. And actually, there’s no 
reason as such why a Doctor Who episode shouldn’t be set in Bristol, is there?

When the Tardis overshoots Shoreditch and lands in Bristol, the Doctor is 
delighted by a new thing in which the Tardis shrinks, then shrinks again, and 
Clara is forced to investigate a case of missing people and killer graffiti on 
her own. It was completely obvious as soon as we saw the mural that these 
people were trapped in the walls, but the way the script twisted our 
perceptions just as the whatever-they-were-calleds twisted the very dimensions 
of space was tense and impressive and in the end, nail-biting and frightening. 
It made just as much sense as it needed to and explained just-little-enough for 
it to work. People frustrated by a lot of the “pseudo-science” this year may 
have cause to complain, but the idea of a threat that only exists in two 
dimensions – well, other writers will be kicking themselves for not thinking of 
it first.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Foct%2F18%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-9-flatline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F16%2F1413478545827%2F78ede5bc-ca14-4748-97cd-ff327fee3c9b-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20recap%3A%20series%2034%2C%20episode%209%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0Flatline&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Foct%2F18%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-9-flatline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20recap%3A%20series%2034%2C%20episode%209%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0Flatline&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Foct%2F18%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-9-flatline%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F16%2F1413478545827%2F78ede5bc-ca14-4748-97cd-ff327fee3c9b-1020x612.jpeg>
 Clara, who is becoming ever more Doctorish. Photograph: Adrian Rogers/BBC 
‘You were an exceptional Doctor, Clara. Goodness had nothing to do with it’

As a way of separating the Doctor from his companion goes, trapping him inside 
a comically miniature Tardis that she has to keep in her handbag is one of the 
more ingenious. And that sequence when he has to “Addams Family” his way out of 
the path of the moving train was laugh-out-loud adorable. But it also forced 
Clara to go solo, recruiting her own companion in likeable oik Rigsy and his 
band of Asbo brothers. But in furthering this story arc, she finds herself 
moving into the more uncomfortable shades of the Doctor’s personality. As she 
did with Maisie last week, she lies to protect them, and is air-punchingly 
blunt with the episode’s true villain, council jobsworth Fenton (Henry Winkler 
via Hellboy); here is a man with so little imagination he is immune to the 
psychic paper. And in the final act, as the unpleasant racist saunters off, 
there is the uncomfortable insinuation that it is not always the right people 
who survive.

Clara is becoming ever more Doctorish; as he points out himself, lying is a 
good survival skill, but her lies tohim about just how much Danny knows don’t 
go down as well. This is definitely building to something, and presumably, 
something not very nice.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Foct%2F18%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-9-flatline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F16%2F1413478836431%2F2aff9ff1-ab20-4a8f-afc2-ce097a80aaea-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20recap%3A%20series%2034%2C%20episode%209%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0Flatline&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Foct%2F18%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-9-flatline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20recap%3A%20series%2034%2C%20episode%209%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0Flatline&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Foct%2F18%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-9-flatline%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F16%2F1413478836431%2F2aff9ff1-ab20-4a8f-afc2-ce097a80aaea-680x1020.jpeg>
 Joivan Wade as Rigsy, seen here with Clara, gave the episode its emotional 
pull. Photograph: Adrian Rogers/BBC 
But on the subject of Danny, I’m becoming less and less sure how we’re 
supposed to hear about him. That line (although itself, part of her original 
lie) about him getting territorial about her leaving stuff in the Tardis, 
didn’t sit well. Did nobody point out that kind of control freakery is how 
domestic abuse can start?

Fear factor

Poor PC Forrest, melting into the carpet like that. But using a quite simple 
special effect, those re-animated graffiti zombie things (could anybody 
actually make out what the Doctor named them at the end?) flickering back to 
life and chasing everyone through the tunnels made for a genuine fright for the 
third week in a row. Good.

Mysteries and questions

Missy’s final cameo and the revelation that she somehow selected Clara ends up 
as little more than a tease, but as Moffat’s big reveals tend towards being the 
more obvious ideas that people below the line have dismissed, we can probably 
safely assume that she was the woman at the end of the computer helpline after 
all. @BuckThunderThrust came up with the tantalising-but-improbable notion that 
Missy is the sister of Dervla Kerwan’s character Miss Hartigan in the 2008 
Christmas special The Next Doctor, and that’s the link with the Cybermen in the 
finale. Nobody seems quite sure whether all these allusions to soldiers and the 
fact that the series finale goes out the weekend of Remembrance Sunday is mere 
coincidence.

Meanwhile, my friend Lee reckons that an explanation for Danny was hidden in 
plain sight and that he never really was a soldier; it was some sort of 
implanted memory from the toy soldier sequence in Listen, and that the Doctor’s 
inability to process that he’s a maths teacher now was about more than mere 
prejudice.

Time-space debris

• A nice guest turn from Joivan Wade as Rigsy, who gave the episode its 
emotional pull. Was the implication on the train that he actuallywanted to die?

• “It’s bigger on the inside.” “I don’t think that statement has ever been 
more true.”

• Clara also had to take control and lead a team in last year’s Nightmare in 
Silver. But perhaps the less said about that the better.

• “I mean this is just embarrassing. I’m from the race that built the Tardis. 
Dimensions are kind of our thing.”

• Why would Clara not just simply let her phone go to voicemail?

• The tense chases-through-tunnels brought to mind The Web of Fear, the 
“missing” 1968 story that was recovered last year.

• Anyone who still enjoys pining for the RTD era might want to think back to 
the last time that drawings became deadly, in 2006’s dreadful Fear Her.

• The Tardis has a siege mode that turns it into a miniature cube covered in 
Gallifreyan etchings.

• Female-fronted pop songs are becoming a bit of a tradition on the blog this 
year. So shall we have a listen to Flatline, the doomed-but-really-quite-good 
comeback track from original Sugababes’ Mutya Keisha Siobhan? Oh go on then.

Next week!

Intriguingly, In The Forest of the Night was written by screenwriting legend 
and Danny Boyle’s mate, Frank Cottrell Boyce.
 