
Spoiler alert: this blog contains plot details for Face the Raven 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b06qqp67>, episode 10 of the 35th series of 
Doctor Who on BBC1

‘You will not insult my memory, there will be no revenge. I will die, and 
nobody here or anywhere else will suffer’

I am delighted, because the Doctor is finally wearing the purple velvet 
jacket, and I am devastated, because Clara Oswald is dead. Well, you have to 
take your pleasures where you can at this difficult time. Worse still, it 
looked like it really, really hurt.

But even before that sting in the tale, newcomer Sarah Dollard’s deeply 
strange story was looking ominous from the moment the Doctor half-heartedly 
assured Rigsy they could save him from the killer tattoo and the Hero Music 
kicked in, notably too early and notably sluggishly. The “ongoing problem” of 
Clara “enjoying that way too much” as she dangled out of the Tardis over the 
skies of London was signposted from the start.


But I’m not entirely sure I can place all of these “stupid risks” Ms Oswald 
has apparently been taking, having spent significant portions of this series 
reluctantly under Missy’s command, trapped in a Zygon mind palace or off-screen 
entirely. But it was a canny move to bring back Rigsy for her exit; remember 
that the cheeky graffiti artist served as her proxy-companion when she turned 
proxy-Doctor inlast year’s Flatline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/oct/18/doctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-9-flatline>
. In taking on his quantum shade, it was the combination of schoolteachery 
pastoral instinct and reckless abandon that finally did for her. Although you 
do wonder if there wasn’t some truth in the suicidal tendency she hinted at 
when she admitted that “maybe she wanted this”. It was an uncharacteristically 
dense move for her not to clock the warning that death-by-quantum-shade could 
not be cheated entirely. Once more, Peter Capaldi ticks off pages of emotive 
dialogue within one facial expression.

So is this really the end for Clara? It’s hardly a major spoiler that this 
isn’t quite the end for Jenna Coleman in Doctor Who, because she is emblazoned 
on the cover of the newDoctor Who Magazine <http://www.doctorwhomagazine.com>, 
in intriguing shots that see her styled as a waitress in a retro US diner. But 
the way this has been played, I can’t imagine she will be getting-out-of-death 
free with another immortality chip from the Mire, or somesuch.

If the overriding theme this year has been the consequences of trying to play 
God, this ending is feeling like it will be much crueller than that. Can anyone 
work out whether there are still multiple versions of Clara running round 
different points in the Doctor’s timeline? And if there are, would the death of 
the original cut them off at the brain stem as well? Which is not to ignore the 
possibility that Coleman’s appearance in the finale could be anything from 
flashback to dream sequence to grief-maddened hallucination. Or even another 
Zygon replica à la Bonnie.

It’s taken all of my self-control to resist watching the preview reel of next 
week’s episode, so that we might all go through these difficult few weeks 
together. I really don’t know, but it’s all getting too much and I need a lie 
down now. Still, natty jacket Doctor.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F21%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-10-face-the-raven%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07976fc6efe4af6214c3f222c077084d34319913%2F0_0_4476_2685%2F4476.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20series%2035%2C%20episode%2010%20%E2%80%93%20Face%20the%20Raven&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F21%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-10-face-the-raven%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20series%2035%2C%20episode%2010%20%E2%80%93%20Face%20the%20Raven&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F21%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-10-face-the-raven%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07976fc6efe4af6214c3f222c077084d34319913%2F0_0_4476_2685%2F4476.jpg>
 Ashildr (Maisie Williams) with Clara and the Doctor. Photograph: Simon 
Ridgway/BBC 
‘You’ll find it’s a very small universe when I’m angry with you’

Beneath the shock and awe of Clara’s demise, Maisie Williams as Me continues 
to intrigue and infuriate, but she is already firmly embedded within mythology. 
Her line, “an infinite lifespan with a finite memory makes for an awkward 
social life”, is now almost up there as a catchphrase on a par with River’s 
“Spoilers” and “Hello Sweetie.” And her character has long since shaped up as a 
character just as problematic.

Actually, it’s a bit of a shame that the 2008 filler episode The Doctor’s 
Daughter <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Doctor%27s_Daughter> ever happened, 
because Ashildr/Me is essentially a foster daughter version of that. While the 
Doctor’s companions constitute friends (and in the modern series, even lovers), 
Ashildr/Me becomes what Jenny’s character should have been – a stark 
examination of the responsibilities and consequences of parenting. The Doctor 
knows he is responsible for the creation of this person, but he’s powerless to 
stop her going down the routes he doesn’t approve of. And after her stint as a 
17th-century highwaywoman, reigning mischief over all she surveyed, her 
maturity 400 years later has led her to the exact same God complex that led to 
him creating her in the first place – taking her sense of responsibility to 
murderous levels.

Certainly, her cahoots with the mysterious “they” looks for all the world like 
the very definition of Daddy Issues. And so the Doctor understands, to a point, 
his culpability in Clara’s death. Maybe he should chat with Ian Beale in the 
next Children in Need crossover.

Following the topical themes becoming more prominent in recent weeks, there 
are things to be said about this episode’s focus on refugee camps and 
integration. But following recent events, we won’t be doing that here tonight.

Fear factor 

It surely cannot be a coincidence that Ashildr’s old godhead Odin was in 
mythology accompanied by two ravens, Hugin and Mugin, even though Me can barely 
remember her old life as Ashildr. Maybe she read about them in her journals? 
But death-by-raven is surely one of the most unsettling we have seen for some 
time, exacerbated by the muting out of Clara’s death screams. Still, there’s an
interesting takedown here <http://www.whats-your-sign.com/raven-symbolism.html 
http://www.whats-your-sign.com/raven-symbolism.html 
http://www.whats-your-sign.com/raven-symbolism.html> of the symbolisms that 
associate the bird so much with death.

Mysteries and questions 

Who are the “they” that Me is in league with to capture the Doctor? The smart 
money, surely, would be on the surviving Timelords, seeing as there has been 
scant detail leaked out as to who or what this year’s Big Bad might be. And 
that would certainly lend credence to @PhaseShift’s response to the request 
last week for Theories More Bonkers Than What Is Actually Happening. I will 
simply just post a screengrab rather than even attempting to paraphrase, but 
this is good …

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F21%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-10-face-the-raven%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef5ef8a946817b0b7b2e8551fb2ffa9963fe2b70%2F0_0_743_446%2F743.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20series%2035%2C%20episode%2010%20%E2%80%93%20Face%20the%20Raven&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F21%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-10-face-the-raven%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20series%2035%2C%20episode%2010%20%E2%80%93%20Face%20the%20Raven&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F21%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-10-face-the-raven%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef5ef8a946817b0b7b2e8551fb2ffa9963fe2b70%2F0_0_743_446%2F743.jpg>
 @PhaseShift’s theory Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dx9OWAAsSXU0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dx9OWAAsSXU0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dx9OWAAsSXU0&media=>
 Watch the Doctor discuss the implications of the time lock’s opening with the 
Master 
Continuity 1010 

How many recycled props returning monsters did you spot in the Trap Street 
Refugee Camp? I counted some Judoon, an Ood and a Cyberman, a Blowfish from way 
back in Torchwood, and possibly a Weevil from the same show?

Deeper into the vortex 

 * After Bethany Black last week, here’s another graduate from Russell T 
Davies’s Cucumber and Banana in the shape of Letitia Wright as Anashon. The 
actress is tipped for big things.

 * Soon, she will appear in Urban Hymns, esteemed director Michael Canton 
Jones’s take on the London riots. And he had fine things to say about the 
Guyana-born 21-year-old,telling the Observer this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/05/letitia-wright-britains-rising-screen-star-michael-caton-jones-leonardo-dicaprio>
: “I’ve not felt like this about someone since Leonardo (DiCaprio). I’ve had 
plenty of really good actors, but I just go on my instinct. My instinct is that 
she can be as big as she wants. Letitia is just gobsmackingly brilliant. The 
camera loves her. She has an emotional honesty.”

 * “Clara, go back to the Tardis and pick up all my most annoying stuff.”

 * If we’re counting this, then newcomer Sarah Dollard becomes the second 
woman to write for Doctor Who this year, the third since the revival and only 
the second since 2008. Her previous credits include Neighbours, Merlin, 
Primeval and Being Human.

 * “Can I not be good cop?”

 * “Doctor, we’ve discussed this. Your face.”

 * Obsessed as I am with the coat, I’m still not convinced there isn’t some 
link between the Doctor’s sudden change of wardrobe and the reference in The 
Woman Who Lived, as it is in some cultures, to purple being the “colour of death
 
<http://www.colormatters.com/does-color-affect-taste/59-color-symbolism/the-meanings-of-colors/228-purple>
”.

 * If Ashildr/Me has been keeping journals since Viking times, that’s a hell 
of a lot of books to be lugging round.

 * Please, if they haven’t already, would somebody compose some Clara and Jane 
Austen fan fiction, sharpish? 
Next week!

Peter Capaldi goes solo in what could turn out to be a first for the show, the 
Doctor’s single-hander, Heaven Sent.
 