

SPOILER ALERT: This weekly blog is for those who have been watching the new 
series ofDoctor Who <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who>. 
Don’t read ahead if you haven’t seen episode five – Time Heist


• Read Dan Martin’s episode four episode blog here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/sep/13/doctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-four-listen>


‘I’m an amnesiac robbing a bank, why would I be OK?’


Look everyone, the Doctor is back! Oh, it’s been a great series so far – but 
something has felt as if he hasn’t been completely … himself.


Deep Breath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/aug/23/doctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-one-deep-breath>
 saw him establish himself out of a post-regenerative fug;Into The Dalek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/aug/30/doctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-two-into-the-dalek-peter-capaldi>
 saw him sink into an emo funk over his own morality; he spent most ofRobot of 
Sherwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/sep/06/doctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-three-robot-of-sherwood>
 complaining and struggling with the idea of being a hero; and in last week’s
Listen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/sep/13/doctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-four-listen>
 he basically went a bit mad obsessing over his own fears.

In Time Heist, the Doctor is properly and completely the Doctor again, leading 
an intrepid group on a dangerous mission and saving the day through a 
combination of intelligence and empathy while having a proper adventure. He 
even larks about with noodle boxes at the end.

Capaldi isn’t softening so much as bedding in and becoming who he is and will 
be; the final revelation that the potentially-iffy premise (the Doctor leading 
a bank job) is actually an elaborate mercy mission done out of empathy and 
forgiveness is incredibly reassuring. That said, I do hope they push into the 
grim territory that’s been hinted at.

As Clara prepares for date two with Danny, the Doctor is clearly put out at 
being sidelined. He even suggests a trip to Brighton, but can’t have known that 
when the Tardis’s outside-phone rings, that it will to lead them – via memory 
worms of course – into a telepathic, teleporting romp that turns out to be of 
his own making.

What follows is Doctor-Who-does-a-bank-job, The Taking Of Pelham One Two Three 
via Minority Report with the slick charm of the BBC’s own Hustle. And from 
writer Steve Thompson, whom some fans will never forgive forThe Curse of the 
Black Spot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2011/may/07/doctor-who-the-curse-of-the-black-spot>
 or, to a lesser extent, last year’sJourney to the Centre of the Tardis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/apr/27/doctor-who-journey-centre-tardis>
, here was his first truly confident Who script.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F20%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-five-time-heist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F19%2F1411129513178%2F5bf02e8a-9891-48ef-8655-53e1514240b1-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20recap%3A%20series%2034%2C%20episode%20five%20-%20Time%20Heist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F20%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-five-time-heist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20recap%3A%20series%2034%2C%20episode%20five%20-%20Time%20Heist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F20%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-five-time-heist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F19%2F1411129513178%2F5bf02e8a-9891-48ef-8655-53e1514240b1-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Teller arrives. Photograph: Adrian Rogers/BBC 
Time Heist manages the neat trick of both being incredibly complex and rather 
a lot of fun; the circular nature of the mission makes much more sense a second 
time round. But it works just as well as a romp, with two of the warmest and 
most memorable guest characters we’ve seen in a while: augmented-human Psi, the 
“brains” of the operation, and mutant-human Saibra, both recruited by the 
Doctor without him having realised it yet (yes, tricky). It’s a Scooby Gang 
that truly gels, without anyone initially knowing who the others are.

It also made just-heavy-enough weather of the bankers-are-evil thing: not too 
much politics, but instead their main villainy being the enslavement of the 
Teller as the bank’s live-in telepathic CCTV. And even then, Director 
Karabraxos is redeemed in the final act.

‘My clone, and yet she doesn’t even protest. Pale imitation really. I should 
sue!’


Is Doctor Who going to get to a point soon where the huge number of episodes 
and guest casts means it is going to run out of national treasures? With fresh 
meat (sorry) in Zawe Ashton’s spine-tingling turn as Journey Blue the other 
week, it’s maybe not too much of a worry. But this week it’s the turn of the 
magnificent Keeley Hawes. She’s been having quite the year already, having put 
in a career-best performance as the dowdy, duplicitousDI Lindsey Denton in Line 
of Duty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/feb/07/line-of-duty-keeley-hawes>
. So it’s palpable how much fun she’s having getting to camp it up as the icy 
Ms Delphox, and in the final revelation, Director Karabraxos herself, an even 
camper governor who staffs her bank with clones of herself and then incinerates 
them when they don’t measure up. Yet as daring as the hair and those glasses 
are, Hawes sells her as a real person.


Fear factor


“Don’t think” is a neat spin on the iconic “Don’t blink”, a trick also used 
with the Clockwork Robots in Deep Breath. But when a trick is this good, I 
don’t really care. It gives the telepathy theme a frightening edge it might 
otherwise have lacked, and allows for more of Jenna Coleman’s close-up scared 
faces. Have you ever tried clearing your mind of everything completely? And a 
woman as uptight as Clara is not the sort you can see doing Chakra. More good 
deaths, too, despite them not really turning out to be deaths.


Mysteries and questions


Apart from the initial misdirection, which suggested that maybe Ms Delphox was 
“the woman in the shop” from The Bells Of St John, there’s not much doing with 
the bigger arc this week. No Missy or Heaven, no biting digs at soldiers, and 
only a glimpse of Danny Pink. But Danny and Clara are moving fast and she’s 
getting giddy about him enough to wear heels and do a girly flick of the hair. 
The whole thing with the Doctor insulting Clara’s appearance (intentionally or 
not) might get old, but it certainly isn’t yet: “Why’s your face all coloured 
in?”


And while I’m not convinced this is really going to be a “thing”, in Psi we 
meet yet another half-person, half-machine thing, to add to the Sheriff of 
Nottingham, the Clockwork Robots and the forthcoming Cybermen. It’s a familiar 
sci-fi tradition, after all.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F20%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-five-time-heist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F19%2F1411130047694%2Fcba67d88-c7e5-419c-b25c-dd0c47e10d9a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20recap%3A%20series%2034%2C%20episode%20five%20-%20Time%20Heist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F20%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-five-time-heist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20recap%3A%20series%2034%2C%20episode%20five%20-%20Time%20Heist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F20%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-five-time-heist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F19%2F1411130047694%2Fcba67d88-c7e5-419c-b25c-dd0c47e10d9a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Mr Porrima (Trevor Sellers), The Doctor (Peter Capaldi), Clara (Jenna Coleman) 
and Psi (Jonathan Bailey). Photograph: Adrian Rogers/BBC 
Time-space debris


• Is the Doctor having second thoughts about his wardrobe? “I was hoping for 
‘minimalist’ but I think I came out with ‘magician’.” Well done to Clara’s 
skinny-tie combo datewear, mind.


• “Shuttipy Up Up Up!” So we do get a nod to Malcolm Tucker after all.


• Location watch: unless I’m mistaken, that planet of solitude is the same 
place used for the exteriors in 2006’s New Earth.


• If Saibra was an X-Men mutant, it would mean she was Mystique, which means 
she would also be a villain. I loved Saibra.


• The time vortex spinning into Clara’s washing machine was a nice touch.


Next week!


It’s back to school for Clara as we get a proper look at her working life in 
The Caretaker, where the Doctor and Danny are getting dangerously close to 
coming face to face.
 