
‘Congratulations, professor. You’ve revolutionised the labour market, you’ve 
conquered nature. You’ve also created an abomination’

Just as Clara Oswald is now so sure of her life with the Doctor that she’s 
starting to take risks, so the production team are steady in their groove and 
comfortable in a purple patch, they’re starting to do the same. No opening 
titles or theme music here; asDoctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who> tackles a “found footage” 
episode.

Now, risks are always, always better than the easy route. But if there’s a 
problem with Sleep No More it’s that the scale of the concept can’t help but be 
undermined by necessities of its execution. Having Reece Shearsmith’s Professor 
Rassmussan hold your hand all the way through it with his commentary takes away 
something of the nervy uncertainty that made found footage staples such asThe 
Blair Witch Project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/79459/blair.witch.project> and 
Cloverfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/feb/01/actionandadventure.drama> such 
classics. Youknow who’s assembled this from the start. Difficult to see how 
that could have been avoided; a Saturday-night family show such as Doctor Who
needs to hold your hand to a certain extent, and the conceit itself turns out 
to be the whole point of the Sandmen’s plan in the first place, and so on. And 
that final sting in the tale is the nightmare fuel that gives Mark Gatiss his
Blink <https://www.theguardian.com/media/organgrinder/2007/sep/19/blinkimissit> 
moment. But for me, it felt like an experiment that only half works, and it’s a 
good job we like Gatiss, or Rassmussan’s mentions at the end of “compulsive 
storytelling” and “a proper climax with the big one at the end” would be 
calling for some serious side-eye. Nobody likes a show off!

But there’s a terrifically chilling premise underpinning this political 
satire. A corporate efficiency drive pushed to disastrous extremes by a mad 
scientist might have come over heavy-handed, but for all the technical 
accomplishment (and itis very accomplished), the exquisite beats of Gatiss’s 
imagination see him deliver Doctor Who at its most Doctor Who-like. Monsters 
made out of sleep in your eyes? That isgood. As if insomnia wasn’t enough of a 
bummer as it is.

‘We live in a time of unparalleled prosperity. A golden age of peace, harmony, 
industry. But every shift must come to an end. Every working day must stop’

The other big talking point this week, of course, is the League of Gentlemen 
quasi-reunion, as Gatiss’s old colleague Reece Shearsmith turns up for a guest 
turn as Rassmussan. The collaboration of those two is always infectious, and 
who doesn’t love a mad scientist? But in a series that has already given us 
Missy and Davros and Evil Clara, he’s unlikely to go down as a classic villain.

What I found most impressive about Sleep No More, though, is the level of 
backstory and context Gatiss that packs in. A far-flung future where a Great 
Catastrophe (more on that below) has caused a tectonic realignment on Earth and 
the Indo-Japanese power bloc is now the planet’s dominant superpower; a 
polytheist society with armies of clone soldiers, and deep political divisions 
between the “wideawakes” and the “Rip van Winkles” who appreciate their sleep. 
You can see how he first envisioned this as a two-parter, and while two hours 
of found footage would have been way too much, it’s a fertile ground for more 
stories and I wonder if we shouldn’t visit this world again.

Fear factor

It’s looking neck-and-neck between this and Under the Lake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/oct/03/doctor-who-series-35-episode-3-under-the-lake>
 for scariest of the season. Where Toby Whithouse’s story played with ghost 
story conventions in an underwater base, Sleep No More riffs on classic horror 
aboard a space station, and the Sandmen are easily as scary as those ghosts. 
Even though he has never written a space-set story before, it’s an undeniably 
Gatiss episode, his affection for the genre and lyrical language shining 
through the claustrophobia. Certainly, the Doctor’s speeches bleed into the 
Shakespeare-quoting beautifully.

Meanwhile, there’s a reason we get to see 474’s bloody demise. This the first 
series the show has been allowed to use blood, as it has been going out after 
8pm. Which may prove a counter-productive benefit given the whole conversation 
about ratings.

Mysteries and questions

As we approach endgame, by this point even the most throwaway line is capable 
of driving us mad with potential significance to Clara’s long goodbye. 
Meanwhile, this week Rachel Talalay, director of the final two episodes, told 
DWM: “[Steven Moffat has] layered in all these things from earlier in the 
series, which you never even thought were important. You have no clue what the 
series arc is, or how Clara leaves, until … well, until you do! It makes this 
finale so exciting – all these mysteries, numerous questions, some questions 
you hadn’t even realised were questions! It’s mind-blowing how well Steven has 
constructed this. At the end of this series, you’ll want to go back and watch 
it all again, ‘Now I see!’”

Theories more bonkers than what’s actually going on, did someone say? 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-9-sleep-no-more%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ff72c8de8e2032093072baf29801bcdba1656ae%2F0_285_4281_2570%2F4281.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20series%2035%2C%20episode%209%20%E2%80%93%20Sleep%20No%20More&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-9-sleep-no-more%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20series%2035%2C%20episode%209%20%E2%80%93%20Sleep%20No%20More&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-9-sleep-no-more%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ff72c8de8e2032093072baf29801bcdba1656ae%2F0_285_4281_2570%2F4281.jpg>
 Nagata (Elain Tan) with the Doctor and Clara. Photograph: Simon Ridgway/BBC 
Progress and such

Undeniably, there’s something of a transgender “moment” happening in TV, 
within the “moment” happening within the wider community. And that maybe 
shouldn’t need to be a talking point, but it will be until it isn’t. At the 
start of this year,Bethany Black 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jul/28/bethany-black-transsexual-comedian>
, who plays 474, became the first trans actor in a recurring trans role on 
British television. Since then, both EastEnders and Hollyoaks have cast trans 
actors in trans parts, and now stand-up Black shows up in only her second 
acting role (the two shows share a casting director in Andy Pryor). Perhaps 
most notably, here she is apparently playing a cis character – a warrior clone 
cis character, but a cis character all the same. Which is definitely a sort of 
progress. Incidentally, I doubt I have ever seen anybody more excited about 
anything than when I ran into Black at Manchester Pride shortly after her 
casting was announced. The lifelong Who obsessive apparently asked Gatiss 
whether this episode was linked to the 1974 storyThe Sun Makers 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/doctorwho/classic/episodeguide/sunmakers/>, because that 
was also set in the 38th century. He had no idea.

Continuity 109

One of the joys this year has been the sheer number of Easter eggs thrown in 
for the more “devoted” among us. This week, we get a reference to the “Great 
Catastrophe”, presumably the same event warned of in 1984’sFrontios 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/doctorwho/classic/episodeguide/frontios/>, where the 
citizens of a doomed planet Earth would flee from the “imminence of a 
catastrophic collision with the sun”.

And when the Doctor complains that, “It’s like the Silurians all over again” 
and insists on doing the naming, he is of course referring to the “controversy” 
over the naming of Doctor Who’s classicHomo reptilia, who would more likely 
have originated in the Eocene period.

Deeper into the vortex

“Cuts, pet.” Austerity is still going strong in the 38th century.


As the Doctor notes, the title is taken from a line in Act II of Macbeth, as 
the Scot laments to his wife:


“Methought I heard a voice cry, “Sleep no more!
Macbeth does murder sleep” – the innocent sleep,
Sleep that knits up the raveled sleave of care,
The death of each day’s life, sore labor’s bath,
Balm of hurt minds, great nature’s second course,
Chief nourisher in life’s feast.”

(There’s a fun “translation” into modern-day language here 
<http://nfs.sparknotes.com/macbeth/page_58.html>, for anyone who’s interested 
in that sort of thing.)


It’s also the name of a “promenade theatre” production based on Macbeth, from 
London’s Punchdrunk theatre company, currently playing in New York.


And another nice pop song plug-in, with the Morpheus machine using the 
Chordette’s 1954 classic Mr Sandman as its theme tune. Shall we have a listen?

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoNuX7bs2qAM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoNuX7bs2qAM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoNuX7bs2qAM&media=>
 Listen to the Chordettes singing Mr Sandman 
Gatiss, as ever, has done his homework. Morpheus, the god of dreams, also 
provided the basis for the Laurence Fishburne Morpheus character in The Matrix; 
and, in turn, the Wachowskis instructed Fishburne to base that performance on 
the character Dream from Neil Gaiman’sThe Sandman 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Morpheus_(mythology)>.


Two uses of “bloody”… Never mind scariest, is this Doctor Who’s sweariest 
episode ever?


Next Week!

Jovian Wade returns as friendly scally Rigsy, and Maisie Williams returns as 
troublesome immortal Me. It’s time to Face the Raven.
 