
SPOILER ALERT: This weekly blog is for those who have been watching the new 
series ofDoctor Who <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who>. 
Don’t read ahead if you haven’t seen episode 1 – Deep Breath

‘Look at the eyebrows! These are attack-eyebrows. You could take bottle tops 
off with these’

“Shush,” he barked, and didn’t we just. A dinosaur stomps across Parliament 
Square, andDoctor Who <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who> is 
back.

Peter Capaldi’s 12th Doctor has probably been the most fiercely anticipated 
new leading man in the show’s history. And in the end he was … probably exactly 
how you would imagine Peter Capaldi playing the Doctor to be. Not the Malcolm 
Tucker clone that Tumblr had so much fun anticipating, but far from an easy 
sell, either. We saw, at the end, the vulnerability underneath, but it took a 
bloody long time to get there. And when the 11th Doctor turned up at the end to 
reassure Clara that this was the same man (surprise! And well done if you 
managed to avoid that spoiler), he was pretty much doing the same for the 
audience.

For all his post-regenerative funk, this was not a case of a “difficult 
transition” as with Colin Baker. This Doctor is just a bit difficult, a man who 
holds his nobility behind a tendency to speak as he finds and to hell with the 
rest. A man who offers to share a last drink with his foe before seeing him off 
(did anyone else wonder a bit about that?) and revels in coming across as 
intimidating. Matt Smith was great at that too, of course, but I honestly 
thought the show’s writers were going to make Capaldi a touch more madcap than 
they seem to be doing. The question mark over whether the Doctor did throw the 
Clockwork Robot off that hot-air balloon was genuinely unsettling. But he 
instantly owns the role with the boldness you would expect from an actor of his 
stature. It takes some presence not to be upstaged by a cameo from your beloved 
predecessor. It looks as if there’s going to be a lot of walking around rooms 
giving speeches, and this is good news.

Deep Breath was a gothic period drama, true to promises of a show with a 
grittier tone and longer, more grounded scenes. In many ways, it was 
surprisingly low-key for a series opener. In reality, it maybe could have done 
with being shaved down to an hour.

But it would take a grump to conclude that this didn’t give us almost 
everything we could have hoped for.

Welcome back everyone!
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Faug%2F23%2Fdoctor-who-telly-addict-special-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F8%2F22%2F1408720781186%2FPeter-Capaldi-Doctor-Who-017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%3A%20Telly%20Addict%20special%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Faug%2F23%2Fdoctor-who-telly-addict-special-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%3A%20Telly%20Addict%20special%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Faug%2F23%2Fdoctor-who-telly-addict-special-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F8%2F22%2F1408720781186%2FPeter-Capaldi-Doctor-Who-017.jpg>
‘Just because my pretty face has turned your head, do not assume I am so 
easily distracted!’

That throwback to 2005’s The End Of the World, where the Doctor and Clara go 
off for “coffee … or chips” must have been no accident. This new, less 
manageable Doctor brings the show back to its 2005 format, the story of the 
companion coping and dealing with a mysterious stranger. And so after an uneven 
first year, Jenna Coleman gets to live up to being the companion we always 
hoped she could be. This is Clara’s story more than anything and the story 
doesn’t shy away from how badly she deals with the situation at first. They may 
lay it on a bit thick that this is Clara’s character now, an “egomaniac needy 
game-player” as the Doctor calls her, but her two-handers, with the Doctor in 
the restaurant, and with Vastra in her chamber, are beautifully done. Back 
home, Clara has a teaching job and will soon get a new boyfriend in colleague 
Danny Pink. Juggling all that with a double life hanging out with a 
time-travelling space detective – what could possibly go wrong?

‘I don’t like her, ma’am. I love her. And as to different, well … she’s a 
lizard’

It’s a measure of Doctor Who’s madness that our familiar territory is the 
Victorian household of a lizard detective, her ninja housemaid wife and their 
Sontaran butler, but here we are, and it’s lovely and familiar to have them 
back. Neve McIntosh as Madame Vastra is emerging as a true star of the show, 
and she gets fleshed out, with her blunt condemnation of Clara’s attitude and 
her lustful manipulation of Jenny. Here is an inter-species lesbian couple in 
the 19th century that you can actually believe in.

Some sectors of the gay media have reported on this alleged “first gay kiss in 
Doctor Who” as if it evenwas the first gay kiss in Doctor Who, which is silly. 
But that moment was still powerful, although in fact, it was just the same as 
most kisses in Doctor Who – transfers of energy rather than random snogs. And 
in any case, there was more lesbian smut with Vastra and Jenny in this episode 
than we’ve ever seen before from them.

And Vastra still punishes criminals by eating them, so that’s lovely as well.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F23%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-one-deep-breath%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F22%2F1408710393465%2F9720764f-391b-4351-a375-e0e08b6adcf5-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20recap%3A%20series%2034%2C%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20Deep%20Breath&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F23%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-one-deep-breath%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20recap%3A%20series%2034%2C%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20Deep%20Breath&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F23%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-one-deep-breath%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F22%2F1408710393465%2F9720764f-391b-4351-a375-e0e08b6adcf5-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Jenna Coleman as Clara joins Peter Capaldi ... Doctor’s orders. Photograph: 
Adrian Rogers/BBC 
Fear factor

I don’t mind the recycling of ideas when they’re this good. This new version 
of the Clockwork Robots (last seen in 2006’s The Girl in the Fireplace) repeats 
the same idea as the Weeping Angels first did inBlink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/organgrinder/2007/jul/02/doctorwhoitsseasonfinalet>
. “How long can you keep your eyes open” is neatly substituted for “How long 
can you hold your breath?” But it works. Ben Wheatley’s direction in that 
sequence, as Clara makes that walk of pain through the bowels of the 
restaurant, is the stuff of true terror and wonderment.

And can we all just take a moment to consider the sight of a body, skewered on 
the top of Big Ben?

Mysteries and questions

Again, this new series wastes no time in throwing us into a story arc, with 
that coda of the Clockwork Robot actually making it to “heaven”, greeted by the 
deranged Missy – another eccentric woman who claims some romantic link to the 
Doctor, which will no doubt annoy some people. She, presumably, is the woman 
from the computer help deskback in The Bells of Saint John 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/mar/30/doctor-who-bells-of-saint-john>
 who connected Clara with the Doctor. And that’s good news for people who 
thought that was an abandoned plot thread.

These Clockwork Robots, harvesting flesh to turn themselves a bit human, are 
the exact opposite of the Cybermen. Since it’s widely known that the Cybermen 
turn up in the finale, might we draw a link there?

Time-space debris

• “I don’t wear the veil as a courtesy to these people, but as a judgment on 
the quality of their hearts.” Go Vastra!

• This Doctor does flirt actually 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/jul/28/flirting-tardis-peter-capaldi-doctor-who-interview>
 – it’s just that he does it with a dinosaur.

• “You’ve redecorated – I don’t like it.” Now Clara gets a go at the 
catchphrase first coined way back inThe Three Doctors 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/doctorwho/classic/episodeguide/threedoctors/>.


• The “heaven” we see at the end is the same location used in The Girl Who 
Waited 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2011/sep/10/the-girl-who-waited>
.


• “You might as well flirt with a mountain range.”

Next week!

Time to meet a new friend in Danny Pink, as well as a very old enemy, as we 
journey Into the Dalek.

 