
‘No one knows they’re not dreaming. Not one of us. Not ever. Not for one 
single moment of our lives’

Merry Christmas! And how about that: probably the only story that will ever be 
told in which “and I woke up and it was all a dream” was not a lazy get-out but 
a miraculous fist-pump of a happy ending.

Last year’s special, The Time of the Doctor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/dec/25/the-time-of-the-doctor-doctor-who-recap>
, was overblown, but it was Matt Smith’s finale, so it needed to be. This one 
played to the show’s claustrophobic strengths – a remote base-under-siege 
adventure turned out to be something even smaller than that, a story that took 
place only in the imaginations of its protagonists. Steven Moffat’s Doctor Who 
has already told us not to blink, breathe or turn around – and with “think” now 
added to the list, we’re fast running out of things we actuallycan do without 
facing certain death. But the dream crabs were marvellously effective. For all 
the psychological chills, this was also the most Christmassy Christmas special 
they’ve ever done.

Because, oh yes, Santa Claus. Ever since Matt Smith made that throwaway line in
2010 special, A Christmas Carol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2010/dec/25/doctor-who-christmas-special-2010>
 – “Of course Father Christmas is real, I’ve met him, his real name’s Geoff” – 
I’ve been lobbying to have Geoff appear in a special. Continuity bores like me 
will wonder whether this Santa Claus was in fact that same Geoff. But while 
Nick Frost’s Santa might dress like the kindly grandpa of Coca-Cola legend, he 
acts like a swashbuckling polar pirate, announces his arrival with an entourage 
of slinkies and goes on with the superiority of a man so judgmental as to 
divide all the world’s children into a binary list of naughty and nice. Santa 
and his elves were great fun. “I can commit 16m housebreaks in one night 
dressed in a red suit with jingle bells,” he grunted, “so, of course I can get 
back in the infirmary.” But Geoff carries out his scientifically impossible 
annual goodwill mission out of solid moral imperative. As Shona so eloquently 
put it: “You’re a dream that’s trying to save us?” And save them he did – 
literally.

I don’t think a Christmas Doctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who> is ever going to top that 
wonderful sleigh ride across the London skies. I just don’t think it’s possible.

‘I stopped believing in fairytales a long time ago’

But even Santa Claus found himself upstaged by what became this year’s big 
mystery: was Clara going to stay or was she going to go? The question over 
Jenna Coleman’s future on the show had echoes of the Sun’s front pages about 
Billie Piper leaving, back in the day. And right up to the very final twist, 
everyone involved teased us to the point where it was getting annoying. 
Ultimately, though, it proved how magical it is not to know what’s going to 
happen in advance.

Clara now becomes new-Who’s longest-serving companion (let’s not even get into 
how we measure longevity in the classic show) and it comes with a renewal of 
her relationship with the Doctor. The worry had been that the testy sparring 
between them would have been difficult to sustain. But if the arc of this 
season had essentially been Clara’s exit story, that ending was just too 
horribly mundane. The other ending they teased us with – one last visit from 
the Doctor to lovely, old, frail Clara on her deathbed – would have worked 
perfectly fine, too, but would also have been quite sad.

Actually, Last Christmas was one big ingenious reunion story – one 
orchestrated by Santa Claus, no less! Good old Geoff. But that dynamic has now 
changed once again, into something more outwardly paternal (definitely, 
definitely not flirty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jul/27/peter-capaldi-doctor-who-no-flirting-sidekick-coleman-new-series>
). Dream Danny gave Clara permission to move on with her life. It’s all to play 
for now.

But when you think about it, she was always going to stay. They start filming 
the next series in February, so the replacement would have been cast already 
and there’s no way that wouldn’t have leaked. Bad old Moffat, ruining our fun 
again with his “wanting everybody to enjoy the story properly”.

Fear factor
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F25%2Fdoctor-who-recap-last-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F18%2F1418903694019%2F5dd0c87d-f476-4b41-9b43-93d2f4b105ca-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20recap%3A%20Last%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F25%2Fdoctor-who-recap-last-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20recap%3A%20Last%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F25%2Fdoctor-who-recap-last-christmas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F18%2F1418903694019%2F5dd0c87d-f476-4b41-9b43-93d2f4b105ca-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Nick Frost’s Santa Claus is a swashbuckling polar pirate. Photograph: Adrian 
Rogers/BBC 
The tacit admission that the dream crab’s design was sort-of ripped off from 
the facehuggers in Alien allowed for an excellent one-liner: “There’s a horror 
movie called Alien? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/oct/13/derek-malcolm-alien-review> No 
wonder people keep invading you.” But it didn’t stop them being one of the 
scariest creations in recent years. Moffat’s psychological tricks – a 
telepathic mind pirate who can only see you if you can see it, and kills you 
while you’re dreaming – are always effective. But props to the design 
department for creating something that genuinely had me covering my eyes. 
Meanwhile, I’ll probably never look at a chalkboard in the same way again.

Yes, as well as being the most Christmassy, Last Christmas is hands down the 
scariest festive special Who has ever done.

Mysteries and questions

So, for next year, it’s anyone’s guess as to where we might go. Next year’s 
series opener will be titled The Magician’s Apprentice, which suggests Clara 
won’t be rushing back to Coal Hill school and the Doctor will be taking a more 
teacherly role. Whether that means this year’s gritty, urban approach will 
change remains to be seen, but it does suggest something more fantastical. And 
though Danny’s story appears to be over, don’t assume that’s the last we’ve 
seen of Samuel Anderson. As he hinted at the recent DVD launch, “There’s always 
Orson.”

Time-space debris

• Dan Starkey, AKA Commander Strax, gets to put in another fine comic turn 
without all those prosthetics as Ian the bitchy elf.

• Poor, lonely Shona. She’s probably not companion material, but I hope things 
turn around for her.

• It’s on a BBC budget, so it would be mean-spirited to snigger about the 
ageing makeup. Let’s not do that.

• “These are Christmas hats. I’ve seen people use them. You put them on and 
absolutely anything seems funny.”

• That line about the Doctor asking Clara to get him a cup of tea (followed by 
a punch in the face) isa reference to 70s companion Jo Grant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2010/apr/20/doctor-who-jo-grant-sarah-jane>
, who was forever being sent off by Jon Pertwee to fetch tea and sandwiches. 
The Time Lord has moved with the times.

• “There are a lot of dangerous things on this funny little planet of yours, 
most of which you eat.”

• Personally, I always did like the tangerines.

• Oh, go on then.
 