
SPOILER ALERT: This weekly blog is for those who have been watching the new 
series ofDoctor Who <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who>. 
Don’t read ahead if you haven’t seen episode seven – The Zygon Invasion.

• Read Dan Martin’s episode six episode blog here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/oct/24/doctor-who-recap-series-25-episode-six-the-woman-who-lived>


‘They know there’s something going on, some radicalisation, some revolution in 
the younger brood. They said they had it under control’

Well there was another change of pace. This week, a blockbusting, 
international urban thriller. With Zygons. Anyone left frustrated with the 
outcome of 50th-anniversary specialThe Day of the Doctor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/nov/25/the-day-of-the-doctor-doctor-who-recap>
; with the Zygon subplot apparently left hanging, need not worry. It’s a bold 
piece of continuity, needing an extensive pre-credits recap to remind viewers 
of the very specific events of two years ago. But this was always the plan, to 
revisit the Zygon peace treaty down the line, and as we arrive back on 
21st-century Earth, we explore the consequences of millions of the shape 
shifters resettled among us in an uneasy accord. Ceasefires are tricky things. 
Which makes the title maybe a bit of a cheat because what’s happening is less 
an invasion than an insurgency, a rebel Zygon cell blowing open a fragile peace.

Did somebody say topical contemporary reference? It’s always been the job of 
sci-fi to hold a mirror up to society, but returning writer Peter Harness goes 
considerably further thanDoctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who> has in recent years. 
Lines like “They’ll think you’re gonna pinch their benefits,” raise a laugh, 
but repeated use of the word “radicalisation” in the script is a bravely 
emotive move in what is still perceived by many as a children’s show. 
Meanwhile, the rebel Zygons’ video made a chilling nod to Isis that can only 
have been deliberate. Still, there were requisite spooky children to lighten 
things.

And after a quieter time on screen last week, it gives Jenna Coleman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/jenna-louise-coleman> the chance to 
camp it up as her Zygon insurgent replica, Bonnie. Who knew the simple act of 
trying your hair in a ponytail could look so malevolent?

“Every race is capable of the best and the worst.” 

“Everyone is peaceful and warlike.” 

“My race is no different.”

“And neither is mine.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-seven-the-zygon-invasion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6082428e617818727e133a10a732823b4a907c6%2F0_117_4281_2571%2F4281.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20series%2035%2C%20episode%20seven%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Zygon%20Invasion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-seven-the-zygon-invasion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20series%2035%2C%20episode%20seven%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Zygon%20Invasion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-seven-the-zygon-invasion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6082428e617818727e133a10a732823b4a907c6%2F0_117_4281_2571%2F4281.jpg>
 Osgood (Ingrid Oliver) and The Doctor (Peter Capaldi). Photograph: Simon 
Ridgway/BBC 
The lovely Osgood, who despite her death last year, is still running round, 
gleefully cosplaying, blissfully at ease with her lack of a first name. When 
news broke that Ingrid Oliver was back as the Unit favourite in a Zygon story, 
the obvious assumption was that this was a Zygon replica, or otherwise, that it 
had been the Zygon replica offed by Missy. There’s a far more intriguing 
explanation; that this individual doesn’t consider herself to be either; she’s 
a hybrid (that word again), the perfect model of cohesion and, in that sense 
the embodiment of the ceasefire itself. We’ll see if she goes rogue next week 
of course, but her grief for her “sister” provided one of the most profound 
emotional beats we’ve seen all year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-seven-the-zygon-invasion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef549720c3ded6d3b4e7dac3a6e730adf8c1ef1c%2F0_0_1621_971%2F1621.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20series%2035%2C%20episode%20seven%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Zygon%20Invasion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-seven-the-zygon-invasion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20series%2035%2C%20episode%20seven%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Zygon%20Invasion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-seven-the-zygon-invasion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef549720c3ded6d3b4e7dac3a6e730adf8c1ef1c%2F0_0_1621_971%2F1621.jpg>
 Rebecca Front as UNIT commando Walsh. Photograph: Screen Grab/BBC 
It’s also nice to have Unit back, front and centre, as semi-regulars, their 
ranks bolstered year-on-year, and the Doctor also now more comfortable in his 
proxy role of President of Earth. And surely it’s no accident that the United 
Nations offshoot is now a predominantly female organisation. Now settled within 
the family of the series, Jemma Redgrave gets to do some proper action-packed 
field work as Kate. Jaye Griffiths is now installed as scientist Jac, and now 
we also have Rebecca Front, reunited withThe Thick of It 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-thick-of-it> co-star Capaldi as 
brusque commando Walsh, attempting to restore order over the Zygon omnishambles.

Fear factor

The Zygons themselves still rank among Doctor Who’s most memorable monsters, 
despite appearing just once in the classic series, 1975’sTerror of the Zygons 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/doctorwho/classic/episodeguide/terrorzygons/>. That saw 
the shape shifters hatch a plot underneath Loch Ness, giving Tom Baker the 
chance to ham it up in tartan. It also featured actor Ian Marter pulling off 
the same trick as Coleman, in a terrific turn as companion Harry’s duplicate. 
But the orange blobby things remain a design classic, and are regularly 
trumpeted as a favourite by David Tennant.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-seven-the-zygon-invasion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b225508edfdab3b9ac5157d04ceb279a960ed39%2F0_0_4482_2693%2F4482.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20series%2035%2C%20episode%20seven%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Zygon%20Invasion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-seven-the-zygon-invasion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20series%2035%2C%20episode%20seven%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Zygon%20Invasion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-seven-the-zygon-invasion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b225508edfdab3b9ac5157d04ceb279a960ed39%2F0_0_4482_2693%2F4482.jpg>
 Let Zygons be Zygons… Photograph: Simon Ridgway/BBC 
Mysteries and questions

There’s that notion of the “hybrid” popping up again, quite deliberately. So 
if this series promises to investigate further the real reason the Doctor ran 
away from Gallifrey (thanks, Davros), then what could link all these hybrids he 
keeps coming across, and the monstrosity of dark legend? There’s big stuff 
going on this year.

Continuity 107

When Kate describes the events of Terror of the Zygons as in the “1970s or 
80s,” it’s no accident. She refers to what’s known as the “Unit dating 
controversy <http://tardis.wikia.com/wiki/UNIT_dating_controversy>”, a 
continuity muddle of mixed-up dates and timelines regarding the classic Unit 
stories that are far too convoluted to go into in this lifetime. There’s an 
in-depth look at ithere <http://tardis.wikia.com/wiki/UNIT_dating_controversy>, 
and a documentary for a DVD extra was even made on the subject, but suffice to 
say that for a long time, nobody seemed quite sure what decade it was. Such can 
be the ripple effects of time travel.

Deeper into the vortex

 * “You left us with an impossible situation, Doctor.” “Yeah, it’s called 
peace.” 
 * Steven Moffat has weighed in once again on the sonic sunglasses 
controversy. Speaking at the MCM London Comic Con he said: “I love the fact 
that people have risen up in anger over the sonic screwdriver. God knows how 
that lot would have got on when they introduced regeneration, or that Time 
Lords have two hearts … As of now, every kid with glasses is Doctor Who! Kid 
whose parents don’t want to shell out for a sonic screwdriver toy, just put on 
a pair of sunglasses, you’re Doctor Who! And best of all, every pin-brained 
celebrity walking into a party with shades on in now cosplaying Doctor Who!” 
 * And so, in this blog’s occasional tradition of planting barely relevant pop 
videos into the commentary, here’s Tiga and Zyntherius.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DH7jF7Kzemnw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DH7jF7Kzemnw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DH7jF7Kzemnw&media=>
 Sunglasses (at night)… 
 * On a related topic, “Doctor Disco?”

 * The Osgoods get their Doctor cosplay on once again with Four’s scarf, 
Seven’s tank top, and Eleven’s bow-tie.

 * The guitar is back. This week: Amazing Grace.

 * Clara is back in that block of flats. Wages for teachers in London must not 
be as healthy as I’d imagined.

 * The Doctor is wearing question-mark underpants. And why not?

 * Published this week is Impossible Worlds: A 50 Year Treasury of Art and 
Design 
<http://www.kasterborous.com/2015/05/doctor-impossible-worlds-50-year-treasury-art-design/>
, a bulging volume that reprints unseen concept art from throughout the history 
of the show. BBC Books has given the Guardian this exclusive mock-up of the 
Zygon cave in this week’s episode, by artist Chris J Lees.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-seven-the-zygon-invasion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77fd82c7ce7495cfebb8f22b3ef5e9282a74dded%2F0_0_2428_2136%2F2428.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20series%2035%2C%20episode%20seven%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Zygon%20Invasion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-seven-the-zygon-invasion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20series%2035%2C%20episode%20seven%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Zygon%20Invasion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-seven-the-zygon-invasion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77fd82c7ce7495cfebb8f22b3ef5e9282a74dded%2F0_0_2428_2136%2F2428.jpg>
 A Zygon cave from Doctor Who, Impossible Worlds: A 50 Year Treasury of Art and 
Design Photograph: Chris J Lees/BBC 
Next week

“Clara Oswald is dead, Kate Stewart is dead.” Can it be? See the worst-case 
scenario considered in the concluding half of this week’s episode, The Zygon 
Inversion.
 