
‘I didn’t come here because I’m ashamed – a bit of shame never hurt anyone. I 
came here because you’re sick, and you asked.’

Speaking at a launch for the series in Cardiff this month, Steven Moffat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/stevenmoffat> said that the idea for this 
two-part opening story had been very simple. The Doctor and Davros, he 
contended, had never had a scene together that had been anything less than 
great. Even in the less revered stories, those two in a room together had 
always, always been electric. There had just never been especially much of it. 
Even the iconic stuff from Genesis is actually fleetingly brief. So his 
one-line pitch was: what would happen if you put them in a room together and 
leave them there for quite a long time?

There’s not a huge amount more to it than that. After the scale and cataclysm 
of last week, Moffat deliberately dials things down. The Witch’s Familiar 
succeeds as a stand-alone piece because of its self-imposed limitations. There 
is only Missy and Clara’s twisted buddy movie, and the sight gag of the Doctor 
in the Davros chair (“anyone for dodgems?”) to bring levity to an episode 
that’s thoughtful, claustrophobic and often incredibly grim.

Doctor Who recap series 35, episode one – The Magician’s Apprentice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/sep/19/doctor-who-recap-series-35-episode-one-the-magicians-apprentice>
This two-part format allows things to breathe – Moffat doesn’t try to pad out 
the extended running time with myriad extra plot twists, he just gives these 
old enemies room to dance around each other, batting back and forth centuries 
of animosity and bloodshed, made to feel recent and urgent once again in the 
light of recent revelations. This might have been brave ifPeter Capaldi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/peter-capaldi> and Julian Bleach as 
Davros didn’t crackle with such warped chemistry together. As each piled layers 
of bluff upon double bluff upon deception and betrayal, that moment when they 
ditched the poetics and just laughed together … considering the Doctor’s 
culpability, surely there was something real there? And even though there was 
no way Davros was really going to be redeemed, and even though the Doctor was 
always going to be one step ahead, was there not a strange romance to it, all 
the same?

And in the good guys’ final victory, that the Doctor knew what he was doing in 
“owing the boy a sunrise”, so he wasn’t crippled by his own compassion after 
all – well, what does that say about the Doctor’s compassion? Maybe all that it 
needed to. At the very end – one small act of compassion was enough to plant 
the slightest notion of mercy in the young Davros that would leave his Daleks 
with that tiniest of design flaws. Maybe that’s why they keep losing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-two-the-witchs-familiar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443194895396%2Fec8aff6b-f5fc-480b-988f-d67957b4857d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20series%2035%2C%20episode%20two%3A%20The%20Witch%E2%80%99s%20Familiar&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-two-the-witchs-familiar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20series%2035%2C%20episode%20two%3A%20The%20Witch%E2%80%99s%20Familiar&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-two-the-witchs-familiar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443194895396%2Fec8aff6b-f5fc-480b-988f-d67957b4857d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Peter Capaldi surrounded by Daleks. Photograph: Simon Ridgway/BBC 
‘Between us and him is everything the deadliest race in all of history can 
throw at us. We, on the other hand, have a pointy stick.’

Meanwhile, as the Doctor and Davros go all De Niro-and-Pacino-in-Heat, Clara 
and Missy got some altogether lighter adventures in the grey space around the 
“friend zone”.

Teaming them up is tricky, which obviously makes it a good idea. Clara seems 
to be getting on remarkably well with this psycho, despite herself. Missy’s way 
of dealing with their awkward, grudging respect is to keep tying her up, 
handcuffing her to walls and shoving her down wells – just in case this Earth 
girl forgets who is boss (“every miner needs a canary”).

The psychopath is playing the good game by being cruel, but she knows that 
Clara’s going to be just fine inside the Dalek – because if the Doctor trusts 
this woman, then so, implicitly, does she. Similarly, as she chivvies the 
Doctor to kill a Dalek, lying that it’s the one that killed Clara, she knows he 
will work out the truth, even if she doesn’t much care either way. We never see 
how Missy survived, and we don’t need to (“Not dead, back, never mind”). But if 
she’s going to have to go into league with the Daleks now, well, that’s just 
what she’ll do. “Know what? I’ve just had a very clever idea!”

Fear factor 

After last week’s hand mines, more Skaro-related body horror in the putrid 
underground sewers. “They’re ever so slightly alive,” quips Missy as it’s 
revealed what really happens to the Dalek dead, and that their word for “sewer” 
is the same as for “graveyard” (we only hear them speak English, but hey). It 
all adds another layer of tragedy to such a monstrous creation: “genetically 
hardwired to keep on living, whatever happens”.

Mysteries and questions 

Further intrigue about what might have been on the Doctor’s Confession Dial, 
and it’s looking increasingly like it’s about more than whether he may or may 
not have left young Davros to die, burdening him with the bitterness and fear 
that would lead him to create the Daleks. Old Davros refers darkly to a 
supposed Dalek/Timelord “Hybrid” that the Doctor may have had a hand in 
creating on Gallifrey; guilt being a possible motivation for him running away 
in the first place (which, of course, would dial back into a Young Davros thing 
… OK, I’m confused now).

Perhaps even more worryingly, let’s consider Missy’s (apparently throwaway?) 
line as Clara is revealed inside a Dalek: “This is why I gave her to you in the 
first place; a friend inside an enemy, an enemy inside a friend. Everyone’s a 
hybrid.”

It was Missy who engineered Clara’s meeting with the Doctor. Are we looking at 
a much darker journey ahead for Ms Oswald?

Continuity 102 

This construction of Skaro was closely based on Raymond Cusack’s original 
design of the Dalek city from 1963; “for no better reason than it’s an 
astonishingly good design,” Moffat toldDoctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who> Magazine. “The sloping 
walls, the sloping doorways, the guillotine doors – it’s just amazing. Better 
than any other design that’s been done for Dalek architecture.”

Meanwhile, this is evidently the first time the Master and Davros have come 
face to face.

Deeper into the vortex 

This was Clara’s third time inside a Dalek. Jenna Coleman’s first appearance 
saw the Oswin version’s consciousness trapped inside one inAsylum of the Daleks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/sep/01/doctor-who-asylum-of-the-daleks>
, while last year a miniaturised gang ventured round another’s innards inInto 
the Dalek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/aug/30/doctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-two-into-the-dalek-peter-capaldi>
.

Could it be significant that the boy is only credited as “the Boy”?

“You keep saying that, but you keep not dying. Can you give it some welly?”

The sonic screwdriver may be gone for now, but who foresaw the Doctor’s move 
towards “wearable technology” with the sonic shades? It’s just a shame that 
Moffat’s conceit has been out-dafted by reality, with the recent emergence of 
the Apple Pencil …

Missy had a daughter?

Not incredibly keen on Capaldi’s Doctor’s scruffier look. When can we see that 
lovely purple velvet jacket from the promo shots, please?

“Don’t get emotional, it fires the gun.”

The whole two-part story is repeated in feature-length form on Sunday at 
3.15pm on BBC1. Is this something we might expect as a regular fixture, given 
this year’s slew of two-part stories?

Next week 

Writer Toby Whithouse returns to Who for what we’re told is an underwater 
ghost story: Under the Lake.
 