
‘Death was the one thing that unified every single living creature in the 
universe, and now it’s gone’

A ghost story. An underwater ghost story at that. Doctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who> loves nothing more than 
to spin conventions on their head, and for his return to the series, writer 
Toby Whithouse culture-jams haunted-house intrigue with classic 
base-under-siege tension. We’ve seen both formats on Who before, but never 
quite like this. As always with Whithouse, there’s fizzing, funny dialogue and 
a cracking ensemble (particular props to deaf actor Sophie Stone, who nails 
Cass as a character, her deafness proving entirely incidental, as it should be).

The two-part nature of the stories this year again allows room to breathe, 
slowly picking off crew members and piling on tension layer by layer, so by 
that breathtaking cliffhanger, you really do feel claustrophobic and completely 
in the dark as to answers. It feels new. It feels odd. It feels uncomfortable. 
It feels … well, actually it feels exactly like what Doctor Who, let alone a 
ghost story, is absolutely supposed to. Which is not to say that it feels like 
one of the classic-series “episode ones”, where they did little more than 
wander about for half an hour. But then, certainties are great things to cling 
on to.

So is Under The Lake a bit boring? Part of me worries that, possibly, yes, for 
an audience primed on the high-octane 45-minute adventures of recent years. 
Last week,The Witch’s Familiar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/sep/26/doctor-who-series-35-episode-two-the-witchs-familiar>
 made a virtue of its languid pace because there was so much of a familiar toy 
box to play around with. Here we just have to deal with set-ups. Under The Lake 
still comes off as a masterpiece in craft and tension, the mystery unfurling in 
style. But it does feel like Whithouse is going to pull off something that 
Doctor Who manages quite rarely; a two-part story where the second half is 
significantly better than the first.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F03%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-3-under-the-lake%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F2%2F1443784172746%2Fac0e0520-bfcb-415f-8876-87f6241295f5-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20Series%2035%2C%20episode%203%3A%20Under%20The%20Lake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F03%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-3-under-the-lake%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20Series%2035%2C%20episode%203%3A%20Under%20The%20Lake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F03%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-3-under-the-lake%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F2%2F1443784172746%2Fac0e0520-bfcb-415f-8876-87f6241295f5-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Who’s in here? Photograph: Simon Ridgway/BBC 
‘Was it something she said? She does that; she once had an argument with 
Gandhi!’

These glory years of the Doctor and Clara find them settled into a groove 
alright; the cue cards she waves in his face to navigate social situations are 
a delightful touch. Similarly, the Doctor is at least trying to acknowledge his 
“duty of care” towards her, all the while plunging her into perilous situations 
week-on-week. Heavy weather is being made of Clara’s evolution into an 
adrenalin junkie (her “I want another adventure!” is just a teensy bit Violet 
Elizabeth Bott). But it’s becoming clear that her new live-in-the-moment 
fervour after losing Danny could be turning into a recklessness that might 
prove her undoing.

Fear factor

Whithouse had fun mashing up the genre conventions as he approached his story, 
telling Doctor Who Magazine this month: “I wanted haunted-house tropes. The 
team finding the spaceship is an echo of the familiar ghost stories, such as 
someone finding a sarcophagus and opening it up, only for an ancient curse to 
be unleashed and so on. The underwater base becomes our haunted house.” 
Similarly, the moss that lines the base becomes the cobwebs and so on. There’s 
definitely no doubting that this is absolutely one of the creepiest Doctor Who 
stories in recent years, the ghosts chillingly rendered, and that final 
cliffhanger a nightmare-baiting humdinger. And we haven’t even seen the monster 
yet …

Mysteries and questions

Obviously, “ghosts” as such are not supposed to exist in a Whoniverse which 
ultimately explains everything via some kind of science. But unlike previous 
ghostly goings-on, the Doctor is delighted to be convinced that these guys are 
the real deal. So what do we think might be the big reveal this time?

Continuity 103

Whithouse gets to bring one of his own creations back, in the form of the 
sinister mole man. This ghost in particular used to hail from the planet 
Tivoli, belonging to a species who love nothing more than to be oppressed and 
enslaved. We last saw them in the writer’s 2011 offeringThe God Complex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2011/sep/17/doctor-who-god-complex>
, with David Walliams playing the timid Gibbis. And next week we get to see 
more from Paul “Dennis Pennis” Kaye as Prentis.

Slipknot's Corey Taylor supplies Doctor Who's monster with scream
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/28/slipknots-corey-taylor-supplies-monster-scream-to-this-weeks-doctor-who>
Random Q&A with a rock musician

In one of the stranger bits of casting news in the history of television, it 
emerged this week that this story’s Big Bad, the Fisher King, will be voiced by 
Corey Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/28/slipknots-corey-taylor-supplies-monster-scream-to-this-weeks-doctor-who>
, frontman with masked heavy-metal heroesSlipknot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/slipknot>. Anyone who has come across 
Taylor’s bloodcurdling squall will know that the idea is not quite as demented 
as it sounds. He doesn’t crop up until next week, but I managed to sneak an 
email chat with the man himself. He was very excited.

DM: How excited are you about this?

CT: I am over the moon about this. I can’t tell you what it means to be a part 
of this world. The only thing for me that would come close would be Star Wars.

DM: How did it come about?

CT: We were playing in Cardiff last year, and were not only invited to the Who 
Experience, but the studios at BBC Wales. I GOT TO GO IN THE TARDIS!! I touched 
EVERYTHING, ha ha ha! The producers, directors and crew all came down to our 
show that night as well – they told me they had a good time!

DM: How big a fan of Doctor Who are you?

CT: Huge! I’ve been watching Doctor Who since I was a kid. Getting a chance to 
work with everyone and contribute to something I love has been an awesome 
experience.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F03%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-3-under-the-lake%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F2%2F1443784341263%2F2d887dc6-12ac-41ff-b15a-ad96425b356e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20Series%2035%2C%20episode%203%3A%20Under%20The%20Lake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F03%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-3-under-the-lake%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20Series%2035%2C%20episode%203%3A%20Under%20The%20Lake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F03%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-3-under-the-lake%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F2%2F1443784341263%2F2d887dc6-12ac-41ff-b15a-ad96425b356e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 New balls please: the Doctor Who, Lunn, Clara, O’Donnell and Bennett. 
Photograph: Simon Ridgway/BBC 
Deeper into the vortex

Fun with useless production trivia: the set for The Drum was repurposed as the 
Dalek control room in The Magician’s Apprentice, which was the following story 
to go in front of the cameras.

‘Hello, sailors!’

Whithouse re-unites here with the actor Steven Robertson as Pritchard. He 
previously starred as Dominic Rook, leader of the “Men in Grey” inBeing Human 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/being-human-episode-by-episode>
.

O’Donnell could be a Doctor super-fan to rival Osgood. Are there a lot of 
these women in the future?

There’s quite a bit of nonsense being written about the show’s ratings this 
year that is predicated on the assumption that the “overnight viewing figures” 
model is in any way fit for purpose. In true BBC adorably-self-lacerating 
style, its own news service even picked up the story of a mass viewer 
“desertion”. So it’s worth reporting that the initial “consolidated” viewing 
figure after seven days for The Magician’s Apprentice was 6.5m, which doesn’t 
include data for anyone watching on mobile devices, nor is it likely to come 
close to the final “consolidated” figure, calculated after 28 days. And this, 
of course, only considers the UK. There’s an in-depth look at the analysis of 
the show’s “ratings crisis” from my chum Morganover at Digital Spy 
<http://www.digitalspy.co.uk/tv/s7/doctor-who/feature/a671109/doctor-who-in-crisis-the-big-questions-facing-the-saturday-night-sci-fi.html#~ppSIzateP9nOUG>
.

Next week

It’ll be a long week to wait after that cliffhanger, but we should get some 
answers as we travel back to Before The Flood.
 