
The many incarnations of Doctor Who have travelled through time and space, 
tacklingenemies from the Daleks to the Weeping Angels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2010/apr/23/doctor-who-the-monster-off>
. Now they are set to enter one of their strangest habitats to date: the 
brightly coloured world of theMr Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2011/may/09/mr-men-in-pictures>
, a place where worms smile and cars can be made from shoes.

The Mr Men/Doctor Who mash-up was inspired by online fan art, and follows a 
new partnership between Puffin Books, BBC Worldwide and Sanrio Global. It will 
see Adam Hargreaves, the son of the Mr Men’s creator Roger Hargreaves, writing 
and illustrating 12 stories for the Time Lord’s different incarnations, in the 
iconic Mr Men style.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fdoctor-who-stars-regenerated-as-mr-men-peter-capaldi-matt-smith-tom-baker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fffe29b14877c627c957bf125063e39ec01a5efa7%2F0_0_1650_1500%2F1650.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20stars%20regenerated%20as%20Mr%20Men&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fdoctor-who-stars-regenerated-as-mr-men-peter-capaldi-matt-smith-tom-baker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20stars%20regenerated%20as%20Mr%20Men&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fdoctor-who-stars-regenerated-as-mr-men-peter-capaldi-matt-smith-tom-baker%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fffe29b14877c627c957bf125063e39ec01a5efa7%2F0_0_1650_1500%2F1650.jpg>
 How Tom Baker’s Mr Men transformation will look Photograph: Jennifer Dee 
The first four books, featuring the first, fourth, 11th and 12th doctors – 
played respectively byWilliam Hartnell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/aug/22/doctor-who-rediscovered-william-hartnell-interview>
,Tom Baker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/nov/04/how-i-made-doctor-who>, 
Matt Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/matt-smith> and Peter 
Capaldi <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/peter-capaldi> – will be 
published next spring. TheFirst Doctor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/from-the-archive-blog/2014/aug/22/doctor-who-capaldi-peter-hartnell-archive>
 will be taking on the Cybermen, reimagined in Roger Hargreaves’ classic style; 
the Fourth Doctor, along withSarah Jane Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/apr/22/elisabeth-sladen-sarah-jane-doctor-who>
, will be confronting the Daleks; the 11th Doctor will be appearing alongside
River Song 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/may/31/doctor-who-river-song-divide-fans>
, and the 12th Doctor with Time Lady Missy.

Dr First, Dr Fourth, Dr Eleventh and Dr Twelfth will be followed with eight 
further titles, one for each doctor.

“There is a wealth of unofficial fan-created content online,” said Alastair 
McHarrie at Sanrio Global. “We wanted to give something back to these 
supporters so we’ve created the first official Hargreaves mashup. Who better to 
partner with than another classic British property,Doctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who>. We couldn’t be more 
excited.”

“As the global publisher of Doctor Who and champions of books which push 
creative boundaries, we are delighted to be publishing such unique and fun 
stories,” said Francesca Dow, managing director of Penguin Random House 
children’s books. “We’re confident and excited they will appeal to the 
thousands of Doctor Who and Mr Men fans around the world.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fdoctor-who-stars-regenerated-as-mr-men-peter-capaldi-matt-smith-tom-baker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb87d84db903dba1882b00c492c5a9be1b623cd9e%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20stars%20regenerated%20as%20Mr%20Men&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fdoctor-who-stars-regenerated-as-mr-men-peter-capaldi-matt-smith-tom-baker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20stars%20regenerated%20as%20Mr%20Men&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fdoctor-who-stars-regenerated-as-mr-men-peter-capaldi-matt-smith-tom-baker%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb87d84db903dba1882b00c492c5a9be1b623cd9e%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 Dr. Eleventh and Matt Smith as the Doctor Composite: BBC/Adam Hargreaves 
Earlier this year, Adam Hargreaves also created four new characters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/12/fabulous-news-mr-men-and-little-misses-get-fresh-set-of-companions>
 to mark the Mr Men’s 45th anniversary: Mr Marvellous, Little Miss Fabulous, Mr 
Adventure and Little Miss Sparkle. He told the Guardian at the time: “I hope my 
dad would have liked my new books – and that he would think they were in 
keeping with the rest of the series.

“It’s one of those weird things – I was never involved with the Mr Men before 
my dad died, and it took a very long time until I felt I had put in an 
apprenticeship which meant I could add new characters. There’s always a sense 
I’m walking in his footsteps, but I hope these capture the humour, which was 
always a key element of his books.”
 