
‘If someone who knew the future, pointed out a child to you, and told you that 
that child would grow up totally evil, be a ruthless dictator who would destroy 
millions of lives, could you then kill that child?’

And we’re back! Did everyone manage to avoid the Davros spoiler? And more to 
the point, didn’t it used to be the case that these series openers used to be 
the light and fluffy ones? And yet here we are, 45 minutes in and we’re about 
to shoot a child in the face.


Genesis of the Daleks: Doctor Who classic episode #7
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/may/23/genesis-of-the-daleks-doctor-who>
The Magician’s Apprentice pulls off with considerable panache the 
no-pressure-guys move of being a sequel of sorts to what was once voted the 
greatest Doctor Who story of all time, 1975’sGenesis Of The Daleks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/may/23/genesis-of-the-daleks-doctor-who>
. There, the Fourth was sent back to the Skaro civil war, tasked by the 
Timelords with averting the Daleks’ very creation, and, for the first time, we 
met their creator Davros. This all culminated in the moral dilemma diligently 
quoted above – albeit with something of a cop-out when the Doctor 
does-it-with-really-having-to-do-it-himself. Moffat offers no such hope of easy 
resolution by making that chilling contention – “Could you kill that child?” – 
the basis of the whole story. And Peter Capaldi’s look of dawning horror when 
he discovers the child’s identity is topped only by his look of utter hangdog 
despair as the cliffhanger approaches.

If, in the past, Davros has come over as a little bit of a daft character, the 
bleak devastation he wreaks by the end of the episode is more powerful than any 
madcap plot to enslave the universe that has come before. And Julian Bleach, 
returning to the role, wrings every drop of menace. This time, we don’t even 
know what he’s up to yet.

There is fun to be had before all that, though. With the Doctor apparently 
facing his darkest day (which does, admittedly, seem to happen rather often), 
he does what he wouldobviously do: hide out in 12th-century Essex at a 
three-week party replete with tanks, confused warriors and power-chords. That’s 
quite some entrance, “dude”.
 “Do I have the right?” 
‘Oh, don’t be disgusting, we’re Timelords, not animals. Try, nanobrain, to 
rise above the reproductive frenzy of your noisy little food chain, and 
contemplate friendship.’

Things really must be bad if Missy is coming on board as an ally. In The Name 
Of The Doctor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/may/18/doctor-who-recap-series-33-episode-13>
, Clara had to face up to the fact that there was somebody, in River Song, who 
might hold a deeper place in his “romantic” affections. Here, perhaps an even 
greater betrayal – she might not even be his best mate. Moffat makes great play 
of the thin line between best friendship and arch enemyhood.


They say of university that the friends you make in freshers’ week are the 
people you spend the next three years trying to shake off. That must be 
epically true of Gallifrey’s Prydonian Academy. The Doctor and the 
Master/Missy’s dance has spanned thousands of years, and neither much seems to
want to shake each other off.

When Clara, aghast at how the pair can be friends, points out that Missy keeps 
trying to kill him, her reply sounds kind of reasonable: “He keeps trying to 
kill me.” We’re back to a Pertwee-Delgado frenemy dynamic, although you doubt 
that Delgado could have pulled off a pirouette like that. Missy’s indignation 
at the suggestion she’s “turned good” is delicious. With Michelle Gomez back on 
such dazzling psychotic form, there’s a bit less for Clara to do than usual, 
but it’s good to see, now that she’s the longest-serving of all the modern 
companions, that she knows what she’s doing, a trusted agent of Unit who still 
keeps up that teaching job. You’d have thought that school would hold too many 
painful memories of Danny.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-35-episode-one-the-magicians-apprentice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F18%2F1442579915131%2F82134799-564b-4774-add8-e4f1f81d9a38-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20recap%20series%2035%2C%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Magician%E2%80%99s%20Apprentice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-35-episode-one-the-magicians-apprentice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20recap%20series%2035%2C%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Magician%E2%80%99s%20Apprentice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-35-episode-one-the-magicians-apprentice%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F18%2F1442579915131%2F82134799-564b-4774-add8-e4f1f81d9a38-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Who are you… the Doctor rocks a medieval crowd. Photograph: Simon Ridgway/BBC 
Fear factor

Vintage blue Daleks on the Planet Skaro! We are truly blessed. Although, as 
we’ve talked about before, the Daleks are more a design classic infused with 
decades of shared understanding than they’resupposed to be scary. A great Dalek 
story needs a bit of extra threat to it. Which we get in the form of the 
unimaginably creepy hand mines, surely enough to turn any nervous young boy 
into the universe’s deadliest tyrant.

Mysteries and questions

With Jenna Coleman making the hardly surprising confirmation that she’s 
leaving this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/sep/18/jenna-coleman-confirms-doctor-who-exit-it-was-emotional>
, the obvious big question will be the nature of her departure. But consider, 
too, the Doctor’s Confession Dial and what might be in it. The signs are this 
could be an ongoing series thread, ifMoffat’s Radio Times episode guide 
<http://www.radiotimes.com/news/2015-09-14/steven-moffats-exclusive-doctor-who-series-nine-episode-guide>
 is anything to go by. He writes of the finale, Hell Bent: “If you took 
everything from him, and betrayed him, and broke both his hearts … how far 
might the Doctor go? It’s time, at last, for the Doctor’s confession.”

Continuity 101

Leaving aside the Genesis premise, this manically eventful opener contains 
more references and callbacks than a mutant could menacingly wave an egg-whisk 
at. Colony Sarff’s quest for the Doctor takes him to all corners of the 
Whoniverse. The Maldovarium was the 52nd-century black market where River stole 
the vortex manipulator in The Pandorica Opens (no sign of the now-decapitated 
Dorium, though). We did see a returning face at the Shadow Proclamation (from
The Stolen Earth <http://tardis.wikia.com/wiki/The_Stolen_Earth>) in the shape 
of Kelly Hunter as the albino Shadow Architect, complete with Judoon. Back, 
too, is Claire Higgins as Ohila, from the Sisterhood Of Karn, last seen in 
webisode The Night Of The Doctor – itself a quite berserk throwback to The 
Brain Of Morbius from 1976. With all this going on, they can afford to throw in 
an actor of the stature of Jemma Redgrave with little more than a cameo as Kate 
Stewart. She’ll be back later in the series.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-35-episode-one-the-magicians-apprentice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F18%2F1442584077521%2F07442e9c-319f-42ce-a8bf-4df6c3e75bae-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20recap%20series%2035%2C%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Magician%E2%80%99s%20Apprentice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-35-episode-one-the-magicians-apprentice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20recap%20series%2035%2C%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Magician%E2%80%99s%20Apprentice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-35-episode-one-the-magicians-apprentice%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F18%2F1442584077521%2F07442e9c-319f-42ce-a8bf-4df6c3e75bae-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Missy and Clara. Photograph: Jack Barnes/BBC 
Deeper into the vortex

The Magician’s Apprentice takes its name from a 2009 fantasy novel by Trudi 
Canavan.


The location filming for Skaro took place at Parque Nacional de las Cañadas 
del Teide in Tenerife. The crew popped over to nearby Plaza de la Iglesia for 
Missy and Clara’s scenes in the “hot country”.


This Doctor does hugging now.


Is it now established that Clara is a bit bisexual? It was hinted that the 
Oswin version had dated girls, and now she admits in a roundabout way to 
sexytime with Jane Austen. All you get when you Google “Jane Austen lesbian” is
this 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/scholars-not-persuaded-by-gay-austen-1594180.html>
.

Behold, for a minute, Davros’s delicious dialogue: “Hunter and prey held in 
the ecstasy of crisis, is this not life at its purest?” Much more of that next 
week.


“I try never to understand, it’s called an open mind.”


Nice to see that Missy’s keeping her catchphrases.


“This is a space station so the gravity should be artificial and 
coppery-smelling and a tiny bit sexy. But this feels real, man.”


Does anyone know if Capaldi, veteran of punk band Bastards From Hell 
<http://www.thelineofbestfit.com/news/latest-news/listen-to-peter-capaldis-80s-post-punk-band-dreamboys-132930>
, was playing that guitar himself?


Next week!

Oh dear. Both women are dead, apparently, the Tardis is destroyed, apparently, 
and the Doctor’s about to kill a child, apparently. So now what? Find out the 
fate of Davros in The Witch’s Familiar.
 