
Uncle Julian’s back! And he’s brought Lovejoy with him! If you’ve been missing 
Julian Fellowes’s Downton Abbey scripts (yes, I know you haven’t, no one has), 
here’s your chance to get more scheming aunts, rich heiresses, downtrodden 
husbands and country estates peeling around the edges ... They were all here. 
As was an awful lot of explanatory detail and very little action or depth of 
emotion.
 Our plot is simple. Or is it? Actually, it’s not at all. The sister of 
Lovejoy (the always brilliant Ian McShane) got pregnant by Doctor Thorne’s 
brother. Then Lovejoy killed Doctor Thorne’s brother by hitting him too hard. 
The baby, Mary, was adopted byDoctor Thorne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-thorne> (AKA Rev). Lovejoy 
doesn’t know about this and has meanwhile become very rich because of the 
railways.

Is Doctor Thorne the new Downton? Let's play period drama bingo!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/03/downton-abbey-doctor-thorne-bingo-julian-fellowes-period-drama-cliches>
Mary grows up and falls in love with Frank. Frank’s family want him to marry 
an American lady for money. Frank wants to marry Mary but he can’t as Mary has 
no money. Except Lovejoy has left money “to his sister’s eldest child” and that 
child is Mary. So now Mary is rich. Or is she? Because Lovejoy’s son has to die 
before she gets anything. And we haven’t even met him yet. (Does he exist?) 
Meanwhile, Lovejoy has lent shedloads of cash to Frank’s family. Can you see 
where this might go as long as a certain person (Lovejoy’s son, as yet unseen) 
can be dispatched?


 It’s all rather exhausting so far. There was beauty here, as there always is 
in any Fellowes costume drama. And with the Weinsteins producing, the 
cinematography, wardrobe and glossy details were fabulous. The Gresham sisters 
alone were a carnival of cleavage, freshly cut flowers and cut-glass accents. 
Very exportable, I’m sure. But what else is there here apart from surface and a 
long wait for Mary to inherit Scatcherd’s fortune?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Fdoctor-thorne-recap-episode-one-want-a-carnival-of-cleavage-this-is-your-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ac62c6337a063c1b981e86b3fb6f7d7221993df%2F0_50_3037_1823%2F3037.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Thorne%20recap%3A%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20want%20a%20carnival%20of%20cleavage%3F%20This%20is%20your%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Fdoctor-thorne-recap-episode-one-want-a-carnival-of-cleavage-this-is-your-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Thorne%20recap%3A%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20want%20a%20carnival%20of%20cleavage%3F%20This%20is%20your%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Fdoctor-thorne-recap-episode-one-want-a-carnival-of-cleavage-this-is-your-show%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ac62c6337a063c1b981e86b3fb6f7d7221993df%2F0_50_3037_1823%2F3037.jpg>
 Worth a fortune: Ian McShane as Lovejoy, sorry, Sir Roger Scatcherd. 
Photograph: ITV 
 It’s tricky for viewers to judge Doctor Thorne as so few will have read the 
original,the third novel in Anthony Trollope’s series The Chronicles of 
Barsetshire <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/dr-thorne.html>. (Full disclosure: 
your reviewer includes herself in this parade of ignoramuses, dear reader.) So 
it could be argued that any flaws are simply replicating those of the original. 
For example, I wonder if the whole piece is slightly ruined by the fact that we 
know the connection between Scatcherd (Lovejoy) and Doctor Thorne (Tom 
Hollander) from the beginning. (Which is also the case in the novel. I, like 
Uncle Julian, can use Wikipedia.) The suspense lies in how that 20-year-old 
connection will be revealed to everyone else. Maybe that works in a novel. I’m 
not sure it works as a plot device in a three-part TV series.

 Fellowes’s biggest challenge in episode one is establishing the characters 
and the connections between them. Which means he has to make people say things 
such as this: “I thought it would fund me for 30 years or more. Ten years on 
and every penny is gone.” No one talks like this. This is a big problem, having 
to condense huge swathes of novelistic exposition into soundbite dialogue. I 
can see that we need this information. But there has to be a more subtle way of 
coming by it, surely? Characters seem to march into a scene, impart 
information, then go away again. But this happened for six years in Downton 
Abbey, and it doesn’t seem to have prevented it from becoming a 
multi-million-pound international cash cow. So it must just be me who finds 
this exceedingly frustrating. Verdict? Enjoyable enough, but too much 
exposition. Not enough emotion or comedy. All the flaws of Downton without the 
breathing space of six series.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Fdoctor-thorne-recap-episode-one-want-a-carnival-of-cleavage-this-is-your-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a77811bfac1c7a6c1ddf4da2b9c9512760387a6%2F0_149_3818_2291%2F3818.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Thorne%20recap%3A%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20want%20a%20carnival%20of%20cleavage%3F%20This%20is%20your%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Fdoctor-thorne-recap-episode-one-want-a-carnival-of-cleavage-this-is-your-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Thorne%20recap%3A%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20want%20a%20carnival%20of%20cleavage%3F%20This%20is%20your%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Fdoctor-thorne-recap-episode-one-want-a-carnival-of-cleavage-this-is-your-show%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a77811bfac1c7a6c1ddf4da2b9c9512760387a6%2F0_149_3818_2291%2F3818.jpg>
 Formidable: Rebecca Front as Lady Arabella and Phoebe Nicholls as Countess De 
Courcy. Photograph: ITV 
 The Rebecca Front fan club

 It’s early days, but I think it’s safe to say that Rebecca Front (Lady 
Arabella) is going to come out of this best. She is the perfect casting and has 
the best lines, managing to wring some comedy out of a fairly stiff (and too 
fast-moving) script. Obviously, Tom Hollander and Lovejoy (sorry, Ian McShane) 
are both excellent. But Lady Arabella is a richer part. The listening at the 
door and running away bit was brilliant, as were her Dame Maggie-level 
one-liners: “She is called his niece. And that is all.” “There have been 
love-makings of a very advanced kind.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Fdoctor-thorne-recap-episode-one-want-a-carnival-of-cleavage-this-is-your-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F21744be4f0599829da023350dd9bf37c3107abeb%2F0_176_3436_2063%2F3436.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Thorne%20recap%3A%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20want%20a%20carnival%20of%20cleavage%3F%20This%20is%20your%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Fdoctor-thorne-recap-episode-one-want-a-carnival-of-cleavage-this-is-your-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Thorne%20recap%3A%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20want%20a%20carnival%20of%20cleavage%3F%20This%20is%20your%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Fdoctor-thorne-recap-episode-one-want-a-carnival-of-cleavage-this-is-your-show%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F21744be4f0599829da023350dd9bf37c3107abeb%2F0_176_3436_2063%2F3436.jpg>
 All about the dresses: corsets and crinolines to the fore. Photograph: ITV 
 Corset corner

 If you want peachy heaving-bosom action, this is your series. I thought Lady 
Augusta’s mammaries might pop out of her dress at one point. If only there 
could be a little more space for the young women here, not only in terms of 
bosom but presence: Alexandrina (Kate O’Flynn), Beatrice (Nell Barlow), Augusta 
(Gwyneth Keyworth) and the American heiress Miss Dunstable (Alison Brie) were 
all superb and I could have watched a lot more of them. Especially 
Alexandrina’s wonderful line to porky beardy Mr Moffat: “At your first mistake, 
I shall rap you on the knuckles with my fan.” (I also liked: “I think you might 
call him Keith.” He is definitely a Keith. A beardy Mr Creosote kind of Keith.)

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Fdoctor-thorne-recap-episode-one-want-a-carnival-of-cleavage-this-is-your-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff6aaa7a51ea8d9feb7a52e3d9e831435ea16cf9%2F0_129_3052_1831%2F3052.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Thorne%20recap%3A%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20want%20a%20carnival%20of%20cleavage%3F%20This%20is%20your%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Fdoctor-thorne-recap-episode-one-want-a-carnival-of-cleavage-this-is-your-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Thorne%20recap%3A%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20want%20a%20carnival%20of%20cleavage%3F%20This%20is%20your%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Fdoctor-thorne-recap-episode-one-want-a-carnival-of-cleavage-this-is-your-show%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff6aaa7a51ea8d9feb7a52e3d9e831435ea16cf9%2F0_129_3052_1831%2F3052.jpg>
 Pretty as a picture: Alison Brie as Miss Dunstable. Photograph: ITV 
 Pug watch

 I love that pug. That is one heavy pug that Rebecca Front has to lug around. 
It’s almost bigger than her and the poor footman who took it off her almost 
winced with the effort. Worth watching for the pug alone. Give the pug an 
Oscar. Although the pug would sit on the Oscar and squash it.

 