

SPOILER ALERT: This weekly blog is for those who have been watching the new 
series ofDoctor Who <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who>. 
Don’t read ahead if you haven’t seen episode seven – Kill the Moon.


• Read Dan Martin’s episode six blog here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/sep/27/doctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-six-the-caretaker>

“You walk our Earth, Doctor, you breathe our air. You make us your friend when 
that is your mood to and you can damn well help us when we need it”

Oh dear. This was always going to happen in the end, wasn’t it? And it’s 
happened by episode seven of 12.

Clara’s outburst was the next stage in what I have loved about this series 
most of all. More than ever before, they’re playing out the reality of running 
off to fight aliens with a time-travelling space detective. And, guess what, 
this life is not all wine and roses. This is a strange way for Doctor Who to 
make you feel – cheering at the telly as Clara tears strips off the man that 
we, and she, had always considered to be our hero, with him incapable of 
acknowledging that he did anything wrong. We sometimes need reminding that this 
guy is not human, and so sometimes that will mean he is not humane. But it’s a 
moment sold just as much on the disappointed confusion in Capaldi’s eyes as the 
full-blooded rage of Coleman’s performance. We no longer need to make note of 
just how good Jenna is this year; she’s already established herself in pantheon 
of all-time great companions.

Kill the Moon reminded us that being trusted implicitly can sometimes feel 
like being abandoned and betrayed. And being forced to be brave when you don’t 
feel you have it in you is not a dilemma restricted to time-travelling 
adventure. While we always knew that the Doctor Who morality gods would decree 
that Clara would do the right thing by not killing the gigantic space flea that 
had been incubating inside the moon for hundreds of thousands of years, we were 
right with her in her dilemma. In the end, here was a compelling exercise in 
“what would you do?”.

All this happened in what we can chalk up as another rollicking good adventure 
in its own right; a classic base-under-siege story that sets itself in a future 
where pioneering space travel can be a grim and lonely undertaking. We get more 
of this Doctor’s lack of bedside manner (“Shoot the little girl first!”) and 
Clara gets to show off more of her teacher skills. Her flapping over her “duty 
of care” may be undermined by the fact that she allows Courtney to go off with 
them on a dangerous adventure in the first place, but that realisation pays off 
too, in her final unravelling. And who wasn’t punching the air for wild child 
Courtney, who was as convincingly vulnerable behind the bravado as she was 
noble and brave in the final act? A future president of the United States, you 
say?

“Neither of you are going anywhere. I’ve lost my crew. We were the last 
astronauts. This is the last shuttle, these are the last nuclear bombs. We’re 
the last chance for Earth and you’re staying to help me”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Foct%2F04%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-seven-kill-the-moon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F2%2F1412247590304%2F98d31934-ed3d-4075-81b2-905fdc4f6f94-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20recap%3A%20series%2034%2C%20episode%20seven%20%E2%80%93%20Kill%20the%20Moon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Foct%2F04%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-seven-kill-the-moon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20recap%3A%20series%2034%2C%20episode%20seven%20%E2%80%93%20Kill%20the%20Moon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Foct%2F04%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-seven-kill-the-moon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F2%2F1412247590304%2F98d31934-ed3d-4075-81b2-905fdc4f6f94-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Hermione Norris guest-starring in Doctor Who. Photograph: Adrian Rogers/BBC 
Oh, but it’s a bleak-looking future for humanity, isn’t it? Until, at least, 
the events of the climax which the Doctor misguidedly sparks. An abandoned 
space programme, a populace blighted by natural disasters for which they are 
not unreasonably looking for something to blame, and a near-unanimous decision 
from the whole race to kill this creature without any real punity or 
understanding of what it might be doing. Once again, the “darkness” of this 
series comes not from having cast a 56-year-old actor known for playing grumpy 
men as its lead, but from the straightness with which it is all being played. 
And encapsulating all that panic and uncertainty is Hermione Norris, in another 
star guest turn as Captain Lundvik. We’ve seen this kind of noble spacewoman 
before, most notably from Michelle Collins in 42 and Lindsay Duncan in The 
Waters of Mars. But once more, Norris sells a more real, uncertain person than 
we’re used to. “You want today to be the day that life on Earth stops because 
you couldn’t make an unfair decision?” Really, who among us would have pushed 
the button and who wouldn’t have? Be honest!

Fear factor

As somebody with a tendency towards arachnophobia, I’d place this up there with
Deep Breath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/aug/23/doctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-one-deep-breath>
 andListen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/sep/13/doctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-four-listen>
 as the creepiest of the run so far. On the other level, that’s still the case 
becauseRobot of Sherwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/sep/06/doctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-three-robot-of-sherwood>
,Time Heist  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/sep/20/doctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-five-time-heist>
andThe Caretaker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/sep/27/doctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-six-the-caretaker>
 are not what you would call scary ones, and the jury is eternally out as to 
whether the Daleks are actually scary or simply comedy creations we like to 
understand to be scary. Giant bacterial spiders rendered this well by the FX 
team freaked the whoopsie out of your correspondent here.

Mysteries and questions
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Foct%2F04%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-seven-kill-the-moon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F2%2F1412248898125%2Fe3cf1d58-6d7b-4ba2-b4be-b256073191ce-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20recap%3A%20series%2034%2C%20episode%20seven%20%E2%80%93%20Kill%20the%20Moon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Foct%2F04%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-seven-kill-the-moon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20recap%3A%20series%2034%2C%20episode%20seven%20%E2%80%93%20Kill%20the%20Moon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Foct%2F04%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-seven-kill-the-moon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F2%2F1412248898125%2Fe3cf1d58-6d7b-4ba2-b4be-b256073191ce-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Courtney Woods in Doctor Who. Photograph: Adrian Rogers/BBC 
No Missy or Seb this week, and surprisingly little theorising about them both 
in the comments last week. Instead, things turned into a straight duel between 
those who like this grounded, emotional approach and those who still pine for 
the 1970s. As for me, I think we should judge the show we have on its own 
merits, and I certainly don’t want to go back to the days of having attractive 
avatars where a character should be. We suffered a bit with that with last 
year’s Clara, didn’t we?

There have been suggestions that this Doctor’s antipathy towards soldiers 
should be undone, because he now knows that hedidn’t cause the terrible events 
of the Time War. But might there not be some conscious double jeapordy going on 
here? Surely the realisation that in that impossible situation, evenhe found a 
way out of being a soldier, would maybe underline that distrust? It’s all to 
play for.

Time-space debris
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Foct%2F04%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-seven-kill-the-moon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F2%2F1412249035433%2Fa878e279-887c-4d94-85a1-78c09a5b11af-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20recap%3A%20series%2034%2C%20episode%20seven%20%E2%80%93%20Kill%20the%20Moon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Foct%2F04%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-seven-kill-the-moon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20recap%3A%20series%2034%2C%20episode%20seven%20%E2%80%93%20Kill%20the%20Moon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Foct%2F04%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-seven-kill-the-moon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F2%2F1412249035433%2Fa878e279-887c-4d94-85a1-78c09a5b11af-1020x612.jpeg>
 The Doctor. Photograph: Adrian Rogers/BBC 
• This was by some chalk the sweariest episode of Doctor Who we’ve ever seen. 
I counted five “bloodys” and several “damns”.

• “The secretary hates me, she thinks I got her a packet of Tena Lady for 
Secret Santa.”

• The location filming took place in Lanzarote, a place Who has filmed before, 
for 1984 story Planet of Fire – it doubled up as the desert planet of Sarn.


• The moon itself has a long and illustrious history in Doctor Who. We first 
visited in 1967’s The Moonbase, when the Cybermen lurked there. It played host 
to a battle with the Ice Warriors in 1969’s The Seeds of Death; housed a penal 
colony in 1973’s Frontier in Space; had Martha’s hospital transported there in 
2007’s Smith and Jones; and the 1969 moon landings played a key role in 2011’s 
The Impossible Astronaut/Day of the Moon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2011/apr/30/doctor-who-day-of-the-moon>
. Most recently, the Cybermen returned there when the rock played host to 
abandoned theme park Webley’s World of Wonders in last year’sNightmare in Silver
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/may/11/doctor-who-episode-blog-nightmare-in-silver>
. Phew.

• “My granny used to put things on Tumblr!”

• Finally, some sad news in the world of Who, with the death of actor Maggie 
Stables. She was a regular in the Big Finish series of audio plays, where she 
played Evelyn Smythe, companion to the Sixth Doctor – an older companion, and 
accomplished academic. I’m not comprehensive when it comes to the audio plays, 
but am told by friends who are that she was one of the most beloved companions 
of all.

Next week!

It is bittersweet as the Doctor and Clara embark on their final voyage 
together, but quite inevitably, something sinister lurks. Frank Skinner and 
singer Foxes guest star in Mummy on the Orient Express.
 