
‘What is a God but the cattle’s name for farmer? What is heaven but the gilded 
door of the abattoir?’

When Peter Capaldi said, pre-series launch, that “the Doctor is about to make 
a mistake that has cataclysmic repercussions,” most of us assumed he was 
talking about leaving the young Davros to die (or not). But on the evidence of 
this week, not a bit of it. Three stories in, we’ve had the blockbuster one, 
we’ve had the creepy, old-fashioned one, and now it seems, we’ve reached the 
fulcrum of the series. In saving Ashildr (Maisie Williams) just a week after 
calling out the Fisher King for bending the rules of life and death, the Doctor 
has done exactly the same, and he realises straight away that he’s on dodgy 
ground. Davros’s warnings about “the hybrid”, and that “compassion is wrong” 
are surely going to hang heavy over the coming weeks, that final lingering shot 
of Ashildr darkening as she watches everything around her die, trapped in her 
own, endless life, is surely going to have consequences.

But before we worry too much about any of that, there’s an enjoyably daft romp 
to get through from writer Jamie Mathieson, who penned last year’s 
widely-lauded Mummy on the Orient Express and Flatline. Vikings have been a 
puzzling omission from most ofDoctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who>, only cropping up once 
before The Time Meddler in 1965; so presumably the Doctor is rarely in the mood 
to tangle with Vikings.

That’s understandable, when he has to train up worst Vikings of them all for 
an all-out battle with dreadnought alien mercenaries, in a riff on The 
Magnificent Seven that is tonally the equivalent of last year’sRobot of Sherwood
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/sep/06/doctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-three-robot-of-sherwood>
. Throwing in an electric eel-based attack strategy and the Benny Hill theme 
music, there’s plenty of fun to be had here before the dark twists of the final 
minutes. This might just be Capaldi’s strongest performance in the role so far.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-25-episode-five-the-girl-who-died%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5628d4c500dbaee1f4a6fccfab2fefd12ffb8807%2F0_183_4281_2569%2F4281.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20recap%20series%2035%2C%20episode%20five%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Girl%20Who%20Died&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-25-episode-five-the-girl-who-died%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20recap%20series%2035%2C%20episode%20five%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Girl%20Who%20Died&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-25-episode-five-the-girl-who-died%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5628d4c500dbaee1f4a6fccfab2fefd12ffb8807%2F0_183_4281_2569%2F4281.jpg>
 Clara and Ashildr. Photograph: Simon Ridgway/BBC 
‘A good death is the best anyone can hope for, unless you happen to be 
immortal’

When we visited the Cardiff set earlier this year, Capaldi revealed, in the 
friendliest way possible, that guest star Maisie Williams is possibly just a 
little bit scary. He told the Guardian and other media: “Maisie amuses me, 
because she’s been onGame of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones> since she was 12, so 
she’s very, very assured technically. She’ll always find her light, she knows 
all the right questions to ask. Jenna and I were quite intimidated by her 
poise.”

Not to give the game away, but there’s clearly a lot more to come for Ashildr, 
or whatever it is she is now. “She has that great combination,” he added, 
“she’s very gifted. There’s quite a range, she has to be quite different in 
[each] episode, and she does it quite beautifully and subtly.”

The bigger question, at least according to the Radio Times cover this week, is 
whether Williams is going to be the next companion. Unlikely that she could 
commit the time given everything else, and the character looks like she’ll be 
going darker before there’s any happy resolutions. But things aren’t looking 
too much better for Clara either; gallivanting round in cheap spacesuits. 
They’re certainly not hammering it home about the Doctor’s “duty of care” for 
nothing.

Fear factor 

More quality nightmare fuel from Mathieson, who last year gave us the Foretold 
and the Boneless, in the form of the Mire. Although they are clearly this 
year’s action-figures-in-waiting, these somewhat gormless looking mechanical 
mercenaries are difficult to look at when the armour comes off.

Mysteries and questions 

The Doctor gave Ashildr a second dose of the revive-chip for “whoever she 
wants,” so do we assume the Viking child is going to be skipping around 
eternity with a companion of her own? And if so, who will it be? Odin insists 
that “this humiliation will not go unpunished, we will meet again,” so is this 
a possible set-up for the finale? And even though Ashildr now appears to be the 
hybrid that everyone was so worried about, Missy’s line, about Clara, being “a 
friend inside an enemy, an enemy inside a friend” is still out there, throwing 
up any number of worrying possibilities.

Continuity 105 

Where to begin? It was always suggested that Capaldi’s previous appearance in 
the Whoniverse would be addressed, and that Russell T Davies himself had 
suggested a possible explanation. But few of us would have expected such an 
overt flashback to The Fires of Pompeii from 2008. This Doctor “chose” the 
Capaldi face “to remind him”. Back then, Donna Noble bullied the Doctor into 
saving Capaldi’s Lucius Caecilius and his family from the volcano, despite his 
instincts about “the rules” of time travel, him finally relenting, saving them 
and admitting that sometimes he needs somebody to stop him. In that story, he 
and Donna literally became the family’s “household Gods”, so the reference 
throws this year’s theme; the dangers of playing God, into even sharper relief. 
It’s maybe just a pity that episode was a bit of a letdown; legend having it 
that Russell T felt bad for underselling Capaldi in that story and so created 
Mr Frobisher inTorchwood: Children Of Earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2009/jul/07/torchwood-children-of-earth-day-one>
 for him by way of making it up.

Deeper into the vortex 

“Adrenaline and testosterone extracted from the finest warriors … ” this 
sounds like my kind of party!

Clara’s wardrobe choices this year have been absolutely A+ this year, but that 
blue blouse really isn’t working for her. Also, still no sign of Capaldi’s 
purple velvet jacket. I’m becoming a bit cross about this. The Doctor may be 
many things, but he is not a grunge musician from circa-1992.

The throwaway line about Clara “fighting” the Doctor for Ashildr surely now 
means that Clara identifies as bisexual. Although, the only line coming from 
the BBC is that there no line.

The Twelfth Doctor gets a shot at the Third’s catchphrase, “reverse the 
polarity of the neutron flow,” chipping, “bet that means something, it sounds 
great!” While never used quite as much as some people think, it’s still turned 
upquite a bit over the years <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QDaCMhKPGys>. 
“Winning is all about looking happier than the other guy.”

Next week!

The true consequences of the saving of Ashildr will surely loom large in The 
Woman Who Lived.
 