
SPOILER ALERT: This weekly blog is for those who have been watching the new 
series ofDoctor Who <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who>. 
Don’t read ahead if you haven’t seen episode two – Into the Dalek

• Read Dan Martin’s episode one episode blog here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/aug/23/doctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-one-deep-breath>

‘A Dalek so damaged it’s turned good. Morality as malfunction. How could I 
resist?’

Never mind the most dangerous place in the universe – this is the most 
dangerous place in television screenwriting. Into the Dalek is the first 
episode of Doctor Who for aeons that isn’t a big event, and it faces a peculiar 
challenge. Our past four adventures with the Doctor have been: a series finale, 
a 3D 50th anniversary mega-sode, a Christmas special with a regeneration, and 
the feature-length debut of a new Doctor. So pity the poor writer who has to 
handle the return to business as usual. The man in question, Phil Ford, deals 
with this by bringing back the Daleks - guaranteed to bust blocks even on an 
off-day - for an epic spin on Fantastic Voyage meets Innerspace with a whiff of 
2005’s Dalek. And it turns out that’s not just a very good place to start, it’s 
an excellent place to remain.

This is everything that last year’s Journey to the Centre of the Tardis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/apr/27/doctor-who-journey-centre-tardis>
 was not. Answering a distress call three weeks after Clara sent him for coffee 
in Glasgow, the Doctor finds himself tangled up in a very peculiar conundrum - 
whether to help an imprisoned Dalek so crazy in the head that it’s gone good. 
Clearly there is only one course of action: miniaturise yourself with the 
handily placed miniaturisation machine and go into the heart of darkness to 
explore.

This might have been an easy way of allowing Capaldi to pontificate at length 
with his “am I a good man?” speech. Thematically, we’ve been here before, with 
the whole notion of Daleks being corrupted by humanity and morality. And here 
is my biggest bugbear - why is the Doctor surprised that fixing the radiation 
leak is going to make “Rusty” revert to type? At that point, he comes across as 
quite stupid, actually.

But on its own terms, Into the Dalek works fantastically well. The 
claustrophobic tension of the journey into Rusty’s bowels is juxtaposed with 
some proper epic space battles and explosions, to make it feel (in a good way) 
much longer than its 45 minutes. We get into some meaty character work with the 
Doctor, at the end, who is genuinely troubled at the Dalek looking inside his 
soul and seeing hatred. We get some stunning production design and a Dalek 
being a bit camp. It has to be said: this was better than we might have 
expected from an episode two.

‘I was a soldier. There were other soldiers and some of them weren’t on our 
side. I’ll leave the rest to your imagination’

Enter Danny Pink: wounded war hero, socially awkward maths teacher and new 
romantic interest for Clara – who wastes no time in marking her territory by 
sounding out her new colleague. While Moffat plays with his favourite toys in 
the awkward early stages of dating, Danny is not introduced as an emasculated 
sap in the way that both Mickey and Rory were. For all the romances, Doctor Who 
has never actually done boy-meets-girl in this way before, and Samuel 
Anderson’s Danny comes with a backstory and leading man potential of his own. 
As befits this new era’s more grounded approach, Moffat has described this 
relationship as being played more realistically. It looks as if we’re going to 
see Clara fall in love. There will be no easy bromance between the Doctor and 
Danny when they eventually meet, and they may even actively hate each other. 
Here is an alpha male who, for better or worse, is not going to take too kindly 
to his girlfriend leading a double life with a 2,000-year-old time-travelling 
space detective.

Production geeks will notice a lot of co-writer credits this year, something 
we’ve not seen before. At first I wondered whether this was Moffat getting 
exasperated at rewriting everybody’s scripts. But it looks as if he’s writing 
Clara and Danny’s love story on his own and weaving that into other people’s 
adventures. That stuff isvery Coupling.

‘My brother burned to death a few hours ago, so he’s really letting me down 
today’

Another strength? The guest stars, or more specifically, Lt Journey Blue, as 
played byFresh Meat’s Zawe Ashton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/nov/04/zawe-ashton-fresh-meat>. Guest 
characters are tricky to both flesh out and get right, but Journey gets a place 
on the good list, established as no-nonsense and brave and vulnerable and 
heroic before the end of the pre-credits. She would be a welcome and natural 
addition to the Tardis team, were it not for the Doctor’s aversion to soldiers 
(watch out, Danny Pink!). Meanwhile, Gretchen’s sacrifice was probably Doctor 
Who’s most powerful death since Father Octavian inThe Time of Angels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2010/apr/24/doctor-who-time-of-angels>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F30%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-two-into-the-dalek-peter-capaldi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F29%2F1409317003584%2F7f9c9196-1f8b-420a-902a-4a3b1f8ca52e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20recap%3A%20series%2034%2C%20episode%20two%20%E2%80%93%20Into%20the%20Dalek&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F30%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-two-into-the-dalek-peter-capaldi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20recap%3A%20series%2034%2C%20episode%20two%20%E2%80%93%20Into%20the%20Dalek&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F30%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-two-into-the-dalek-peter-capaldi%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F29%2F1409317003584%2F7f9c9196-1f8b-420a-902a-4a3b1f8ca52e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Doctor Who: Into the Dalek. ‘Exterminate!’ Photograph: Adrian Rogers/BBC 
Fear factor

Of course the trouble with the Daleks is they’re loud and dramatic and always 
turn up for the great big showstoppers. But “scary” has never been actually 
their strong suit - we know they should be scary sothat we tend to think 
“computer says scared” without, necessarily,actually being scared. So props 
once again to directorBen Wheatley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ben-wheatley> for evoking a genuine sense of 
claustrophobic menace as our intrepid crew embarked on their suicide mission.

Of course, the person you’re supposed to be scared of by the denouement is 
this new “dark Doctor” So let’s get to this next.

Mysteries and questions

Last week I agreed with @steveblock’s comment: “Am I the only one who thinks 
the robot jumped?” No, Steve, you’re not. Capaldi’s Doctor is billed as dark 
and dangerous, all things you can have a lot of fun with when you castPeter 
Capaldi <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/peter-capaldi> as a 
children’s hero. But the one thing we know for certain about the process of 
regeneration is thatthis is the same man.

So Half Face Man was not pushed. The Doctor would find another way. Steven 
Moffat spent the entire 50th specialretconning 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Retroactive_continuity> his predecessor’s big 
idea out of the compulsion that this is not how this character rolls becausehe 
would have found another way. So I’m not buying that he would betray that 
boldness by throwing it all away for a single flash of some eyebrows. The 
integrity behind manipulating a vulnerable and nascent entity into killing 
himself is a different dilemma in itself, but murder? Not buying it. Still, 
with Half Face Man and now Gretchen safely at Missy’s tea party in “heaven’”, 
this is clearly something we’ll be revisiting. Do tell us your theories about 
the true nature of Missy.

Time-space debris

• The fleshing out of Clara continues - and reliably, she’s a Guardian reader! 
Or at least, a reader of an alternative version of the Guardian that doesn’t 
run a weekly blog analysing every detail of her entire life.

• There’s a lot of focus on the lever on the Tardis console with this Doctor. 
And his “thing” appears to be chalkboards.

• Clara doesn’t actually live aboard the Tardis, but she does have her own 
wardrobe there, evidently.

• “You don’t need to be liked, you’ve got all the guns.”

• One of the lovelier stories to come out of the promo appearances this year 
is that Capaldi wasn’t due to be at work on the day they filmed the 
blowing-up-the-Daleks sequence. But he went in on his day off to watch the it 
anyway.

• With all the excitement about the new Doctor last week, we never got to 
talking about the new, clockwork-steampunk opening titles and the more 
electronic arrangement of the theme tune. So how do we all feel?

• “You’re not my boss, you’re one of my hobbies.”

• Continuity: in the Dalek’s memory bank is a sequence from 2008’s Journey’s 
End <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/jul/07/television.television>. So 
Rusty was in that battle.

• Doctor Who has done miniaturisation before; recently in Let’s Kill Hitler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2011/aug/27/doctor-who-television>
, and back in 1975’s The Invisible Enemy.

Next week!

It’s time for the fun one, as Mark Gatiss returns to the writer’s chair and 
the Doctor and Clara meet Robin Hood, in Robot of Sherwood.
 