
SPOILER ALERT: This weekly blog is for those who have been watching the new 
series ofDoctor Who <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who>. 
Don’t read ahead if you haven’t seen episode eight – The Zygon Inversion.

• Read Dan Martin’s episode seven episode blog here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/31/doctor-who-series-35-episode-seven-the-zygon-invasion>

‘When you’ve killed all the bad guys, and when it’s all perfect and you’ve got 
it exactly the way you want it, what are you gonna do about the people like 
you?’

In the end, the Doctor won by acting. His bluff about the empty Osgood Box had 
just the right effect in calling off the Zygon insurgency but, more broadly,
Peter Capaldi <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/peter-capaldi> won as 
the Doctor by acting. It was pointed out a while ago by our friends at theRadio 
Times <http://www.radiotimes.com/> that the 12th Doctor had yet to have his 
definitive “Doctor moment” 
<http://www.radiotimes.com/news/2015-09-10/nine-things-we-want-to-see-in-doctor-who-series-9>
 – such as Eccleston’s “Everybody lives!” or Smith’s grand address atop 
Stonehenge, or even McCoy’s “unlimited rice pudding”.

Well, here it was this week, and then some, and then quite a considerable bit 
more. As he delivered his passionate, eloquent takedown of Zygon rebel Bonnie (
Jenna Coleman <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/jenna-louise-coleman> 
on lipsmacking evil-twin form), this version of the Doctor was comprehensively 
nailed, skewering perfectly who this man is. That brusque exterior is a barely 
held together veneer to rein in a compassion and a frustration constantly 
trying to outdo each other within a heart as big asthe Medusa cascade 
<http://tardis.wikia.com/wiki/Medusa_Cascade>; an exasperated parent who can 
never do enough. Or indeed, you might say, a Scotsman. This Doctor has never 
been written better, Capaldi has never channelledTom Baker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/nov/04/how-i-made-doctor-who> 
more, that sequence is cemented instantly as the “Capaldi moment” in clip shows 
for the rest of time.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-eight-the-zygon-inversion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2201eb17a6e57fd677507f677c2d060d677327bc%2F0_0_4181_2510%2F4181.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20series%2035%2C%20episode%20eight%3A%20The%20Zygon%20Inversion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-eight-the-zygon-inversion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20series%2035%2C%20episode%20eight%3A%20The%20Zygon%20Inversion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-eight-the-zygon-inversion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2201eb17a6e57fd677507f677c2d060d677327bc%2F0_0_4181_2510%2F4181.jpg>
 ‘What is it you are actually hoping for?’ Pitting logic against the Zygons. 
Photograph: Simon Ridgway/BBC 
After last week, The Zygon Inversion took the action down a few notches, but 
the themes way, way up. And like all the world’s knottiest problems, the 
premise of all global conflict was undermined with startling simplicity, not 
through Lennon-ist peacenik soundbites but a determined, rational unpicking of 
the logic topped off with the doozy of a rug-pull; what is it you are actually 
hoping for? It’s a shame that the trifling divisions beneath all political and 
religious conflict seem more ingrained in real-life humans than they do in 
fictional Zygons, or that this episode will likely not be used in any real-life 
peace talks any time soon. Or indeed, that more of us aren’t like Osgood.

It was a risky game to attempt the sort of contemporary allegory that The 
Zygon Inversion knocked out of the park. And it actually ended up even more 
topical than was probably intended, in the wake of the Labour party conference.
In saying he would never push the nuclear button 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2015/sep/30/labour-conference-jeremy-corbyns-morning-interviews-politics-live>
,Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> blew the 
cover that nobody would ever push the button really. Of course there was 
nothing in the Osgood Box; it was just important that everyone thought there 
was, just as half of Corbyn’s shadow cabinet think it’s probably important that 
people think Britain has a nuclear deterrent that it would use. Unfortunately 
forAndy Burnham <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andyburnham>, he doesn’t 
have the power to wipe people’s memories. (Not even with his leadership 
campaign material, boom-tish.)

‘You are a credit to your species’

Osgood was devised as the best of fandom. In contrast to the lone, angry 
typists a lot of people associate us with being, The Day of the Doctor brought 
in a youthful (rather than simply “young” ), enthusiastic cosplayer, and a 
female. It was little wonder thatIngrid Oliver 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm2028298/>’s performance won everyone’s hearts. Now, 
she’s being pitched as the best of humanity itself, her open mind and heart 
seemingly being what will hold the ceasefire together. The Doctor might have 
set Bonnie on the straight and narrow, but it’s the link with Osgood that will 
keep her there; neither will answer the question of which of them is which, 
“until the day that nobody cares about the answer”. A grinningly optimistic end 
to what could have been an incredibly grim story. And now, she has a first 
name! Praise be, Petronella.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-eight-the-zygon-inversion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F045759922b8009241d73d837ce0b5509a669f5eb%2F0_252_4281_2569%2F4281.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20series%2035%2C%20episode%20eight%3A%20The%20Zygon%20Inversion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-eight-the-zygon-inversion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20series%2035%2C%20episode%20eight%3A%20The%20Zygon%20Inversion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fdoctor-who-series-35-episode-eight-the-zygon-inversion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F045759922b8009241d73d837ce0b5509a669f5eb%2F0_252_4281_2569%2F4281.jpg>
 The best of humanity: Osgood with Clara and the Doctor. Photograph: Simon 
Ridgway/BBC 
Fear factor 

We’ve always been given to just accepting that the Zygons are shapeshifters 
without actually ever seeing how they do it. So it was a cunning bit of body 
horror to see the poor, civilian sleeper agent, trapped midway through a 
transformation he is desperately trying to avert. “I’m not part of your fight. 
I never wanted to fight anyone – I just wanted to live here.”

Mysteries and questions 

Knowledge of Jenna Coleman’s departure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/sep/18/jenna-coleman-confirms-doctor-who-exit-it-was-emotional>
 has clearly provided fuel for this year’s arc-speculation, with episodes 
teasing us shamelessly about what fate might await Clara. Now Peter Capaldi has 
further lanced the boil,speaking to Nick Grimshaw on Radio 1 this week 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p0373b0w>. “I don’t want to go into what 
happens, because it’s very clever what happens in it, but it’s very sad,” he 
teased. “It’s not quite what you think’s going to happen. You think what’s 
going to happen is going to happen, but then something else happens.

“That’s what’s wonderful about Doctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who>. It’s always clever the 
way these things are done. It’s not quite as straightforward as it appears. Get 
lots of hankies ready, that’s what I would say. It’s sad over a number of 
weeks.”

Continuity 108 

If you’re going to bring in the daughter of beloved old goat the Brigadier, 
you might as well have some fun with it. So as Kate recounts to the Doctor how 
she escaped the Zygons, the glee onJemma Redgrave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2010/jul/11/jemma-redgrave-corin-redgrave-interview>
’s face is palpable as she reels off her father’s famous catchphrase: “Five 
rounds, rapid.” As coinedhere <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0grVDUL_en0> in 
The Daemons from 1971.

Deeper into the vortex 

The sonic specs controversy rages on: “Isn’t that a bit pointless? Like an 
invisible hearing aid?”

It isn’t actually established anywhere within the canon that the Doctor’s 
first name is not Basil, is it?

And indeed, “Doctor John Disco.” And why not? Disco is a much better surname 
than Smith.

“You know I’m 2,000 years old? I’m old enough to be your messiah.”

Once again, Clara is well aware that she is an excellent liar.

“Most of your kind don’t want that.” “Then it’s time we stopped giving them a 
choice.”

It’s worth reporting comments Steven Moffat made in an interview with Variety 
this week 
<http://variety.com/2015/tv/news/doctor-who-steven-moffat-lucca-comics-1201631032/>
 regarding the show’s potential longevity: “It’s definitely going to last five 
more years, I’ve seen the business plan. It’s not going anywhere. And I think 
we can go past that. It’s television’s own legend. It will just keep going.”

Clara’s prison-house inside the Zygon pod recalled the dream states from Last 
Christmas; she even appears to do a “dream check”, to try to work out if it is 
a dream. It also brought to mind Donna’s domestic fantasy from Silence in the 
Library.

Next week!

Things go a little “off-piste” as Mark Gatiss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/mark-gatiss> delivers Cloverfield-style 
“found footage” episode Sleep No More.
 