

SPOILER ALERT: This weekly blog is for those who have been watching the new 
series ofDoctor Who <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who>. 
Don’t read ahead if you haven’t seen episode 10 – In the Forest of the Night

• Read Dan Martin’s episode nine episode blog here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/oct/18/doctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-9-flatline>


‘Do you like the forest being in Trafalgar Square? I think it’s lovely’

Here’s writer Frank Cottrell Boyce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/cottrell-boyce>, speaking to Doctor Who 
Magazine this month:

If you read almost any story a kid writes in primary school, it will say, ‘And 
they ventured into the forest …’ The forest is danger, isn’t it? But I’d never 
seen it in a dystopia, really. When you’ve had post-apocalyptic worlds in 
films, they’re always flooded, or cold, or barren, not invaded by forests. 
Also, the forest is a fairytale. That idea of children lost in the wood – 
that’s got a power going right back to Little Red Riding Hood, and further. 
We’re primed to be afraid for a child in a forest.”

Winner of the Carnegie Medal for children’s literature and the man who 
scripted the majestic London 2012 Isles of Wonder Olympic Opening Ceremony, 
Cottrell Boyce is the sort of man you listen to when it comes to fairytales, 
young imagination and big, collective happenings.

And so of course he is right. Without any undue hyperbole, here was one of the 
greatest setups Doctor Who has ever known. Overnight, the trees take back the 
Earth. Every street, every surface, is smothered with foliage, big strong trees 
strong enough to twist down Nelson’s Column. And to make matters even more 
awkward, we start the adventure from a Coal Hill sleepover that’s going badly 
wrong.

But if there’s a problem, it’s that a setup is all it was. Some people like to 
trot about the phrase “deus ex machina” when complaining bitterly about Doctor 
Who resolutions. But at least in those cases thereare resolutions to speak of. 
And an actual threat.

Here, there is all the brilliantly done doom-and-gloom, end-of-days, 
Clara-choosing-to-die-with-the-rest-of-humanity stuff. And then – D’oh! – the 
Doctor just remembers that actually there was no threat in the first place and 
the trees had sprung up to protect us from the solar flare. So we get a brief 
after-threat where they have to stop the nasty humans from (not unreasonably) 
killing all the trees with their nasty pollutants. And they achieve that 
through a nice little girl asking nicely and everything’s lovely again.

I’m being facetious of course. Some of Doctor Who’s most magical recent 
episodes have come from bringing in off-kilter writers from different genres. 
Think Richard Curtis’s Vincent and the Doctor or Simon Nye’s Amy’s Choice. This 
certainly fits into that bracket. But for some reason, I got quite grumpy this 
week and I’m not sure why.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Foct%2F25%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-10-in-the-forest-of-the-night%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F23%2F1414085728362%2F3bf994a2-98f3-48c0-b7cb-946cb76d4451-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20recap%3A%20series%2034%2C%20episode%2010%20%E2%80%93%20In%20the%20Forest%20of%20the%20Night&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Foct%2F25%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-10-in-the-forest-of-the-night%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20recap%3A%20series%2034%2C%20episode%2010%20%E2%80%93%20In%20the%20Forest%20of%20the%20Night&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Foct%2F25%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-10-in-the-forest-of-the-night%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F23%2F1414085728362%2F3bf994a2-98f3-48c0-b7cb-946cb76d4451-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘This difficult Doctor’s bedside manner with children is becoming increasingly 
lovely and charming.’ … The Doctor and Maebh. Photograph: Adrian Rogers/BBC 
‘I just want the truth’


There’s clearly a lot more going on with Danny Pink to be revealed in the 
finale. He “didn’t try too hard to stay alive” during his military service. But 
just to put out there what’s been a growing anxiety: I really don’t like him. 
Maybe it’s my sensibilities and distaste for his boy soldiery marshalling of 
the kids like some kind of H&M Baden-Powell. But come on, we’ve all met men 
like this: anxious about his girlfriend having other male mates and 
passive-aggressively trying to convert her to his worldview with a thousand 
tiny pin-pricks while maintaining his role as the victim. It’s bullying via sex 
appeal, and I’m not sure whether this is the intention or whether the character 
has been written clumsily, but right now it’s not sitting well. I just don’t 
believe a woman like Clara would stand for this and if we’re now meant to start 
feeling uncomfortable about how easy she’s starting to find lying, I’m just 
going to cheer her on because who should have to put up with a man like that, 
however pretty the actor is? Meanwhile, this difficult Doctor’s bedside manner 
with children is becoming increasingly lovely and charming.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Foct%2F25%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-10-in-the-forest-of-the-night%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F23%2F1414085937181%2F98aabeac-677e-4b2a-bc88-ad753e16a95e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20recap%3A%20series%2034%2C%20episode%2010%20%E2%80%93%20In%20the%20Forest%20of%20the%20Night&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Foct%2F25%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-10-in-the-forest-of-the-night%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20recap%3A%20series%2034%2C%20episode%2010%20%E2%80%93%20In%20the%20Forest%20of%20the%20Night&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Foct%2F25%2Fdoctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-10-in-the-forest-of-the-night%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F23%2F1414085937181%2F98aabeac-677e-4b2a-bc88-ad753e16a95e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ruby, Clara, The Doctor and Danny in action. Photograph: Adrian Rogers/BBC 
Fear factor

Probably without even having noticed, Cottrell Boyce gifts himself the point 
of the sonic screwdriver being useless on wood, and so without much of a clue 
or a handy tool, the Doctor is rendered helpless. And his helplessness, and 
Clara’s grim bravery in leading him to his escape and humanity’s certain doom 
(“because these children won’t ever stop wanting their mums and dads”) give the 
episode its great sense of jeopardy, it being the case that there’s no real 
jeopardy at all. There are no real aliens either, but the use of real-world 
monsters such as wolves and tigers more than makes up for that. Come to think 
of it, somebody should probably write a Night at the Museum-style story where 
the taxidermy comes back to life ...

Mysteries and questions

Missy loves surprises. These brief glimpses of her are telling us less and 
less, but we’re only a week away from getting some answers, so never mind.

Time-space debris

• The title of course is taken from William Blake’s poem The Tyger 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/172943>, part of his Songs of Experience 
collection.

• Good research skills on the part of FCB. The Tunguska blast 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tunguska_event> of 1908 was a real thing that 
actually happened.

• I know we’re all supposed to root for Maebh, but the star of the show was 
clearly Ruby. “You’re letting your imagination run away with itself.”

“I’m not though, am I? Because I haven’t got an imagination. You can ask Miss 
Oswald.”

• The Tardis has SatNav now.

• “Don’t make me say it … I don’t want to be the last of my kind.”


• Another Earth-in-crisis montage of international news reports. Another 
missed opportunity to bring back Trinity Wells.


• Finally, it’s very rare that a celebrity death can move so much of the 
nation all at once. But the brave and brilliant way Lynda Bellingham dealt with 
hers is going to be something to treasure. In the Whoniverse, she will always 
be remembered as the no-nonsense Inquisitor from the 1986 saga The Trial of a 
Timelord, clip below. Who guruToby Hadoke’s Who’s Round podcast interview with 
Bellingham, recorded just a few months ago, can be downloaded here 
<http://www.bigfinish.com/releases/v/toby-hadoke-s-who-s-round-71---lynda-bellingham-1151>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DY2INBe_qZFo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DY2INBe_qZFo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DY2INBe_qZFo&media=>
Next week!

And we’re into the two-part finale. In Dark Water, finally some answers are on 
their way about who Missy is and what she is up to. Also: Cybermen!

 