
Joe Hockey is a man trying to make sense from nonsense. For all the 
Coalition’s talk of family values, the federal government doesn’t appear to 
have the faintest idea of what a functioning childcare, parental leave and 
family support regime would look like.

That’s probably why Hockey’s interview with Laurie Oakes 
<http://jbh.ministers.treasury.gov.au/transcript/093-2015/> on the Sunday 
before the budget was such an extraordinary stuff-up. Why else would he feel 
compelled to agree with Oakes that claiming parental leave payments from an 
employer and the government simultaneously was “basically fraud” and then later 
deny it?

Of course the system is in disarray: nobody in the Coalition seems to agree on 
what paid parental leave is supposed to do.

Tony Abbott said in 2013 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/news/tony-abbott-in-line-of-fire-on-women-of-calibre-comment-when-talking-about-paid-parental-leave-scheme/story-e6frf7jo-1226637275729>
 that parental leave entitlements should be provided so that reproduction is 
incentivised for high-earning “women of calibre”. Now Hockey says claimants who 
earn over $90,000 are fraudsters. Does the government fund childcare and PPL to 
boost female workforce participation, to support healthy children and families, 
or to promote gender equality?

Calm down dears: we may have been rorting but at least we're not rorters! | 
Kristina Keneally
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/19/calm-down-dears-we-may-have-been-rorting-but-at-least-were-not-rorters>
This fundamental confusion, and a complete refusal to articulate or address it 
in public, is why the government has such an impressive collection of policy 
failures and embarrassments to its name.

Abbott is a human microcosm of this phenomenon, and if he weren’t prime 
minister the government’s position might be very different. He has a 
pre-existing ideological commitment to “traditional” family values, involving a 
heterosexual nuclear family unit in which married couples divide their 
responsibilities along rigid public sphere-private sphere, earning-caring, 
work-home lines. His PPL scheme was an attempt to encourage this arrangement.

It failed, because it exposed a contradiction between Abbott’s family values 
and his commitment to economic rationalism. Itwouldn’t have lifted women’s 
workforce participation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2014/mar/10/abbotts-paid-parental-leave-will-do-little-to-bring-women-to-the-workforce>
, and therefore did not represent good “value for money” in terms of public 
expenditure. Since this is generally the bottom line in policymaking, the 
choice was between keeping the scheme and trashing the government’s reputation 
as “good economic managers”.

This seems to be the fate of family policy: built on deeply suspect 
foundations or not tailored to meet any specific goal or benchmark, we get 
increasingly ridiculous ad hoc measures to plug the gaps.

Take the increasing cost and short supply of childcare. Formal childcare 
replaces an unpaid caring workforce, mostly mothers, with a paid one – 
childcare workers. Doing so enables mothers to rejoin the paid workforce. The 
Productivity Commission’s childcare report found that there are up to 165,000 
parents 
<http://www.pc.gov.au/inquiries/completed/childcare/report/childcare-overview.pdf>
 (mostly mothers) who do not work, or work less than they would like, because 
they cannot access adequate childcare.

Despite the soaring cost, childcare workers receive low wages, and the Fair 
Work Commission will hear a case later this yeardemanding pay increases of up 
to 70% 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/industrial-relations/union-wants-70pc-pay-rise-for-childcare-workforce/story-fn59noo3-1227212453544>
. If these wage increases are won, the sector will become commercially unviable 
without subsidies. But there is speculation that these subsidies tend to be
captured by providers 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-05-11/breunig-childcare-package/6460868>, 
which also functions to increase the cost to parents.

The picture that emerges is of a fundamentally unsustainable industry, propped 
up by a government that is caught in another bind and unable to articulate the 
rationale for its current course of action.

Deregulating childcare is one method of decreasing centre operating costs 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-03-27/jha-why-feminists-should-support-childcare-deregulation/5347476>
, and at face value it seems to be in line with the federal government’s 
economic philosophy.

It’s true that the National Quality Framework requirements, mandatory staff 
qualifications and increased staff-to-child ratios have made childcare more 
expensive. It’s also true that increasing professionalisation is part of the 
justification given by the union, United Voice, when they demand higher pay for 
workers.

So strip the regulations away, pay staff almost nothing and Bob’s your uncle: 
higher female workforce participation, lower government expenditure on 
subsidies.

Employers and unions unite to try to force changes to paid parental leave plan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/20/employers-and-unions-unite-to-try-to-force-changes-to-paid-parental-leave-plan>
This is an impossible prospect for “family values” reasons. There’s simply no 
way for the government to endorse underpaid, unqualified childcare workers 
while professing to value the special parent-child bond, or remaining 
rhetorically committed to a child-centric conception of care.


Yet alternatives, like a Finnish-style system 
<http://www.womensagenda.com.au/talking-about/top-stories/want-cheap-plentiful-quality-childcare-go-to-finland/201402043530#.VVmLKpL_4z8>
 of publicly-funded daycare controlled by local government would require, like 
Abbott’s PPL scheme, an abandonment of the principles of economic rationalism 
and the supposed primacy of individual choice.

Instead of acknowledging this and making a tough decision, the government has 
released a band-aid reform package and announced a pilot program that would see
unqualified nannies eligible for subsidies 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-04-28/federal-government-to-subsidise-nannies-childcare-children/6426568>
. This policy will be vociferously opposed by childcare centres that don’t want 
to compete with bargain basement alternatives, and childcare workers who must 
hold qualifications.

Perth-based think tank the Indonesia Institute provided a submission to the 
Productivity Commission advocating low-paid carers from Indonesia and the 
Philippines, to be paidas little as $200 per week 
<http://www.smh.com.au/national/call-for-asian-nannies-to-reduce-childcare-costs-20140328-35oln.html>
. This seems unlikely to get the go-ahead, but in our current atmosphere who 
can blame them for trying?

Hockey’s real mistake was allowing Oakes to draw out his own attitudes towards 
“family values”, which turn out to be quite different to Abbott’s. Focusing on 
the word “fraud” distracts from the substance of Hockey’s broader point, which 
is that he believes government-funded family entitlements are an unearned gift 
at taxpayers’ expense rather than a way to support the natural family structure 
in which Abbott believes so strongly.

The Coalition’s policies will remain an incoherent compromise between these 
two commitments as long as they continue to ignore how irreconcilable they 
really are, and Australian families will suffer as a result.
 