
I do not think it is a coincidence that the novel as a form reaches maturity 
at the same point as the bourgeoisie as a class are ascendant. Although the 
novel has its forerunners and predecessors – Boccaccio, Rabelais, Cervantes, de 
la Fayette – it gets into its stride with affluent, middle-class white men: 
Richardson, Fielding, Sterne, Smollett.

Will Self has recently written 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/25/will-self-humans-evolving-need-stories>
 about the shift from page to screen, word to image, and while agreeing with 
much of what he writes about the nature of narrative, I’d like to propose a 
more optimistic vision. The novel is hamstrung by its 18th-century origins and 
the TV box set sets fiction free.

There are certain things about the novel we take for granted. The protagonists 
have intact selves. They have cogent agency – they choose to do this (marry Mr 
Darcy, say) or not do that (marry the Rev St John Rivers, say). They have 
memories that they trust – and can trust – and desires they comprehend.

Literature is one of our first attempts at simulating reality, and its 
characters offer necessarily simplified versions of the messy business of being 
a human. Philosophers, psychoanalysts and neuroscientists have all called into 
question these notions that we cherish – will, self, choice, desire, 
recollection – but the novel has failed to keep up with these insights. I know 
myself that I do not know myself, that what I want is not what I choose to 
want, that the “me” that was 11 is barely recognisable as the “me” that is 44.

Some novelists – Will Self, again, Tom McCarthy, Nicola Barker, Lydia Millet, 
andthe much-underrated Nigel Dennis 
<http://www.villagevoice.com/arts/personality-crisis-7135428> (my copy of Cards 
of Identity is much-thumbed and has a clipping of a review byHélène Cixous 
<https://jwa.org/encyclopedia/article/cixous-helene> inside it) – have tried, 
and sometimes succeeded in creating novels where the self is not fixed but 
fluid, where want is both absence and yearning, where the stories we tell 
ourselves about ourselves are realised as stories. Philip K Dick assessed the 
differences between being human and non-human or post-human or anti-human, but 
the human was always there before the prefix, even in Do Androids Dream of 
Electric Sheep?Ken MacLeod’s Corporation Wars 
<http://www.tor.com/2016/02/29/robots-revolt-revealing-the-corporation-wars-by-ken-macleod/>
 is a bold attempt to create novels where there are no flesh-and-blood humans: 
the corporation is not corporeal. They’re also great fun, if you like tiny 
robots having big fights while discussing Locke’s theories of personhood. But 
even in them, the yearning is to be enfleshed again.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fdoes-westworld-tell-a-truer-story-than-a-novel-can%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ac1050f4163afba9048ddc5c0fd441a40dc2f67%2F0_63_2409_1445%2F2409.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Does%20Westworld%20tell%20a%20truer%20story%20than%20a%20novel%20can%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fdoes-westworld-tell-a-truer-story-than-a-novel-can%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Does%20Westworld%20tell%20a%20truer%20story%20than%20a%20novel%20can%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fdoes-westworld-tell-a-truer-story-than-a-novel-can%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ac1050f4163afba9048ddc5c0fd441a40dc2f67%2F0_63_2409_1445%2F2409.jpg>
 Non-human, post-human or anti-human? Rachael from Philip K Dick’s Do Androids 
Dream of Electric Sheep?, adapted as the film Blade Runner Photograph: 
Allstar/WARNER BROS/Sportsphoto Ltd. 
Westworld is set in a futuristic theme park, in which human “guests” pay to 
live out (or outlive) wild-west fantasies; like Zane Gray but with the added 
awfulness of mutilating, shooting and raping the robotic “hosts”. But where’s 
the fun in sadism if you know the object of your abjection is a marionette? The 
bosses of the nasty playground have therefore put a lot of time, money and 
intellect into making the “hosts” as lifelike as possible. Lifelikeness is a 
cardinal virtue of the novel, according to the great critic James Wood. But 
what if the “hosts”, by imitating humanity, become human-esque? Or better than 
humans? Based on one of Michael Crichton’s better pieces of writing – his 
script for the 1973 filmWestworld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/westworld> – it imagines 
consciousness as virus, glitch as evolution. In the TV show, the postmodern 
stakes are upped: to make your casual viciousness more realistic, there are 
structured narratives – quests, in the old Hero With a Thousand Faces sense. 
The narratives keep changing, to encourage repeat business. But what might not 
change, to paraphrase CS Lewis, is the unchanging inhuman and non-human heart.

That’s why Westworld seems to be the best example of what I’ll call “the 
post-human novel”. Spoilers ahoy: one character is a simulacrum of another 
character, and therefore two characters. Two characters, with radically 
different personalities, turn out to be one. Another character only achieves 
self-awareness by splitting herself into two, a riff on schizophrenia and 
consciousness being uneasy companions. Memories can be rewritten but pain is 
indelible. They want what they do not want. The hosts may be stuck in their 
narrative loops, but how often do any of us stray from habitual behaviour? The 
use of repetition in the series is striking; it would be a major achievement to 
create the same elegance in a novel. The finale reveals snow-globes within 
snow-globes – is the exterior of these globes just another globe? It’s likethe 
Bostrom Trilemma <http://www.simulation-argument.com/simulation.html> turned 
into articulate story. Without the visual elements, the sameness of the 
dissimilar and the unlikeness of the same, these ideas would be difficult to 
translate into prose.

That is where the novel and the box set still have something in common. 
Regardless of the metaphysics of Westworld, it still has its ethics. It looks 
at exploitation, sexual abuse and casual violence with a keen eye. There has 
always been the possibility of new technologies creating new aesthetics, from 
Dennis Potter to cassetteboy’s remixes. Westworld shows how television can 
mature, and outstrip the outdated, unquestioned foundations of the novel.
 