
A council worker from Brighton, whom Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> mistook on Twitter for his 
own daughter, has urged the president-elect to face up to his responsibilities 
and learn more about climate change.

Trump quoted a praiseworthy tweet directed to him by Lawrence Goodstein, a 
Twitter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> user in Seekonk, 
Massachusetts, that described his daughter Ivanka as “a woman with real 
character and class” late on Monday.

But Goodstein had mistakenly put @Ivanka, not @IvankaTrump – not a significant 
mistake in light of Goodstein’s 160-odd followers, but of far greater 
consequence circulated by Trump to his 20.1 million.


Related: @Ivanka from Brighton sends climate change reply to Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/17/ivanka-majic-donald-trump-twitter-climate-change-brighton>

So Trump’s shoutout was instead directed to Ivanka Majic, a council worker from
Brighton <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/brighton>, England, who used to work 
for the Labour party, whose number of Twitter followers doubled overnight.

Majic has taken advantage of her moment on the global stage by urging Trump to 
both take more care in his tweets and accept the scientific consensus about 
manmade climate change, which Trump challenged during his campaign.

Replying to the president-elect, she tweeted: “And you’re a man with great 
responsibilities. May I suggest more care on Twitter and more time learning 
about#climatechange <https://twitter.com/hashtag/climatechange?src=hash>.” 

She also tweeted data pointing out that 97.5% of publishing climatologists and 
about 90% of all publishing scientists supported the human-induced climate 
theory.

Overnight Majic has attracted a global following. “Ivanka Majic from Brighton, 
England, is a wonderful woman. You’re right,” replied Mark Pygas, a writer for 
Distractify, to Trump and Goodstein. “I mean, she’s probably trying to sleep 
and her phone is going off the hook but it’s a hell of a story.” According to a 
subsequent screenshot tweeted by Pygas,Goodstein blocked him 
<https://twitter.com/MarkPygas/status/821194910187589634> for pointing out the 
error and made his account private.

Trump had not deleted his tweet nor acknowledged his mistake at the time of 
writing, though Goodstein made his account private. It had been retweeted 2,800 
times and favourited 15,000 times, with more than 4,600 replies – the vast 
majority of them including Majic.

The Guardian has attempted to contact Majic, believed to be employed as a 
researcher at Brighton and Hove city council. Her profile suggests she is not 
as active a user of Twitter as the president-elect, with just six tweets – most 
of them retweets – in the past week.

Her last activity on Twitter was a retweet encouraging votes in Brighton’s 
upcoming restaurant competition and another publicising a resident’s appeal for 
the return of her lost house keys.

On Saturday, Majic had tweeted a link to a news story about Brighton’s 
“thriving food scene”:

Meanwhile, Ivanka Trump, who campaigned with Trump and is moving to Washington 
DC as her husband, Jared Kushner, becomes a senior White House adviser, seemed 
oblivious to the compliment paid to her by Goodstein, sharinga photo of 
“#datenight <https://twitter.com/IvankaTrump/status/821196107921375232>” with 
her 2.74 million followers.

Goldstein’s misdirected tweet had come during a CNN programme on the incoming 
first daughter featuring interviews with her brothers, Donald Jnr and Eric 
Trump, and about which theirfather had expressed concerns 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/821172595869577220>:

As president, Trump will have the option 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/01/the-next-potus-twitter-account-wont-follow-barack-obama-out-of-office>
 of taking over the official @POTUS Twitter handle or maintaining his own, 
@realDonaldTrump. With 20.1 million followers hanging on his every missive 
compared with @POTUS’s 13.5 million, Trump has given no indication he will make 
the switch.

Related: The next @POTUS? Twitter account won't follow Barack Obama out of 
office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/01/the-next-potus-twitter-account-wont-follow-barack-obama-out-of-office>

Sean Spicer, the incoming White House press secretary, told CNN earlier this 
month that Trump would “probably be tweeting from both, or whatever he chooses”.

Last week, BuzzFeed News publicised concerns 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/josephbernstein/donald-trumps-twitter-account-is-a-security-disaster-waiting?utm_term=.jv1j6B2za#.od4KWvnap>
 that Trump’s “shockingly insecure” personal Twitter account had no known 
special security protections and was open to being exploited with potentially 
devastating impacts for the stock market and geopolitical stability.

It would not be the first time Trump’s account has been hacked: in 2013, when 
he was best-known as a real estate tycoon and host of The Apprentice TV show, 
someonereportedly gained access to his account 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/02/21/donald-trump-twitter-account-hacked_n_2733969.html>
 to tweet Lil Wayne lyrics (“These hoes think they classy, well that’s the 
class I’m skippen”, from the remix of will.i.am and Britney Spear’s Scream & 
Shout).

“My Twitter has been seriously hacked --- and we are looking for the 
perpetrators,”Trump tweeted at the time 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/304636780903288834>.
 