
In this tumultuous US election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-elections-2016> there seems, for once, 
to be a genuine choice on offer about which kind of ideas will spend four years 
being thwarted in a congressional logjam. This year’s race has already spawned 
thousands of newspaper articles and even a Book of Revelation. It’s actually 
hard to find a clip of Donald Trump’s campaign that doesn’t look like a RoboCop 
insert. Then again, saying that a US election is particularly ridiculous is a 
bit like saying that Towie has jumped the shark. Unfortunately, even the most 
horrified coverage of this depraved contest assumes that it’s the election 
that’s the problem and not the society that produces it.

American elections are traditionally held on a Tuesday. This is because it 
allowed people to worship on Sunday, go to the town hall on Monday, vote on 
Tuesday and leave Wednesday clear for market. In Britain, we have elections on 
a Thursday because everyone was too pissed on a Friday. American elections 
always seem incredibly complicated to us, which is probably a bit rich when 
we’re about to have a nationwide referendum on Europe to decide who’s going to 
be running the Tory party.

One feature of this election is the way that the elite of the Republican party 
seem to have become completely estranged from their own electorate. Of course, 
they always worked against the interests of their voters, but they used to at 
least understand who they were and what they wanted. With almost infinite 
resources, the closest they’ve got to producing a popular candidate is Ted 
Cruz: a cross between a permanently disappointed sitcom vampire and the high 
school yearbook photo of every serial killer of the modern era.

The Republicans seem to be shocked that the result of decades of polarising 
rhetoric is a polarised society. The conservative establishment has spoken in a 
language of constant crisis, despite being ridiculously well served by the 
status quo, and it’s surprising how well the fear campaign has worked, 
considering that most of the country is on anti-anxiety medication. 
Conservatives have focused on false crises of international terror and 
immigration, little recognising that many voters have been equating that 
narrative with their own real crises of unemployment, debt and foreclosure.
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has simply cast 
himself as a solution. Trump is in many ways just saying what the other 
candidates would say on cocaine, but he’s also a unity candidate. His hope is 
to bring all of America together in their rejection of reality.

Trump divides his time between working some kind of King Ralph angle, and 
claiming that he’s going to make the US great again by using his business 
experience. We can only assume that means repeatedly declaring it bankrupt, 
then changing its name so he can just shake off all the debt. Trump’s one 
liberal policy seems to be his desire to pump more funding into mental health – 
which I’ve taken the liberty of interpreting as a massive cry for help. You can 
actually make your own Trump policies by going through the incinerator at the 
Daily Mail and picking through the dust for anything they thought might get 
them prosecuted. His position on climate change is “How can there be global 
warming when it’s still so cold in my soul?”

For anyone who has ever asked why the US needs to address the issue of 
reparations for its history of slavery, Donald Trump is why. He is the living 
embodiment of America’s unresolved issues. “How on earth can America consider 
expelling people of a different faith?!” an appalled England asks of a country 
created by the people they expelled for having a different faith. If you’re 
small, black and always felt that you didn’t have the confidence to crowd surf, 
Trump’s political rallies must come as a godsend. God knows who you vote for if 
you’re black in the USA – I guess all the politicians think black people are 
too preoccupied with videoing the police with their one lowered hand. 
Interestingly, in Nevada 45% of Latino votes went to Trump. Perhaps this 
indicates that people’s identities are more sophisticated than the clumsy 
definitions that political machinery uses to appraise them. Indeed, the very 
idea of racial groups as homogeneous is probably only possible in a racist 
society.

Trump seems to have the emotional range of a Power Rangers villain and the 
social skills of a teenage Minotaur. He looks like a pumpkin having a nervous 
breakdown, talks like the words are being fired out of his mouth by a tennis 
ball launcher and has the general manner of an arrogant televangelist suspected 
of murder by Columbo. His approach to public speaking? “If in doubt, switch to 
your internal monologue.” His core demographic? Possibly men whose holiday 
destinations would significantly overlap with a list of missing women. Trump is 
bringing out people who’ve never voted, people who felt they had no one to 
speak for them until now, people who throw microwaved beans at the television 
and people who go shopping in their pyjamas. And who knows, if Trump’s 
supporters are using their eight-fingered fists to make banners and red hats 
rather than drunkenly beating their kid into a coma that they won’t let a black 
doctor treat, maybe that’s a good thing. Trump knows that he appeals to people 
who are suspicious not just of political elites but everything those elites 
believe in, including rationality, and when confronted with anything empirical 
instinctively retreats into unverifiable anecdotes.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Freduce-anxiety-stress-advice-2016-elections-trump-clinton-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20reduce%20your%202016%20elections%20anxiety%3A%20advice%20from%20four%20experts%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Freduce-anxiety-stress-advice-2016-elections-trump-clinton-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20reduce%20your%202016%20elections%20anxiety%3A%20advice%20from%20four%20experts%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Freduce-anxiety-stress-advice-2016-elections-trump-clinton-video&media=>
 How to reduce your 2016 elections anxiety:advice from four experts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/mar/16/reduce-anxiety-stress-advice-2016-elections-trump-clinton-video>
Trump/Sanders might actually end up being an interesting election centring on 
detailed arguments about trade and jobs, and Trump might come off really badly, 
as these are areas on which he has the firm grasp of a stroke victim eating an 
eclair. It’s certainly been entertaining to watch Sanders try to convey a 
message of hope through the dark prism of the US’s Stage 4 corporate media. 
Aside from all the obvious problems of inherent bias, he has to energise people 
by asking them to engage in the passive activity of watching him on television, 
has to ask for activism and a more sophisticated understanding of political 
problems through a medium that is all about voyeurism and simplification. It 
reminds me of when you used to see communists in the city centre of a Saturday, 
trying to explain Marxism to people while they were out shopping.

A Bernie Sanders <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bernie-sanders> 
presidency would certainly be entertaining, not least because at 74 by the end 
of a second term he’ll think that he’s Beyonce. If you want a president who’s 
going to sort out healthcare, the ideal incumbent is someone who’s going to be 
using it a lot, really soon. Then again, if there’s one advantage to being the 
first socialist president of the United States, it’s that dying of old age 
isn’t really going to be a big worry. Sanders will be the first Jewish man to 
run for president and Republican elites seem to hate everything about Jews, 
except Israel. It says something about the incredible strength of antisemitism 
that paranoid ideas about Jews controlling the media and banking systems 
persist even among the people who control the media and banking systems.

Trump poised for Wisconsin setback after campaign's worst week
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/03/donald-trump-wisconsin-primary-polls-ted-cruz>
Hillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> hasn’t 
really had any idea how to deal with Sanders. To continue to calmly explain why 
someone ahead of you in general election polling is unelectable (and Clinton 
hates to see a leader being unelectable, unless they’re a dictator in some 
vassal state) suggests that some of her personal stiffness has seeped into what 
seems increasingly a detached and inflexible campaign. On the campaign trail, 
she’s a cynical power player projecting the weary joy of a shopping mall Santa 
while inside her burns the fury of Michael Corleone having to do a meet and 
greet at a farmers’ market in Idaho. She seems to shake hands with each member 
of the public as if musing on all the things she could do to them if only they 
were Libyan.

I know this all sounds like a lazy swipe at Clinton for being an uncaring 
android, and of course it is, but there’s a serious point. The sort of 
presentation strategy that would work best against Trump – a tireless public 
servant saddened at having to deal with the insults of a reality show star – is 
probably well outwith her abilities as a performer. Also, Trump fares best 
against candidates who he can paint as opportunistic insiders subservient to 
corporate interests, and Clinton can only accentuate those qualities as she 
pivots to the right to take him on. The sentiments she has to fake in a 
campaign – joy, relaxation, a desire to reach out to people – are all 
incredibly difficult for her. Luckily, the palette of emotions we can expect of 
her presidency – bitter triumph, cynicism and indifference – are well within 
her range.

Clinton will very likely beat Trump decisively because he is even more 
unpopular with Republicans than she is with Democrats. There’s every chance 
that conservative donor money will start to flow towards Clinton who at least 
knows to speak very carefully about the things that really matter, like trade 
deals. At least we’ll get the entertainment of watching her trying to destroy 
Isis using the methods by which she helped to create Isis, turning the Middle 
East into an endless game of Whac-A-Mole. For America, and indeed the rest of 
the world, Clinton versus Trump will be like being on a bus being driven at 
high speed towards a cliff by a psychopath, where there’s a chance that a 
chimpanzee might grab control of the steering wheel. It’s not a question of 
whether this will make things better or worse, it’s more that the whole idea of 
“better” may be gradually ceasing to exist.
 