
When US District Judge Gonzalo Curiel unsealed a hoard of highly unflattering 
documents this week about Trump University, Donald Trumpresponded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jun/01/donald-trump-attacks-judge-overseeing-trump-university-case-video>
 the way one would expect: with bullying and race-baiting.

“They ought to look into Judge Curiel,” Trump declared, “because what Judge 
Curiel is doing is a total disgrace.” Trump also asserted that the Indiana-born 
Curiel “happens to be, we believe, Mexican, which is great”. Trump also called 
for Curiel to recuse himself … on the grounds that he made decisions Trump 
disagreed with.

Donald Trump's sole consistent trait: offering pricey, empty promises | Jeb 
Lund
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/01/donald-trump-university-campaign-empty-pricey-promises>
His attacks 
<http://fusion.net/story/307971/donald-trump-judge-mexican-hater-trump-university/>
 exemplify, yet again, why the prospect of a President Trump is terrifying. 
First of all, they suggest a rather cavalier attitude towards judicial 
independence. Politicians are, needless to say, free to publicly criticize 
judges, even when they’re one of the parties before the court. But the call to 
“look into” Curielcrosses a line 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2016/06/01/437ccae6-280b-11e6-a3c4-0724e8e24f3f_story.html>
 towards being threatening.

Admittedly, there are limits to how much Trump could threaten judicial 
independence from the White House. Article III of the consitution provides 
various tools that could theoretically undermine the independence of the courts 
– packing federal courts with additional members selected by the president, 
stripping the courts of jurisdiction and removal from office. All of these 
actions, however, would require an act of Congress. Given that FDR’s proposal 
to pack the courts was rejected by Congress in the aftermath of a historic 
landslide in the 1936 presidential election, it’s unlikely that even a 
Trump-friendly Republican Congress would take such extreme measures.

But there’s still reason for concern. Would Trump be willing to abide by 
adverse rulings? And how much in general would Trump feel bound by legal 
constraints?

His threatening comments are the latest example of the authoritarian tendencies
 <http://www.vox.com/2016/5/20/11720276/donald-trump-authoritarianism> that 
have been central to his rise. They’re also an example of what the 
libertarian-leaning law professor Orin Kerrhas called 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/volokh-conspiracy/wp/2016/05/06/the-rise-of-donald-trump-and-the-politics-of-delegitimization/>
 “the politics of delegitimization”. Because Curiel disagrees with Trump, he is 
therefore inherently corrupt and unfit for office. Democracy is premised, in 
part, on the promise that the losing factions of an election remain members of 
the political community. Having a president who believes that legitimate 
opposition is a logical impossibility is highly dangerous.

And Trump’s attacks on Curiel show that Trump’s particular “politics of 
delegitimization” have a strongly white supremacist component. Trump referred 
to Curiel as “Mexican”as a way 
<http://www.salon.com/2016/06/01/white_americas_sad_last_stand_this_is_why_donald_trump_attacks_mexican_judge/>
 of indicating that he was therefore not really American. This emphasis on 
racial hierarchy has been central to Trump’s campaign, from his proposals to 
ban Muslims from entering the country to his proposal to build a wall on the 
southern border. When Trump says he wants to “make America great again”, in 
large measure he means “make America more like it was when it was whiter”.

How Donald Trump emboldens bigots across the world | Amana Fontanella-Khan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/16/donald-trump-hindu-nationalist-far-right-presidential-election>
And while Republicans might like to think that the race-baiting Trump 
continues to engage in is incidental to his support, it’s not. As the political 
scientist Phil Klinknerhas shown 
<http://www.vox.com/2016/6/2/11833548/donald-trump-support-race-religion-economy>
 with the use of public opinion data, “Trump’s appeal has little to do with 
economics” but instead is primarily explained by racial resentment. Calling an 
American-born judge “Mexican” isn’t just a random insult; it’s part of a 
successful political strategy.

And it’s reminiscent of the comments that made Trump a major figure in 
Republican politics: his assertions that Barack Obama was not actually an 
American but had been born in Africa. Did Trump’s embrace of racist paranoia 
make him toxic within the Republican party? Hardly.

Mitt Romney might bemoan Trump now, but when he was running for president in 
2012 heenthusiastically sought 
<http://www.cnn.com/2012/02/02/politics/campaign-wrap/> the endorsement of the 
country’s most famous birther. Trump’s disgraceful attacks on Curiel represent 
what he’s always been. He didn’t come out of nowhere; he’s just blunter about 
exploiting racial resentment than the typical national Republican politician.
 