
Donald Trump provoked fresh outrage on Saturday by lashing out 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/820251730407473153> at a revered 
civil rights activist who challenged the legitimacy of his election win.

Related: Attempts to hold Trump to account only seem to make him stronger and 
stranger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/14/donald-trump-press-conference-twitter-media>

The criticism of US congressman John Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/16/john-lewis-congressman-march-graphic-novel-civil-rights-memoir>
 came on the day of a civil rights march in Washington aimed at Trump’s 
incoming presidency, two days before Americaobserves the annual Martin Luther 
King Jr Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/14/biloxi-mississippi-great-americans-day-tweet-martin-luther-king-jr>
 and six days before the country’s first black president leaves office.

Lewis, who was beaten by state troopers during the historic 1965 march over 
the Edmund Pettus Bridge in Selma, Alabama, is the first leading Democrat to 
publicly question Trump’s right to govern.

“I don’t see this president-elect as a legitimate president,” he told NBC’s 
Meet the Press this week 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/meet-the-press/rep-lewis-i-would-not-invite-trump-selma-n707056>
.

The 76-year-old congressman from Georgia, seen by some as the moral conscience 
of the nation, will boycott Trump’s inauguration, the first he has missed since 
becoming a member of Congress three decades ago.

“I think the Russians participated in helping this man get elected, and they 
helped destroy the candidacy of Hillary Clinton,” he said.

Clinton received 2.9m more votes than Trump but lost the electoral college. 
When assailed, Trump is known to favour a playbook of hitting back harder, even 
against seemingly no-win targets such asKhizr and Ghazala Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/20/khizr-khan-vilified-trump-far-right-voice-heard>
, the parents of a US soldier killed in Iraq;Alicia Machado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/27/alicia-machado-miss-universe-weight-shame-trump-speaks-out-clinton>
, a Miss Universe winner; andMeryl Streep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/09/donald-trump-calls-meryl-streep-over-rated-golden-globes-twitter>
, the Oscar-winning actor.

On Saturday he decided that Lewis should be no different, using Twitter to say 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/820255947956383744> that he “should 
spend more time on fixing and helping his district, which is in horrible shape 
and falling apart (not to mention crime infested) rather than falsely 
complaining about the election results. All talk, talk, talk – no action or 
results. Sad!”

The comments – from a man backed by figures linked to the Ku Klux Klan and 
other racist far-right groups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/former-ku-klux-klan-leader-and-us-alt-right-hail-election-result>
 – drew a scathing response, even from the president-elect’s own party.

Ben Sasse, a Republican senator for Nebraska and frequent Trump critic, said 
on Twitter <https://twitter.com/BenSasse/status/820275834946809857>: “John 
Lewis and his ‘talk’ have changed the world.” Conservative commentator Bill 
Kristol posted: “It’s telling, I’m afraid, that Donald Trump treats Vladimir 
Putin with more respect than he does John Lewis.”

Evan McMullin, a former CIA officer who ran as an independent conservative in 
the presidential election,said 
<https://twitter.com/Evan_McMullin/status/820262848148414464>: “While you 
avoided the draft, John Lewis risked his life for equality in America. You’ll 
never even dream of such selfless patriotism, Donald.”

Howard Wolfson, a former deputy mayor of New York, commented 
<https://twitter.com/howiewolf/status/820262825230794752>: “John Lewis did more 
to make America great in one day on the Edmund Pettus Bridge than Donald Trump 
ever will.”

This week, Lewis also spoke out against Trump’s nominee for attorney general, 
Senator Jeff Sessions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/13/jeff-sessions-attorney-general-confirmation-southern-gentleman-act>
 of Alabama, during a confirmation hearing. Sessions was denied a federal 
judgeship in 1986 over alleged racist remarks. This week, a letter from King’s 
wife, Coretta Scott King, opposing his nomination was rediscovered andpublished 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/powerpost/wp/2017/01/10/read-the-letter-coretta-scott-king-wrote-opposing-sessionss-1986-federal-nomination/?utm_term=.14b1ef7ec815>
 by the Washington Post.

“We need someone as attorney general who’s going to look out for all of us, 
and not just some of us,” said Lewis, a protégé of King.

Trump’s latest Twitter storm coincided with a civil rights march in Washington 
led by activists angry over his offensive remarks about Muslims, Mexicans and 
other minority groups. In poor weather, Rev Al Sharpton led around 2,000 
protesters along the National Mall, ending at theMartin Luther King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/martin-luther-king> Jr Memorial, about two 
miles from the steps of the US Capitol, where Trump will be sworn in as 
president on Friday.

Addressing marchers, Cornell William Brooks, president and chief executive of 
the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, said: “We will 
march until hell freezes over, and when it does, we will march on the ice.”

The march kicked off a week of demonstrations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/14/inauguration-protests-guide-where-events-happening-donald-trump-president>
 scheduled before, during and after Trump’s inauguration.

Trump got 8% of the black vote in the presidential election, according to exit 
polls; Clinton received 88%.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Obama dedicates his final weekly address to the American people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/14/obama-dedicates-his-finally-weekly-address-to-the-american-people-video>
The changing of the guard in Washington, however, is gathering momentum. Even 
before Trump takes office, Republicans wona gateway victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/13/congress-house-affordable-care-act-obamacare-repeal>
 in Congress on Friday in their efforts to scrap Barack Obama’s signature 
healthcare law. With a 227-198 House vote, Congress gave final approval to a 
budget that will ease passage of a still-unwritten bill replacing the 
Affordable Care Act.

The budget “gives us the tools we need for a step-by-step approach to fix 
these problems and put Americans back in control of their health care”, House 
speaker Paul Ryan said after the vote.

Related: John Lewis: 'I don’t think I’ve changed much. I still consider myself 
an activist' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/16/john-lewis-congressman-march-graphic-novel-civil-rights-memoir>

But internal divisions are emerging. At least seven Republicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> have said they want to wait 
until a replacement is ready before they will vote to repeal Obamacare, wary 
that 20 million people who gained health insurance could suddenly lose it.

Trump could also face a bumpy ride from his own cabinet. This week several of 
his nominees underwentSenate confirmation hearings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/james-mattis-mike-pompeo-confirmation-hearings-russia>
 and expressed views that differed from his own on everything from Russian 
hacking to the Iran nuclear deal to immigration rights.

The president-elect brushed off the dissent, claiming he had told his picks to 
“say what you want to say”. He said: “I may be right, they may be right.”

Meanwhile, on Saturday Obama delivered his last weekly address at the White 
House with a call for active citizenship.

“Our success depends on our participation, regardless of which way the 
pendulum of power swings,” he said. “It falls on each of us to be guardians of 
our democracy; to embrace the joyous task we’ve been given to continually try 
to improve this great nation of ours. Because for all our outward differences, 
we all share the same proud title: citizen.”

He added: “It has been the honour of my life to serve you as president. Eight 
years later, I am even more optimistic about our country’s promise. And I look 
forward to working along your side, as a citizen, for all my days that remain.”
 