
Not for the first time EastEnders' scriptwriters have been made to look 
terribly unimaginative. While the show's characters have been leading their 
usual dull and yet strangely implausible lives, the actors who play them have 
been leading much more exciting (and yet somehow equally implausible) lives.

First Leslie Grantham effortlessly out-filthied Dirty Den. Now June Brown, the 
woman who for nearly 20 years has valiantly battled with Dot Cotton's 
impossible task of being even more miserable and ineffectual than Pauline 
Fowler, has come out in the tabloids as the person best placed to save 
Libertines' frontman Pete Doherty from his drug addiction.

June's experience of drugs started some time after 1998, when her godson, 
musician Tim Arnold, was dropped from his record label, dumped by his 
girlfriend and thrown out of his house, all in the same week. As a 
broken-hearted wannabe rock star (he was in a band called Jocasta), the 
solution must have seemed obvious. Start smoking crack!

"Crack's one of those drugs that, unlike the music business, is completely 
reliable," he says now. "You ask it to do something for you and it does it."

It did it so successfully that five years later Tim was living in such a 
clich√©d version of drug hell that even Brookside would have rejected his story. 
Luckily, with the help of June and others, he was able to check in to a remote 
Thai monastery called Thamkrabok, which claims to have world-beating success 
rates for curing drug addiction.

June was so impressed by his subsequent recovery that she pledged to help him 
set up a charity to bring other addicts, particularly musicians like Pete 
Doherty, from the UK to Thamkrabok. "Anyone can go," she said. "We will pay 
your fare, all you need is to commit to treatment. I'm a huge Libertines fan. 
It'd be a marvellous place for Pete to kick his addiction."

But there's more. Within three weeks of his stay at the monastery Tim was not 
only off drugs, he'd started recording a new album based on the abbot Luang 
Por's deeply strange system of extracting music from the spirits of the 
mountainside.

"I go up into the mountains with lots of tracing paper and pens and trace the 
cracks on rocks," Tim explains in a disconcertingly matter-of-fact manner. "And 
then I come back home and staple the tracing paper to Luang Por's graph and 
start extracting the notes."

Perhaps the most bizarre part of the story is that the resulting album 
Lokutara isn't some freaky excursion into the mind of the mountain. Rather it's 
pleasantly melodic but wishy-washy, like Hey Jude without Paul McCartney's 
razor wit or biting cynicism. Tim's latest project is a record based on his 
tracings of the cracks in Stonehenge.

So now that it seems June has had her way and Pete is off to Thamkrabok, can 
we look forward to the next Libertines album being made in a similar fashion? 
That's yet another reason to wish Pete a very swift return to health. The idea 
of the Libertines going around tracing their own sacred places (Chas'n'Dave's 
house? The offices of the NME?) is just too bizarre to think about.
 