
On Sunday night, PBS aired the final episode of Downton Abbey  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/dec/25/downton-abbey-the-finale-happy-endings-for-virtually-every-single-character>
for the first time in the US. It was a highly anticipated occasion all over the 
nation, except at my house. I’ve never seen a single second of Downton Abbey 
and was not planning to for the remainder of my time on this planet. So you can 
imagine how thrilled I was when my editor kindly requested I watch the finale 
and give my thoughts. At last, I could consider myself a part of the most 
milquetoast cultural phenomenon sinceKenny G 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/22/china-furious-kenny-g-hong-kong-protests>
.

What I know about this show couldn’t fill up a shot glass. I understand that 
it takes place in an English estate in between the world wars, that it follows 
the trials and tribulations of high-born occupants of said estate and their 
working-class servants. What I don’t know is whyDownton Abbey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/downton-abbey> has amassed a fiercely 
loyal cult audience here in America. I hope that as the episode unspools, the 
veil will be lifted and I will have an epiphany of sorts, motivating me to go 
back and watch the whole series from the beginning. At the very least, I just 
want to understand what all the fuss is about. I am giving myself only one 
restriction: I cannot do any secondary research during the show. I have to 
figure out what’s happening in the story on my own.

Downton Abbey – the finale: 'happy endings for virtually every single 
character'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/dec/25/downton-abbey-the-finale-happy-endings-for-virtually-every-single-character>
We open, as is customary, on the credits. Immediately, I’m put off. There’s a 
quick shot of a table setting with two knives. Two knives? How many knives does 
one person really need? For some meals, I don’t even use one knife, let alone 
two. With two knives, I feel like Leonardo from Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles 
<http://tmnt25.crtti.com/assets/img/content/bio_leonardo_3.gif>, which is not 
ideal, since I’ve always been more of a Raphael kinda guy. Per my arbitrary 
rule, I can’t Google anything during the show, so I haven’t the faintest idea 
why one would need two knives. Is one for butter and the other for cutting 
food? Is it a salad knife? Is it to stab a particularly officious party guest? 
Talk about a cliffhanger.

My first impression is that everyone speaks in exposition, declaring their 
intentions loudly and unsolicited. In particular, Matthew Goode’s character 
routinely dredges up his decision to stop racing cars because of some accident 
that killed a character I’ve never heard of in every social situation 
imaginable. I suppose this is not unlike the curious habit that citizens of Los 
Angeles have for prattling on about themselves in conversation. “I’ve retired 
from racing cars because I killed someone” is the English equivalent of “I’m 
working on my screenplay,” which instantly ingratiates Matthew Goode to me.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fdownton-abbey-final-episode-why-did-america-fall-so-hard-for-the-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ec1f839270a73fc7037007df2ae4e0a2fd4ac31%2F0_140_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Downton%20Abbey%3A%20why%20did%20America%20fall%20so%20hard%20for%20the%20show%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fdownton-abbey-final-episode-why-did-america-fall-so-hard-for-the-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Downton%20Abbey%3A%20why%20did%20America%20fall%20so%20hard%20for%20the%20show%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fdownton-abbey-final-episode-why-did-america-fall-so-hard-for-the-show%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ec1f839270a73fc7037007df2ae4e0a2fd4ac31%2F0_140_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Maggie Smith as Violet, Dowager Countess of Grantham. Photograph: Nick 
Briggs/AP 
Twenty minutes in and I’m having a hell of a time keeping track of all the 
elderly white women. Helpfully, some of them wear hats and some of them don’t. 
I know who Dame Maggie Smith is, so that gives me my bearings. As I come to 
learn more about these characters, I develop fun nicknames for each of them: 
Maggie Smith, Not Maggie Smith, Not Maggie Smith with a Hat, Maggie Smith with 
a Hat, Young Maggie Smith. I really feel I know these people.

A character who is not Maggie Smith and is also common says: “The future is no 
ladies’ maids at all, but we haven’t quite got there.” Yes, as a citizen of the 
future, I can say that there are no ladies’ maids any more, unless your name is 
Donald Trump, in which case you own an island/tax shelter populated exclusively 
with ladies’ maids. Ladies’ Maid Island doesn’t exist on any map, but if Trump 
is elected president, it will quickly become the 51st state. Its only exports 
will be polished brass and gossip.

I do see some of the appeal of this program in that, everyone’s constantly 
drinking and changing clothes. It’s a bit like Mad Men, if even less happened 
and all the characters were much more repressed. One scene ends in a parlor 
over sherry and another scene begins in a slightly different parlor, but with 
champagne instead of sherry. Considering how much alcohol these people drink, 
you’d think they’d have far more to say to each other.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fdownton-abbey-final-episode-why-did-america-fall-so-hard-for-the-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b0e62b79ee5c02335272f3e502b5dda19d4ad9d%2F0_198_2999_1802%2F2999.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Downton%20Abbey%3A%20why%20did%20America%20fall%20so%20hard%20for%20the%20show%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fdownton-abbey-final-episode-why-did-america-fall-so-hard-for-the-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Downton%20Abbey%3A%20why%20did%20America%20fall%20so%20hard%20for%20the%20show%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fdownton-abbey-final-episode-why-did-america-fall-so-hard-for-the-show%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b0e62b79ee5c02335272f3e502b5dda19d4ad9d%2F0_198_2999_1802%2F2999.jpg>
 Robert James-Collier as Thomas Barrow. Photograph: Nick Briggs/AP 
A young fellow named Mr Barrow, who I bet is considered a form of sex symbol 
by Downton enthusiasts, finds a new job. I don’t know if he’s getting paid more 
to leave or if he’s getting a promotion. I’ve been trying to find something to 
do on my phone that doesn’t involve the risk of accidental spoilers, so I’ve 
taken to refreshing Instagram every 15 minutes, which caused me to miss why Mr 
Barrow is leaving. My mind wanders. I ponder the question of why there are more 
maids and butlers than actual people living in this house. They must unmake 
beds and spill various fluids just to give their servants something to do 
besides speculate on the internal motivations of rich people.

Some butlers have decided to go on an errand to get silver polish. We don’t 
see it, but it’s probably more exciting than whatever is going on here. One 
chubby butler has a column in a magazine, some kind of advice column on how to 
dress. I suppose this suggests a future for the lower classes – wit can be your 
ticket out of the humdrum life of the servant. The rest of the butlers are 
quitting, so this rich family is going to have to find someone else to floss 
for them.

An old man who sounds like he’s recently taken a sedative appears to tell not 
Maggie Smith without a hat that he has “pernicious anemia” and will probably 
die. On an American television show, there’d be a bit of crying and wailing – 
the sort of histrionic acting that ends up in an awards show highlight reel. 
This being an English costume drama, the most we get is a few seconds of lip 
quivering and culturally specific brave-face chattering. “I’ve had a good 
innings,” he says. Jolly good, rah rah and all that. Sorry about the dying 
thing, old girl. Cheerio. Is this a parody?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fdownton-abbey-final-episode-why-did-america-fall-so-hard-for-the-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0968e22f9e7f37166424f9b80b3da2601298d0cf%2F0_249_3322_1995%2F3322.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Downton%20Abbey%3A%20why%20did%20America%20fall%20so%20hard%20for%20the%20show%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fdownton-abbey-final-episode-why-did-america-fall-so-hard-for-the-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Downton%20Abbey%3A%20why%20did%20America%20fall%20so%20hard%20for%20the%20show%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fdownton-abbey-final-episode-why-did-america-fall-so-hard-for-the-show%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0968e22f9e7f37166424f9b80b3da2601298d0cf%2F0_249_3322_1995%2F3322.jpg>
 Lady Edith: who is she? Photograph: Nick Briggs/ITV PLC 
I’ve now watched enough of this program to know that the blonde girl with the 
pointy nose is named Edith. She sees someone she recognizes at dinner. I guess 
his name is Bertie. They have a secret. I don’t know what the secret is (sorry, 
texting) so I am going off of the assumption that this is an X-Files crossover 
and Edith has alien DNA. Or she’s a time-traveller come to warn everyone about 
the rise of fascism. Or she has, like, a secret daughter. I honestly don’t know.

I realize that some of these people are meant to be poor, but they all sound 
terribly rich and smart to me. Oh my God, maybe … that’s the point of the whole 
show? That we’re all equal, no matter what class we’re born into? I feel like 
Neo from The Matrix <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-matrix> after he 
learns his entire life has been a computer simulation.

In case you were wondering, Matthew Goode still doesn’t want to race, but he 
needs to find some activity to keep him from pestering his wife all day. If I 
was writing this show, he’d be forced to race by some big hulking brute, 
preferablyJason Statham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/20/jason-statham-action-hero-spy>. 
They’d race, but it would end in controversy, so to settle their differences, 
they’d have to fight each other with sticks and wrenches and whatever else they 
can find lying around. Also, this fight would have to take place on the roof of 
a building in downtown Los Angeles. In short, I would like Downton Abbey to be 
more likeFurious 7 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/fast-furious-7> in every 
way possible, up to and including a Wiz Khalifa song over the end credits.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fdownton-abbey-final-episode-why-did-america-fall-so-hard-for-the-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f854115443cc32c5a2a8fbe0cf45dbee59674e1%2F0_0_3366_2023%2F3366.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Downton%20Abbey%3A%20why%20did%20America%20fall%20so%20hard%20for%20the%20show%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fdownton-abbey-final-episode-why-did-america-fall-so-hard-for-the-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Downton%20Abbey%3A%20why%20did%20America%20fall%20so%20hard%20for%20the%20show%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fdownton-abbey-final-episode-why-did-america-fall-so-hard-for-the-show%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f854115443cc32c5a2a8fbe0cf45dbee59674e1%2F0_0_3366_2023%2F3366.jpg>
 Ailing … Jim Carter as Mr Carson and Phyllis Logan as Mrs Hughes. Photograph: 
Nick Briggs/ITV/PA 
The head butler, who I learn is named Carson, is sick. He keeps spilling 
drinks on everything, which is not at all advantageous for his profession. Mr 
Barrow is really leaving at the worst possible time, isn’t he? Speaking of, 
half this episode is taken up with Barrow saying goodbye to the rest of the 
people in the house. I half-expected he’d start saying goodbye to each and 
every piece of silverware too. “Farewell, spoon. See you later, knife. Take 
care, extra knife that no one actually needs.”

Edith and Bertie are going to get married, but Bertie’s mom doesn’t approve 
because Edith may or may not be a lizard underneath all of that makeup. 
Fortunately, Bertie’s mom reconsiders and consents to the nuptials when she 
discovers that Edith is not a lizard at all. The forked tongue and the scales 
are just a coincidence. This makes Edith so happy, because I guess her life has 
been quite terrible, what with all the sitting, drinking, eating and sleeping 
she does.

Over an hour and a half has gone by and we’ve reached the wedding. It’s New 
Year’s Eve and the whole gang is assembled. I am so close to these characters 
now. It’s like I’m a part of the Crawley family. I even know that they’re 
called the Crawley family. The one that looks like Keira Knightley is named 
Mary!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fdownton-abbey-final-episode-why-did-america-fall-so-hard-for-the-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68f0f2c96708ad6eaf3774863435c2f15d85fcfa%2F0_0_3000_1803%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Downton%20Abbey%3A%20why%20did%20America%20fall%20so%20hard%20for%20the%20show%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fdownton-abbey-final-episode-why-did-america-fall-so-hard-for-the-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Downton%20Abbey%3A%20why%20did%20America%20fall%20so%20hard%20for%20the%20show%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fdownton-abbey-final-episode-why-did-america-fall-so-hard-for-the-show%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68f0f2c96708ad6eaf3774863435c2f15d85fcfa%2F0_0_3000_1803%2F3000.jpg>
 It’s Michelle Dockery as Not Maggie Smith – or rather, Lady Mary. Photograph: 
Nick Briggs/AP 
Maggie Smith asks Not Maggie Smith why the English are so dour. “I blame the 
weather,” she says. And with that, a cliche is born. Not Maggie Smith’s 
boyfriend is sick, but he’s not that sick, so they get to be old together. 
Someone pregnant gives birth to a child in Mary’s bedroom, which means a 
servant is going to have to burn all the sheets. Edith gets married. Matthew 
Goode decides to become a used car salesman, the sorry fate of all ex-athletes. 
In a shocking swerve, Barrow agrees to come back to Downton to be head butler 
after Carson regrettably resigns. I’m so glad we spent all that time watching 
him say goodbye. It made his inevitable return all the more inevitable.

The Earl and Countess of Grantham settle in, wistful about the passage of 
time, but optimistic about the future. Let’s just hope that the geopolitical 
stability of the continent continues and Europe isn’t overrun by blustery thugs 
and jackbooted stormtroopers anytime soon. I’m sure that won’t happen and the 
Crawleys will live happily ever after, or at least until the reunion special. 
The show concludes with an exterior of the titular home, covered in snow.

Do I understand why this show is so popular? Yes, I do. It’s like the British 
version ofEmpire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/dec/10/best-of-tv-2015-no-8-empire>
 – silly clothes and soap opera-style human exaggeration. It makes the viewer 
feel slightly superior, because the actors have accents and are quite posh. 
Watching this show is not dissimilar to crashing a fancy dinner party where you 
don’t know any of the other guests, but they all know each other and are prone 
to in-jokes and obscure references. It’s a historical program that skips all 
the exciting parts of history.

Instead of the very American tendency to paint our costume dramas with 
monumental import (is the era memorialized by HBO’s Vinyl really that critical 
or is it just old men waxing nostalgic about their glory days?) Downton appears 
content to languidly report on just how dull the past actually was. I can see 
that being refreshing for Americans growing tired of yet another loud, pompous 
hour-long starring some gruff, perpetually moist antihero. Plus, it put me 
straight to bed when it was over. Now, if you’ll excuse me, I’m off to Google 
“second knife”.
 