
The company behind the Beats by Dr Dre headphones is reportedly preparing to 
buy out its minority shareholder, the mobile phone makerHTC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/htc>, and bring in a new business 
partner.

Beats Electronics, founded by hip hop producer Dr Dre and music mogul Jimmy 
Iovine, is expanding to speakers, car audio systems and an internet music 
streaming service. According to a report in the Wall Street Journal, the 
company is in talks with an investor that could provide debt financing for its 
ambitions and possibly take a stake in the business, following an abandoned 
attempt at credit raising a few months ago. As part of the renewed plans, the 
report said, Beats will buy out the 25% stake in the company held by Taiwanese 
smartphone maker HTC.

Beats originally sold a 50.1% stake in its business to HTC for $300m in August 
2011, with the mobile phone maker hoping that the firm's software would give 
its phones a reputation for high sound quality, while selling its products 
along with Beats headphones. A year later Beats bought back the stake at around 
half the price.

Beats has transformed headphones from a cheap add-on for mobile music devices 
to high-end accessories that retail for as much as Â£350 in the UK and are 
sported by global celebrities such as Kanye West and Lady Gaga. The company has 
reportedly grown its revenues from $200m in 2010 to nearly $1bn last year. HTC, 
by contrast, is stuck in a downward spiral and has warned that it expects to 
report its first-ever loss in the third quarter of this year, having posted an 
83% slump in second quarter profits.

According to market research group NPD, Beats controls 59% of the US market 
for premium headphones, which grew by 18% last year. However, predictions of 
slower growth in the market have prompted Beats to explore beyond headphones.
 