
Japan’s growth figures were bad. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/15/japans-economy-shrinks-again-as-shinzo-abe-kickstart-plan-is-blown-off-course>
 Thedata for Chinese exports 
<http://news.yahoo.com/china-jan-exports-slump-6-6-y-o-025148513.html> was even 
worse. A signal for the financial markets to have another dose of the 
heebie-jeebies? Not a bit of it. This was one of those days when bad news was 
good news.

The thinking goes as follows. If the Japanese economy shrank by 0.4% in the 
final three months of 2015 and Chinese exports fell by more than 11%, 
policymakers will sit up and take notice. Central banks will stimulate activity 
by cutting interest rates, even when they are already negative, and by 
expanding their quantitative easing (QE) programmes.

Right on cue, Mario Draghi popped up before the European parliament  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/feb/15/market-turmoil-asian-stocks-soar-despite-japan-shrinking-14-live>
to administer a bit of his own soothing balm. Yes, of course, the European 
Central Bank (ECB) is abreast of what has been going on in the markets, and 
“will not hesitate to act” if necessary.

Markets took this as a promise from the ECB president that he will come up 
with more stimulus next month. More stimulus equals more growth equals higher 
corporate profits equals higher share prices.

A moment’s thought suggests this is a far from watertight thesis. For a start, 
financial markets should wait and see what Draghi does rather than get too 
excited about what he says. TheECB disappointed in December  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2015/dec/03/ecb-stimulus-qe-negative-rates-mario-draghi-live>
by not delivering as much extra stimulus as expected, in large part because 
Draghi ran into resistance from Germany.

Even if the ECB does come up with the goods and this is accompanied by more 
action from the Bank of Japan and the People’s Bank of China, there is no 
guarantee that it will have any material effect. There has been no shortage of 
action from central banks these past seven years and, let’s be honest, the 
outcome has been disappointing.

Andrew Lapthorne, analyst at Société Générale, notes that one of the ploys 
being used by central banks – negative interest rates– is subject to the law of 
unintended consequences. Negative interest rates make holding government bonds 
attractive even when they are yielding next to nothing. Yet one of the 
rationales for QE is that it discourages investors from holding government 
bonds and encourages them to dabble in riskier assets.

All this prompts the conclusion that bad economic news really is bad news. In 
the current climate, there are really only two groups of people. Those who 
admit they don’t really have a clue what’s going on and those that don’t have a 
clue but pretend that they do. Central banks fall into the latter category.
 