
Geoffrey Szuszkiewicz told his family he didn’t want anything for Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas>. But when he opened his 
stocking to find a roll of duct tape, some cling film and tin foil, he 
relented. “I was ecstatic. I could use everything,” he says

The 33-year-old dancer from Canada was in the middle of a “buy nothing” year 
when he opened his present, and had managed to cut out spending on anything 
except a pre-defined list of basic groceries and necessities for 12 months.

Szuszkiewicz is part of an anti-consumerist movement, known as minimalism or 
mindful consumerism, that has been sweeping across the globe via blogs, 
self-help books and social media. This move towards buying less often attracts 
new converts during the festive season when people balk at the scale of 
Christmas spending.

According to the Nationwide building society, people on average spend roughly 
half their monthly pay on Christmas. One in three, meanwhile, pay for Christmas 
using a credit card or overdraft.

Mark Boyle bought a smallholding in the west of Ireland with the proceeds of 
his book, The Moneyless Man, after spending three years living entirely without 
money. “I generally don’t spend anything at all at Christmas now – and I’m 
much, much happier,” he says.

“I didn’t buy or spend anything for those years – I’d grow or forage my food. 
Now I let people come and stay for free in my home, and run a moneyless pub. At 
Christmas, everyone from round here brings a bottle and we get together and 
have a shindig. For me, that’s what Christmas is about – meeting up and sharing 
food and drink. I avoid shopping at this time of the year in any way I can.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ffrugal-christmas-people-stopped-shopping-minimalism-movement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4adaa14983fcbcd6deb1596ede2f1d7747bd5544%2F0_30_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dreaming%20of%20a%20frugal%20Christmas%3F%20Meet%20the%20people%20who%E2%80%99ve%20stopped%20shopping&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ffrugal-christmas-people-stopped-shopping-minimalism-movement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dreaming%20of%20a%20frugal%20Christmas%3F%20Meet%20the%20people%20who%E2%80%99ve%20stopped%20shopping&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ffrugal-christmas-people-stopped-shopping-minimalism-movement%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4adaa14983fcbcd6deb1596ede2f1d7747bd5544%2F0_30_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
 Moneyless Man Mark Boyle says he needs nothing and now puts a much greater 
value on time. Photograph: Leigh Pearson 
Also among those who have embraced the more frugal lifestyle is financial 
journalist Michelle McGagh, who has been blogging about her “no-spend” year, 
and detailing the challenges and benefits of her new lifestyle. The savings she 
made helped her to pay off a substantial chunk of her mortgage. Last Christmas 
she spent just £14.53 on a meal for six people, did a “presents amnesty” with 
the adults in her family and made toy cars to give as gifts to her nephews.

Similarly, this Christmas will see Boyle make a few useful gifts for close 
friends and family out of wood, but he has stopped buying gifts completely and 
never receives any shop-bought presents. “There isn’t anything I need, even 
though I am supposedly living below the poverty line,” he says.

Like many minimalists he now values time over money. “I think the best gift 
you can give someone is time, when you are genuinely fully present. Step off 
the treadmill of rushing around earning money to pay for stuff and you find 
life goes much slower. I have so much more time now to do the things I love 
doing – and not just at Christmas, but all year-round. I feel liberated,” Boyle 
says.

Szuszkiewicz feels the same way. “You experience this huge release and 
liberation from cultural norms when you stop spending, especially at Christmas. 
I used to feel obligated to spend money I didn’t have on gifts I didn’t know 
whether my family needed or wanted. Now, everyone knows my policy is to not buy 
any gifts, so I no longer feel that obligation and I enjoy Christmas much 
more,” he said.

He is generous with his time instead, and during his “buy nothing” year made 
batches of chocolate, dried fruit and pickled vegetables which he gave to 
friends and family. “Consumables are great because they get eaten – and then 
they’re gone.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ffrugal-christmas-people-stopped-shopping-minimalism-movement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0797d643ba9bc9a57c49a98814019b638de75417%2F105_384_2958_1775%2F2958.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dreaming%20of%20a%20frugal%20Christmas%3F%20Meet%20the%20people%20who%E2%80%99ve%20stopped%20shopping&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ffrugal-christmas-people-stopped-shopping-minimalism-movement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dreaming%20of%20a%20frugal%20Christmas%3F%20Meet%20the%20people%20who%E2%80%99ve%20stopped%20shopping&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ffrugal-christmas-people-stopped-shopping-minimalism-movement%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0797d643ba9bc9a57c49a98814019b638de75417%2F105_384_2958_1775%2F2958.jpg>
 Geoffrey Szuszkiewicz saved £24,000 during his no-spend year. Photograph: Cris 
Cerdeira 
Szuszkiewicz is currently using the £24,000 he saved over his no-spend year to 
travel around the world, and owns no possessions other than those he carries in 
his backpack. But he doesn’t want anything for Christmas.

“Physical things are literally a burden for me – and that’s not what Christmas 
means to me anymore. It’s about being with the people I love.”

He acknowledges that he makes a choice not to spend, rather than being forced 
into that position by circumstance. “But I think there’s nothing wrong with 
living this way, if you do have a choice. Why should you buy stuff that you 
don’t need to buy, just because you have more money to spend than other people?”

For people with children, the idea of an abstemious festive season might prove 
difficult. However, Sarah Koontz, a Christian writer from South Dakota who has 
two young children, says it teaches willpower. “Completing two no-spend 
Christmases taught me that it is OK to accept a gift from someone knowing that 
I cannot reciprocate, or that I’ve spent far less on them. Everyone is entitled 
to their own gift-giving strategy, and comparison is a trap I prefer to avoid,” 
she says.

She says that she has been called stingy – or even Scrooge – from time to 
time, but her convictions carried her through. “Our family is able to enjoy the 
traditions of Christmas more now that we have eliminated consumerism from the 
holiday. We still exchange small gifts, many of them homemade, but we have 
learned that true generosity requires more than a credit card. Spending less 
money on Christmas forced us to be generous with our time, energy, and talents. 
Those are the best gifts of all – because they are priceless.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ffrugal-christmas-people-stopped-shopping-minimalism-movement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0cef0249de3bf7c697d91eefe875dec731f8b1f7%2F0_0_800_480%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dreaming%20of%20a%20frugal%20Christmas%3F%20Meet%20the%20people%20who%E2%80%99ve%20stopped%20shopping&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ffrugal-christmas-people-stopped-shopping-minimalism-movement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dreaming%20of%20a%20frugal%20Christmas%3F%20Meet%20the%20people%20who%E2%80%99ve%20stopped%20shopping&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ffrugal-christmas-people-stopped-shopping-minimalism-movement%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0cef0249de3bf7c697d91eefe875dec731f8b1f7%2F0_0_800_480%2F800.jpg>
 Sarah and Ryan Koontz, with daughters Anya, left, and Nadia, right. 
Photograph: Kristi Foreman 
She is not alone in feeling this way. Sal Crosland, a 33-year-old holistic 
therapist from Huddersfield, writes the minimalist blog OneEmptyShelf.com. She 
has got rid of everything in her home she doesn’t need, and now focuses on 
giving experiences and making memories with her loved ones at Christmas.

“When I was doing my no-spend year and I thought back to past Christmases, I 
realised I couldn’t remember what I got, but I could remember where I was and 
who I was with,” she says. “Now, instead of stressing about buying presents, I 
place more importance on relaxation and family time and I look forward to 
Christmas much more.”

She always asks her family not to buy her anything for Christmas, and even 
when other people are given gifts in front of her she says she doesn’t feel 
like she is missing out. “I know it is my choice and my decision to opt out – 
and that makes all the difference.”

The act of cutting back on giving gifts at Christmas can be catching. Canadian 
blogger Cait Flanders went on a two-year-long shopping ban to try to pay off a 
Can$30,000 debt (£18,000), and in solidarity her family stopped exchanging 
gifts on Christmas Day. This year, even though the ban is over and the debt 
repaid, they have decided not to exchange gifts again. “It took so much 
pressure off everyone, and resulted in a much more meaningful holiday.”

Now she says that she would prefer to give someone a random gift on any other 
day of the year. “I hate feeling like I need to give gifts out of obligation.”

Regina Wong, founder of the Live Well With Less website, has similar 
motivations for reducing her spending at Christmas this year. “I have become 
uncomfortable with the highly commercial nature of Christmas and the general 
pressure and expectations of the season. I’m not against consumption – I’m just 
against mindless consumption, and consumption one can’t afford. I’ve realised I 
already have all I want or need.”

I couldn’t remember what I had got for Christmas in the past, but I could 
remember who I was with
Sal Crosland, holistic therapist 
MAKING THE CHANGE

■ Tell people in advance that you won’t be buying gifts. “When I explained why 
I wasn’t spending at Christmas, the general reaction was relief,” Geoffrey 
Szuszkiewicz says. “People respected and understood my decision. If anyone 
doesn’t understand your reasons for cutting back, and still wants you to buy 
them something, I would recommend re-evaluating that relationship.”

■ Don’t underestimate your skills or the value of a homemade gift, says Mark 
Boyle, especially one that celebrates what you think is wonderful about the 
person you are giving it to. “Every single person alive has got some sort of 
skill or hobby they can use to give someone a gift or an experience. And I 
think there’s a lot more heart and soul in something you make yourself for 
another person, especially if it is something unique and distinctive that you 
think that particular person will like and need.”

■Remember that your presence can be a present too. “A kid might want a 
computer at Christmas - but is that going to be the deepest longing of that 
kid’s heart?” Boyle says. “At another level, perhaps without even knowing how 
to articulate it, what that kid may really want is a deeper connection to his 
or her parents through quality time. Try to understand the person you are 
giving to, and what they long for, instead of feeding an addiction to 
consumerism.”
 