
Throw off your cares and woes! Banish all thoughts of the forthcoming 
TrumpoBrexalypse and rejoice! The greatest prophylactic against despair you 
could ever hope for has emerged: the Carringtons and the Colbys are back in 
town. Yes! Let your hearts swell as majestically as the theme music did during 
its nine-season pomp –Dynasty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/apr/26/your-next-box-set-dynasty>
 isbeing rebooted 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/live-feed/dynasty-reboot-works-at-cw-934334>.

Josh Schwartz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2005/jan/22/broadcasting.fashion> and 
Stephanie Savage <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm1335634/> are to executive produce 
it – as much, I hope, for Savage’s quintessentially 80s-style name as for their 
soapy bona fides as the creators of The OC – and it will be broadcast by the CW 
network. In view of how important this is to the gaiety of nations and the 
survival of our collective mental health, I offer a few tips on how not to ruin 
Dynasty.

Don’t overthink it


The Shapiros never did. Producer Aaron Spelling 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aaron_Spelling> never did. That’s how you end up 
with something as brilliant as a character called Dex Dexter, whose sole 
defining feature was that he always delivered his lines standing at a 45-degree 
angle to his scene partner.

The original creators simply licked a metaphorical finger, found which way the 
wind was blowing, added some diamond necklaces, horses and oil and went with 
it. And if they needed to change direction, they pushed someone down the 
stairs, or into a pond or massacred everyone at a wedding. If you thoughtGame 
of Thrones <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones> was the 
first to that, you’re too young to be reading this.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fdynasty-rebooted-how-not-to-ruin-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17e823243d16a3295a4026dc19310a561464e171%2F0_0_1587_2392%2F1587.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dynasty%20is%20being%20rebooted%3A%20here%E2%80%99s%20how%20not%20to%20ruin%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fdynasty-rebooted-how-not-to-ruin-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dynasty%20is%20being%20rebooted%3A%20here%E2%80%99s%20how%20not%20to%20ruin%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fdynasty-rebooted-how-not-to-ruin-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17e823243d16a3295a4026dc19310a561464e171%2F0_0_1587_2392%2F1587.jpg>
 Joan Collins’s Alexis earned the programme great acclaim. Photograph: 
Everett/Rex/Shutterstock 
Find your Joan Collins


Dynasty only took off after Collins arrived as Alexis (“Oh my God!” gasped 
Fallon, “That’s my mother!”), the world’s greatest – well, everything. Bitch, 
nemesis, businesswoman, style icon. Everything. (Apart from mother – sorry, 
Fallon.) Find someone who can do that. I’ll give you a hint – it’sJoan Collins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/joan-collins>. Get Joan Collins. She’s 
still working. She is still everything. Get Joan Collins.

Don’t mess with the iconography


Alexis’s makeup became Joan Collins’ makeup, which now has basically become 
Joan Collins <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/joan-collins>. So, you really 
do need her. I really cannot stress this enough.

If not, you’ll just have to paint her on to Leighton Meester 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm1015262/>, add a big hat and hope for the best. 
Good luck. It won’t work.

Write straight and play camp


Or vice versa. But take it seriously.

And take it to excess


We’re not here for nuance. Take everything too far. Especially the plot. We 
want lots of it. More than you could believe possible. Rule of thumb – do not 
let 20 minutes pass without someone being thrown from a horse, developing 
amnesia, finding themselves in a burning cabin or unconscious atop a mountain, 
or revealing themselves to be Blake’s illegitimate half son by his step cousin 
who is currently sleeping with the chauffeur and setting fire to log cabins in 
his spare time.

But, remember: excess does not mean detail. Make sure all heart transplants, 
births or bullet-removal operations are conducted with slightly less attention 
to physical and medical accuracy than is observed in thegorilla-brain switching 
scene in Young Frankenstein <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yH97lImrr0Q>.

Follow the Fallon Rule


Established when Pamela Sue Martin left at the end of season four, this rule 
states that if any actor wants to leave, let ’em. Apart from Joan Collins. 
Simply replace them with another actor without explanation. Martin came back as 
Emma Samms. Not one viewer cared.

Heather Locklear <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000181/>


Get her, too. Also, animatronic John Forsyth 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0001234/>. Then you’re golden.
 