
Bow down, good people of Soapland: it’s Peggy Mitchell’s manor this month and 
you’re just living in it. The most fabulous matriarchEastEnders has ever seen 
may have been a shadow of her former self when she arrived back in the Square, 
but she provided many a tear-jerking moment before she departed for good on 
Tuesday. Despite the sad circumstances of her return, Peggy was a breath of 
straight-talking fresh air. The cutting one-liners that made her so very Peggy 
were still there. “At last! A decent hairdo,” she said to Roxy, giving her the 
once-over. “Not like those rats’ tails you used to have.”

Babs calls time for the last time: farewell Peggy Mitchell, queen of EastEnders
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/17/farewell-peggy-mitchell-the-queen-of-eastenders-barbara-windsor>
Peggy’s eyes flashed with fear as the doctors told her the cancer had spread 
to her brain, but she remained proud. “Cancer’s not having the last word,” she 
told Phil, “I am.” For one second there was a glimpse of the old Peggy, about 
to slap cancer round the face, call it an old tart and tell it to “Get outta my 
pub!”

Only one woman had the power to reunite Mitchell brothers Phil and Grant (who 
let his one raised eyebrow do the talking as he made his comeback). And only 
one woman could bring a tear to the nation’s eyes as she was paraded round the 
Square on the back of a milkfloat crooning It’s Now Or Never. The fact that Dot 
rolled her eyes and gave her a lecture about growing old gracefully made that 
moment even more beautiful.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Feastenders-peggy-grant-mitchell-coronation-street-hollyoaks-emmerdale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18b68c24dae2356dc52eb81c347f87c9c420a7b3%2F0_34_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EastEnders%3A%20a%20look%20back%20at%20Peggy%20Mitchell%E2%80%99s%20last%20hurrah&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Feastenders-peggy-grant-mitchell-coronation-street-hollyoaks-emmerdale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EastEnders%3A%20a%20look%20back%20at%20Peggy%20Mitchell%E2%80%99s%20last%20hurrah&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Feastenders-peggy-grant-mitchell-coronation-street-hollyoaks-emmerdale%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18b68c24dae2356dc52eb81c347f87c9c420a7b3%2F0_34_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Bruv… Grant and Phil Mitchell. Photograph: Jack Barnes 
Arch-enemy Sharon planned one last supper, pretending that her 
ex-mother-in-law didn’t hate her, and even Shirl got involved on the 
cake-making front. “I’m noMary Berry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/01/mary-berry-wins-3-million-viewers-beating-panorama>
,” she lamented. Ain’t that the truth. Sharon fondly recalled the time she 
dared to order Peggy to get outtaher pub. “I told her if you don’t stop waving 
that polished finger in my face you’ll be picking those false eyelashes out of 
the ice bucket.” Yeah, yeah, Sharon. Photos or it didn’t happen.

A short history of death on EastEnders
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/may/18/every-eastenders-death-peggy-mitchell-barbara-windsor>
While all this was going on, EastEnders chanced a cheeky side story with Mick 
and Linda becoming embroiled in some kind of crazy wife-swapping escapade with 
Belinda and Neville. It was proper naughty 
pop-your-car-keys-in-the-fruit-bowl-and-I’ll-show-you-my-ice-dispenser stuff, 
with Mick ending up trapped in a hot tub next to Neville’s budgie smugglers, 
which is just the light reliefEastEnders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/eastenders> needed.

But the real star of the show was Peggy. Let’s not remember the old gal taking 
her own life rather than allowing cancer to get the final say (with the ghost 
of Pat Butcher alongside her). Instead, let’s remember her drifting down the 
Thames with Phil, admiring the city she loved so much to the sound of Moon 
River. No,you’ve got something in your mince pie.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Feastenders-peggy-grant-mitchell-coronation-street-hollyoaks-emmerdale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F223f3f3c2e3dfc11bc3c603b1cfc991ac407d625%2F0_45_2008_1205%2F2008.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EastEnders%3A%20a%20look%20back%20at%20Peggy%20Mitchell%E2%80%99s%20last%20hurrah&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Feastenders-peggy-grant-mitchell-coronation-street-hollyoaks-emmerdale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EastEnders%3A%20a%20look%20back%20at%20Peggy%20Mitchell%E2%80%99s%20last%20hurrah&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Feastenders-peggy-grant-mitchell-coronation-street-hollyoaks-emmerdale%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F223f3f3c2e3dfc11bc3c603b1cfc991ac407d625%2F0_45_2008_1205%2F2008.jpg>
 A night on the lash… Kate and Gail. Photograph: Andrew Boyce 
Over in Coronation Street, Gail was taking her first ever disco nap. The 
occasion? Carla’s hen do, which was a work of genius. The hens assembled 
brandishing Carla’s trademark. No, not a large Shiraz. They hit the town in 
long, dark, glossy wigs. Everything about that night was pure joy, from Carla 
belting out It’s Raining Men to Gail’s wonderment at being refreshed and on the 
loose in a nightclub. “This is what the Haçienda must have looked like,” she 
marvelled.

Soaps are the real beating heart of TV | Hannah Verdier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/11/soaps-tv-eastenders-emmerdale>
Of course no soap hen night would be complete without the gaggle mistaking a 
pair of policemen for strippers. “It was a very easy mistake to make,” argued 
ringleader Drunk Gail. “They were very muscular. For constables.”

Meanwhile, Nick’s stag was a barrel of laughs after he wrestled with the 
results of his latest brain scan. “I can’t control my emotions,” he admitted to 
David. “What happens if I walk down the aisle and I deck her?” Nick tried his 
best to get out of the wedding, but Carla’s powers of persuasion are strong. 
For someone whose default facial expression is “I’ve seen it all”, you’d think 
she’d know better than to tie the knot next week, whenBritain’s Got Talent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/britains-got-talent> airs every 
night, pushing Corrie into post-watershed ratings-chasing territory. Going by 
past evidence, a fresh episode of Corrie each evening means that someone’s 
bound to get killed/jilted/pushed under a tram at some point. Or, as that wise 
sage of the Street Sally said: “If this is the hen do, God help us on the 
wedding.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Feastenders-peggy-grant-mitchell-coronation-street-hollyoaks-emmerdale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ceffc3f9c6d034f43651d362b3de220cc7605c7%2F0_39_2008_1205%2F2008.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EastEnders%3A%20a%20look%20back%20at%20Peggy%20Mitchell%E2%80%99s%20last%20hurrah&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Feastenders-peggy-grant-mitchell-coronation-street-hollyoaks-emmerdale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EastEnders%3A%20a%20look%20back%20at%20Peggy%20Mitchell%E2%80%99s%20last%20hurrah&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Feastenders-peggy-grant-mitchell-coronation-street-hollyoaks-emmerdale%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ceffc3f9c6d034f43651d362b3de220cc7605c7%2F0_39_2008_1205%2F2008.jpg>
 Brain of Britain… Cain, Holly and Charity. Photograph: Andrew Boyce 
Meanwhile in Emmerdale, Cain was back to his evil best. Hood up and on the 
warpath, he set out to find out the identity of Belle Dingle’s mystery older 
man. Sadly, his brain didn’t match his brawn and poor Rakesh was on the 
receiving end of a case of mistaken identity. Well, if you’re going to falsely 
imprison someone, why not make it a lawyer? “He’s definitely a man who knows 
that being tied up in a shed all night is grounds for some serious suing,” said 
the ever-helpful Charity.

And how does Hollyoaks compete with the big guns of soap storylining? By 
carrying on being bonkers. Blushing bride Sienna gave her forbidden lust object 
Trevor the glad eye as she walked down the aisle with Ben; Cameron tried to 
drown Ste; and The Gloved Hand Killer’s waters broke. Add a dash of Mercedes on 
the rampage and it’s just another standard month in the sleepy ’Oaks suburb.
 