
Online retailer eBay <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ebay> paid just 
£1.1m in tax in the UK last year, despite telling US investors that Britain was 
its second largest market, generating revenues of $1.4bn (£1.1bn).

The company appears to have reduced its tax bill by using a corporate 
structure that routes advertising fees from hundreds of thousands of British 
sellers through an overseas company, according to UK filings.

The group’s main UK unit reported revenues of just £185m last year and tax of 
only £1.1m. Latest accounts foreBay (UK) Ltd 
<https://beta.companieshouse.gov.uk/company/03726028/filing-history/MzE1ODk5NTk3N2FkaXF6a2N4/document?format=pdf&download=0>
, which employs 372 staff, many of them at offices in Richmond, west London, 
confirm the British subsidiary does not receive a penny of the fees paid by UK 
sellers that advertise goods oneBay.co.uk <http://www.ebay.co.uk/>.

Instead, the UK company’s revenues come from “the provision of services to 
eBay International AG”, its Swiss parent company. This Bern-based firm, which 
also uses a branch office in Luxembourg, is at the heart of eBay’s most 
significant operations outside of the US. It holds the key to hundreds of 
millions of dollars in tax savings the online auction group enjoys each year.

Like Google, Apple and other hi-tech multinationals, eBay routes income from 
customers in many of its largest markets, including the UK, through a European 
sales hub located in a tax-friendly country. The income can then flow into 
further controversial tax structures that ultimately wipe huge sums off the 
group’s tax bills.


UK losing millions in VAT from non-EU sellers on Amazon and eBay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/01/uk-losing-millions-vat-non-eu-sellers-amazon-ebay>
Last year, the then British chancellor George Osborne introduced a new 
punitive tax, known as thediverted profits tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/29/googles-tax-deal-with-the-uk-key-questions-answered-chancellor-taxes>
, designed to target tech businesses artificially shifting UK revenues abroad. 
He said such practice had “abused the trust of the British people 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-britain-politics-osborne-tech-idUKKCN0HO15N20140929>
”.


It later emerged, however, that while some companies, such as Amazon and 
Facebook, said they would change their tax structures, others – including 
Google – have continued to book UK sales overseas.

Osborne targets overseas sellers on Amazon and eBay in VAT clampdown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/16/osborne-targets-overseas-sellers-on-amazon-and-ebay-in-vat-clampdown>
Last year’s accounts for Facebook’s main UK subsidiary have been filed with 
Companies House and are due to be released shortly. However, changes to the 
group’s British tax structure are not likely to be apparent from company 
filings until figures for 2016 are released next year. Figures for 2016 are 
expected to show a dramatic jump in revenues asincome from Facebook’s largest 
UK advertisers <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-35724308> started to be 
booked in the UK business for the first time. Some experts, however, have 
suggested there may not be a huge jump in Facebook’s UK taxesbecause of other 
factors <https://waitingfortax.com/2016/03/04/facebook-and-uk-corporation-tax/>.

Latest accounts from eBay (UK) Ltd, published on Friday, suggest the group 
believes its UK tax structure remains advantageous, despite Osborne’s supposed 
crackdown.

When asked by the Guardian whether it was in discussions with HMRC about the 
UK’s new diverted profits tax, eBay declined to comment. In a statement, it 
said: “In all countries and at all times, eBay is fully compliant with 
national, EU and international tax rules.”

The shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, said: “Yet again, it seems like another 
multinational company thinks it can play by different rules to the rest of us.

“The Tories have dragged their feet for years and voted against tough action 
to make it harder for firms to avoid UK tax. It’s time they followed Labour’s 
lead and started taking corporate tax avoidance seriously.”

In its annual report, the US parent company eBay Inc confirms that certain 
subsidiaries have secured favourable tax rulings from authorities in Luxembourg 
and Switzerland. This effectively approves the group’s controversial European 
tax structure.

“We benefit from tax rulings concluded in several different jurisdictions, 
most significantly Switzerland and Luxembourg,” eBay Inc explained in the small 
print of itsannual report 
<https://investors.ebayinc.com/sec.cfm?DocType=Annual&Year=&FormatFilter=>. 
“These rulings provide for significantly lower rates of taxation on certain 
classes of income and require various thresholds of investment and employment 
in those jurisdictions.”

As a result of these arrangements, the group said it made tax savings of $319m 
last year, and $986m over the last three years. eBay Inc enjoyed an effective 
tax rate for 2015 of 19%, well below headline rates in its three largest 
markets: the US, UK and Germany.


eBay Inc confirms in its annual report that some tax authorities have called 
some of its arrangements into question, and that the years 2003 to 2012 remain 
under scrutiny. Further tax audits are possible in several major markets 
including the US, UK, Germany and Korea, it said.

Accounts for eBay (UK) Ltd show revenues for 2015 down 2% at £185m, and pretax 
profits down almost 9% at £8.1m. The tax charge for the year was £1.07m, not 
all of which was due in the UK because the company is active elsewhere in 
Europe and in Australia.


eBay (UK) Ltd is not the only British company within the eBay group. Another 
UK unit is Gumtree.com Ltd, the free-to-advertise online marketplace. It 
reportedpretax profits of £20.2m 
<https://beta.companieshouse.gov.uk/company/03934849/filing-history/MzE1ODQzMzM0MGFkaXF6a2N4/document?format=pdf&download=0>
 on sales of £58.7m last year, and tax of £4m.

eBay also owns the music and sports ticket-trading website Stubhub.co.uk 
<http://www.stubhub.co.uk/about-us/>, but this UK-facing web business is run by 
eBay International AG. eBay also owned the payment processing business PayPal 
until it was de-merged in July last year.
 