
For most of its short life, the European Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank> fretted about 
inflation being too high. Now it has the opposite concern.

The fear of deflation explains the package of measures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/10/how-european-central-bank-ecb-trying-revive-eurozone>
 announced by Mario Draghi on Thursday. Three months ago, the ECB president 
disappointed the markets by coming up with less stimulus than he had led them 
to expect. This time there were no half measures.

The ECB sets three interest rates and it cut all of them. The central bank has 
been buying bonds in return for cash at a rate of €60bn (£47bn) a month, but 
will now up the purchases to €80bn a month for at least a year, and probably 
longer. It launched a scheme on Thursday under which commercial banks would be 
paid for borrowing money provided they re-cycle the funds to the private sector 
in the form of loans to households and companies.

And still it wasn’t enough to slake the insatiable thirst of the financial 
markets for more and more stimulus. The euro initially fell on the foreign 
exchanges but then rose when Draghi said the ECB did not anticipate the need 
for any further cuts in interest rates.

Markets volatile after ECB cuts interest rates and boosts QE - business live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/mar/10/ecb-stimulus-measures-mario-draghi-negative-rates-qe-business-live>
There is certainly a need for bolstering demand in the eurozone. Since 
December, the ECB has revised down its 2016 growth projection for thesingle 
currency bloc from 1.7% to 1.4%, but the really big change has been to its 
forecast for inflation. Three months ago, it was expecting the eurozone cost of 
living to go up by 1% this year: it is now pencilling in an increase of 0.1%.

Draghi’s plan is to make money plentiful and to make it cheap, yet the 
eurozone’s problem is not a lack of credit supply, which is at a five-year 
high, but the weakness of demand for loans even at historically low interest 
rates.There are limits to what central banks can do 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/11/golden-age-central-banks-end-time-tax-and-spend>
 and the ECB is rapidly approaching them.

Draghi knows that monetary policy – interest rates, quantitative easing and 
incentives to borrow – can only do so much. He would like his actions to be 
supported by structural reform and a more aggressive use of fiscal policy. 
Catherine Mann, chief economist at the Organisation for Economic Cooperation 
and Development, thinks the same. She believes the ECB is carrying too much of 
the burden for stimulating the eurozone economy – and she is absolutely right.

Higher government spending would help increase growth and persuade businesses 
and households to snap up the low-cost loans on offer. UntilEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> has a more sensible approach to 
fiscal policy, all the pressure will fall on Draghi. But the ECB can’t solve 
all the eurozone’s problems. It can buy time but not much more.
 