
Mario Draghi, president of the European Central Bank, has announced that he 
will pump €1.1tn at a rate of €60bn (£46bn) a month into financial markets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2015/jan/22/davos-2015-day-2-qe-ecb-lagarde-draghi-merkel-live>
 until September 2016, in an attempt to prevent the fragile eurozone economy 
from grinding to a halt.

In a keenly anticipated announcement at the ECB’s headquarters in Frankfurt, 
Draghi said the operation would continue, “until we see a sustained adjustment 
in the path of inflation”.

What the experts say about the ECB's latest round of QE
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/22/what-the-experts-say-about-the-eus-latest-round-of-quantitative-easing>
By buying eurozone governments’ bonds using electronically created money – 
so-called quantitative easing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/22/what-is-quantitative-easing> 
– the ECB hopes to shore up confidence, boost inflation, and drive down the 
value of the euro on foreign exchanges, helping to boost exports and kickstart 
growth. The €60bn a month figure includes the purchases of private sector 
assets that the ECB had already begun to try to unlock credit markets.

Draghi said the decision on the ECB’s governing council was made with “so 
large a majority that no vote was necessary”.

The launch of QE is likely to infuriate Berlin, which views it as akin to a 
bailout for free-spending governments such asGreece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece>. However, with average prices 
already falling across the eurozone, the ECB wants to avoid the threat of a 
deflationary spiral, in which consumers and businesses slash spending while 
they wait for prices to fall further, dragging the economy into a slump.

“While the sharp fall in oil prices over recent months remains the dominant 
factor driving current headline inflation, the potential for second-round 
effects on wage and price-setting has increased and could adversely affect 
medium-term price developments,” Draghi said.

What is quantitative easing?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/22/what-is-quantitative-easing> 
In a concession to the Germans, Draghi promised that national central banks 
would bear most of the risk of their governments defaulting, with just 20% of 
the new bond-purchases subject to “risk-sharing”. In an aside that will be 
heard loud and clear in Athens, Draghi also warned that, “some additional 
eligibility criteria will be applied in the case of countries under an EU/IMF 
adjustment programme”. That could allow the ECB to exclude Greek bonds from QE 
if, for example, a future Syriza government ditched the austerity programme 
imposed by its creditors.

Draghi has promised to do “whatever it takes” to safeguard the single 
currency, and has repeatedly signalled in recent months that with eurozone 
inflation slipping well below the ECB’s 2% target, he felt more action was 
necessary. However, he stressed that QE alone would not repair the eurozone 
economy, and reforms by member-country governments would also be necessary.

“What monetary policy can do is to create the basis for growth, but for growth 
to pick up you need investment, for investment you need confidence, and for 
confidence you need structural reforms”. He urged governments urgently 
implement reforms, saying, “the more they do, the more effective our monetary 
policy will be.”

The ECB had already announced, in a statement earlier on Thursday, that it 
would leave its main interest rate unchanged at 0.05%.
 