
The European Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank> brought respite to 
volatile financial markets after indicating it is ready to inject fresh 
stimulus into the eurozone as soon as March.


The ECB left interest rates on hold at its latest policy meeting but its 
president,Mario Draghi <https://www.theguardian.com/business/mario-draghi>, 
acknowledged growing uncertainty about the economic outlook as he said the 
central bank would review its policy in March – sooner than many investors had 
been expecting.


London’s bluechip FTSE 100 index rebounded from a three-year low on Draghi’s 
remarks, which followed assurances from his Bank of England counterpart, Mark 
Carney, this week thatUK interest rates would stay at their record low 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/19/bank-of-england-mark-carney-rules-out-uk-interest-rate-rise>
 amid turmoil on global markets and signs that the domestic economy had 
softened.

The FTSE <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ftse> 100 closed up 100 points, 
or 1.8%, at 5,773.8 but it is still down more than 7% from the start of the 
year having sold off with other leading bourses around the world on worries 
over global growth and China’s downturn.

The pan-European FTSEurofirst 300 index closed up 2%. On Wall Street, the Dow 
Jones industrial average was up 1.2% and the S&P 500 was up 0.8% at the time of 
the London close.

Stock market rally peters out amid continued turmoil
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/21/asia-pacific-bounce-back-as-china-tries-to-ease-new-year-holiday-cash-squeeze>
In December, the ECB expanded its quantitative easing programme - where the 
bank pumps money into the financial system by acquiring bonds – and trimmed a 
deposit rate paid on reserves held at the central bank.

But the action was deemed too modest by market players at the time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/03/ecb-launches-new-stimulus-package-eurozone>
. Many had been expecting more aggressive moves following signals from Draghi 
that he was serious about lifting eurozone inflation out of the doldrums.

Referring to a tumultuous start to the year on global markets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/20/ftse-100-heads-closer-to-bear-market-amid-sharp-global-falls>
, which has seen trillions of dollars wiped off the value of world shares and a 
40% drop in oil prices since the last ECB policy meeting, Draghi used a news 
conference on Thursday to defend December’s moves as entirely appropriate at 
the time.

He told reporters: “As we start the new year, downside risks have increased 
again amid heightened uncertainty about emerging market economies’ growth 
prospects, volatility in financial and commodity markets and geopolitical 
risks.”

“It will therefore be necessary to review and possibly reconsider our monetary 
policy stance at our next meeting in early March.”


By every meaningful measure, today's elites are gods. This should make us 
angry | Jeff Sparrow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/21/by-every-meaningful-measure-todays-elites-are-gods-this-should-make-us-angry>
On currency markets, the euro weakened to a two-week low against the dollar on 
the prospect of more monetary policy easing from the ECB as soon as March. 
Draghi’s comments also moved oil prices: Brent crude was up more than 6% from 
the previous session at $29.60 per barrel.

The price had fallen below $28 this week  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/18/oil-price-dips-below-28-to-13-year-low-as-markets-brace-for-iranian-supply>
as worries about oversupply intensified on the prospect of fresh supply from 
Iran after the lifting of sanctions last week. Analysts cautioned that Draghi’s 
words had soothed markets for now, but they would need to be followed with real 
action.

“ECB president Draghi once again saw the equity markets confirm his ‘super’ 
status as they jumped almost as soon as he started his speech,” said Alastair 
McCaig, analyst at online trading company IG.

“All in all, it was very impressive, especially when you consider he didn’t 
actually promise anything, but he was convincing enough to get JPMorgan, RBS 
and Barclays to bring forward their calls for further easing from June to 
March.”

Ranko Berich, head of market analysis at the foreign exchange company Monex 
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, said any euphoria on 
the back of promises of central bank action may prove to be fleeting and that 
it remained unclear if the ECB was willing to commit to the sort of “massive, 
unconditional and open-ended QE programmes” seen from the Bank of Japan and the 
US Federal Reserve.

“As commodity prices fall and base effects from the euro fade, deflation will 
again threaten the eurozone and inflation expectations could begin to fall 
apart. If this is how 2016 plays out, vague promises will no longer be enough 
to keep the economy on track and the ECB will be forced to put its money where 
Draghi’s mouth is,” Berich said.



 