
The European Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank> is under growing 
pressure to step up support for the eurozone’s flagging economy after the bloc 
slipped back into negative inflation in February.

The surprise drop in prices marked the third time in a year that inflation has 
turned negative, fanning fears that the eurozone is headed for all-out 
deflation – a sustained period of falling prices. The news cemented market 
expectations that the ECB would use its meeting next week to inject fresh cash 
into the single currency bloc and to cut a key interest rate further into
negative territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/18/negative-interest-rates-what-you-need-to-know>
.

Central bankers on the defensive as weird policy becomes even weirder
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2016/feb/21/central-bankers-on-the-defensive-as-weird-policy-becomes-even-weirder>
Headline inflation dropped to -0.2% in February, down from 0.3% in January, 
according to an early estimate from statistics office Eurostat. That contrasted 
with forecasts for a reading of zero in a Reuters poll of economists.

Low energy prices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/18/oil-price-dips-below-28-to-13-year-low-as-markets-brace-for-iranian-supply>
 were the main factor behind the drop, but price pressures in other areas of 
the economy played a part. There was also a drop in core inflation – taken as a 
guide to underlying price – adding to signs that low inflation was becoming 
more entrenched as eurozone economies battled with sluggish global demand from 
a fresh slowdown and the lingering impact of the last financial crisis.

Core inflation, which excludes the more volatile prices of unprocessed food 
and energy, fell more than expected to 0.8% from 1% in January and was its 
lowest since April last year.

Economists said the inflation numbers raised questions over the firepower of 
central banks to revive growth and prices.Deflation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/deflation> concerns central bank 
policymakers because it can lead to consumers delaying spending in the 
anticipation of good becoming cheaper, creating a cycle of diminishing demand 
that hits economic growth.

This year will be the fourth year of inflation undershooting the ECB’s target 
of close to 2%, said Anatoli Annenkov, economist at French banking group 
Société Générale. There were no limits to the ECB’s willingness “but clear 
limits to its effectiveness”, he said. “Despite its best efforts, the ECB’s 
challenge to break the backbone of lowflation remains a tall order. Looking set 
to miss its target for a fourth year this year, we expect it to miss it for 
another four years, at least, without the help of more substantial economic 
reform. That won’t stop the ECB from doing what it must according to its 
self-imposed target, but with markets increasingly unconvinced, we are 
approaching the ‘effective’ limit of the ECB’s tools.”

The inflation figures follow warnings from the IMF 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/imf> and the OECD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/oecd> that governments cannot rely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/24/imf-urges-uk-to-ease-austerity-should-economy-slow-further>
 on low interest rates and money-printing programmes to shore up growth. A 
weekend meeting of finance ministers and central bank chiefs from the G20 group 
of countries ended with a similar statement that “monetary policy alone cannot 
lead to balanced growth”. But the policymakers failed to come up with a 
concrete plan of how they might revive a sluggish world economy.

The Bank of England governor, Mark Carney, used his speech at the Shanghai 
meeting to insistcentral bankers still had ammunition left 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/26/bank-of-england-chief-accuses-g20-of-failing-to-enact-reforms-to-boost-growth>
 to boost growth. But he too argued for more help from governments.


This week marks seven years of UK interest rates at a record low of 0.5% and 
Carney has hinted that he isprepared to cut the base rate further 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/23/bank-of-england-could-cut-interest-rates-to-zero-but-not-below-says-mark-carney>
 but has ruled out following the trend seen in other countries for negative 
rates, where depositors are effectively charged for parking their money. The
Bank of Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/29/bank-of-japan-shocks-markets-by-adopting-negative-interest-rates>
 recently joined the ECB, the Danish central bank, the Swedish Riksbank and the 
Swiss National Bank in cutting rates to below zero to rescue their economies 
from deflation and the prospect of recession.

The US Federal Reserve <https://www.theguardian.com/business/federal-reserve> 
raised interest ratesin December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/06/federal-reserve-interest-rate-hike-close-call-minutes>
, amid signs of a strongly growing US economy. But a string of poor economic 
figures since then raised doubts about any future rate-rises and even prompted 
some economists to speculate the move could be reversed.

The ECB meets again next week to decide its next move and its chief, Mario 
Draghi, has already indicated the central bank will announce moves to inject
fresh stimulus into the eurozone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/21/ecb-interest-rate-hold-steadies-markets>
. Economists expect the Frankfurt-based body to expand itsquantitative easing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/22/what-is-quantitative-easing> 
programme – where it pumps money into the economy by buying up assets from 
financial institutions – and to further cut its deposit rate by 10 basis points 
to -0.4%. Another reduction in the deposit rate means it would be charging 
banks more to hold their money overnight.


The weak core inflation figure “pretty much seals the deal on additional 
monetary easing” at next week’s meeting, said Teunis Brosens at ING bank. “The 
weakening of core inflation shows the real and present danger that cheap oil 
will cause low inflation to become ingrained in eurozone price and wage 
dynamics. This is especially bad for debt-laden households, businesses and 
governments in SouthernEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, 
which will have little scope to ‘inflate away’ their debt burden by increasing 
nominal wages,” Brosens said.
 