
At the age of 11 I was an angry boy who earned unpopularity through assiduous 
selfishness and hostility. At that time I was at a boarding school in Kent, 
surrounded by rich, fecund forest. It proved my saviour in several different 
ways.

 The first was literal. The forest was my protection from occasional hordes of 
other boys who decided to pick on me. Because I was nimble, I would leg it into 
the forest and conceal myself by hiding under piles of leaves or in bushes. I 
would lie completely still and in between the cries of the chasing pack, listen 
to the sounds of the wood. The forest wrapped me up and hid me.

 But during the spring and summer terms it was also a place where I could feel 
pleasure in solitude and through which I was able to become elevated beyond my 
unhappy terrestrial life. I would head off to the edges of the estate in which 
the school was located and climb to the top of some very tall trees. From that 
position of sovereignty, I could relax. I gazed out across the countryside, 
above, as well as within it.

It was slightly scary to be so high up. I was aware that a fall would be 
fatal. But it made me feel safe from the teachers, with whom I refused to 
collaborate, and the other boys, who quite understandably, wanted revenge for 
my atrocities. It is interesting that such a seemingly uncivilised boy could 
have felt such a strong sense of the beauty surrounding him when at the top of 
those trees. It was an intensely aesthetic experience; the shapes of the tree 
trunks intrigued me, the sharp greens of the leaves soothed, the sunlight 
refracting through in uneven flashes. The mosses growing at the base felt cosy, 
the bark’s springy sponginess felt lithe in my hand.

Later on, as a 14-year-old being educated at an all-boys school I was shipped 
off for a week in the summer holidays on a camping adventure with other 
teenagers. Much to our surprise, the organisers announced that we had to take 
ourselves off for 24 hours. We were given a few shillings (it was 1968) and 
told to take our sleeping bags and a tin for cooking in, but not our tents. We 
were not to return until lunchtime the next day (this was before the era of 
health and safety).

The experience of having to fend for ourselves certainly created a solidarity. 
The strongest memory I have is of successfully starting a fire by rubbing 
sticks together, enabling us to cook some baked beans. The power of night also 
stays with me: we had to find somewhere to sleep (a barn did the trick), but 
above all, it gave me an unprecedented awareness of the simple fact that night 
and day are profound, inescapable realities.


Ecotherapy encompasses a wide variety of interventions, whether they be 
prolonged periods in wilderness, gardening or individual therapy. They are all 
united by the concept that exposure to nature will improve wellbeing and 
healthy living. Reviews of the evidencesuggest that it can 
<http://wilderdom.com/adventuretherapy/AdventureTherapyBenchmarkingOutcomes.html>
, but what is the theory behind it? Why should immersion in greenery (even if 
only a municipal park) or huge landscapes (mountains, the sea, deserted 
regions) reduce depression, delinquency, addiction and other problems?

 Many ecotherapeutic interventions entail group activities like my camping 
trip. Wilderness programmes (often misrepresented as boot camps) are created 
for troubled teenagers, such as the delinquent, the drug-addicted and the 
depressed. They can consists of as much as eight weeks of living in small 
groups in remote regions.

A significant part of their effect is achieved by forcing the client to 
concentrate on survival and the need to cooperate with others in order to do 
so. The sense of isolation and the absence of now common modern methods for 
self-stimulation, such as the internet and substance abuse, are also believed 
to help the client to detoxify from established bad patterns.

But nature is also shown to be independently important. The egocentricity of 
clients is often reduced by awareness of something much bigger than them, 
whether it be mountains, wide open plains or huge skies. The feeling that the 
client is the centre of the universe is called into question by the sheer scale 
and complexity of nature. For many clients, hell has been other people in their 
normal lives. The solitude and lack of pressure to satisfy the demands of peers 
and family lead to significant improvements in such self-attributes as esteem, 
efficacy and control.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fjun%2F17%2Fecotherapy-how-outdoors-improve-mental-health-parks-wilderness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F17%2F1402996808717%2F2a3180b1-4e66-497c-8d03-27f369f66df8-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ecotherapy%3A%20how%20does%20the%20great%20outdoors%20improve%20mental%20health%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fjun%2F17%2Fecotherapy-how-outdoors-improve-mental-health-parks-wilderness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ecotherapy%3A%20how%20does%20the%20great%20outdoors%20improve%20mental%20health%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fjun%2F17%2Fecotherapy-how-outdoors-improve-mental-health-parks-wilderness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F17%2F1402996808717%2F2a3180b1-4e66-497c-8d03-27f369f66df8-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Many people gain a new perspective when out in the wilderness. Photograph: 
Alamy 
 There are many reports of clients of all ages having spiritual experiences as 
a result of exposure to wilderness. They report a deep sense of connection to 
all things. A heightened awareness of plants, animals and landscape leads them 
to ponder existence beyond themselves. The power of nature encourages a sense 
of higher powers and of connection both to self and to others.


Accessing the inner child


 Why would nature have this benign effect? A valuable theory was offered by a 
leading figure in this field, Michael Cohen founder and co-ordinator of the
American Project NatureConnect (pdf) 
<http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED374387.pdf>. He maintains that nature 
offers a different civilisation from that of human culture. Earth offers a 
wisdom, joy and beauty that excludes pollution, war and insanity. Nature is 
willing to share its magic and secrets with anyone, anywhere, any time. He 
writes that, "the natural world produces no garbage. On a macro level, 
everything is valued, nothing is discarded or unwanted and that defines 
unconditional love in action … we, as part of life, inherit the natural world’s 
integrity as our inner nature, a profound globally shared creation blueprint 
which too often we, demeaningly, call 'the little child within us’."

 Cohen contrasts modern techno-logic with bio-logic. Bio-logic, he argues, 
uses our multisensory ways of knowing and being for harmonious survival. 
Techno-logic employs words and stories that exclude our natural sensory wisdom. 
Our intellects, it seems, dislocate us from natural senses and feelings, like 
nurturing, place, curiosity, hunger, motion, trust, empathy, sound, compassion 
and reason. By characterising these as morality or suchlike, we are separated 
from their truth, they become a story. To experience them truly we have to 
realise these traits are solely of, by and from the natural world (one might 
argue that conventional education is an exercise in such dislocation).

 Cohen gives an example of men able to access their natural senses. "In 
Scotland, farmers were overturning their hay bales to exterminate rats living 
beneath them. A trio of rats tried to flee but, unlike the other fleeing rats, 
these three stayed closely together which limited their ability to escape." The 
farmers saw that one of the rats was blind and the others were guiding it to 
safety. Deeply moved, the farmers did not kill them. Sufficiently in tune with 
their inner nature, their socialised farming selves were overridden.

 Cohen maintains that our conditioning makes us use words, symbols and images 
to represent our natural sensory world. The representation of nature becomes 
more immediate and real to us than the direct sensing of it. I remember an 
episode in my early 20s which exemplifies this. From my birth onwards I visited 
a beach with a beautiful view in north Cornwall. I can still recall the smell 
of the air, the sound of the seagulls, the feel of the hot sand underneath my 
feet as a child. But whilst at university, I noticed something awful. I would 
find it impossible to stand on that beach without trying to equate it with a 
moment or scene from a fiction – a film, a novel, a poem. I distinctly recall 
trying to force myself to stop doing that and the desperation I felt at my 
inability to experience this place again in its raw beauty, without having to 
put it into words or to experience it as analogous to a fiction.

Cohen offers a number of simple and practical techniques (in the paper linked 
to above) that anyone can employ to stimulate what he calls our "old-brain", 
the unpasteurized natural experience of nature. They overlap neatly with the 
current vogue for mindfulness which increases awareness of your bodily states 
through meditation; our bodies are part of nature, our minds can disconnect us 
from our bodies and from nature.

Perspective and limits


It is important to recognise the limits of what exposure to nature can 
achieve. Telling someone who is depressed to go and smell flowers or immerse 
themselves in beautiful landscapes is unlikely to work on its own. If that 
person is a single mother with a six-month-old baby and a landlord chasing her 
rent, her depression might just turn into aggression at such a suggestion. 
Likewise, if she is depressed because her father belittled her from an early 
age.


The fundamental causes of emotional distress are psychosocial (and not genetic 
–it was recently admitted by our leading gene psychologist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/feb/18/psychologist-robert-plomin-says-genes-crucial-education>
 that he can’t find any genes to explain mental illness). However, it is also 
true that we are twice as likely to be emotionally distressed if we are urban 
rather than rural (and four times more likely to suffer schizophrenia). Part of 
the reason for this is estrangement caused by lack of exposure to natural 
sights, sounds and smells, to dislocation from the natural rythms of the 
seasons, of night from day.

Ecotherapies work because they reconnect us with nature; its external reality 
but most fundamentally, our inner natures.

Oliver James’s book Love Bombing – Rest Your Child’s Emotional Thermostat 
(Karnac) offers a simple ecotherapeutic technique for restoring balance in 
relationships between children and parents.

Interested in finding out more about how you can live better 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/live-better>? Take a look at this 
month's Live Better Challenge here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/mar/26/welcome-to-the-live-better-challenge>
.

The Live Better Challenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/live-better> is funded by Unilever; 
its focus is sustainable living. All content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled advertisement feature. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 