
At last, the troubled question of how much central bank independence is 
desirable receives sensible political analysis.

Ed Balls, Strictly speaking, isn’t a politician these days. But the former 
shadow chancellor knows a thing or two about such matters, having been an 
architect of the Bank of England’s independence in 1997, andhis nuanced take 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/17/ed-balls-bank-of-england-strictly-come-dancing>
 puts the crude populism of the likes of Michael Gove and William Hague to 
shame.

Unlike them, Balls acknowledges the bleedin’ obvious: that the Bank did a 
decent job of preventing the post-banking crisis recession turning into a 
depression. That record is why, incidentally, the Bank’s governor, Mark Carney, 
is entitled to grumble about politicians engaging in a “massive 
blame-deflection exercise”.

Monetary activism was endorsed by the government of the day. If politicians 
don’t like the “bad side effects”, as Theresa May calls them, of low interest 
rates, they are allowed to take off-setting measures. They use taxation to 
address inequality; or they could do pension funds a favour by addressing the 
distortions caused by the mad system for calculating deficits.

But Balls is correct to say that the Bank has accumulated massive powers since 
the crisis and that its actions now routinely take it into territory 
traditionally regarded as political. Only this week, for example, Threadneedle 
Street gained the right, more or less, to close down the buy-to-let lending 
market if it spies risks in the system.

That notion would have been regarded as far-fetched back in 1997. It flowed 
from George Osborne’s action in 2010 to return full responsibility for 
financial stability to the Bank. Theadneedle Street, arguably, is now more 
powerful than at any time in its 300-year history. Has political accountability 
kept pace? Probably not, which is Balls’ point.

His big idea is that an extra layer of oversight is required – “a systemic 
risk body chaired by the chancellor” to oversee the whole system. The fine 
details probably require some work but the idea is worth debating: the Bank 
would still have operational independence to set interest rates but the 
government would keep a closer eye on the mandate.

A useful side effect might be an end to the sillier Bank-bashing. Hague, for 
example, jumped straight from his dislike of low interest rates toissuing an 
apocalyptic warning 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/10/17/central-bankers-have-collectively-lost-the-plot-they-must-raise/>
 that unless central banks changed course “the era of their much-vaunted 
independence will come, possibly quite dramatically, to its end”.

Let’s hope not: central bank independence has served the UK well. But there is 
a fair argument that independence is best protected by ensuring the Bank’s 
enormous powers have greater checks and balances. Give Balls’ idea 7 out of 10: 
needs more polish, but an engaging contribution.

EDF’s home troubles don’t instil confidence

In EDF we trust, said the government in effect when it gave a thumbs-up to 
Hinkley Point C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/15/hinkley-point-c-nuclear-power-station-gets-go-ahead>
, the nuclear plant that will supposedly one day supply 7% of our electricity. 
But have ministers had a look at the current chaos in EDF’s home market of 
France?

EDF has issued two profit warnings in three months, prompted by an order by 
the French nuclear safety regulator that tests be conducted on 18 of the 
company’s 58 reactors. Some of those reactors have returned to service but not 
enough for EDF to meet its output targets. Thus French power prices have 
soared. Power has even been flowing to France from the UK through the giant 
interconnector at times. The direction, set by where wholesale prices are 
higher, is normally the other way.

That is one reason why the UK wholesale price of electricity for this winter 
is massively higher than the forward price for next winter – about £80 a 
megawatt hour versus £50. There is no reason to doubt National Grid’s assurance 
that supplies are sufficient for this winter, but the price signal is 
unmistakable: the market is nervous.

As Peter Atherton of energy consultant Cornwall explains it, the UK system is 
traditionally designed to cope with eight or nine things going wrong 
simultaneously, but three or four might be tricky today. “We are now seeing a 
significant risk premium in the wholesale price as reserve margins have got 
tighter,” he says. “It hasn’t happened in the past but it is happening now.”

Not all the blame for the spike in UK wholesale prices can be laid at EDF’s 
door. And maybe all its French reactors will be signed off as safe in the new 
year. But one worry about Hinkley is more acute than ever: EDF looks 
over-stretched at home and in no position to attempt a big UK adventure.
 