
Eddie Jones landed in his homeland in positively chatty mood, so enthused by 
his return that he converted thebag-search he was subjected to 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/02/eddie-jones-arrives-in-australia-expecting-coordinated-attack-on-england>
 at immigration into a sort of welcome-home mat. Prickly, but good for cleaning 
the dust from his shoes. Australian customs probably did well, given the 
effervescence of their prodigal, not to strip-search him and give him a rabies 
jab.

Eddie seems to have a personal formula: the more volubly he lays down his 
challenges to his England players, the better they play. He wanted them to play 
with mongrel snap; they played with gleeful cruelty in the Six Nations. He 
wanted them to be able to express themselves; the finishing power of the 
three-quarters suggests that the entire side are heading for places never 
before visited by English rugby.

Eddie Jones airport bag search the latest case of trouble in transit | Simon 
Burnton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/03/eddie-jones-airport-bag-search-transit>
David Duckham – with apologies to those of you too young to remember – must 
look at the ball going the way of Anthony Watson and muse wistfully on what 
might have been had such a supply once come his way. Jack Nowell may share the 
same thought, but his turn will come. Duckham’s presumably won’t but the former 
England great – and greatly underserved – will also admire the way Watson 
evades traffic in even the tightest of spaces. He is a spearhead, although it 
is not perhaps the right description for a wing carrying the game at a zigzag 
into a dimension beyond contact.

No wonder his coach is chatty. He has to keep up the banter and lay down the 
challenges or the project may falter. For the good of his larynx it may come as 
a relief if Australia pinch a game in the three-match series. Eddie, you know 
it’s good to see you again and all that, but take a break, mate; you’ve got the 
verbal trots.

Perhaps he is just happy to have a good team. And a deep team. The way 
Courtney Lawes and Joe Launchbury combined in the second rowagainst Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/29/england-wales-international-match-report>
 made a mockery of the notion that Maro Itoje and George Kruis are now head and 
shoulders above the rest. The returning duo did not play with the furrowed brow 
and wild stare of the dispossessed but with the open-eyed brightness of players 
at ease with the environment and the coach’s requirements. You’re fed up, Eddie 
would have said. Show me what you’re going to do about it. And they did.

There was understandably less initial togetherness in the back row, where Jack 
Clifford, James Haskell and Teimana Harrison came together for the first time. 
They took a little time to settle into the swing of things. Thank goodness, you 
can hear whole generations of players say. It’s not supposed to be easy – 
international rugby in general and England-Wales in particular.

Clifford had a little bit of luck for his try. Either that or Dan Cole has 
recalibrated himself as a finely honed reading instrument, one programmed never 
to do wrong again – not even a tiddler of a knock-on. Under Eddie anything is 
possible. Anyway, once in possession of the scrap from the hand of Dan, the No8 
set off at a speed that probably won’t make Scott Williams’s show reel. In the 
Wales centre’s defence, he is not exactly a slouch, but Clifford’s pace would 
have made him wince. If there is a visible improvement in England since the 
World Cup, it seems to be in their velocity – off the mark, and over two 
furlongs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Feddie-jones-england-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0eeccd3e026b1c6a52d86f4d2cb02630f36721bb%2F0_173_3798_2278%2F3798.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eddie%20Jones%20returns%20for%20Australia%20tour%20with%20England%E2%80%99s%20sights%20raised%20%7C%20Eddie%20Butler&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Feddie-jones-england-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eddie%20Jones%20returns%20for%20Australia%20tour%20with%20England%E2%80%99s%20sights%20raised%20%7C%20Eddie%20Butler&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Feddie-jones-england-australia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0eeccd3e026b1c6a52d86f4d2cb02630f36721bb%2F0_173_3798_2278%2F3798.jpg>
 Teimana Harrison’s display against Wales has reopened debate on the role of 
Chris Robshaw. Photograph: David Rogers - RFU/The RFU Collection via Getty Ima 
Harrison had an excellent second half. He looked big and industrious and yet 
somehow unseen – the way a 6 should be. The only problem is that it will reopen 
the debate on the role of Chris Robshaw, who does no wrong yet garners no 
praise. The obvious fix is an outstanding performance by the former England 
captain, who presumably will be in the team to face Australia in Saturday’s 
first Test in Brisbane.

Or will Harrison be given another go? Has the coach in his outpourings given 
any hints? Not yet but his week will worth listening to with interest and it’s 
not often you can say that about media briefings. Hasn’t Eddie been good value 
in the travelling theatre that does the rounds in the buildup to big games? He 
was always good, but he’s playing a blinder at the moment.

England, Ireland and Wales prepare for telling tours | The Breakdown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/02/wales-england-ireland-tours> 
Can he pull it off against Michael Cheika, his old team-mate at Randwick in 
Sydney? Almost as if by prior arrangement, the new coach of Australia has let 
the old one have all the say, promising in a quaintly old-fashioned way that 
the Australia players would do all the talking. On the field, obviously.

In a three-Test series there is plenty of time for counter-banter and the 
development of a new line of argument. There is plenty of time before the first 
encounter for Cheika to break his vow of silence and lob in a jibe. It is very 
hard to see a bodyline series – to use one of Eddie’s – start without some 
verbal tussling between two old mates, now in direct opposition. Too much 
mutual respect is positively un-Australian and possibly even a federal offence.

Even if it remains unadorned by decorative slanging, this should be a series 
to relish. Both coaches have seized teams at a low point and transformed them 
into sides bristling with intent. They have changed perceptions within the camp 
– the Australians are converts to scrummaging, England to high tempo and 
adventure. Even if its preamble is silent, it promises to be deafeningly 
entertaining.
 