
An Egyptian court has recommended the death penalty for three journalists and 
three others charged with endangering national security by leaking state 
secrets to Qatar, in a ruling condemned by the Doha-based al-Jazeera channel as 
shocking.

Jordanian national Alaa Omar Sablan and Ibrahim Mohammed Helal, who both work 
for al-Jazeera, and Asmaa al-Khateeb, a reporter for Rassd – a pro-Muslim 
Brotherhood news network, were sentenced in absentia. They can appeal.

The sentence is the latest since a crackdown on the Muslim Brotherhood after 
an army takeover stripped former presidentMohamed Morsi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mohamed-morsi> of power in 2013 following 
mass protests against his rule.

Al-Jazeera <https://www.theguardian.com/media/al-jazeera> said the ruling 
provoked “shock and anger” and called for international action to safeguard 
journalists’ rights to report news freely.

“The death sentence against journalists is unprecedented in the history of 
world media and amounts to a real stab against freedom of expression around the 
world,” the satellite channel said in a statementposted on its website 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2016/05/al-jazeera-ibrahim-hilal-slams-egypt-death-verdict-160507133545255.html>
.

Morsi and other Brotherhood leaders, as well as leading figures from the 2011 
popular uprising that toppled Hosni Mubarak, many of them secular activists and 
journalists, are now in prison.

Following Saturday’s ruling, a final decision is expected on 18 June after the 
sentence has been referred to the top religious authority, the Grand Mufti, for 
a non-binding opinion.

Judge Mohammed Shireen Fahmy, who announced the verdict, also said that a 
ruling against Morsi and several others charged in the same case would be 
postponed to the same date.

Prosecutors in Saturday’s case argued that Morsi’s aides were involved in 
leaking sensitive documents to Qatari intelligence that exposed the location of 
weapons held by the Egyptian armed forces.

Defence lawyers said that documents had been moved out of the presidential 
palace to protect them during growing protests against Morsi’s rule, but this 
process was not the responsibility of the president and the documents presented 
in the case showed no signs of spying.

“The case’s documents are devoid of any type of espionage or participation in 
it,” a defence lawyer told Reuters.

Morsi has been sentenced in three other cases, including the death penalty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/01/mohamed-morsi-execution-death-sentence-egypt>
 for a mass jail break during the 2011 uprising and a life sentence for spying 
on behalf of Hamas.

Qatar had supported Morsi, who is in prison along with thousands of 
Brotherhood members, many of whom have been sentenced to death on separate 
charges.

Relations between Qatar, a Gulf Arab state, and Egypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> have been icy since July 2013 when 
Egypt’s then-army chief Abdel Fattah al-Sisi overthrew Morsi.

Sisi says the Brotherhood poses a serious threat to security despite the 
crackdown, which has weakened what was once Egypt’s most organised political 
group.
 