
Almost eight in 10 people are satisfied with policing, according to a report 
published by the police watchdog.

 The survey 
<https://www.justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/hmic/news/news-feed/new-survey-reveals-people-are-confident-in-the-police/>
 of 26,000 people also found that the majority of the population felt that 
crime and antisocial behaviour was not much of a problem (62%), while a further 
one in 10 did not consider it a problem at all (10%).

 The study, conducted last summer but published for the first time on 
Wednesday, was carried out by Ipsos Mori on behalf of Her Majesty’s 
Inspectorate of Constabulary to monitor public views of policing. It is the 
first time the study has been done.

 The findings reveal that 76% of people are happy with policing in their area 
despite 36% not having seen a police officer on patrol over a period of 12 
months. Another 23% said they had seen police on foot only once or twice over a 
year. Those living in the most deprived neighbourhoods, however, are more 
likely to report having seen a uniformed police presence on foot.

But the survey also found a quarter of respondents believed that crime and 
antisocial behaviour was a big problem in their local area (25%). Age appears 
to have an impact on feelings of safety with 33% of 16 to 24-year-olds feeling 
unsafe, compared with 21% of those aged 65 and over.


The study questioned people aged over 16 across the 43 police forces in 
England and Wales, between 15 July and 6 August 2015.

 Last October, the chair of the National Police Chiefs’ Council, Sara 
Thornton, and Craig Mackey, deputy commissioner of the Metropolitan police, said
the era of routine patrols <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-34651119> by “bobbies 
on the beat” had come to an end.

 They also said funding cuts would lead to a transformation in investigating 
crime, but the Home Office said at the time police reform was working and crime 
was falling.

 Police budgets in England and Wales were protected in real terms 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-34922126> in the former chancellor George 
Osborne’s spending review last November.

People’s overall contentment with policing appears to reflect the national 
picture of falling crime rates, as recorded bythe latest Crime Survey for 
England and Wales 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/bulletins/crimeinenglandandwales/yearendingmar2016#main-points>
(CSEW). The CSEW shows overall crime has been falling since a peak in 1995, 
with some fluctuations from year to year. The latest survey ending March 2016 
showed a 6% fall in the number of incidents against adults aged 16 to 59. There 
were 6.3m incidents, compared with 6.8m in the previous survey year.

 Improved crime rates, however, do not reliably result in people feeling 
safer. The same ONS survey showed that around 6 out of 10 adults (61%) 
perceived crime in the country as a whole to have risen over the past few 
years. Fewer people, however, perceived that crime had risen in their local 
area (32%). Instead, when asked about the level of crime in their local area, 
compared with the level nationally, only a small proportion (9%) thought crime 
in their local area was above average and 55% felt it was below average.

 News programmes on TV and radio are most often cited 
<http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20150904115259/http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/crime-stats/crime-statistics/focus-on-public-perceptions-of-crime-and-the-police--and-the-personal-well-being-of-victims--2013-to-2014/index.html>
 as the main source of information influencing people’s perceptions of national 
crime levels (cited by 67% of people).

The 2013-14 survey found 12% of adults classified as having a high level of 
worry about violent crime. Almost one in five adults (19%) thought it was 
either “very” or “fairly likely” that they would be a victim of crime within 
the next 12 months. All of these measures were at a similar level to the 
previous year and the general trend has been flat for a number of years.
 