
One Friday night in Angola’s capital 24-year-old Domingos Manuel Filipe Catete 
had had a few too many drinks and passed out in a stranger’s minivan. When the 
owner discovered him, he was taken to the local police station and arrested.

Catete had come to Luanda in search of work, but now aged 32 he is still being 
held in the city’s central prison after eight years without trial under a 
“preventive detention” order.

Though Angola’s punitive justice system came under intense scrutiny since 
popular rapperLuaty Beirao <http://xn--luaty%20beiro-7eb/> was jailed along 
with 16 other young activistslast month 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-35912505> for “plotting a rebellion” 
against president José Eduardo dos Santos, little is known about the men and 
women held indefinitely without charge.

Deprose Muchena, director of Amnesty International, has said the Angolan 
authorities increasingly “use the criminal justice system to silence dissenting 
views”, whileHuman Rights Watch 
<https://www.hrw.org/world-report/2015/country-chapters/angola> has accused 
local police of using harassment, intimidation and pervasive surveillance to 
keep citizens in check.


Forty years on from independence, Angola still lacks freedom
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/11/angola-forty-years-on-from-independence-lacks-freedom>
Catete’s story is a common one for those held under the detention order: 
almost all have been detained for more than six years without charge, and are 
usually from out of town.

“I was drunk and there was a car with an open door parked in front of me... so 
I got in and went to sleep,” he explains. The next morning, the owner “drove me 
straight to the police station where he accused me of stealing a CD case full 
of music.”

Hungover, Catete protested: “How could I have stolen anything from the car 
when I was still fast asleep?”


Catete then claims that officers attached to the bureau of criminal 
investigation beat him until he confessed. “To this day, I bear the scars 
across my forehead and right arm.”

He was then put in a cell and says he was only formally questioned five years 
later in 2013. It took another two years until he was questioned by another 
prosecutor.

“He asked me to explain what had happened. I did, and I’ve heard nothing 
since,” he says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Fangolas-punitive-prison-system-rafael-marques-de-morais%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f86ae1fa34e9e590ed224625bf8cbbf583dc942%2F0_87_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eight%20years%20for%20falling%20asleep%20in%20a%20parked%20car%3A%20welcome%20to%20Angola's%20penal%20system&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Fangolas-punitive-prison-system-rafael-marques-de-morais%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eight%20years%20for%20falling%20asleep%20in%20a%20parked%20car%3A%20welcome%20to%20Angola%27s%20penal%20system&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Fangolas-punitive-prison-system-rafael-marques-de-morais%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f86ae1fa34e9e590ed224625bf8cbbf583dc942%2F0_87_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
 17 Angolans activists were accused of preparing acts of rebellion in Luanda. 
Photograph: Paulo Juliao/EPA 
Police abuse 

“Preventive detention, even with extensions, should last no more than 210 days 
and be reserved for crimes against state security,” explains Godinho Cristóvão, 
a spokesman for national human rights group theAssociation for Justice, Peace 
and Democracy <http://ajpdangola.co/en/> (AJPD).

“By that time, if there is insufficient evidence to prosecute the charge, the 
suspect should be released.”

Detention without charge lasting six, seven or even eight years is illegal, he 
adds, “and an extraordinary abuse of process. It’s actually scandalous. 
Horrifying.”

Even if a prisoner is legitimately found guilty of damage to property or 
trespass, the maximum punishment should not exceed a two-year prison term 
according to national law.

But this has not been the case for men like Catete. Many men held in detention 
speak of experiencing physical abuse at the hands of police and criminal 
investigation officers, often to extract false confessions.

João Domingos da Rocha 
<http://expresso.sapo.pt/sociedade/2015-10-28-Luaty-e-o-veneno-na-ponta-da-lanca-em-Angola>
, a 26-year-old who spent seven years in preventive detention on suspicion of 
having stolen second-hand clothing, says he was attacked to produce a 
confession, whileJustino Longia 
<http://www.esquerda.net/en/artigo/abuso-de-prisao-preventiva-em-angola-uma-desumanizacao/40526>
, accused of a similar crime, spent five years in jail and was also forced to 
falsely confess. Both were set free, but only after their cases made national 
headlines.

Nelson de Assunção Manuel, 26, has been held for four years and eight months 
in preventive detention. He too claims that the police used violence to extract 
his confession.

Manuel, who is still incarcerated, explained what happened: “It was 8am and we 
were preparing the materials for a house we were building in [the] Kapolo 
neighbourhood, when suddenly a small boy appeared with a police unit. He 
pointed at us and said we were thieves.”

Manuel was with six other workers who were all taken into custody. “We were 
set up on by several policemen who beat us with hosepipes and iron bars and 
forced us to say that we [had been] armed,” he explains.

“They broke my left arm with an iron bar and to this day I have difficulties 
because I never received any medical treatment.”

According to Manuel, who also has no relatives in Luanda, the group was only 
questioned for the first time in 2013, then again last year in 2015. There have 
been no further development in their cases.

Physical abuse and torture are prohibited under the terms of the Angolan 
constitution and “in cases where the law is clearly being breached – because 
the term of preventive detention has exceeded the limit, or because of the use 
of violence to extract a confession – the law has a provision for the public 
prosecution to free the detainees,” says Rui Verde, a legal analyst.

Anonymous hacks Angolan government after activists jailed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/31/anonymous-hacks-angolan-government-after-activists-jailed>
“Failure to do so is a failure to comply with the law, and a violation of 
fundamental human rights,” he adds.

A police spokesperson said they would look into both of the ongoing cases but 
declined to give an official comment.

According to Verde, a public prosecutor who holds suspects in preventive 
detention beyond the limit could also face prosecution in both the criminal and 
civil courts for damages.

With regard to allegations about police violence, Verde explained that the 
“ultimate responsibility lies with the Interior Minister who should be called 
upon to resign if nothing is done to put an end to such abuse.”

“The law must be observed, and must be seen to be observed, by all.”

A version of this article first appeared on Maka Angola 
<http://www.makaangola.org/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=11948:eight-years-in-preventive-detention-justice-angola-style&catid=28&Itemid=230&lang=en>
 