
Moses Emesu looks tired – his voice a little lower, his smile laboured, his 
movement more listless than usual.

"I am feeling some malaria," says the Amorikot primary school headteacher, 
visibily drooping behind a small table in the little room that teachers share 
with bags of cement, garden tools and musical instruments. "But I am on 
medication. I got some quinine injections yesterday and the other day."

Despite more than a year of  promises <> by Soroti district education and 
political authorities to send teachers here, Emesu is still theonly qualified 
teacher 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/katineblog/2009/sep/30/education-amref/> at 
Amorikot, earning a monthly government salary of just under Ushs 225,000 (£64).

Six school "dropouts" - people who had not been able to finish their schooling 
- are working with him as "community teachers" on about Ushs 56,000 (£16) a 
month. Qualified teachers are a key missing link in the effort to change the 
fortunes of this school, whose fragile grass structures of 2007 have since been 
replaced with permanent classrooms from the Amref project.

Emesu, 36, divorced, father of eight, and holder of a diploma in primary 
education, has been in charge of Amorikot since April 2009. He came here on a 
promotion from being classroom teacher at Olwelai primary school.

Born and bred here, he lives barely a kilometre away from the school with his 
mother, who also takes care of his children. But he has not had much luck in 
his personal life since his promotion. Last October, unknown people torched his 
mother's house. All his academic certificates were destroyed and he has yet to 
get replacements from the national examinations body.

Then, earlier this year, he woke up one morning and his bull was missing. With 
neighbours' assistance, he trailed the hoofmarks and recovered the animal about 
7km away. Next, his sheep went missing, without trace.

At school, Emesu works like a shock absorber. Every now and then, one of the 
community teachers will disappear – having returned to school or found a 
better-paying occupation. Emesu has to step in and teach the abandoned class. 
He is now the only teacher for the 56 pupils in primary one. Sometimes there is 
no chalk, and he has to use his own money.

Midway during our interview, a man appears at the door. 

"Yes, Mr Olado! What happened? You just disappeared . . ." says Emesu as the 
man, Moses Olado, joins us. He was a primary three teacher until recently. He 
has come with some pupils' school reports he still had.

"I am now in town. I found another school to teach," Olado tells his former 
boss.

"How about the school books you had? You need to bring them back."

"I will bring. I will bring," Olado replies. In his new school, he earns Ushs 
80,000 (about £23) per month.
 Moses Emesu, head at Amorikot primary school, Katine, from April 2009 to 
September 2010 when all government funded teachers were withdrawn from 
community schools. Photograph: Richard M Kavuma 
Emesu has lost hope of getting the promised government teachers. He says 
district officials have tried their best but Amorikot's status as a community 
school is proving an insurmountable hurdle. His only hope is in a government 
takover of the school, which would entitle it to qualified teachers and 
government grants.

"Yesterday I was in the district education officer's office to fill a 
comprehensive form about the state of this school," says Emesu. "The government 
is soon taking over the school but I do not know when this will happen. These 
forms will be taken to Kampala and the central government will decide whether 
to take over the school or not."

This, however, is unlikely to happen soon. In April, an education ministry 
said the government had no money for "coding" (assessing) schools' suitability 
for government funding).

Everything considered, Emesu's spirits are low. In May he asked the education 
authorities for a transfer to another school, but he was urged to stay on and 
support his village's school.

"The district education officer told me to think about it for three days and 
give him a call but he also told me that if I leave, the school may collapse." 
That may be an exaggeration, but Emesu has brought considerable order and 
commitment to the school. Sometimes he personally supervises the cleaning of 
the compound by the pupils.

The head appreciates the support the school has received from African Medical 
Research Foundation (Amref) <http://www.guardian.co.uk/katine/amref/> and the 
Katine community development project 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/katine/2008/sep/23/background.news/> – transforming 
it from the poorest in the sub-county to one with some of the best premises. 
Amref has also donated school books and musical instruments and built a 
borehole near the school, which means hungry pupils can at least drink safe 
water.

But still there are challenges. "The project considered pupils but not 
teachers," says Emesu. "We do not have a single teacher's house. Teachers come 
from very far away and often arrive late for lessons."

And then Emesu mentions an unusual challenge – no signpost. Unusual, because 
some organisations put a signpost to announce what they intend to do and who is 
funding it. But not Amref at Amorikot.

"When you are to receive visitors, how do you direct them to the school?" asks 
Emesu, with another pained smile. "Eh, also: please report that our football 
field has no goal posts. It is embarrassing for such a big school."

Yes, Amorikot, the poorest school three years ago, can at least now say that 
about itself.

 This interview took place just weeks before all Ugandan government-funded 
teachers seconded to community schools, including Moses Emesu, were suddenly 
recalled by government edict to their former government schools at the 
beginning of last month
 