
The government should not impose elected mayors on local areas as a condition 
of devolution, a cross-party committee of MPs has said, warning that there has 
been a lack of transparency in thegovernment’s “devolution revolution” 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/chancellor-unveils-devolution-revolution>.

In non-metropolitan areas in particular, elected mayors are “unlikely to be an 
easy fit”, the communities and local government select committee said in a 
report.

As part of his “northern powerhouse” project to rebalance the UK economy, 
George Osborne, the chancellor, has made it clear that city regions are 
expected to accept a mayor in return for more control over spending and 
resources.

So far, Greater Manchester <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/greater-manchester>
, Liverpool and Sheffield city regions, Tees valley, West Midlands and the 
north-east have agreed to elect mayors in 2017.

Liverpool and West Midlands sign devolution deals with central government
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/17/liverpool-west-midlands-devolution-deal-northern-powerhouse-government>
None of those areas has held referenda on whether residents want regional 
mayors, though Durham, in the north-east, is currentlyholding a consultation 
<http://www.durham.gov.uk/article/7051/Household-poll-on-devolution-agreed>. 
Results of that poll will be revealed on 24 February and could put thewhole 
north-east deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/23/chancellor-to-unveil-devolution-deals-for-two-more-city-regions>
 in peril.

Greater Manchester is the only area to have agreed control over its 
multibillion-pound health budget in order to integrate health and social care. 
But the committee said it was unclear who would be accountable if things went 
wrong. “We received no clear explanation as to how accountability under health 
devolution will work and have recommended that the government revisits this 
issue,” the report said.

After consulting local leaders and members of the public across England, the 
committee said more effort had to be made to involve residents in devolution. 
“We have found a significant lack of public consultation and engagement at all 
stages in the devolution process,” the report said.

Local areas should be allowed to decide whether or not they wish to have an 
elected mayor, the MPs wrote, suggesting: “Those which do not want an elected 
mayor, but nonetheless want substantial devolved powers, should be allowed to 
propose an equally strong alternative model of governance.”

Where a combined authority has been created, the mayor could be seen as an 
unpopular and unwanted “fifth tier” of local government – parishes, districts, 
boroughs, counties and then mayoralties – the committee warned.

Government accused of contempt for north over Sheffield office closure
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/29/government-accused-of-contempt-for-north-over-sheffield-office-closure>
“Aside from the potential for confusion ... we think that the public will 
probably be left feeling that there is too much bureaucracy and too many 
politicians. There is a risk that this could lead to low turnouts at mayoral 
elections, which would have implications for the democratic legitimacy of 
elected mayors. This is a consequence that needs to be addressed in the long 
term, possibly by a move to having more unitary authorities,” the MPs wrote.

We are very concerned that the public will not understand who will be 
responsible for what in their local area.”

The elected mayors, due to take office in 2017, are intended to be a “first 
among equals”, with overview and scrutiny committees made up of councillors 
from the constituent councils. That means that the mayors will be less powerful 
than their counterpart in London, who acts alone and then has their decisions 
scrutinised by the London assembly.

But the report warns that a particularly charismatic figure could end up with 
more executive power than envisaged. “Although the elected mayor is intended to 
be a ‘first among equals’, she/he may soon establish, or already have, a 
profile and position which makes this balance difficult to achieve,” it said.

The committee also found that there was a lack of transparency in the 
government’s agenda, writing: “We also believe that the government’s approach 
to devolution in practice has lacked rigour as to process: there are no clear, 
measurable objectives for devolution, the timetable is rushed and efforts are 
not being made to inject openness or transparency into the deal negotiations.”
 