
It’s a commonplace that we are different people in different social roles – 
mother, worker, friend, lover. We put on a face to meet the faces that we meet. 
Creating new personas, or using ones from other settings, is important in order 
to flourish.

David Bowie <https://www.theguardian.com/music/davidbowie>’s life is a 
powerful illustration of how we can be more conscious of which persona should 
be the host of the radio show, so to speak.Three of his aunts and his 
half-brother had mental health issues 
<http://www.inquisitr.com/3105853/how-david-bowies-familys-mental-health-made-him-creative-schizophrenia-confirmed-as-genetic-linked-to-creative-siblings/>
. Bowie’s consequent fear of insanity stalked him during the years of his 
greatest creations, between 1969 and 1973. It suffused his lyrics and was 
expressed in his stage personas.

In acting the role of Ziggy Stardust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/mar/27/ziggy-stardust-david-bowie-plaque>
, Bowie became a global star. But, more importantly, through that persona he 
was also able to comfort himself and address his fears.Rock ’n’ Roll Suicide 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9jg4ekLG9Zo>, the final song on the Ziggy 
Stardust album 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Rise_and_Fall_of_Ziggy_Stardust_and_the_Spiders_from_Mars>
, has Bowie consoling Ziggy, then David Jones (Bowie’s birth name) consoling 
Bowie (“I’ll take my share, I’ll help you with the pain”).

Subsequently, he created several other selves that served the same purpose. In 
the 1980s, Bowie emerged a far more emotionally healthy man. After decades of 
sex addiction and drug abuse, he settled into astable marriage in which he 
became a loving father 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/04/20/iman-reveals-how-her-24-year-marriage-with-david-bowie-lasted/>
. The key was the therapeutic use he had made of personas to achieve 
authenticity.

His story might seem of little relevance to “ordinary” people. But it contains 
important clues to how most of us can enrich our personal and professional 
lives.

Working as a therapist, I have not met a single client who does not have a few 
or numerous different personas. Edith, for example, was a high-achieving civil 
servant who had, from a very young age, been colonised by her mother’s 
unfulfilled ambitions. Having passed all her exams with top grades, she had 
flown up the civil service hierarchy. Although she had had love affairs, she 
had never married or had children. Now aged 48, she was – to her friends and 
colleagues – a charming, confident and impressive woman.

But this was a mask. Behind it was an angry person who was deeply frustrated 
because she had little idea of what she truly felt about almost anything. So 
completely had her needs been dictated by her mother that authentic 
self-determination was a mystery to her.

We began to talk about Good Edith as the smooth persona with which she dealt 
with everyone, including her friends. Her relationship with me was the first in 
which she revealed vulnerability and misery. As time went by, other Ediths 
emerged. There was Greedy Edith, who would gorge herself on ice cream, Mars 
bars and takeaways to the point of feeling sick. There was Madonna Edith, who 
had fantasies of dominating sexual conquests and engaged in virtual sex with 
strangers on the internet. There was Angry Edith, who imagined pulverising smug 
married friends who were living the life she sometimes wished for herself. And 
there was Baby Edith, who longed to be cuddled and cared for.

In our work together, we were gradually able to understand the childhood 
origins of these personas, and this enabled Edith to be more conscious of the 
needs that lay behind them. As time went by, she began to see how her different 
moods were expressed through them and to consider how she might find more 
fruitful alternatives. Eventually, she was able to relinquish Good Edith in her 
work life, developing Professional Edith, who was more assertive or softer as 
required. In her personal life, she moved from the virtual to the actual, 
eventually finding a partner with whom she could playfully enjoy herself.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fziggy-stardust-persona-therapy-david-bowie-oliver-james-mental-health%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9905e1ea31b85e29f3c1c4461a3cb03544cfd974%2F0_0_1920_2627%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Embrace%20your%20inner%20Ziggy%20Stardust%20%E2%80%93%20the%20power%20of%20personas%20in%20therapy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fziggy-stardust-persona-therapy-david-bowie-oliver-james-mental-health%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Embrace%20your%20inner%20Ziggy%20Stardust%20%E2%80%93%20the%20power%20of%20personas%20in%20therapy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fziggy-stardust-persona-therapy-david-bowie-oliver-james-mental-health%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9905e1ea31b85e29f3c1c4461a3cb03544cfd974%2F0_0_1920_2627%2F1920.jpg>
 Upping Your Ziggy is about understanding the different parts of yourself 
better. Photograph: Sipa Press/Rex Features 
The title of my book – Upping Your Ziggy – conveys that same journey that 
Edith went through: understanding the different parts of yourself better, 
identifying them and their origins, and then being more conscious about which 
you choose to be in different settings. For most of us, this does not require 
years of costly therapy.

The more I work as a therapist, the more convinced I become that personas are 
only a matter of degree. For example, I have a friend who took up a hobby; 
within three years she was representing her country in international events. 
She dealt with her newcomer status to the game (which is largely dominated by 
men) by calling herself Gerald when playing it. In this guise, her self-doubt 
slipped away.

When my son was nine years old, he went for a trial with a Premiership 
football club. His performance was astonishingly good and, on the way home, I 
asked how he had pulled it off. He revealed that he had simply pretended to 
himself that this was a normal game for his usual club, thereby relieving 
himself of the fear of being judged.

At the time, he occasionally enjoyed the pretence that he was a squirrel 
called Nibbles. As well as reframing which game he was playing during the 
trial, he thought of himself as Nibbles the carnivorous squirrel, becoming an 
all-conquering destroyer and creator.

For all of us, it is valuable to write down a list of our different personas 
and give them names. At a deep level, many of them are developed as a result of 
the mixture of love and maltreatment that all of us experience in our families. 
Using that self-awareness, you can watch the different personas coming out to 
play. Where they are problematic, you can make a conscious choice to be someone 
else, someone better. This applies even to the most distressed of us.

Research in the past decade has eroded the bogus boundaries between sanity and 
insanity that the psychiatric profession has sought to impose. Considerable 
numbers of us see visions and hear voices outside our heads. There are some 
striking examples of people who have these supposed symptoms of insanity but 
who are conspicuously sane.

I have met Eleanor Longden, a psychology lecturer and researcher at Liverpool 
University, on a number of occasions, and there is nothing ostensibly odd about 
her. Ina TED talk 
<https://www.ted.com/talks/eleanor_longden_the_voices_in_my_head>, she 
described beginning to hear voices as an undergraduate – voices that became 
increasingly hostile as she fell apart under the stress created for her by the 
psychiatric system and the stigma that goes with mental illness in our society. 
She came to realise that, although they were outside her, the voices were 
expressing feelings and traumas that she had experienced as a child, but had 
not properly processed.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.ted.com%2Ftalks%2Feleanor_longden_the_voices_in_my_head&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.ted.com%2Ftalks%2Feleanor_longden_the_voices_in_my_head>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.ted.com%2Ftalks%2Feleanor_longden_the_voices_in_my_head&media=>
She developed a dialogue with these voices and, eventually, was able to 
befriend them to such an extent that they helped her (for example, to get top 
marks in her university exams by telling her the answers – a form of cheating, 
she jokes). Such voices were, she maintains, sane reactions to insane 
situations – such as the sexual abuse she experienced when she was young.

There are many ways for us to take charge of our personas, be it simply by 
self-reflection, with the help of friends, by writing novels or creating art, 
or through therapy. We simply need to get a dialogue going between our 
different parts.

If most exceptional achievement derives from childhood adversity, so does 
nearly all mental illness. Bowie’s half-brother passed through the door marked 
Madness. Bowie opened it, took a good look around and then passed through to 
the adjoining one, marked Artistic Self-Expression. It was his conscious use of 
personas that enabled him to make that choice.

•Upping Your Ziggy 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/421865/>: How David 
Bowie Faced His Childhood Demons and How You Can Face Yours by Oliver James is 
published by Karnac Books (£9.99)
 