
Winter might be coming for the residents of Westeros but for the creators of 
Game of Thrones <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones> and 
HBO it was clear skies again at the Emmys, where the series won the best drama 
series award for the second year in a row.

The HBO series was up for 24 awards and came away with 12 at Sunday night’s 
Emmy awards in Los Angeles, breaking a record set by the sitcom Frasier with a 
total haul of 38Emmys <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/emmys>.

Emmys 2016: full list of winners
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/18/emmys-2016-full-list-of-winners-as-they-happen>
The Battle of the Bastards episode was singled out for praise and won awards 
for best drama writing (David Benihoff and DB Weiss) and directing (Miguel 
Sapotchnik 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/28/game-of-thrones-director-miguel-sapotchnik-season-six-finale>
).

Veep <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/veep>, which has been nominated 
42 times at the Emmys, won the best comedy category.

It was also a great night for The People v OJ Simpson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/19/the-people-v-oj-simpson-finale-review-racism-sexism-and-celebrity-dazzle>
, Ryan Murphy’s dramatisation of the infamous trial. The show picked up 22 
nominations and won the outstanding limited series gong, while actors Sterling 
K Brown, Sarah Paulson and Courtney B Vance all picked up individual honors for 
their performances as Christopher Darden, Marcia Clark and Johnnie Cochran, 
respectively.

Rami Malek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/14/mr-robot-rami-malek-the-world-is-chaos>
 took home a surprise win for lead actor in a drama, for his performance as 
Elliot Alderson, a paranoid, socially awkward hacker inMr Robot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/14/mr-robot-finale-11-questions-that-need-to-be-answered>
, while Tatiana Maslany won in the best actress category for Orphan Black.

The issue of diversity was constantly raised, with Jimmy Kimmel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/jimmy-kimmel> starting the evening by 
joking about Hollywood’s propensity for saying how much it cares about 
diversity without necessarily doing anything about it. One moment that wasn’t 
so funny was when Aziz Ansari was cut off before being able to give his speech 
after winning outstanding writing in a comedy series for Master of None.

“That was a little weird earlier, I just wanted to thank my parents who 
inspired the episode and acted in the show too,” he said, when he appeared 
later to give the award for best writing for a variety special. The band was 
also criticised for playing off a producer of The People v OJ Simpson, who was 
making an emotional dedication to her wife.

Former Republican presidential candidate Jeb Bush 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/jeb-bush> appeared in a bizarre opening 
segment, playing a chauffeur for Julia Louis-Dreyfus. “If you run a positive 
campaign the voters will ultimately make the right choice,” he said in a 
self-effacing scene that poked fun at his disastrous campaign.

Kimmel’s own performance was at times controversial, especially a joke he made 
about Johnnie Cochran being “somewhere looking up at us” after Courtney B 
Vance’s win.

The Emmy voters’ habit of picking the same winners continued with Jeffrey 
Tambor and Julia Louis-Dreyfus picking up lead actor and actress in a comedy. 
Louis-Dreyfus has won the award five years in a row for Veep, while Tambor 
picked up the award after winning last year for his performance inTransparent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/transparent>.

Jeffrey Tambor calls on industry to hire more trans actors in Emmys speech
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/18/emmys-2016-jeffrey-tambor-transgender-transparent>
Tambor also led a tribute to Garry Shandling, who died in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/25/garry-shandling-obituary> 
and who he worked with on the Larry Sanders show. There was another tribute for
Garry Marshall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/20/garry-marshall-creator-of-happy-days-dies-aged-81>
 from Henry Winkler, who called him “one of the most beloved men in the history 
of our business”.

It was a good night for British talent, with John Oliver winning for best 
variety talk, and Sherlock (best made for TV movie) andThe Night Manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-night-manager> (best directing) 
also winning on the night.

Regina King won best supporting actress in a limited series or movie for the 
second year in a row for her performance in American Crime. Key & Peele won in 
the variety sketch category for their Comedy Central series, which ended after 
its fifth season. Ben Mendelsohn managed to cause an upset in the best 
supporting actor in a drama category by beating Game of Thrones stars Kit 
Harington and Peter Dinklage.
 