
If your childhood happened between the mid-1970s and early 80s, you will 
probably recall a particularly miserable symbol of that era’s reduced budgets 
and shrinking horizons: the broken-down, litter-strewn park.

Slides would be so caked in mud as to make them unusable; roundabouts wouldn’t 
go round; grass would go uncut. I grew up in suburban Cheshire, and even there, 
the same applied: in amid the fag ends, dog shit and broken bottles, a weird 
sense of times so topsy-turvy that places meant to deliver happiness had become 
a byword for a kind of low-level sadness. Is there a more forlorn sight than a 
broken swing?

No place for park life in Cameron’s ‘big society’ | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/02/no-place-for-park-life-in-camerons-big-society>
Two weeks ago, I spoke to a mum and dad in Newcastle who were trying to 
entertain their toddler in a play area with a cracked slide, and talked about 
other places nearby now covered in graffiti, and rendered all but unusable. The 
national statistics show how widespread this almost silent crisis is becoming. 
At the last count,86% of the people in charge of local parks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jun/26/uk-parks-crisis-budget-cuts-campaigners>
 had seen cuts to their budgets since 2010; and almost half of local councils 
were considering either selling their parks, or somehow contracting them out. 
All over the country, in fact, you now see much the same sight: perhaps the 
most vivid, immediate embodiment of what some people call the public realm, 
rotting away at speed – and now set to decline even further, as the 
Conservatives continue to strip money from councils’ budgets.

Autumn statement: Osborne isn’t fixing the roof, he’s eroding the foundations 
| Mariana Mazzucato
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/25/autumn-statement-osborne-deficit-fixes-eroding-economic-stability>
But as evidenced by the reaction to George Osborne’s autumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/autumn-statement-2015>, in the dizzy 
heights of the London-based media, this is not how the world looks at all. 
“Whatever happened to austerity?” parped the front page of Thursday’s Daily 
Mail, while the Telegraph apparently announced that spending cuts had now 
finished (“The end of austerity”). The ever-thoughtful Sun ran a front-page 
illustration of three Osbornes lined up on a fruit machine, with the headline 
“Borne lucky” and a story announcing nothing less than a “£27bn jackpot”. To
judge from the newsstands <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/blogs-the-papers-34928865>
, the munificent bonanza facilitated by dodgy fiscal forecasts and headed up by 
the U-turn on tax credits had been perfectly timed to coincide with Christmas.

These are truly Orwellian times, but this recasting of want as plenty is 
particularly surreal. Over the next five years – and possibly for even longer 
than that – the kind of dire, drastic cuts councils have been forced to make 
since 2010 will be continuing. Indeed, the situation looks more impossible than 
ever. To quote one very reliable source: “Even if councils stop filling in 
potholes, maintaining parks, closed all children’s centres, libraries, museums, 
leisure centres and turned off every street light, they will not have saved 
enough money to plug the financial black hole they face by 2020.”Lord Porter 
said that 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/25/local-government-councils-funding-gap-critical-budget-cuts-social-care-spending-review>
. He’s the chair of the Local Government Association. He’s also a Tory.

The chancellor’s hopeless offers of assistance extend into the distance

Before the spending review, councils in England and Wales were anxiously 
modelling cuts to their spending of between 25% and 40%, and worrying about 
increases in demand for the services they have to provide as a matter of law, 
which are forecast to add £10bn to their costs by 2020. But between now and 
then, money that currently goes from central tolocal government will be cut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/25/public-service-winners-and-losers-in-spending-review>
 by more than 50%. On Wednesday, almost no one seemed to notice this, not least 
in the House Of Commons. But whileJohn McDonnell was quoting Chairman Mao 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2015/nov/25/the-chairman-mao-moment-mcdonnell-throws-the-little-red-book-at-osborne-video>
, a lone note of alarm from Yvette Cooper – remember her? – drew attention to 
what was afoot. “Appears to be a 56% cut to Govt funding for local councils … 
did I miss that in Chancellor’s speech?”she tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/YvetteCooperMP/status/669517052571426817>.
Yvette Cooper (@YvetteCooperMP) 
Appears to be a 56% cut to Govt funding for local councils table 2.1 p78 AS - 
did I miss that in Chancellor's speech?#spendingreview 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/spendingreview?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/YvetteCooperMP/status/669517052571426817> November 25, 
2015 <https://twitter.com/YvetteCooperMP/status/669517052571426817> 
This huge cut will happen, but it is part of a bigger plan. Since 2013, with 
some caveats,councils have kept half of the money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/06/business-rates-plan-may-widen-inequality-among-councils>
 they get from business rates, and carried on putting the rest into a centrally 
administered pot. This is then spread around the country according to the
current council-funding formula 
<https://www.theguardian.com/local-government-network/2014/jan/08/allocation-funding-local-authorities-barnett-formula>
 – whose iniquities are a big source of complaint among council leaders, but 
which at least represents some residual idea of redistribution, not least from 
south to north. Now, councils are to largely keep all their income from 
business rates, while the money passed to local authorities from central 
government will eventually be cut to nothing. How this will be phased in and 
what any redistributive element might look like is unclear, though it’spretty 
obvious 
<http://www.communitycare.co.uk/2015/11/11/governments-spending-review-means-social-care/>
 that a system of “top ups and tariffs” will be much less redistributive than 
the current system.

The danger, clearly, is that thriving places – London, to pick one obvious 
example – will be awash with funds, while other places struggle. Moreover, when 
the new system materialises, the money available in any area for basic services 
will not be decided according to need, but how well businesses are doing, and 
whether local politicians can attract more of them. To hear some Tories talk, 
unimpeachable neoliberal logic could then be brought to bear: if you cut your 
local business rates, money-hungry corporations might come swarming. There 
again, they might not – in which case, you’ll just have a lot less money. More 
to the point, can you imagine what this new system will mean when we collide 
with another recession? (By way of a grim kind of answer, Osborne has said that 
he will now let councils keep 100% of the proceeds from the sale of any assets, 
to be used as they fit. You never know: flogging off parks might be one option.)

The chancellor’s hopeless offers of assistance extend into the distance. He 
has also come up with the idea of allowing local politicians to somehow protect 
adult social care – for elderly people, as far as anyone understands it – by 
putting up council tax by up to 2%, and far too much of the media has fallen 
for the idea that this represents something credible. In Liverpool, the full 2% 
hike would raise £3.2m a year, but the city’s annual social care bill is £172m. 
Even the government’s plans to eventually give councils £1.5bn for social care 
via the so-calledBetter Care Fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/may/06/nhs-better-care-fund-policy-halted-whitehall-review>
 woefully fail to meet the scale of a mounting problem. The research charitythe 
Health Foundation <http://www.health.org.uk/> reckons that Britain’s care gap 
will be £6bn by 2020; even if he is lucky, both of Osborne’s measures would 
barely scrape together half that sum.

David Cameron hasn’t the faintest idea how deep his cuts go. This letter 
proves it | George Monbiot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/11/david-cameron-letter-cuts-oxfordshire>
Buried in the autumn statement, there was also an announcement that the 
government intends to completely cut the £2.6bn a year it gives to councils for 
public health spending (which covers areas such as drug and alcohol abuse, 
sexual health, and teenage pregnancy). The idea, apparently, is that the money 
can be made up thanks to all those business rates. The more likely outcome, of 
course, is that these things will fall into the same fragile category as 
libraries, parks, bus subsidies, welfare advice, help for homeless people, 
transport to school for children with special educational needs, and more: a 
great roll call of the basics of any halfway civilised society, either under 
threat, or disappearing fast.

This, then, is Osborne’s dystopia – where newspapers announce that two and two 
make five, wealth collides with public squalor, and the slides and swings stay 
broken. One question demands to be asked, which should be addressed to the 
supposed forces of opposition, as much as the government: how long can it last?
 