
Productivity growth is always a major economic issue, but is often mired in 
political bun fighting over calls for greater industrial relations flexibility. 
This week theProductivity Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/productivity-commission> released a 
discussion paper seeking ideas for how to improve productivity but which 
pointedly asked for new ideas.

It’s not surprising the Productivity Commission thinks productivity is pretty 
important. They do perhaps over-egg the pudding in theirlatest discussion paper 
<http://www.pc.gov.au/inquiries/current/productivity-review/discussion> out 
this week, where they open by suggesting that “there is a justified global 
anxiety that growth in productivity ... has slowed or stopped”.

Clinton or Trump, either one is going to face recession and a hollowed out 
middle class | Greg Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/08/clinton-or-trump-either-one-is-going-to-face-recession-and-a-hollowed-out-middle-class>
Global anxiety might be a bit much (as Ross Gittins noted 
<http://www.smh.com.au/comment/an-economy-without-growth-is-far-from-our-biggest-worry-20161107-gsk817.html>
, there are a few other issues to be anxious about, such as climate change), 
but there is no doubting that productivity growth is important.

It’s important because by and large national income rests on productivity 
growth.

Until Australia had a massive boost in the value of our exports in the 
mid-2000s, the ABS’s measure of “national wellbeing” of real net national 
disposable income grew in line with labour productivity:

The problem, as the Productivity Commission notes, is that we can’t rely on a 
boom in iron ore and coal prices to fuel our income growth into the future. So 
it means we need to think about productivity growth – especially as it has 
slowed in the past decade:

The Productivity Commission suggests that the boom in export prices hid much 
of the problem for Australia. The paper notes that instead of a sharp fall in 
national income via our slowing of productivity growth, there has just been an 
“inexorable slowing towards reduced opportunity, greater dispute over shares of 
a smaller than expected pie, and selective protection”.

And this brings into focus the “global anxiety” the Productivity Commission 
talks of, because in Australia – as around the world – productivity growth has 
slowed in the past decade.

It’s nice perhaps to know that we are not alone in having this problem. 
Canadian and Australian productivity growth is pretty much in step over the 
past 40 years – and both saw a big surge in the 1990s and then a sharp slowing 
in the 2000s:

Given this, it does also highlight that the solution to productivity growth is 
not just a company tax cut or a change to our workplace relations system.

If that were the case you would expect to see significant difference between 
Australia and the rest of the world, but in fact we’re suffering much the same 
as others, just as we did as well as others in the 1990s.

The issue for the Productivity Commission involves the breakdown of labour 
productivity. Essentially, labour productivity growth derives from three 
aspects.

The first is “capital deepening” which is essentially the increase of 
investment in capital per worker. Usually this is broken down into two groups – 
IT and non-IT, and derives from the assumption that more capital, such as 
computers or machinery, enables workers to be more productive.

The second aspect is labour composition which looks at the skill level of 
workers – under the assumption that more skillful workers will be more 
productive.

The final aspect is multi-factor productivity which looks at the ability of 
labour to make use of that capital.

And this is where we see the biggest problem for productivity during the first 
decade of this century – most of the productivity growth came from capital 
deepening and multi-factor productivity actually went backwards:

Now, it is not all bad – a major reason for the fall was the mining industry. 
The massive mining boom in the 2000s actually reduced productivity because it 
was much more labour intensive than the industry had previously been. And as we 
now move to the export phase, which is much less labour intensive, that aspect 
will be reverse somewhat.

But the Productivity Commission suggests just hoping that will solve all the 
problems is perhaps wishful thinking. And it also has some other issues – 
namely, trying to accurately measure productivity growth.

The issue is that there are a lot of things in the economy that affect 
productivity that don’t get measured. The commission notes for example, that 
washing machines, vacuum cleaners and refrigerators, boosted household 
productivity in the 20th century and that “freed up people for employment and 
leisure” but “these gains are not captured in official statistics.”

Similarly, road congestion lowers the efficiency of people’s personal travel, 
which is not counted, as well as that of public and commercial transport, which 
is counted.

Yes, we need to improve productivity, but not by slashing penalty rates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/commentisfree/2016/feb/06/yes-we-need-to-improve-productivity-but-not-by-slashing-penalty-rates>
The commission also notes that while it is great to talk of increasing 
national income via productivity growth, the distribution of that income is 
vitally important. The commission notes that “public support is more likely for 
reforms that offer benefits to the bulk of people”. It also notes that while 
productivity grew during the period, inequality in Australia (as in many OECD 
countries) increased from the 1990s to 2007.

The USA is a perfect example of the issue of worrying about productivity and 
not inequality – since the 1980s, the link between productivity growth and 
worker compensationhas completely split 
<http://www.epi.org/publication/ib330-productivity-vs-compensation/>. A few 
years ago, theACTU also issued a report 
<http://www.actu.org.au/media/297315/Shrinking%20Slice%20of%20the%20Pie%202013%20Final.pdf>
 noting that a similar “decoupling of productivity and worker earnings” had 
occurred here since the mining boom.

So what to do? The commission is not making recommendations at this stage, it 
is seeking ideas.

Rather wonderfully, however, it has made a plea for “new and novel ideas 
because there is already a strong awareness of many reform options that parties 
would like to see implemented. More of the same is not likely to be helpful”.

It’s a good point. Mostly, productivity in this country becomes a fight over 
industrial relations. With a bit of luck, this new review might bring to light 
issues that are less easily divided into Labor and Liberal.
 