
The government’s English baccalaureate is stifling pupils by forcing them to 
take subjects they do not enjoy, in some cases creating problems for motivation 
and behaviour, according to a survey of schools funded by the National Union of 
Teachers.

The survey of 1,800 NUT members, carried out by researchers at King’s College 
London, found a large majority blamed the Ebacc –which is a school performance 
measure 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/english-baccalaureate-ebacc/english-baccalaureate-ebacc>
 – for narrowing the range of subjects being taught for GCSE examinations, with 
creative and vocational subjects being squeezed out.

First introduced in 2010, the Ebacc is a government-mandated suite of GCSE 
subjects 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/english-baccalaureate-ebacc/english-baccalaureate-ebacc>
 that includes English, maths, sciences, foreign languages, history and 
geography. The Department for Education has previously said its aim is for 90% 
of pupils in England to be eligible for the Ebacc.

But according to the NUT survey, teachers say the push towards the suite of 
more traditional, academic subjects has led to fewer schools offering subjects 
such as music, drama or design and technology, and giving pupils fewer options.

Leaving arts subjects out of the Ebacc will deprive poor children of culture | 
Grayson Perry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/nov/02/arts-subjects-ebacc-children-culture>
“The government should take this report seriously. It uncovers significant 
problems with the Ebacc and shows the profession does not support the attempt 
to steer all schools towards a narrow range of subjects,” said Kevin Courtney, 
general secretary of the NUT. “The demands of Ebacc are driving creative and 
vocational subjects out of the curriculum and are harming students’ motivation, 
engagement and appetite for learning.”

Around 84% of teachers surveyed reported a decrease in vocational subjects 
being offered, while a similar proportion said there had been a decrease in 
examination entry rates in creative subjects.

One music teacher told the researchers: “Excellent candidates for artistic 
subjects have been actively discouraged from taking arts courses and told to do 
triple science and Ebacc instead,” while another said it was “harder to get 
higher ability musicians to consider GCSE [music] as an option”.

But the survey also revealed a welcome surge in take-up of modern foreign 
languages, with 59% reporting an increase in entries. Since foreign languages 
were removed as a compulsory subject by the previous Labour government there 
has been concern at the fall-off in numbers entered forGCSEs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/gcses>.

Entry rates in geography and history have also increased, according to 69% of 
the mainly classroom teachers surveyed. But one history teacher told the 
researchers: “Students are pressured into the Ebacc with the result that they 
are now taking subjects that they ‘dislike least’. This has led to demotivated 
pupils and more behavioural issues for subjects like history and geography.”

The Department for Education has defended the policy 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/implementing-the-english-baccalaureate>
 by arguing that “there is time for most pupils to study other valuable 
subjects in addition to the Ebacc, including religious studies, arts subjects 
or vocational and technical disciplines”.

The survey also found distinctions between the types of schools affected by 
the Ebacc, with struggling schools more likely to have cut back on choices 
offered to pupils. “We found a significant correlation between the Ofsted 
rating of the schools and how their curriculum offer had changed, with teachers 
working in schools categorised as ‘inadequate’ or ‘requires improvement’ more 
likely to report that students had a reduced number of GCSEs to choose from,” 
the researchers noted.

EBacc a disaster for drama in state schools | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jul/03/ebacc-a-disaster-for-drama-in-state-schools>
The survey also found teacher dissatisfaction with a new accountability 
measure, known as progress 8, and with the reformed GCSE examinations in 
English and maths which will be sat for the first time next summer.

The teachers’ concerns emerged as a new report by Prof Alison Wolf – the 
author of aninfluential review of vocational education 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/19/traditional-gcse-subjects-britain-reforms-qualifications-employers-universities>
 – is published, which is highly critical of the “dysfunctional” state of 
tertiary education in England.

According to Wolf, the perverse incentives created by £9,000 tuition fees and 
student loans in higher education has significantly downgraded the role of 
shorter and more cost-effective sub-degree courses and are likely to cost 
future taxpayers billions of pounds to meet the costs of unpaid student loans.

“If the Treasury’s worst predicted GDP outcomes of Brexit occurred, real 
graduate earnings would be reduced for a limited number of years. That could 
increase the public cost of providing student loans to just one annual cohort 
of English undergraduate students by as much as half a billion pounds,” the 
report, published by theEducation Policy Institute <http://epi.org.uk/>, claims.
 