
Amid the debate about Gareth Southgate’s decision to omit Wayne Rooney from 
the starting lineup againstSlovenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/slovenia>, it is worth remembering he was 
not replaced by a similar player. Southgate introduced a holding player, Eric 
Dier, which completely changed the balance of England’s midfield, and 
inevitably changed their gameplan. It was a significant move in terms of 
personnel but was primarily a tactical change.

A defensive shift was not entirely unexpected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/11/slovenia-england-world-cup-qualifying-match-report>
 – a trip to Slovenia is a very different test to ahome game against Malta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/08/england-malta-world-cup-qualifying-match-report>
 – but England’s shape was influenced by what Southgate had expected from the 
opposition. Before the match, he talked specifically about the optimum way to 
play against a diamond midfield: shifting the ball quickly to the full‑backs, 
who can fly forward and create overloads down the flanks. Dier was presumably 
selected, in part, because Southgate expected England to be at a numerical 
disadvantage in the centre of midfield, and required more structure in that 
zone. It is unusual for a manager to talk so candidly about the opposition’s 
system before a match but Southgate’s message became less relevant once it was 
apparent Slovenia were playing a 4-1-4-1 system.

England’s full-backs, therefore, were not in space but instead up against the 
Slovenia wide midfielders Benjamin Verbic and Roman Bezjak, who tracked them 
manfully. With that attacking approach denied,England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> had few obvious plans: Theo 
Walcott and Jesse Lingard both struggled to get into the game, the former 
staying wide on the right and the latter taking up clever positions between the 
lines, rarely found by team-mates in deeper positions.

Joe Hart’s stunning saves earn sloppy England point in Slovenia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/11/slovenia-england-world-cup-qualifying-match-report>
That was the frustrating aspect of England’s midfield – the lack of ambition 
shown by Dier and the captain, Jordan Henderson. It is understandable Southgate 
wanted to guard against the counterattack because Slovenia have clever, quick 
attacking midfielders. With Dier alongside him, Henderson could have pushed 
forward more, asking questions of Jasmin Kurtic, who was happy to push up and 
press but rarely had to sprint the other way. The most impressive aspect of 
Slovenia’s play was their midfield pressing – they did not harass England’s 
centre-backs relentlessly but pounced when John Stones and Gary Cahill 
attempted to thread balls into the midfield zone.

It took time for England to settle, and Dier’s early wayward backpass that 
forced Joe Hart to save from Bezjak underlined their nervousness. With 20 
minutes remaining, Henderson made a similarly careless mistake, playing a blind 
pass straight to Josep Ilicic – Hart again came toEngland’s rescue with another 
crucial save. Slovenia’s most presentable opportunities generally came from 
England errors.

Germany v Northern Ireland, Slovakia v Scotland and more: World Cup 2018 
qualifier clockwatch – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/oct/11/germany-northern-ireland-slovakia-scotland-world-cup-2018-qualifier-clockwatch-live>
Slovenia’s pressing meant their holding midfielder Rene Krhin was forced to 
cover a huge amount of ground in front of the defence and England’s brightest 
attacking player was Dele Alli, who showed wonderful movement to escape the 
attention of Krhin. His clever drift into space in the opening stages allowed 
him time to slip an excellent through-ball toDaniel Sturridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/daniel-sturridge>, who miscontrolled and 
wasted a fine goalscoring chance. Ten minutes into the second half Alli’s 
storming run in the inside‑left channel was followed with a slightly underhit 
pass towards Sturridge, which was easily intercepted.

Alli was allowed extra attacking freedom without Rooney in the side, and he 
confirmed his status as England’s best option in the No10 position. He could 
have been helped further with some better movement from Sturridge – whereas 
Harry Kane has an excellent relationship with Alli at Tottenham, creating space 
in the opposition’s backline for Alli to race into, Sturridge makes more 
straightforward runs and is primarily concerned with getting himself in scoring 
positions.

Alli was sacrificed with just over 15 minutes remaining when Rooney was 
summoned from the bench but the Spurs midfielder is the man in possession of 
the No10 shirt and should be England’s primary attacking midfielder for the 
foreseeable future.
 