
It might be stretching it a bit to say that this was a slam won in the grand 
manner, because in truth the second half was a laboured affair, withEngland 
rarely required to do much more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/19/england-win-six-nations-grand-slam-france-match-report>
 than stop a France team that was growing wearier with every throw into the 
lineout. It was here that the difference between the two sides was most obvious 
with Maro Itoje and – on this day in particular – George Kruis picking off the 
ball at will. France couldn’t play and England eased to their clean sweep.

England win Six Nations grand slam for Eddie Jones against France
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/19/england-win-six-nations-grand-slam-france-match-report>
To win a grand slam without lighting up the sky is, in a way, a compliment. 
This was not like the team of 2003 approaching a zenith; this was a team in the 
throes of rediscovery and reconstruction.They have been uplifted by Eddie Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/mar/19/eddie-jones-revolution-england-six-nations-grand-slam>
, led intelligently – yes, exactly that – by Dylan Hartley and they have sold 
themselves to the task of making their nation proud of them.

They had to play away from home three times. The overall standard of the 
championship was far from inspired, but each and every team had set their 
sights on late September, meaning that all teams were struggling to touch the 
heights after going from their World Cup campaigns straight back to their clubs 
and then into this. It’s a gruelling schedule with the potential for mishap at 
every turn. To go unbeaten is so very difficult, and to find fault would be 
churlish.

Must there be a but? No. Youngsters were given a chance and came to the fore. 
Itoje had another fine outing. England tried to be inventive and attack-minded 
long before Wales, Scotland and Ireland gave themselves licence to thrill in 
the final round. George Ford refused to be bound by his form at struggling Bath 
and played with cheek for his country.

Billy Vunipola, held in check here for long periods, has become a model of 
persistence. Not for the No8 the role of the hit man operating in short bursts, 
but an indefatigable workhorse, willing to sort out problems – a sponge – and 
yet able to be a hammer, the launcher of attacks. His surge from the scrum 
helped to create the try for Anthony Watson. Billy has been a giant.

England’s Eddie Jones: grand slam winners can develop to beat All Blacks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/20/england-eddie-jones-grand-slam-all-blacks>
France came into the Six Nations with a similar background – a World Cup that 
went wrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/18/french-media-france-day-of-shame-new-zealand>
 and a new coach, Guy Novès, in charge. France ended up losing their last three 
games, having started with wins at home against Italy and Ireland. They began 
by unleashing Virimi Vakatawa on a world that knew him only as a sevens player 
and he sparkled. But by the end of the five games, the wing was stuck too tight 
to the touchline, unsure of where his parameters lay.

His team, too, seemed unsure of what to do where. They have a grand project to 
respect the French way of playing, but for the moment it seems too vague. Lying 
deep and shipping the ball down a line of stationary team‑mates is no real link 
to the ways of old. France used to throw the ball flat and the players coming 
from deep had to flow on to it. Vakatawa and Gaël Fickou and Maxime Mermoz and 
Maxime Médard and Wesley Fofana all had their individual moments, but at no 
time did they combine and put fear in the minds of their opponents. The France 
of old used to make even the All Blacks worry, so good were their angles and 
variations of speed. Not here; not yet.

England from start to finish were clear in their designs and their 
understanding of what they could and couldn’t do. They were never too 
ambitious, becauseEddie Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eddie-jones> 
said that it would take time to develop the understanding that must go with the 
desire to play with total freedom. Ford and Owen Farrell were neat and tidy 
throughout and Jonathan Joseph had his big day in Rome, but the England 
midfield looks as if it still waiting for Manu Tuilagi to make his full return.

It may never happen because anybody who is out of the game for a year or more 
runs the risk of finding it so different that they cannot make up for lost 
time. England need to have Tuilagi back at full bore on tour, or start to think 
of a new midfield strategy. Perhaps Elliot Daly will yet have his chance.

Eddie Jones’ revolution: how he led England to Six Nations grand slam | Eddie 
Butler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/mar/19/eddie-jones-revolution-england-six-nations-grand-slam>
There was also a problem with penalties. Maxime Machenaud kicked seven of 
them. Dan Cole was targeted by the French media before the game as a one-man 
points-machine – for France. The prop had a say of his own with an almost 
graceful roll for his try, and it is true that he goes into the areas of 
contact where penalties can go one way or the other. But as England improve 
they must be meaner with their gifts.

As they head for the next stage – of being constant on any continent – they 
must combine a tighter discipline with a greater freedom of expression. Wales, 
grand slam winners twice under Warren Gatland, have found it difficult to take 
this step, of going from solid in contact to liberated on the ball. The 
competition between the neighbours to pass and think under pressure should push 
them both towards this great next level.

That’s the theory. The grand slam is not an end in itself, but a spur to 
greater deeds. It’s just that after going five games unbeaten in the oldest 
annual tournament sometimes you need a break and to be told: “Well done. That 
was excellent.”
 