
Uncertainty over the EU referendum has driven the biggest fall in the number 
of people trying to buy a property since the financial crisis and deterred 
sellers from putting their homes on the market, according to the latest report 
from surveyors.


The fall in buyer inquiries is expected to lead to a drop in UK house prices 
over the next three months, and seems to have already led to a softening of the 
market in London, May’s monthly report from the Royal Institution of Chartered 
Surveyors (Rics) found.
Referendum explained: current voting 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/06/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=current_polling>
The group said the number of homes for sale had declined more widely than at 
any time since it started collecting data in April 1999, while buyer demand had 
fallen across the UK for the second month running and at the fastest pace since 
2008. Rics said across the country 33% more property professionals had reported 
a drop in inquiries than a rise.

Comments from contributors “identify several potential causes of this decline 
in buyers’ appetite, with uncertainty over the upcoming referendum on the UK’s 
membership of the EU by far the most prevalent suggestion”, the report said.

Among those quoted reporting that the referendum had hit property sales were 
estate agents in Leicester, Grimsby and Exeter, as well as those in central 
London where the result could have the biggest impact on prices.


Other factors included the change to stamp duty for buy-to-let buyers, which 
means that since 1 April they have paid a higher tax rate on their purchases. 
However, Rics’ chief economist, Simon Rubinsohn, said: “There is not at this 
point a sense that a fundamental shift is taking place in the market.”

House prices could fall by 18% if Britain quits EU, says George Osborne
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/20/eu-referendum-george-osborne-house-prices-brexit>
Looking ahead over the next three months, 10% more Rics members said they 
expected house prices to fall than to rise, with those in London and East 
Anglia the most likely to predict a drop.


Surveyors in some areas – including Wales, Scotland, Northern Ireland and the 
Midlands, expected to see prices creeping up in the coming three months, 
although price inflation in these areas was predicted to weaken.


However, Rics warned prospective first-time buyers that the price falls were 
likely to be temporary, and that they could face higher rents. Rubinsohn said: 
“Sadly, for the many young people looking to enter the property market, it is 
unlikely that we are seeing the emergence of a more affordable market.

“Instead it appears to me that what we are looking at is a short-term drop 
caused by the uncertainty resulting from the forthcoming EU referendum coupled 
by a slowdown following the rush to get into the market ahead of the tax change 
on the purchase of investment properties.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Feu-referendum-uk-housing-market-house-buyers-decline-inquiries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F632078c493030f0f1d9c7a7edec62d5a5c1692fe%2F0_0_3787_2272%2F3787.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%20uncertainty%20weighs%20on%20UK%20housing%20market&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Feu-referendum-uk-housing-market-house-buyers-decline-inquiries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU%20referendum%20uncertainty%20weighs%20on%20UK%20housing%20market&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Feu-referendum-uk-housing-market-house-buyers-decline-inquiries%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F632078c493030f0f1d9c7a7edec62d5a5c1692fe%2F0_0_3787_2272%2F3787.jpg>
 A vote to remain in the EU could revive the housing market, a surveyor told 
Rics. Photograph: Xinhua/Barcroft Media 
The survey found that in the longer term house prices were thought likely to 
regain momentum, with surveyors predicting increases of 4.1% a year for the 
next five years. Rents are predicted to rise more quickly, increasing at a pace 
of 4.7% a year.

Lucian Cook, head of residential research at property firm Savills, said: 
“When the gap between the number of homes coming to the market and new buyer 
numbers widens, we can expect a slowing of activity or price growth. This is 
the first time we’ve seen this across the UK as a whole, which points to 
pre-referendum uncertainty.”

Cook said in London the market had been cooling for several months “and is a 
real reflection of stretched affordability in the capital which has now 
translated into slowing house price growth which we expect to continue. This 
said, assuming interest rates remain low, the fundamentals of supply and demand 
in the capital mean that we do not anticipate price correction.”


Among the respondents to the Rics survey was Richard Banks, from the G Herbert 
Banks estate agency in Worcestershire. “I suggest that the referendum has 
slowed things down and if we get a remain vote I believe things will pick up 
again. An out vote will be a disaster for the property market,” he said.
 