
The European Medical Corps 
<http://ec.europa.eu/echo/content/launch-european-medical-corps_en> (EMC) 
recently set up by the EU is being sent on its first mission – to help tackle 
theoutbreak of yellow fever in Angola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/13/angola-yellow-fever-outbreak-shows-that-funding-vaccines-is-critical>
.

Since the first case of the mosquito-transmitted disease was reported in the 
capital, Luanda, in December 2015,293 people have died, amid some 2,267 
reported cases 
<http://www.who.int/emergencies/yellow-fever/situation-reports/12-may-2016/en/>.

Angola's yellow fever outbreak shows funding vaccines is critical | Sam Agbo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/13/angola-yellow-fever-outbreak-shows-that-funding-vaccines-is-critical>
The EMC was created in February in the wake of the west Africa Ebola crisis, 
during which some11,000 people died of the disease 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/13/ebola-epidemic-over-liberia-expects-all-clear-world-health-organisation>
. It has ready-to-deploy teams from nine EU member states – Belgium, 
Luxembourg, Spain, Germany, the Czech Republic, France, the Netherlands, 
Finland and Sweden – and is part of the European Emergency Response Capacity, 
under the EU Civil Protection Mechanism.

The commissioner for humanitarian aid and crisis management, Christos 
Stylianides, said: “We have learned the lessons from the Ebola crisis.

“Today, we are deploying a first team of public health experts as part of the 
European Medical Corps. They will complement the efforts of the Angolan 
government and work closely with the WorldHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Organisation and other 
international partners on the ground to deal with the yellow fever outbreak. 
Together we can understand it better and stop it faster.”

The European Commission’s humanitarian aid and civil protection department 
says that during the two-week mission the EMC team, made up of experts from 
Germany, Portugal and Belgium, will investigate the epidemiological 
characteristics of the outbreak.

It will also assess the risk of it spreading further – including outside Angola
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/angola> – look at the implications for 
European travellers to the country, and help local doctors.

The virus has spread to the neighbouring Democratic Republic of the Congo. 
Cases have been reported in Kenya, Uganda and Mauritania 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-04-13/yellow-fever-outbreak-spreads-to-dr-congo-vaccine-shortage/7324180>
. Anumber of cases have been reported in China among workers returning home 
from Angola <http://www.who.int/csr/don/6-april-2016-yellow-fever-china/en/>.



American doctors, writing in the Journal of the American Medical Association 
<http://jama.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=2522030>, have warned it 
could become a global crisis due to alack of vaccines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/13/angola-yellow-fever-outbreak-shows-that-funding-vaccines-is-critical>
, which take six months to produce.



In Angola, which suffered previous outbreaks in 1971 and 1988, about 5 million 
people have been vaccinated, according to the World Health Organisation 
<http://www.who.int/features/2016/yellow-fever-angola/en/>, out of a population 
of 24 million <http://data.worldbank.org/country/angola>. In much of 
sub-Saharan Africa, vaccination is advised for visitors.





Yellow fever is an acute viral haemorrhagic disease 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs100/en/> for which there is no 
cure. Initial symptoms include backache, muscle pain, fever, headache and 
shivering.

 