
Four central European countries are prepared to veto any Brexit deal agreed 
between the UK and theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> 
that restricts their citizens’ rights to live and work in Britain, the prime 
minister of Slovakia has said.

In a stark reminder of the challenge Britain faces at the negotiating table, 
Robert Fico said Hungary, Poland, the Czech Republic and Slovakia – known as the
Visegrad, or V4, group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/23/poland-czech-republic-hungary-slovakia-brussels-brexit>
 – would not hesitate to block any future trade accord that threatened the key 
EU principle of free movement of workers.

Brexit vote was rejection of economic status quo, says Jeremy Corbyn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/15/brexit-vote-was-rejection-of-economic-status-quo-says-jeremy-corbyn>
“The V4 countries will be uncompromising,” Fico said on Saturday, a day after 
EU leaders met informally in Bratislava, without Britain, to try to chart a 
roadmap for the bloc’s future after theshock of the Brexit vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/britain-votes-for-brexit-eu-referendum-david-cameron>
.

“Unless we feel a guarantee that these people [living and working in Britain] 
are equal, we will veto any agreement between the EU and Britain,” Fico told 
Reuters. “I think Britain knows this is an issue for us where there’s no room 
for compromise.”

London has not yet revealed what kind of trade agreement it wants with the 
European Union, but has saidits priority is to control EU immigration  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/31/restricting-immigration-will-be-at-heart-of-brexit-deal-theresa-may-says>
while maximising opportunities for trade.

The European commission and parliament, in addition to the 27 remaining member 
states who must all ratify a future Brexit trade deal, have repeatedly made 
clear that enhancedaccess to the single market will not be on offer  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/28/brussels-eu-summit-leaders-push-quick-divorce-cameron-germany-brexit>
unless Britain accepts free movement.

Brexit was not formally discussed at Friday’s meeting, but the commission’s 
president, Jean-Claude Juncker, reiterated the bloc’s stance at a press 
conference, saying he could not see “any possibility of compromising” on the 
question.

Fico also stressed after the summit that he and other central European 
governments would not allow their nationals to become “second-class citizens”.

He said on Saturday that fierce Visegrad opposition to mandatory quotas for 
refugees had persuaded the EU to shift its approach to the migrant crisis. The 
bloc will now pursue a new principle of “flexible solidarity”, he said, 
although it is not yet clear what that might mean in practice.

Fico said the V4 countries would show the same determination in defending 
their common interest in protecting their citizens’ rights to work in Britain, 
reiterating that there could be no “cherry-picking” in upcoming Brexit 
negotiations and that EU freedoms must be respected.

Britain has said it will not start the formal two-year talks to leave the EU 
this year because it needs time to consider its position, but could do so next 
year. In principle the article 50 exit deal, which the EU will approve by 
qualified majority voting, must be concluded before the new trade deal – which 
will require unanimity – can be addressed.

What is article 50 and why is it so central to the Brexit debate?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/25/article-50-brexit-debate-britain-eu>
On Friday the European council president, Donald Tusk, said in Bratislava that 
he believed following a meeting with the prime minister, Theresa May, that
article 50 would probably be invoked in January or February 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/16/theresa-may-likely-trigger-article-50-brexit-talks-early-2017>
.

However, a Downing Street source said on Saturday that the prime minister did 
not specifically mention January or February at the meeting and that Tusk’s 
comments were an “interpretation” of their conversation.

Fico said the Visegrad group would continue to adopt and defend common 
positions, which he described as being sometimes more “pragmatic” than other EU 
nations owing to the four states’ history since the second world war and the 
collapse of the communist bloc.

He said he wanted migration issues to be more clearly addressed in the bloc’s 
future roadmap, but was happy that border security was more of a priority and 
that discussion was now underway on flexible solidarity to allow countries to 
offer what they feel they can to help resolve the migrant crisis.
 