
Antoine de Caunes is a novelist, actor, film director and television 
presenter. His greatest talent, however, may well be his ability to keep a 
straight face. It’s a skill he’s making use of as he lists the guests appearing 
in a special edition of his show Eurotrash. “There is this guy named Human 
Nature who transforms himself into different animals, and he will transform 
himself into a unicorn,” he says, his face betraying no glimmer of smirk. “It’s 
very spectacular, it’s not just a guy in some makeup. Really spectacular.”

After some thought, Antoine continues: “We have the Spanish psychic that can 
read the future in vegetables and fruits…”

At this point, the face of the man sitting next to Antoine, his co-host, the 
fashion designerJean Paul Gaultier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/jean-paul-gaultier>, lights up. He 
has remembered another guest: “We have a guy who does something, not sex, with 
his dick …”

“Voila: Pricasso!” says Antoine, triumphantly. “He is the most brilliant 
artist, who is doing some portraits with his dick. He’s painting a portrait of 
Jean Paul.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Feurotrash-is-back-brexit-special-we-have-a-guy-who-paints-portraits-with-his-penis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ef8279717740ef08b8e79ec6560c3b4e0a584cd%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eurotrash%20is%20back!%20%E2%80%98We%20have%20a%20guy%20who%20paints%20portraits%20with%20his%20penis%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Feurotrash-is-back-brexit-special-we-have-a-guy-who-paints-portraits-with-his-penis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eurotrash%20is%20back%21%20%E2%80%98We%20have%20a%20guy%20who%20paints%20portraits%20with%20his%20penis%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Feurotrash-is-back-brexit-special-we-have-a-guy-who-paints-portraits-with-his-penis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ef8279717740ef08b8e79ec6560c3b4e0a584cd%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Pricasso with presenters De Caunes and Gaultier. Photograph: Stuart 
Thomas/Channel 4 
The EU referendum has brought us its share of heated debate about the economy, 
immigration and trade. As of next Friday, it also brings a reprise of a gaudy, 
wry and very human television show: Eurotrash. First shown on Channel 4 in 
1993, the programme was part of a lurid flowering in broadcasting – see also 
music show The Word – that became known as “post-pub TV”.

From singing dogs to the Schrobenhausen Asparagus Queen, erotic performers to 
chefs, Eurotrash combed the continent (and occasionally the world) for the 
outrageous, the eccentric and the entertaining. A mix of studio guests, 
location reportage and bits to camera, the show had an air of spontaneity, a 
risque humour and a bright, DIY aesthetic. It cost a lot to make – reportedly 
£500,000 per hour – but then, as Dolly Parton memorably said, it takes a lot of 
money to look this cheap. Nor was it money ill spent; at its peak the programme 
secured a 20% audience share for its timeslot.

The show had some favourite characters in its 16 series. Lolo Ferrari and Eddy 
Wally will both be remembered in a retrospective segment of this week’s EU 
referendum-themed show. Wally, who died this year, was a Flemish singer who 
wouldn’t stop singing (“A nightmare to interview,” says Antoine). Lolo, a 
French dancer, was a “sweet, beautiful” character, encouraged by her husband to 
have dramatic breast augmentation; she killed herself in 2000. Both also fondly 
remember Mr Penguin, a man from Belgium who so loved the flightless birds that 
he dressed as one.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfEJl_Qazyy4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfEJl_Qazyy4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfEJl_Qazyy4&media=>
Beyond the stories, it was the partnership of De Caunes (screen persona: 
twinkling, cynical wit) and Gaultier (wide-eyed ingenue) that elevated the show 
into something special. “Banter” is now a debased concept, but the infectious 
humour that still passes between 62-year-old Antoine (brown leather jacket, 
jeans) and 64-year-old Jean Paul (black suit, black-and-white polka-dot tie) is 
the product of a natural, long-standing rapport.


Friends for nearly 40 years, they socialised on the Paris club scene of the 
early 1980s. A favourite haunt then was Le Palace, a club that broke the rules 
of what the pair remember as an inflexible Parisian social order. “It was a 
nice, creative time in Paris in the 1980s,” remembers Jean Paul. “The Palace 
was the only club that was a little like English clubs, with the mixing of 
different social classes.” (It also provided the theme of Jean Paul’s 2016 
couture collection.)

As their careers developed, the pair kept up a friendship. When Channel 4 
sought a new magazine programme after De Caunes’s success on pacy music show 
Rapido, producer Peter Stuart, an American living in Europe, tapped into their 
chemistry. “He said: ‘Why don’t we do something about all these strange 
characters that would show the Brits that Europe is an interesting place?’” 
remembers Antoine. “And because he has a very sick mind he came up with this 
idea.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Feurotrash-is-back-brexit-special-we-have-a-guy-who-paints-portraits-with-his-penis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F690c68a458f63500c8122d66e1b0dcc706f7c1f3%2F216_5_2706_1623%2F2706.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eurotrash%20is%20back!%20%E2%80%98We%20have%20a%20guy%20who%20paints%20portraits%20with%20his%20penis%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Feurotrash-is-back-brexit-special-we-have-a-guy-who-paints-portraits-with-his-penis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eurotrash%20is%20back%21%20%E2%80%98We%20have%20a%20guy%20who%20paints%20portraits%20with%20his%20penis%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Feurotrash-is-back-brexit-special-we-have-a-guy-who-paints-portraits-with-his-penis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F690c68a458f63500c8122d66e1b0dcc706f7c1f3%2F216_5_2706_1623%2F2706.jpg>
 De Caunes and Gaultier as Charles and Camilla. 
For Gaultier, the proposal came at a transitional point in his life. “My 
partner died,” he says. “This became like a recreation, like going back to 
school, doing stupid things. For me, it was like therapy because I’m shy, 
though maybe it doesn’t look like it. It gave me confidence and I was having 
fun.”

The scene in the studio today suggests that still holds true. Despite brutal 
deadlines (the show is being shot in one day), high spirits remain intact as 
the pair shoot their links and sketches. In principle, this one-off special 
attempts to help the viewer decide their position on the EU: whether to leave 
(represented by the cynical De Caunes persona) or remain (enthusiastic Jean 
Paul). In practice, we watch as Ukrainian pop stars NikitA and six back-up 
dancers perform a dance routine based on the video of their 2011 hit Verevki, 
in which the pair walk naked around a supermarket. Later, Antoine and Jean Paul 
reprise popular roles as Prince Charles and Camilla Parker-Bowles (Jean Paul: 
“She is a style inspiration”) and Eddie Izzard pops by to deliver some surreal 
recommendations on where to visit in Europe.

More serious comment comes with a discussion of European member nations. It is 
illustrated by a map, as Antoine points out, “painted on the body of a 
semi-naked contortionist. Just to keep things interesting …” A dancer dressed 
in marabou feathers walks across the set with a card promising a “European fun 
tax”.

It’s all entertaining stuff, the pair regularly corpsing, and occasionally 
being reprimanded by Stuart (on directing duties) for sounding too French. But 
does Eurotrash – birthed in the pre-internet era – still have a place, now 
eccentricity and titillation are accessible to anyone? Times have changed to 
the point where dogs doing tricks and people with “unique talents” are the 
stuff of primetime TV.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Feurotrash-is-back-brexit-special-we-have-a-guy-who-paints-portraits-with-his-penis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57da495b1daff7a954d0c42f4589e69245ea2818%2F0_200_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eurotrash%20is%20back!%20%E2%80%98We%20have%20a%20guy%20who%20paints%20portraits%20with%20his%20penis%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Feurotrash-is-back-brexit-special-we-have-a-guy-who-paints-portraits-with-his-penis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eurotrash%20is%20back%21%20%E2%80%98We%20have%20a%20guy%20who%20paints%20portraits%20with%20his%20penis%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Feurotrash-is-back-brexit-special-we-have-a-guy-who-paints-portraits-with-his-penis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57da495b1daff7a954d0c42f4589e69245ea2818%2F0_200_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Antoine doesn’t deny the world has changed, but maintains that Eurotrash has a 
part to play. “You can get anything now,” he says, “except without the point of 
view. With Eurotrash, we are the editors. We care for these people, their 
stories are interesting. It’s not just freaky, showbizzy.”

De Caunes – these days the anchor of French news and talk show Le Grand 
Journal – doesn’t like the idea of trash and doesn’t watch TV. Still, he says 
Eurotrash operates in a different world from, say, TV talent shows. “I don’t 
like the idea of exploiting what people have, or putting them on show,” he 
says. “I know it is a goofy show, but the point of Eurotrash is not to make fun 
of them but to have funwith them. I don’t look at people as circus animals.”

Both Antoine and Jean Paul are adamant that, while Eurotrash works in England, 
it would never be tolerated in their native France, a “very, very serious” 
place where self-mockery is inadmissible.

Q&A: Jean Paul Gaultier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/apr/12/jean-paul-gaultier-q-and-a> 
“Brits have an irony about themselves which the French don’t have,” says Jean 
Paul. “Maybe that’s it! You like yourselves, so you can criticise yourselves. 
But at the same time you have a view of what is funny about you, and cultivate 
it.”

The same might equally be said of Antoine and Jean Paul, fluent in a very 
British line in self-deprecation. They have no difficulties with celebrity, 
they explain, or with being recognised, as they enter their own very strange 
spotlight once again.

“Perhaps people look at Jean Paul because he is blond,” says Antoine.

“People look at him because he is good-looking,” says Jean Paul.

“We have been around for a while,” decides Antoine, “and people look at us 
like something that has been around. Like a piece of furniture…”

Jean-Paul hoots with laughter: “Like an antique!”

Eurotrash airs on Friday 17 June at 9pm on Channel 4
 