
The first day of the official 10-week EU referendum campaign kicks off on 
Friday after months of in-fighting and backbiting, with the leave campaign 
arguing that Brexit would save the NHS and the remain campaign claiming that a 
vote to leave could risk a 2008-style financial crash.

The official campaign period includes rules on spending and in other areas 
ahead of the vote on 23 June. The two official campaigns can spend up to £7m 
each on campaigning, with £600,000 in public funds, and get a free mailshot and 
national TV broadcast.

The mayor of London, Boris Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris>
, a prominent figure in the official Vote Leave campaign, will use a rally in 
Manchester on Friday night to argue that Brexit would give the NHS a 
multibillion-pound boost, claiming a large chunk of the UK’s £10.6bn net 
contribution to Brussels could be diverted to pay for hospital beds.

He will go on to make speeches in Leeds and Newcastle this weekend as Vote 
Leave points to predictions showing the health service could face a shortfall 
in funding of £12.3bn by 2020-21. The move has been interpreted as an attempt 
to reach Labour voters.

Meanwhile, the former chancellor Alistair Darling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alistairdarling> will issue the latest in 
a long line of dire warnings from the campaign to stay in the EU. Giving a 
speech in Westminster, Darling, who led the campaign to keep Scotland in the 
UK, will say dark clouds are gathering on the horizon and point to what 
happened when economic confidence collapsed in 2008.

“The single most important determinant of the health of our economy is 
confidence, and it is waning as the risk of leaving comes in to focus,” he will 
say.

“We know what happens when confidence plummets. We saw that in 2008 and we are 
still living with the consequences of the global financial crash. Confidence 
remains low and uncertainty is making that worse.

“When the IMF single us out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/12/imf-says-britain-leaving-the-eu-is-a-significant-risk>
 as facing what will be a self-inflicted wound, we can’t ignore it. We can’t 
afford to take a decision where no one on the other side has any clear idea of 
where we would end up if we left.”

Darling’s speech comes after the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, speaking to an 
audience of Labour-supporting students and trade unionists in London on 
Thursday,made his case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/14/jeremy-corbyn-leaving-eu-would-lead-to-bonfire-of-rights>
 for staying in the European Union in his first major speech on the subject.

Responding to calls for him to step up the fight for Britain to remain in the 
EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/09/labour-mps-urge-corbyn-to-do-more-in-pro-eu-debate>
, Corbyn warned that Brexit could give a Conservative government the 
opportunity to slash protection for workers, in a “bonfire of rights”.

Remain campaigners are concerned at a fall in support from Labour voters, with 
the coverage of the debate so far primarily focused on Connservative party 
splits. Labour voters are twice as likely to vote to stay in the EU, but 
concerns are mounting that they could be put off from turning out to vote.

Speaking to BBC Radio 4’s Today programme on Friday, Darling admitted there 
were similarities between the campaign to persuade Scotland to stay in the UK 
and the pro-EU campaign, both of which have been dubbed “Project Fear” by 
rivals.

“There are similarities actually, in that we are being invited – in both 
cases, in the Scottish referendum and now – to take something of a leap into 
the unknown, a leap into the dark,” he said. “What I’m saying is that there is 
overwhelming economic evidence that we are better off, stronger and more secure 
being part of theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, the 
largest market in the world.”

The leader of the House of Commons, Chris Grayling, will become the first 
Conservative cabinet minister to share a platform with the Ukip leader, Nigel 
Farage, on Monday, as the rival Brexit groups seek to adopt a united front. The 
Vote Leave campaign, which counts Tory government ministers in its ranks, was 
designated the official anti-EU campaignon Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/13/vote-leave-official-brexit-campaign-eu-referendum-boris-johnson>
, causing outrage among the rival campaigns.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fyanis-varoufakis-eu-owen-jones-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Yanis%20Varoufakis%3A%20'I'd%20love%20to%20give%20Brussels%20a%20bloody%20nose'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fyanis-varoufakis-eu-owen-jones-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Yanis%20Varoufakis%3A%20%27I%27d%20love%20to%20give%20Brussels%20a%20bloody%20nose%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fyanis-varoufakis-eu-owen-jones-video-interview&media=>
Yanis Varoufakis: ‘I’d love to give Brussels a bloody nose’ – video interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2016/apr/15/yanis-varoufakis-eu-owen-jones-video-interview> 