
Portugal went top of Group I with a 2-1 win over Serbia on Sunday.

Defenders scored both Portuguese goals as Ricardo Carvalho and Fábio Coentrão 
netted in each half, either side of a spectacular equaliser from Nemanja Matic 
with an overhead kick.

Portugal’s third straight win under Fernando Santos, who took charge after 
Cristiano Ronaldo’s team lost its opening qualifier against Albania, gave them 
nine points from four games. It is two points ahead of second-place Denmark, 
which has a game in hand, and Albania, which beatArmenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/armenia> 2-1 In the day’s other Group I 
game.

Serbia has one point from four games as it tries to make up lost ground after 
being deducted three points for disturbances during a home qualifier against
Albania <https://www.theguardian.com/football/albania> last October.

The top two from the nine groups qualify automatically for Euro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016>.

Carvalho, unmarked in the Serbian penalty area, headed in Danny’s cross after 
10 minutes, puttingPortugal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/portugal> on 
the road to victory despite a patchy performance.

Portugal shifted down a gear after the goal and allowed openings for the 
Serbians, with Dusan Tadic shooting wide.

Ronaldo had little influence on the game until he unleashed a powerful 
swerving shot on the half-hour which Vladimir Stojkovic just managed to push 
wide, and two minutes later the striker pierced the visitor’s defence with a 
run before he was closed down.

Matic levelled with a bicycle kick inside the Portuguese area, but two minutes 
later Coentrão was at the back post to tap in João Moutinho’s low cross from 
the right.

Portugal coach Santos was barred from contact with players at the Stadium of 
Light in Lisbon as he served the first of a two-game ban for improper conduct 
at last year’s World Cup, where he ledGreece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/greece>. Claudiu Keseru’s goal was enough 
to seeRomania beat the Faroe Islands 1-0 and stay ahead of Northern Ireland at 
the top of Group F by a single point.Hungary and Greece drew 0-0 in Budapest, 
leaving the Euro 2004 champions bottom of the group.

Albania moved into contention to qualify from Group I as goals from Mergim 
Mavraj and Shkelzen Gashi saw them come from behind to beatArmenia.
 