
5.42pm BST 

Cameron and Merkel settle in for a night of talks

David Cameron has arrived in Berlin and is meeting with his German 
counterpart, Angela Merkel.

Shortly after arriving, Merkel showed Cameron around the grounds of her 
country mansion posing for pictures and doing lots of statesman-like pointing 
into the distance.

They then headed inside for a fireside chat to sort out all of Europe's 
problems.

And with two of Europe's most powerful leaders settling in for the night, it 
marks a good point to end today's live coverage of the eurozone crisis.

Thank you for all your comments and enjoy the weekend, we'll be back on Monday.
 German Chancellor Angela Merkel and her husband Joachim Sauer welcome David 
and Samantha Cameron. Photograph: FABRIZIO BENSCH/REUTERS 
5.32pm BST 

Family portrait
 European finance ministers poses during their meeting in Dublin. Photograph: 
CATHAL MCNAUGHTON/REUTERS 
As promised, here's the family portrait of the EU ministers at their meeting 
in Dublin.

5.11pm BST 

Merkel and Cameron meet

David Cameron has arrived at Angela Merkel's country retreat and both are 
posing for photos with their spouses.

Meanwhile, to get you in the mood, the Open Europe blog has written a list of 
10 things Cameron shouldn't say to Merkel. 
<http://openeuropeblog.blogspot.co.uk/2013/04/10-things-that-david-cameron-should-not.html>

These include:

"I always thought the ECB should become more activist."

and

"Can you point me to that no-bailout clause in the EU treaties again?" 

Elsewhere, the often amusing Angela Merkel twitter feed has tweeted about 
David Cameron bringing his family to stay in Germany overnight.(see 12.33pm) 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2013/apr/12/eurozone-crisis-live-cameron-merkel-eurogroup#block-5167f11de4b046e93b9621e0>
Angela Merkel (not) (@Queen_Europe) 
For f***'s sake, when I told David to bring the kids I meant @williamjhague 
<https://twitter.com/williamjhague> and that Chancellor dude.
 <https://twitter.com/Queen_Europe/status/322741285507186688> April 12, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/Queen_Europe/status/322741285507186688> 
Updated at 5.17pm BST

5.02pm BST 

New Portugal spending cuts agreed

Over in Lisbon, the Portuguese government has presented new spending cut plans 
to the EU after a court rejected its initial €1.3bn austerity measures for this 
year.

The cuts are required as part of the agreement for its €78bn bailout.

The government will implement new spending cuts worth €600m at all ministries 
and bring forward the same amount of reductions envisaged for 2014.

In return, eurozone finance ministers will extend Portugal's loan maturity 
date by seven years.

4.26pm BST 

The eurozone finance ministers have finally made it out for their group photo. 
Will upload a picture shortly. The photographer just shouted "and one more but 
look happier!"

4.19pm BST 

Just to add some context, the last time gold fell below $1,500 an ounce was in 
July 2011

4.14pm BST 
Steve Goldstein (@MKTWgoldstein) 
Wow, what's dropping faster, #bitcoin <https://twitter.com/search/%23bitcoin> 
or gold? Latest: Gold -$60 , sub $1,500 an ounce; Bitcoin, down $54, at $69 BTC
 <https://twitter.com/MKTWgoldstein/status/322728181100584960> April 12, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/MKTWgoldstein/status/322728181100584960> Michael Hewson 
(@michaelhewson) 
Looking forward to paying less at the pump in light of recent falls in oil 
prices - Brent $101.30#oil <https://twitter.com/search/%23oil> #notholdingbreath
 <https://twitter.com/search/%23notholdingbreath>
 <https://twitter.com/michaelhewson/status/322728776637239296> April 12, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/michaelhewson/status/322728776637239296> 
Updated at 4.14pm BST

4.10pm BST 

Gold below $1,500

Gold prices are plunging today despite poor US retail figures today and 
declining consumer confidence, which usually leads to a boost for gold as a 
save haven.

It is now down 3% today to $1,497 an ounce. Silver is also suffering.

It won't be much help for Cyprus, who are considering selling its gold 
reserves to raise funds for its bailout agreement.

3.46pm BST 

Busy FinMins

The eurozone finance minster meetings is Dublin continue, and they must've got 
really stuck into their discussions because they are now running late for their 
family photo which was due 15 minutes ago. Latest estimates are that they will 
be ready in 10 minutes, unless negotiations over where in the lineup each 
minister stands have reached an impasse.

One topic that hasn't been covered in discussions today has been the concern 
over Slovenia (see below).

3.29pm BST 

Slovenia banking boss supports €1bn estimate for recapitalisation

Staying in Slovenia, the head of the country's largest bank said the 
government's estimate that around €1bn is needed to recapitalise the country's 
three main lenders is correct, despite the OECD questioning it earlier this 
week.

Janko Medja, head of Nova Ljubljanska Banka, said plans to sell a bank, as 
suggested by the Slovenia PM, won't happen for at least a year.

On Tuesday the OECD had said it believed the government may have 
underestimated the amount needed for recapitalising the banks.

2.57pm BST 

Slovenia PM: asset sales plans due in 14 days

In Slovenia, seen as the next eurozone country to fall into trouble, 
privatisation plans will be put to the country's parliament in two weeks, 
according to the PM.

The plan to sell off state assets, including a bank, is aimed at avoiding a 
bailout.

PM Alenka Bratusek said she would send a stability programme to EU partners by 
May 9.

The country needs to raise €3bn to cover its budget deficit, recapitalise its 
state-owned banks and repay maturing debt.

Bratusek said

We will immediately start processes to privatise one or two companies. My wish 
is that one of those would be a bank
 Slovenian Prime Minister Alenka Bratusek assured Brussels reforms will 
continue in the hope of avoiding a bailout. Photograph: Xinhua/Landov/Barcroft 
Media 
2.48pm BST 

Herman speaks

President of the European Council tweets
Herman Van Rompuy (@euHvR) 
I have decided to put tax evasion on agenda of next #EUCO 
<https://twitter.com/search/%23EUCO> 22 May. We must seize this political 
momentum.ow.ly/k0cc4 <http://t.co/S3FXE0Rcgk> #euro 
<https://twitter.com/search/%23euro>
 <https://twitter.com/euHvR/status/322706539523735552> April 12, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/euHvR/status/322706539523735552> 
1.39pm BST 

German gold smuggler

It has just been pointed out by AP that the German man arrested trying to 
board a plane in Athens 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2013/apr/12/eurozone-crisis-live-cameron-merkel-eurogroup#block-5167f307e4b046e93b9621e1>
 with gold in his luggage didn't have half a ton, but just 7kg.

A decimal point went astray in the original story. Police found 7.185kg, not 
7,185kg.

It's not just the weight of the gold that has changed, it's value also fell 3% 
this week, below $1,530, to its lowest point in almost a year.

1.32pm BST 

Cyprus gold

Dijsselbloem says there will be on pressure put on Cyprus to sell its gold to 
fund the bailout.

He said

Selling some gold has always been a option put forward by the Cypriot 
authorities, but this is a decision to be made independently and it is not any 
demand from the Troika or Eurogroup.

And with that, the press conference has now ended.

1.28pm BST 

Draghi confirms that he has told the Cyprus president that he cannot sack the 
country's bank governor, Panicos Demetriades.

He said the independence of the ECB is enshrined in EU law and will not 
interfere in the running of the bank.

1.23pm BST 

Cyprus loan

Olli Rehn, the Finnish finance minister, says the €17bn Cyprus bailout was for 
net financing needs, while the new figure of €23bn is for gross financing.

The €23bn figure came from a leaked document which an exasperated Rehn said 
shouldn't be relied on.

It's like comparing apples with pears and ending up with oranges.

That's what happens when you write stories based on leaked documents.

Also asked how Cyprus will return to growth in just two years, he said

There is a lot of uncertainty for the exact growth of Cyprus

Interesting that the predictions are already being questioned when the loan 
hasn't even arrived yet.

1.11pm BST 
Nick Malkoutzis (@NickMalkoutzis) 
A Eurogroup statement while there's still daylight? It feels wrong.
 <https://twitter.com/NickMalkoutzis/status/322682612315475968> April 12, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/NickMalkoutzis/status/322682612315475968> 
1.10pm BST 

Eurogroup statement on Cyprus

The eurozone finance ministers have issued a joint statement on Cyprus. 
<http://bit.ly/10ZEAlw>

Here's a slice to whet your palate:

The Eurogroup notes with satisfaction that the Cypriot authorities have 
implemented decisive bank
resolution, restructuring and recapitalisation measures to address the fragile 
and unique situation of
Cyprus' financial sector. The Eurogroup commends the authorities for their 
demonstrated resolve in
implementing these important measures in a tight timeframe and reiterates its 
appreciation for the
efforts made by the Cypriot citizens over the last weeks.

Updated at 1.42pm BST

1.05pm BST 

The ECB head Mario Draghi is at the Dublin press conference but has decided he 
has "nothing to add" to proceedings.

1.03pm BST 

Cyprus loan increase "not discussed"

Austrian finance minister Maria Fekter says talk of increasing the €10bn 
Cyprus loan was not discussed in meetings this morning.

12.58pm BST 

He also urges the Troika group of lenders and Greece to accelerate talks.

12.57pm BST 

Dijsselbloem says Ireland is a living, breathing example that the adjustment 
programme works.

He adds that ministers would like to extend loans to Ireland and Portugal by 
another seven years.

12.54pm BST 

Cyprus update
Francine Lacqua (@flacqua) 
#Cyprus <https://twitter.com/search/%23Cyprus> hasn’t requested additional 
financial aid: spokesman
 <https://twitter.com/flacqua/status/322678312986083328> April 12, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/flacqua/status/322678312986083328> 
12.52pm BST 

Dublin press conference begins

Jeroen Dijsselbloem, the Dutch finance minister, is now taking at the eurozone 
meeting in Dublin.

The conference can be watched here <http://www.eu2013.ie/press-centre/>

He is currently running through the discussions that have been held, in 
particular the loan to Cyprus, which could be approved by April 24.

12.41pm BST 

German man arrested over gold smuggling

An unusual tale from Greece, where a German national has been arrested for 
trying to board a plane at Athens International Airport with half a ton of gold 
in his luggage.

Officials also found nearly €300,000 in cash, according to Greek website 
ekathimerini.com 
<http://www.ekathimerini.com/4dcgi/_w_articles_wsite1_1_12/04/2013_493377>

As Mike van Dulken points out
Mike van Dulken (@Accendo_Mike) 
That's an awkward excess baggage discussion RT @ekathimerini 
<https://twitter.com/ekathimerini>: German arrested with half a ton gold at 
Athens airportdlvr.it/3D5MCk <http://t.co/vUgXB9TNWF>
 <https://twitter.com/Accendo_Mike/status/322673574517305344> April 12, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/Accendo_Mike/status/322673574517305344> 
12.33pm BST 

Cameron heads to Germany

David Cameron is on his way to Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> to meet up with Angela Merkel, and 
this time he's bringing the family.

Samantha Cameron and their three children will be coming with him, making it 
the first official trip they've been on with the prime minister.

Since the weekend is approaching, they've been invited to stay with Merkel and 
her publicity shy husband Joachim Sauer, at her Meseberg residence - the 
equivalent of Chequers.

Official conversation will focus on the Syrian conflict, European reform and 
the forthcoming G8 summit.

Updated at 12.49pm BST

11.35am BST 

Germany: Cyprus loan non-negotiable

Confirming the line of Luxembourg's finance minister earlier, the German 
government has said the €10bn IMF loan is non-negotiable.

Eurozone finance ministers in Dublin gave political backing for the loan, but 
German government spokesmen said the amount was "not up for negotiation"

The international credit programme of about €10bn is of course very high in 
relation to the size of the Cypriot economy.

Updated at 12.23pm BST

10.32am BST 

Cyprus bailout

Adding to Cyprus's woes on learning the bailout needed has increased to €23bn, 
Luxembourg's finance minister, Luc Frieden, told German radio this morning that 
the IMF's €10bn contribution cannot be increased.

He said

I believe the policy will be that the volume will remain at €10bn.

I know that right now [financing needs] are somewhat higher for the period 
from 2013-2016, but we cannot do any more.

Updated at 10.57am BST

10.22am BST 

Irish bank debt maturities extended

Back in Dublin, our correspondent Henry McDonald writes

Ireland's finance minister has said he has secured a deal to extend Ireland's 
bank debt maturities by seven years.

Michael Noonan said he reached the agreement with the Republic's EU partners 
as he arrived in Dublin Castle this morning for the EU finance ministers' 
summit.

Eurogroup ministers are meeting first to discuss the proposed deal for Ireland 
and Portugal which would give both countries more time to repay the EU portion 
of the two countries' bailouts.

Speaking on his arrival at the meeting, Noonan said he was reasonably 
optimistic.

He said: "The discussions I have had over the last 48 hours were quite 
successful and there is certainly agreement in principle now.

"Whether there is any particular difficulty that arises from colleagues or 
not, we won’t know until it is openly discussed at meetings, but I am 
reasonably optimistic."
 Irish finance minister Michael Noonan (right) and Greek finance minister 
Ioannis Stournaras at the Dublin meetings. Photograph: Aidan Crawley/EPA 
Updated at 10.58am BST

10.03am BST 

Eurozone industrial output

Eurozone industrial output fell more than expected in February.

It dropped 3.1% compared with a year earlier and was up just 0.4% compared 
with January.

Bad news was compounded by a revision of January figures from -0.4% 
month-on-month to -0.6%

10.00am BST 

Cyprus by numbers

As we look forward to the eurozone finance ministers' meeting in Dublin, where 
it's hoped the refinancing of Cyprus can be agreed, here's a quick reminder of 
what money the country needs.

According to Reuters, Cyprus needs €23bn from the second quarter of 2013 to 
the first quarter of 2016.

The eurozone bailout fund will give €9bn, the IMF €1bn and Cyprus must find 
€13bn.

The €10bn international bailout will go on:

 * €2.5bn on recapitalising the remains of the banking sector 
 * €4.1bn on redeeming maturing government debt 
 * €3.4bn to cover fiscal needs of Cypriot government 
And Cyprus will make up its contribution from:

 * Up to €10.6bn from resolution on Laiki bank, losses imposed on junior 
shareholders and deposit for equity swap of uninsured depositors at Bank of 
Cyprus 
 * Up to €600m from corporate tax rise to 12.5% from 10% and doubling capital 
gains tax to 30% 
 * Around €400m from gold sales 
 * Up to €1bn from debt rollover 
 * €1.4bn from privatisation 
 * €100m from a reduction in interest rates on its Russian loans 
A full breakdown of the numbers can be found here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2013/apr/12/cyprus-bailout-key-details-breakdown>

Updated at 12.06pm BST

9.37am BST 

UK construction data

UK construction output rose in February by 5.5% compared with January, but 
fell 7% year-on-year, according to the ONS.

The previous year-on-year numbers in January was -7.9%.

Updated at 9.37am BST

9.11am BST 

IMF forecasts leaked

Bloomberg is running an article that, it claims, contains a draft of the 
International Monetary Fund's world economic outlook 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-04-11/imf-trims-u-s-growth-outlook-in-draft-report-citing-fiscal-cuts.html>
 due to be released next week. It contains a lowered forecast for US economic 
growth, Bloomberg says, will GDP expanding by 1.7% instead of 2% due to the 
automatic budget cuts and tax changes that have kicked in this year. The global 
economy has been inched lower as well, from 3.5% to 3.4%.

Updated at 9.11am BST

8.53am BST 

Osborne: Dublin meeting will be "low key"

The Press Association is quoting a Treasury source, saying that George Osborne 
will attend the gathering of EU finance ministers but it will be "rather low 
key from a UK perspective."This means that the UK won't be extending any 
bilateral loans to Cyprus and will not be closely involved in discussions about 
a banking union and the eurozone-wide banking supervisor. UK banks are not 
expected to be subjected to the authority. The treasury minister, Greg Clark, 
will also be attending.

8.42am BST 

This WSJ comment piece about Cyprus is being tweeted this morning. The intro 
is pointed.
Yiannis Mouzakis (@YiannisMouzakis) 
"Never in the field of government bailouts have so many lost so much 
credibility over such a small sum of money"on.wsj.com/10S3HYC 
<http://t.co/OINkLhwF2n>
 <https://twitter.com/YiannisMouzakis/status/322614150884884480> April 12, 2013
 <https://twitter.com/YiannisMouzakis/status/322614150884884480> 
8.39am BST 

Market update

The FTSE got off to a negative start this morning, down 20.31 points or 0.3% 
at 6395. Reuters attributes this to profit taking - the FTSE has been on a good 
run - and concerns that Cyprus and others will require deeper bailouts.

Meanwhile, the pan-European FTSEurofirst 300 index has also slipped 0.3% in 
early trading.

Richard Perry, chief strategist at Central Markets, said:

There is the potential that Cyprus may need more money, and that may be a 
reason for investors to book a bit of profit on the back of the recent strong 
run.

Updated at 8.40am BST

8.29am BST 

Dijsselbloem speaks

Mind out markets, Jeroen Dijsselbloem, the Dutch finance minister and head of 
the Eurogroup, has given an interview. But it looks slightly more benign than 
his index-rattling efforts last month, when he said the Cyprus deposit-raid
might be a blueprint for all future EU bailouts 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/mar/25/cyprus-bailout-dijsselbloem-chaos-markets>
.

In his interview with the Irish Times 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/business/economy/europe/jeroen-dijseelbloem-outlook-for-ireland-is-rather-positive-1.1357692>
 he says the outlook for Ireland - one of five EU countries to receive a 
bailout (if you count Spain's banks) - is "rather positive". He dances around 
the notorious "template" comments about Cyprus, stressing that "we have to work 
towards a different way of working with banking crises in the future." But he 
uses a phrase - bail-in - that is a euphemism for tapping savers' deposits 
above €100,000 (and bondholders too). So the issue of deposit raids - Cypriots 
are facing a bigger wipeout than first thought after events of recent days - 
won't go away. He says:

In a post-crisis situation you need mechanisms to deal with these problems. We 
are working on those – in the resolution and recovery directive there will be a 
way of dealing with a ‘bail-in’, giving us the instruments to do bailins in a 
proper way.

He goes on to say that deposits above €100,000 are still fair game.

There will be a hierarchy and the uninsured depositors will be at the end of 
the hierarchy... I can’t speculate on what the outcome is, but they’re 
definitely included in the proposal that’s now on the table [to deal with 
future crises].

Updated at 12.50pm BST

8.17am BST 

Henry McDonald, our Ireland correspondent, says today's meeting of Eurogroup 
finance ministers and heads of central banks in Dublin will be picketed by 
members of the Republic's largest police union.

Up to 30 members of the Garda Representative Association's central executive 
have gathered outside Dublin Castle where the Eurogroup event for finance 
ministers is taking place. 

The GRA say they have staged the picket in protest at what they call the 
"unfairness" of cuts imposed on rank and file police officers in the state. 

GRA general secretary PJ Stone said this morning: "We have been badly treated 
by our political masters, and having been repeatedly denied the opportunity to 
directly negotiate our pay, we must express our anger and frustration through 
our continued placard protest."

Their placards include: "IRELAND Support your Police" and "IRLAND Unterstutze 
Deine Polizei".

The sight of the union representing more than 11,000 Gardai picketing their 
own government organised pan-European event will be an embarrassment for the 
Fine Gael-Labour coalition. Ireland holds the EU Presidency up until midway 
through this year. 

The stability of the European financial system and the growth prospects for 
the Union are a key topic for today.

Tomorrow, ministers will look at more information sharing between tax 
authorities.

The sharing of information is to combat tax evasion is also on the agenda at 
Dublin Castle.

Updated at 8.23am BST

8.17am BST 

Spotlight on Dublin and Berlin

Morning all - it is a day of gatherings for the eurozone. Given that it is the 
year of the gathering in Ireland (to celebrate the country's considerable 
cultural and genealogical wattage), there is appropriately enough a meeting of 
Eurogroup finance ministers in Dublin. They will discuss theongoing crisis in 
Cyprus 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2013/apr/11/cyprus-bailout-leaked-debt-analysis-bill>
and then move on to theimminent one in Slovenia  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/apr/09/slovenia-eurozone-bailout-rumours>
before, reportedly, agreeing to extend the bailouts for Ireland and Portugal. 
But the latter might not be announced until tomorrow.

In Berlin, David Cameron is meeting Angela Merkel. The election clock is 
ticking for both of them, with Merkel's coming later this year. Right now, one 
of them is more likely to be returned to power than the other - but Cameron 
still has two years to ensure that the eurozone does not continue to 
destabilise the UK economy and his election chances.

Updated at 8.22am BST
 