
Apple, Amazon, Starbucks <https://www.theguardian.com/business/starbucks> and 
McDonald’s are being unfairly targeted by the European Commission over tax 
avoidance, according to Robert Stack, the US Treasury official in charge of 
international tax policy.

After meeting with EU competition officials in Brussels on Friday, the 
Financial Times reported 
<https://next.ft.com/content/c63db5c8-c6b1-11e5-808f-8231cd71622e> that Stack 
said: “We are concerned that the EU commission appears to be disproportionately 
targeting US companies.”


Stack questioned the “basic fairness” of the ongoing investigations into 
billions in tax revenues that the EU believes top US companies are avoiding by 
striking “sweetheart” deals with certain EU countries.


His strongly worded comments are likely to worsen a growing rift between 
European and US officials over issues including tax policy and online privacy. 
It comes as theEuropean Commission is considering an investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/28/eu-could-force-google-to-pay-more-uk-tax>
 into Google’s alleged special treatment over taxes by the UK government. 
McDonald’s and Apple are also under scrutiny.


Tim Cook, Apple’s CEO, has dismissed charges that his company does not pay its 
fair amount of taxes as “political crap”. Apple takes advantage of low tax 
rates in Ireland to cut its bill and the companycould owe as much as $8bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/15/apple-european-commission-ruling-back-taxes-ireland>
 in back taxes if the European commission rules against the scheme.


He and tech executives from Google and other companies have lobbied hard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/17/google-lobbyists-congress-antitrust-brussels-eu>
 in Washington for support over what they see as an unfair campaign by European 
officials. Cook met with European commissioner Margrethe Vestager last week to 
argue his case.


The commission has argued that the preferential tax treatments offered to 
large US companies constitute a form of illegal “state aid”. Luxembourg and the 
Netherlands have already been charged with recouping tens of millions of euros 
in back taxes from Fiat and Starbucks.


European tax commissioner Pierre Moscovici has argued 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/27/eu-europe-tax-reforms-avoidance-google-ccctb-moscovici>
 for a European-wide “digital tax” that would stop individual European 
countries brokering special deals to attract top tech companies.

The Financial Times reported that Stack believes the EU is misguided in its 
thinking and may be targeting funds that rightly belong to the US Treasury. 
“The retroactive application of these new approaches calls into question the 
basic fairness of the proceedings,” he said. “We are greatly concerned that the 
EU commission is reaching out to tax income that no member state had the right 
to tax,” he said.

Apple, Google, Microsoft and others have taken advantage of foreign low tax 
regimes to build up huge cash reserves overseas. Apple announcedthis week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/26/apple-iphone-sales-slowdown-2007-drop-holiday>
 it now has $205bn in cash.
 