
The eurozone’s reputation as the laggard of the global economy appeared to be 
overly pessimistic, after revised figures showed annual GDP growth in the 
currency bloc edged higher to 1.7%.

Eurostat, the official data agency for the European Union, showed that GDP 
growth in the first quarter was 0.6%, after being trimmed to 0.5% in an earlier 
estimate, pushing the annual growth rate up fromthe previous estimate of 1.6% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/29/eurozone-economy-grows-faster-than-expected-ecb>
.

Growth in the fourth quarter of 2015 was also revised up to 0.4% 
quarter-on-quarter from 0.3%.

Eurostat pointed out that an increase in investment was among the biggest 
factors in the boost to GDP across the eurozone along with a rise in exports of 
0.4%, though the eurozone’s healthy trade balance was slightly eroded by a rise 
in imports of 0.7%. It added that the US economy expanded by just 0.2% in the 
first quarter.

Campaigners for the UK to remain in the EU are likely to welcome the figures, 
which show the rise in eurozone growth and the 0.5% average rise in GDP for the 
28 countries of the EU outstrippingthe UK’s 0.4% growth rate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/27/uk-gdp-growth-slows-to-04-amid-eu-referendum-uncertainty>
 in the first three months of the years.


Among the largest economies in the EU, France grew at 0.6%, Germany 0.7% and 
Spain 0.8%. Italy could only manage a 0.3% growth rate while Greece contracted 
by 0.5%, Poland slipped by 0.1% and Hungary suffered a 0.8% drop in national 
income.

EU jobless rate hits seven-year low; US data mixed – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/may/31/eurozone-inflation-unemployment-germany-china-stock-market-live>
In the fourth quarter of 2015, GDP grew by 0.4% across the 19-member eurozone 
and 0.5% across the EU.


In May, the European commission forecast euro area growth of 1.6% and EU 
growth of 1.8% in 2016. If the current momentum is maintain, analysts said 
these figures would need to be revised upwards, though most have warned that 
this depends on the UK voting to remain in the EU.

Howard Archer, chief economist at IHS Global Insight, warned that uncertainty 
surrounding global growth could slow regardless of the referendum vote.

He said: “It is probable that eurozone GDP growth will soften in the second 
quarter. Global economic uncertainties and problems are still a handicap for
Eurozone <https://www.theguardian.com/business/eurozone> growth not only 
through limiting exports but also through limiting the upside on business and 
consumer confidence.

“It is also notable that first quarter growth was clearly helped in some 
countries (notably Germany) by the mild weather helping construction activity.

“Nevertheless, there are important positives for eurozone economic activity 
and we believe it should be able to sustain steady growth around 0.4% 
quarter-on-quarter.

“Consequently we expect eurozone GDP growth to come in at 1.7% in 2016, which 
would be up slightly from 1.6% in 2015 and the best performance since 2010.”
 