
Stock markets across Europe have fallen following weaker than expected 
economic indicators, falling oil prices, anda warning from the International 
Monetary Fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/05/imf-director-christine-lagarde-growth-global-economy>
 stoked fears of a slowing global recovery.

All major European markets fell, with the FTSE 100 in London closing down 1.2% 
or 73 points at 6091.23, after new data indicated global economic uncertainty 
andconcern over the EU referendum weighed on Britain’s services sector in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/05/uk-services-sector-markit-cips-pmi-eu-referendum-slowing-global-economy>
, in the latest sign that the UK recovery is losing momentum.

The German Dax was the biggest faller of the major European stock markets, 
down 2.6%, after factory orders fell unexpectedly as a result of weaker foreign 
demand.


German industrial orders declined 1.2% in February, well below expectations of 
a 0.2% rise in Europe’s largest economy, the biggest monthly fall in six 
months. Stefan Schilbe, economist at HSBC, said the fall “clearly shows that 
the weak global environment is taking its toll”.

The fragile state of the global economy was further highlighted by falling oil 
prices – Brent crude at one point hit a one-month low of $37.27 a barrel – and 
a warning from the head of the IMF,Christine Lagarde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/christine-lagarde>, who said in a lecture in 
Germany that growth was “too slow, too fragile, and risks to its durability are 
increasing”.

European shares slipped to a six-week low. The FTSEurofirst 300 – featuring 
Europe’s largest companies – fell 1.9% to its lowest level since 25 February. 
The French CAC fell 2.2% and the Spanish Ibex was down 2.4% as investors around
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> were left disappointed 
by data from the eurozone services sector.

Growth in the sector slowed in March according to the Markit PMI survey, and 
was revised down from an earlier estimate. The headline index fell to a 
14-month low of 53.1 last month from 53.3 in February, where anything above 50 
indicates growth.

Howard Archer, chief European and UK economist at IHS Global Insight, said: 
“This is a setback to hopes that the eurozone economy may just be starting to 
improve after a dreary start to 2016.


“Global economic uncertainties and problems have clearly hampered eurozone 
growth so far in 2016 not only through limiting exports but also through 
weighing down appreciably on business and consumer confidence, which has 
negative implications for employment, investment and consumption decisions.”

In the UK, a closely watched survey of the dominant services sector suggested 
that progress came to a virtual standstill last month as companies weighed up a 
combination of risks, including the looming possibility of anexit from the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/04/uk-finance-chiefs-brexit-tops-risk-list>
.

The sector, which includes restaurants, bars and hotels, experienced the 
weakest quarter in three years during the first three months of the year, 
according to theMarkit/Cips PMI index 
<https://www.markiteconomics.com/Survey/PressRelease.mvc/5c33ba54f4b043b0ad7a7e7f6c1959b1>
.

James Knightley, a senior global economist at ING, said concerns over the 
possibility of Britain leaving the EU were weighing heavily on the services 
sector, which accounts for about three-quarters of the UK economy.

“With opinion polls suggesting that the vote will be incredibly close, 
businesses are likely to act cautiously and not embark on any significant 
expansion plans until the economic outlook is clearer,” he said. “This means 
that investment and labour hiring plans will be more limited.”

The March UK services PMI was the latest indication that economic growth has 
slowed since the beginning of the year.

Chris Williamson, the chief economist at Markit, said that along with 
equivalent surveys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/01/uk-manufacturers-cut-jobs-and-prices-amid-economic-slowdown>
 for the manufacturing and construction sectors, the report suggested the 
economy grew by 0.4% in the first quarter, compared with0.6% in the fourth 
quarter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/31/uk-economy-growth-record-trade-deficit>
 of 2015.

“Business confidence remains in the doldrums as concerns about the global 
economy continue to be exacerbated by uncertainty at home, with nerves 
unsettled by issues such as Brexit and the prospect of further government 
spending cuts announced in the budget,” he said.

The report showed a slight improvement in overall activity in March. The 
headline index edged up to 53.7, from 52.7 in February. Any figure above 50 
indicates expansion. However, confidence among companies operating in the 
sector dipped and new business growth slowed.

Williamson said growth was likely to slow further. “It seems unlikely that 
March’s upturn in the pace of growth represents the start of a longer term 
upswing,” he said. “In contrast, the survey data suggest growth is more likely 
to weaken further in the second quarter.”

Williamson said the prospect of a rise in UK interest rates seemed “a long way 
off”. The Bank of England hasheld rates at 0.5% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/04/bank-of-england-votes-9-0-to-keep-interest-rates-on-hold>
 since March 2009.

In better news for the eurozone, retail sales increased unexpectedly in 
February, by 0.2% compared with January. Growing demand in France and Spain 
helped offset a fall inGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>, 
according to the EU statistics office Eurostat.
 