
A return to growth in France and a solid pace of expansion in Germany have 
helped the eurozone shrug off the UK’svote to quit the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/britain-votes-for-brexit-eu-referendum-david-cameron>
.

Economists feared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/08/imf-cuts-growth-predictions-for-eurozone-over-post-brexit-confusion>
 the eurozone would suffer a damaging blow from the Brexit vote as exports to 
the UK became more expensive and business confidence waned. But those concerns 
appeared unfounded after the August composite IHS Markit survey – which brings 
together manufacturing, services and construction – indicated GDP growth across 
the 19-member currency zone will continue at 0.3% a quarter and 1.2% for the 
year.

France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> posted a rise in output 
driven by the private sector, which increased output at the sharpest rate in 10 
months during August. The IHS Markit purchasing managers’ index jumped to 51.6, 
up from 50.1 in July, where a figure above 50 indicates an expansion in 
activity.

Eurozone shrugs off Brexit uncertainty in August - business live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/aug/23/eurozone-surveys-to-give-latest-clues-on-brexit-fallout-business-live>
The better-than-expected news for François Hollande, follows a report showing 
thatFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>’s unemployment rate fell 
below 10% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/18/french-unemployment-rate-falls-first-time-2012-francois-hollande>
 in the second quarter, the lowest level since the French president took office 
in 2012.

In Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>, a slowdown in the 
services sector was offset by strong export growth reported by manufacturers. 
The balance left the economy with slightly lower growth, but employers still 
faced large backlogs of work and increased employment to match the buoyant 
outlook.

Political instability continues to threaten the recovery in the eurozone as 
countries as diverse as Italy, Finland and Greecestruggle to recover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/14/greece-crisis-bailout-austerity-recession>
 from the 2008 financial crash. The refugee crisis and the longer-term threat 
of the UK leaving the EU are also high on European leaders’ agenda at ameeting 
in Naples 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/22/beginning-new-europe-merkel-renzi-hollande>
 this week, which seeks to breathe new life into the European project.

Chris Williamson, chief business economist at the data provider, said that in 
the short term there were “no signs of the recovery being derailed by Brexit 
uncertainty”. He said: “The survey data are consistent with the region’s GDP 
growing at a quarterly rate of 0.3% in the third quarter, or 1.2% annualised, 
which is similar to that seen on average over the first half of the year.”


A sign that consumers are beginning to worry could be found in the European 
commission’s consumer confidence indicator, which dipped 0.6 percentage points 
to -8.5 in the August flash release. But Bill Adams, senior international 
economist at PNC Financial Services, said this was only slightly weaker than 
its -8.2 average in 2016 before the referendum and hit confidence less than the 
Brussels terrorist attack in March or early 2016 financial volatility.

The composite PMI found that German firms suffered a rise in input costs for 
the fourth consecutive month. However, inflationary pressures remained muted 
across the eurozone and growth, while steady, is likely to disappoint officials 
at theEuropean Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank>, who have pumped 
billions of euros into the financial system in a bid to increase growth and 
boost prices.

Williamson said: “While the resilience of the PMI in August will add to the 
belief that the ECB will see no need for any immediate further stimulus, the 
weakness of the overall pace of expansion and disappointing trends in hiring, 
order books, business optimism and prices all suggest that policymakers will 
keep the door open for more stimulus later in the year.”
 