
The European commission has avoided handing a propaganda weapon to those 
campaigning for Britainto leave the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/18/vote-leave-claims-brexit-give-scotland-more-powers-eu-referendum>
 by delaying a decision on disciplinary action against Spain and Portugal for 
breaking budget rules until after the EU referendum.

Brussels said the postponement of possible action, which could include fines, 
was due to thegeneral election in Spain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/03/spain-26-june-election-king-dissolves-parliament>
 on 26 June, three days after the referendum on Britain’s EU membership.

The announcement by Pierre Moscovici, the European commissioner for economic 
affairs, that the two countries – whichwere badly affected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/20/spains-improving-economy-is-not-reaching-everyone>
 by the eurozone crisis – would be given more time to repair their public 
finances will also be a relief to David Cameron.

The prime minister has been buoyed by recent polls suggesting 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-05-18/u-k-pound-rises-as-opinion-poll-boosts-lead-of-pro-eu-campaign>
 that the remain campaignis pulling ahead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/16/phone-poll-finds-10-point-lead-for-remain-but-web-survey-puts-leave-ahead-brexit>
 in the referendum battle, but is keen that potential punishments for countries 
breaking EU fiscal rules, along with decisions on otherpotentially toxic topics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/10/greece-austerity-grexit-drachma> 
such as Greece’s debt and migration, should be delayed for just over a month.

Following an intervention from Jean-Claude Juncker, the EC president, 
Moscovici told a news conference in Brussels that the commission did not 
consider that this was the right moment economically or politically to get 
tough. The inability ofSpain’s caretaker government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/commentisfree/2016/may/01/the-guardian-view-on-spain-political-impasse-no-relief-yet-in-sight>
 to take budget decisions ahead of the election justified putting off a 
decision until early July, he said.

Instead, Brussels said it wanted to see further action to reduce borrowing, 
adding that it would review the positions of Portugal and Spain in early July. 
They have both failed to reduce their budget deficits below thelimit of 3% 
<http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/economic_governance/sgp/index_en.htm> of 
national output demanded by the EC.

Brussels also granted Italy the maximum flexibility under EU fiscal discipline 
procedures in response to demands from Rome to be given more space torevive 
anaemic growth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/21/italy-reforms-europe-not-working-generation>
 and cope with the cost oftaking in refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/18/here-it-is-a-big-dream-syrians-taken-in-by-vatican-begin-new-life-in-rome>
.

The respite for Spain and Portugal <https://www.theguardian.com/world/portugal>
 may prove brief, since hardline eurozone countries, led by Germany, are 
insisting that enforcement action be taken in early July. In theory, the 
commission could fine the two countries up to 0.2% of their GDP for breaking 
the rules.

Spain <https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain> was set a target to reduce its 
budget deficit to 4.2% of GDP in 2015, but is on course for a 5.1% shortfall. 
Portugal’s 2.7% of GDP target will be breached by 1.7 percentage points.

Moscovici cited the Spanish election and the fact that a caretaker government 
was unable to make decisions on the budget among the factors in the decision to 
defer action.

“We are proposing new deadlines for both countries to correct their excessive 
deficits,” he said. “We propose that each country receives one extra year and 
one extra year only. The new deadline for Portugal will be 2016, and for Spain, 
2017.”


Carsten Brzeski, an economist at ING, said the decision on Spain made 
technical sense, since a new government in Madrid would be needed to implement 
any possible recommendations from the commission.

“At the same time, however, this decision also has a slight air of avoiding a 
political clash during the election campaign, as [the] Spanish prime minister, 
[Mariano] Rajoy, has recently caught attention with promises to cut taxes after 
the elections.

“At the current juncture, with most eurozone countries desperately trying to 
revive growth and tackle unemployment, today’s decision was in our view the 
right decision. It is not always a bad thing if barking dogs don’t bite.”
 