
Europe’s economies are rigged to protect older workers at the cost of new 
employees, the president of theEuropean Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank> has told the 
Guardian.

Mario Draghi <https://www.theguardian.com/business/mario-draghi> also said 
“tragic” high levels of youth unemployment had the potential to threaten social 
harmony in Europe and that rock-bottom inflation was damaging the prospects of 
Generation Y by redistributing their wealth to older people.

Mario Draghi: 'Reducing youth unemployment is a priority for everyone'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/11/mario-draghi-reducing-youth-unemployment-is-a-priority-for-everyone>
Draghi told the Guardian there should be a “more open, flexible, innovative 
and business-friendly society” that did not disadvantage new workers because 
companies were afraid of taking on new staff. He gave theexclusive interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/11/mario-draghi-reducing-youth-unemployment-is-a-priority-for-everyone>
 as part of aGuardian series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/millennials-the-trials-of-generation-y>
 investigating the economic plight of young adults around the world.

Youth unemployment is a tragedy and prevents people from playing a full and 
meaningful part in society
Mario Draghi 
Setting out his views before the ECB’s dramatic decision on Thursday to lower 
interest rates to zero percent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/10/ecb-cuts-eurozone-interest-rate-to-zero>
 in an attempt to pump life back into the Eurozone and return inflation back to 
a target rate of 2%, Draghi said:

“In many countries the labour market is set up to protect older ‘insiders’ – 
people with permanent, high-paid contracts and shielded by strong labour laws.”

“The side-effect is that young people are stuck with lower-paid, temporary 
contracts and get fired first in crisis times. That also means that employers 
are reluctant to invest in young people, so the incomes of this generation stay 
lower over their lifetime.”

Europe’s most powerful banker, 68, who has been at the ECB’s helm for four 
years, also said it was a priority forEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> to tackle chronic youth 
unemployment and reform a job market that locked out young workers.

“Youth unemployment is a tragedy and prevents people from playing a full and 
meaningful part in society. If every second young person is out of work – as is 
still the case in some countries in Europe – it seriously harms the economy ... 
and it threatens social harmony,” said Draghi.
European job market 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/03/youth-unemployment/giv-27167uXlYMMTPLTld/>
Draghi said the situation for young people was made worse by a lack of 
inflation, whichaccording to the bank’s own research 
<https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpwps/ecbwp1853.en.pdf> was increasing 
inequality and damaging their prospects.

Low inflation means that savings, likely to be held by older people, maintain 
their value, while debts, which are more likely to be held by younger people, 
do not erode.

“Nobody stays young forever. The crucial question is whether a person can 
participate fully in the economy over his or her lifetime – get a good 
education, find a job, buy a home for the family,” said Draghi.

“What makes me worry is that increasing inequality might prevent people from 
doing that. This is an issue all our societies need to look at carefully.

“The ECB’s role in that is to maintain price stability, which prevents unfair 
redistribution. For example,our research shows 
<https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpwps/ecbwp1853.en.pdf> that in the euro 
area too low inflation results in redistribution from younger, more indebted 
households to older households that are typically net creditors.”

Responding to Draghi’s comments, Johanna Nyman, the president of the European 
Youth Forum, said: “After the financial crisis, there has been an increasingly 
clear pattern: young people are paying the price for mistakes that were not 
ours.


“Of course, job creation is crucial. But young people should not be put in a 
position where we are told that it is a choice between low-paid jobs not 
matching our qualifications, unpaid internships or no jobs at all. ”

Near-zero inflation and fears of decades of Japanese-style low or no growth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/17/europe-lack-growth-japanese-stagnation-austerity-germany>
 have been the latest issues to beset Europe since the 2008 financial crash.


Why the falling oil price may not lead to boom
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/17/why-falling-oil-price-not-mean-global-economic-boom>
In the euro area, inflation has been below 1% for more than two years and is 
expected to drop further because of a dramatic collapse in oil prices. In 
February, Draghi said he would “refuse to surrender” to its effects.

Thursday’s unprecedented move by Draghi to create an environment of even 
cheaper money by reducing interest rates on borrowing and expanding its money 
printing programme failed to stimulate markets at close.


Draghi’s interview comes amid a Guardian investigation into the incomes of 
Generation Y, also known as millennials, showing they are almost no better off 
in terms of disposable income than their parents were in a number of countries 
across Europe and America.

His comments are published on the day that sees the launch of the first 
Europe-wide intergenerational index showing that ageing populations and the 
fallout from the 2008 financial crisis have led to the prospects of young 
people across the EU hitting a 10-year low.

The index <http://index2016.if.org.uk/>, drawn up by the Intergenerational 
Foundation <http://www.if.org.uk/> thinktank, found that alongside increased 
future debt repayments, the average share of health spending consumed by the 
over-60s across the EU rose from 42% in 2000 to more than 54% in 2013.


In effect, over-60s consumed more than half of all healthcare resources in the 
EU, despite representing less than a quarter of all EU citizens.

Health care spend across Europe 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/03/healthcare_spending-zip/giv-27167GJtRH1cjd5tL/>
Pension spend was also higher than 10% of GDP in some of Europe’s largest 
economies: France, Germany, Denmark, Italy and the UK.

Angus Hanton, the co-founder of the Intergenerational Foundation, said the 
findings “should act as a wakeup call to policymakers”.

“Younger generations are being systematically disadvantaged. We cannot expect 
the young to carry the burden of an ageing population if we do not give them 
the tools required to become economically active citizens. It is therefore in 
all generations’ interests to prioritise spending on the young,” Hanton said.

Asked whether today’s younger adults would have as good a standard of living 
as pensioners today when they came to retire, Draghi responded: “That’s our 
common choice. Our standard of living depends on the strength of our economy.

“Much focus is put on the central bank to raise growth, and it can contribute 
through price stability and a stable financial system. But in the long run real 
growth is driven by what the economy can produce. That is much more about 
ideas, technology, flexibility, motivation, skills. It is up to elected 
governments to set a growth-friendly environment.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Feuropean-job-market-is-rigged-against-younger-workers-says-draghi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe537b26c628b9f99023160677390ded10e2d6faa%2F9_0_1876_1125%2F1876.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20job%20market%20is%20rigged%20against%20younger%20workers%2C%20says%20Draghi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Feuropean-job-market-is-rigged-against-younger-workers-says-draghi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=European%20job%20market%20is%20rigged%20against%20younger%20workers%2C%20says%20Draghi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Feuropean-job-market-is-rigged-against-younger-workers-says-draghi%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe537b26c628b9f99023160677390ded10e2d6faa%2F9_0_1876_1125%2F1876.jpg>
 Illustration: Janne Iivonen 
Read on: The trials of Generation Y - the full series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/millennials-the-trials-of-generation-y>
 