
One of the worst aspects of parenting, apart from the mess and the exhaustion, 
is the arts and crafts element.Halloween 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/26/clowns-banned-halloween-costume-2016-schools>
 is a particularly tough time for this. For girls at least, the choice of 
costume is between a horrible $40 princess kit or the hell of going hand-made. 
The former, aside from the expense and whatever squeamishness you might have 
about pink synthetic fibres, is full of irritating gender bias; and the latter, 
for those of us who hated doing things with glue and glitter the first time 
around, is a reminder that life is too short.

No clowns allowed: scariest Halloween costume of 2016 faces bans across US
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/26/clowns-banned-halloween-costume-2016-schools>
To date, the gender thing hasn’t intruded too aggressively on my 
20-month-olds; they have a lot of boys’ hand-me-downs from friends, and 
although the babysitter occasionally tries to sneak frills and bows into their 
wardrobe, most recently a headband with “Mommy’s Little Cupcake” printed across 
it, most of the time what they wear elicits neither interest or comment.

Halloween is different. I remember last year a girl of two running around in a 
fireman costume which, in my neighbourhood of New York’s Upper West Side, 
attracted vaguely disapproving looks, and in certain neighbourhoods of Brooklyn 
would have been grounds for counselling about gender identity, but either way 
is considered a problem. Meanwhile, if you’re making your own costume, no 
matter how much you claim to hate Halloween, it is hard to stop a competitive 
edge creeping in. “Can’t I just put them in plaid shirts and fake beards and 
call them Brooklyn hipsters?” I said to a friend last week. “No one’ll get it,” 
they replied. “Why don’t you do literary ladies?Cynthia Ozick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/jul/04/cynthia-ozick-life-writing-interview>
 andVirginia Woolf <https://www.theguardian.com/books/virginiawoolf>.” “Too 
hard,” I said. “Ruth Bader Ginsburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jul/14/ruth-bader-ginsburg-regrets-donald-trump-remarks-faker>
?” “What will I do for the glasses?”

Her son wanted to go as a pillow. “They’re going to think he’s a badly made 
ghost,” I said, and rejected her suggestion that I let my children decide their 
own costumes, too – as right now, no matter the question, every answer they 
give is either “park” or “I don’t like that”, neither of which lends itself to 
fancy dress.

The best I have right now is sending one as a pumpkin, and the other as a 
rabbit, which means head-to-toe pink, but at least doesn’t involve a tiara. I’m 
going as a sour-faced ghoul, no makeup required.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fevery-parents-nightmare-halloween-costume%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe244d9f1c75875dc695b689093c5973861834d6%2F0_55_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Every%20parent%E2%80%99s%20nightmare%3A%20the%20horror%20of%20a%20high-stakes%20Halloween%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fevery-parents-nightmare-halloween-costume%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Every%20parent%E2%80%99s%20nightmare%3A%20the%20horror%20of%20a%20high-stakes%20Halloween%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fevery-parents-nightmare-halloween-costume%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe244d9f1c75875dc695b689093c5973861834d6%2F0_55_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 ‘The colouring books themselves are clearly something people buy to address a 
perceived deficit and then never look at again, like home exercise equipment or 
bestselling books about the economy.’ Photograph: Adrian Sherratt for the 
Guardian 
Take a (felt) tip from me 


Perhaps I should relax at the local library, where last week a notice went up 
above the desk advertising a new “adult colouring club”. The librarian said 
interest in the event had been brisk, in spite of what struck me as its 
slightly puzzling nature: an attempt to turn an activity everyone has talked 
about but that I suspect no one actually does into a real-life event.

Halloween? It’s more than trick or treat | Ronald Hutton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/28/halloween-more-than-trick-or-treat-origins>
The backlash against the idea of adult colouring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/26/adult-colouring-in-books-anxiety-stress-mindfulness>
 has gone so far now as to have inspired whole books about the infantilisation 
of adults in western culture, but I see no particular harm in it. The colouring 
books themselves are clearly something people buy to address a perceived 
deficit and then never look at again, like home exercise equipment or 
bestselling books about the economy. Sometimes just ordering a thing is enough 
to make a problem feel solved.

Nightmare scenario 


The other thing about Halloween in America is that it is very hard to opt out 
of. You have to be that person who turns off all the lights and crouches in the 
kitchen for three hours, so the trick-or-treaters think you’re out, or else you 
actually have to go out – and even then, you’re supposed to leave candy at your 
door. I’m not usually such a scrooge. (See my fun thoughts about colouring.) But
Halloween <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/halloween> is so overblown 
and labour-intensive, and such an invitation for screeching, that it really has 
become a meta-exercise in realising my nightmares. Now if I could just think of 
a way to express this in costume form.
 