
This was an old‑fashioned derby with a modern twist: fast, furious, frantic 
and mainly based around pressing. Ronald Koeman’sEverton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> tried to match Liverpool’s 
intensity while playing direct passes into attack, creating a scrappy and 
disjointed contest.

The opening stages set the tone: Ross Barkley made a crunching tackle on 
Jordan Henderson and it was clear neither side would be able to settle. Idrissa 
Gueye and James McCarthy pushed up on to Adam Lallana and Georginio Wijnaldum, 
the Everton centre-backs kept a high line andLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> were squeezed into their own 
half. Their centre-backs were the only players with much time on the ball but 
an early mix-up between Ragnar Klavan and Dejan Lovren, going for the same 
ball, revealed their nervousness.

Sadio Mané’s injury-time winner earns Liverpool dramatic derby victory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/19/everton-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
Liverpool took a while to get going and, while they are known for their 
high-tempo football under Jürgen Klopp, they have yet to prove they can offer 
something more when the opposition match that speed.

Everton, however, had a clear plan. They had unsettled Manchester United and 
Arsenal with direct balls into the centre-forward Romelu Lukaku and that 
approach made particularly good sense against Liverpool’s gegenpressing. 
Whenever Liverpool’s forwards and midfielders pushed up, Everton knocked the 
ball long, turning them and putting Klopp’s side on the back foot. Lukaku was 
occasionally excellent at bringing down the ball and feeding onrushing 
midfielders, an area of his game that has improved considerably over the past 
year. One move, when Ramiro Funes Mori found him quickly and Barkley picked up 
the second ball in a dangerous position, showed Everton had a route to goal.

Henderson did not exert the influence required here, neither tracking Barkley 
effectively nor positioning himself to stop Lukaku receiving such easy 
passes.They also made inroads down the right. Roberto Firmino, who has not 
looked entirely comfortable in his left-sided role since Divock Origi’s 
presence forced him wide, tended to get sucked into the centre of the pitch, 
helping to press Ashley Williams or McCarthy. That meant Séamus Coleman was 
free to scamper up the touchline, and the Irishman was the game’s most 
influential player in the opening stages.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fliverpool-everton-merseyside-derby-klopp-firmino-tactics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b7d9b8a838ff3079d3500eb8859dffad64bd44c%2F0_71_2688_1613%2F2688.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Everton%20put%20the%20press%20on%20but%20Klopp%E2%80%99s%20change%20lets%20Firmino%20float%20free%20%7C%20Michael%20Cox&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fliverpool-everton-merseyside-derby-klopp-firmino-tactics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Everton%20put%20the%20press%20on%20but%20Klopp%E2%80%99s%20change%20lets%20Firmino%20float%20free%20%7C%20Michael%20Cox&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fliverpool-everton-merseyside-derby-klopp-firmino-tactics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b7d9b8a838ff3079d3500eb8859dffad64bd44c%2F0_71_2688_1613%2F2688.jpg>
 Roberto Firmino is thwarted as he prods at goal in the second half. 
Photograph: BPI/Rex Shutterstock 
Liverpool grew into the contest, however, particularly when the tempo dropped 
slightly. Lallana, their form player, drifted into deeper positionsfrom Gueye 
and played some neat passes into attack, while Klopp’s decision to switch Origi 
and Firmino also worked well. The Brazilian saw more of the ball, dropping deep 
to overload midfield, while Origi proved a counter-attacking threat down the 
left flank. Origi also made a good near-post run for the game’s first clear 
chance, meeting a Nathaniel Clyne pull-back with a wayward finish. That was 
actually exactly the type of move Everton had been attempting to play, 
involving their right-back on the overlap. In such a congested midfield scrap, 
it was natural that the full-backs found space.

Liverpool find the finish to take the edge off Everton’s furious intent | Paul 
Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/19/liverpool-sadio-mane-everton-derby-football>
Klopp would have been disappointed with Liverpool’s first‑half effort and 
within five minutes of the second period his side finally exploited Everton’s 
high line with a simple lob over the top of the defence for Firmino, who 
shrugged Fuenes Mori aside but could not quite provide a suitable finish. The 
Brazilian started to take charge – a lovely backheeled wall pass nearly put 
Sadio Mané in behind, but Leighton Baines read the danger and made a crucial 
intervention. Liverpool looked far better with him at the heart of the action, 
and more passes in behind the opposition played into the hands of Mané, 
invisible before half‑time but increasingly lively with lots of balls to chase.

It was Mané who eventually proved the match-winner, first to react when the 
substitute Daniel Sturridge’s slightly deflected shot bounced back off a post. 
It was hardly a vintage Liverpool display but Klopp deserves credit for subtle 
changes which put the away side in control for the majority of the second half. 
Firmino and Origi changing positions was crucial, while Sturridge remains a 
very useful reserve. Overall, though, this was a frustrating game; notable for 
its high tempo and lack of technical quality. It was a typical derby but 
certainly not a classic.
 