
The ex-wife of a Saudi billionaire has won the right to make a claim on his 
fortune after the court of appeal ruled that the man’s diplomatic immunity was 
irrelevant to the case. Sheikh Walid Juffali is being sued by Christina 
Estrada, a former Pirelli calendar girl, for a share of his £4bn fortune after 
the couple, who had been married for 13 years, split up.

The bench, headed by the master of the rolls, Lord Dyson, had been forced to 
consider whether the high court was right to dismiss as “spurious” the Saudi 
businessman’s claim to have been protected from litigation because of his role 
as permanent representative to the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) 
for the Caribbean island of St Lucia.

Philip Hammond <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond>, the 
foreign secretary, took the highly unusual step of criticising the high court 
judge’s decision to strip diplomatic immunity from the sheikh in the divorce 
proceedings. The Foreign Office (FCO) warned that if the decision stood, 
British diplomats could be hauled before the courts of any country in which 
they are serving and their position “scrutinised, and their status 
unjustifiably curtailed”.

Hammond bluntly said the court’s ruling “should not be upheld or endorsed”. In 
an unusual step, the FCO submitted an opinion from Tim Eicke QC backing the 
Saudi billionaire. It said the judge had “erred” in attempting to “look behind” 
the Saudi billionaire’s accreditation as a diplomat.

Hammond argued that only the “executive [acting through the FCO] as part of 
the royal prerogative of conducting foreign relations” can decide to “accept 
[or not] a diplomat”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Fex-wife-saudi-billionaire-sheikh-walid-juffali-right-claim-slice-fortune%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F800c05de863b08a5f96ff4f53637b3df7273f3f0%2F80_156_2521_1514%2F2521.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ex-wife%20of%20Saudi%20billionaire%20wins%20right%20to%20claim%20slice%20of%20his%20fortune&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Fex-wife-saudi-billionaire-sheikh-walid-juffali-right-claim-slice-fortune%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ex-wife%20of%20Saudi%20billionaire%20wins%20right%20to%20claim%20slice%20of%20his%20fortune&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Fex-wife-saudi-billionaire-sheikh-walid-juffali-right-claim-slice-fortune%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F800c05de863b08a5f96ff4f53637b3df7273f3f0%2F80_156_2521_1514%2F2521.jpg>
 The couple attending a ball held by Elton John in 2005. Photograph: Brendan 
Beirne/Rex/Shutterstock 
Lord Dyson, heading a three-person bench, accepted the foreign secretary’s 
argument and said the high court judge, Justice Anthony Hayden, was “wrong to 
hold that [Juffali] is not entitled in principle to immunity from [the] claim”. 
The court of appeal reversed the decision to strip the Saudi businessman of 
immunity, but instead said immunity was not relevant in this case.

The judges found that as Juffali was permanently resident in the UK – after 35 
years and three marriages – and “the claim does not relate to any official acts 
performed in the exercise of his [diplomatic] functions”, he could not claim 
immunity from divorce proceedings.

The high court ruling had described the sheikh’s role as a diplomat as “an 
entirely artificial construct”, adding that he had “no pre-existing connection 
to St Lucia” and that there was no evidence that he had “any knowledge or 
experience of maritime matters”.

It was said Juffali, who chairs one of Saudi Arabia’s largest companies, only 
sought to become a diplomat to defeat “[his wife’s] claims consequent on the 
breakdown of their marriage”.

The intervention by Hammond is significant because a growing number of 
litigants are claiming diplomatic and state immunity in English courts, with 
lawyers sayingLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> is attracting a 
global super-rich partly drawn to the capital as a good place to fight legal 
disputes.

About 22,000 people are entitled to diplomatic immunity in Britain, including 
diplomats and their families. Last month, the high court ruled that one of the 
world’s richest men –Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin Jaber al-Thani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/13/diplomatic-immunity-of-qatars-former-billionaire-pm-questioned-in-high-court>
, the former prime minister of Qatar – could not be sued in London over claims 
that agents acting on his behalf falsely imprisoned and tortured a British 
citizen, because he is protected by diplomatic immunity.

In that case, Hammond’s deputy, James Duddridge, said: “It is ultimately for 
the court to decide whether a foreign diplomat in the UK enjoys immunity in any 
particular case.”

Geoffrey Robertson QC, a former UN judge, told the Guardian that UK courts 
should have the power to rule on diplomatic immunity to stop “sham” 
appointments being made by foreign embassies and end abuse of the law by rich 
and powerful individuals. He added that abuses of diplomatic immunity had grown 
in parallel with the rise of human rights law. “Take for example the idea that 
everyone should have access to a court. So we are seeing cases where a rape 
victim can’t have access to the court because the alleged rapist is a diplomat. 
So this immunity destroys our rights to access to justice which comes from the 
Magna Carta.”

What diplomatic immunity does, said the QC, is put diplomats “above the law”. 
He said: “One of the most marked cases is that diplomats are not allowed to 
engage in business, and we know Middle Eastern embassies where they do little 
else. The government has turned a blind eye to this because the Foreign Office 
favours certain governments for trading reasons and doesn’t ask questions. 
Until now, the courts have said, ‘Well, the UK government accepts these people 
as diplomats and diplomats they are.’ That might be changing.”

In comments released after the Guardian reported the story, a spokesman for 
Juffali said: “Our client is saddened and disappointed by today’s decision to 
dismiss his appeal.

“Whilst he is grateful that the court has vindicated his appointment as the 
permanent representative to the International Maritime Organisation and 
rectified Mr Justice Hayden’s error, he is dismayed that the court has 
concluded that he is permanently resident in this jurisdiction in circumstances 
where he does not have indefinite leave to remain in this jurisdiction, and 
spends only a limited number of days in the UK each year.”

“[Juffali] remains committed to maintaining his diplomatic duties and is 
appreciative that the office of the prime minister for St Lucia has testified 
first-hand that he has conducted his diplomatic duties in an exemplary manner.”

A Foreign Office spokesman said: “On occasion the Foreign and Commonwealth 
Office intervenes in cases to clarify matters of international law, in order to 
assist courts in the UK. In the case of Estrada v Juffali, we clarified the 
principles for the appointment of permanent representatives to the 
International Maritime Organisation and the scope of the immunities that apply 
under international law.”
 