
It’s been known for some time that people share things on social media – a lot 
–without reading them first 
<http://www.theverge.com/2014/2/14/5411934/youre-not-going-to-read-this>. The 
writer Alex Balkrecently compared Facebook to “the coffee table on which people 
placed their unread copies of Thomas Piketty’s Capital” 
<http://www.theawl.com/2016/04/share-yourself-stupid>: when we share, we’re 
often really focused on promoting a certain image. Buta new study 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0747563216300607> goes 
further: apparently, sharing things, or just having the option to share, 
undermines the ability to digest and remember them. (Participants were twice as 
likely to make errors in a comprehension test.) When your attention is partly 
occupied by thoughts of how you’ll share or discuss what you’re reading, it’s a 
distraction from actually reading it – made worse, presumably, if your 
newsfeed’s also scrolling by in the corner of your eye. Social media is like 
belonging to a book club, but only ever reading novels while you’reat the book 
club, two glasses of cabernet the worse for wear.

The only surprise is that any of this comes as a surprise. It should be 
obvious that attention is a limited resource (that’s why people crash when they 
text and drive) yet we rarely treat it like other such resources. If a major 
corporation took £10 from your bank account daily, for no benefit, you’d be 
furious. But as Matthew Crawford points out inhis book The World Beyond Your 
Head <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/366398/>, the 
same corporation can help itself to your attention with a loud TV ad in an 
airport lounge, dragging your focus from conversation. Indeed, we actively 
collaborate with attention theft: iPads that let you jump from your novel to 
the web or to FaceTime chat are more popular than e-readers that won’t. In a 
culture that viewed attention differently, we might pay extra for such 
limitations. Instead, we act as if our attentional capacities are infinite, 
then feel scattered and exhausted when it turns out they aren’t.

You can deal with the situation by denying there’s a problem, as some pundits 
like to do <http://buzzmachine.com/2011/02/24/the-distraction-trope/>; or you 
can take draconian measures, quitting social media for ever, or going ondigital 
detox retreats 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/07/fashion/a-trip-to-camp-to-break-a-tech-addiction.html>
. But I prefer the middle path encapsulated in the Buddhist idea of “guarding 
the sense doors”. The world stakes its claims on our attention, this argument 
goes, through the “sense doors”, chiefly the eyes and ears. So it’s wise to 
employ a doorman. (I imagine a firm but polite butler, not a bouncer on 
steroids.) You don’t need to nail the door completely shut, as Facebook 
quitters do; you just need to stay mindful of who’s trying to get in.

Don’t think you’re lucky? Think again | Oliver Burkeman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/06/dont-think-youre-lucky-think-again>
In practical terms, this means not mixing attentional modes: read when you’re 
reading, share when you’re sharing. You could send articles you discover online 
toInstapaper <https://www.instapaper.com/> or Evernote <http://evernote.com>, 
read them later offline, then treat sharing as a discrete task, perhaps at a 
specific time. This may not mean always being narrowly focused on one task; 
plenty of social situations need “wide-angle” attention instead. But it does 
mean not trying to use attention simultaneously for two incompatible tasks. Let 
one visitor across the threshold at a time. The others will wait on the 
doorstep. Or, better yet, wander off and stop pestering you.

oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com>
 