
Tax experts warned that HM Revenue & Customs was underestimating the size of 
Britain’s tax avoidance problem after the agency claimed that Britain’s annual 
tax shortfall was only £36bn – a figure that ignored controversial structures 
used by multinationals such as Google, Apple and Starbucks.

Top HMRC <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hmrc> officials will face 
questions from MPs next week over their refusal to challenge tax avoidance by 
multinational corporations. Members of the public accounts committee are also 
expected to further investigate HMRC’s claims that its compliance team 
generated record revenues of £26.6bn by chasing down tax dodgers.

Official estimates from HMRC 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/561312/HMRC-measuring-tax-gaps-2016.pdf>
, published on Thursday, show Britain’s public finances missed out on tax 
revenues of £36bn in 2014-15. HMRC’s tax gap figures have remained at about the 
same level for several years despite increasing claims the agency has made 
about the impact of its compliance work.

In a report published this year 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201516/cmselect/cmpubacc/674/67405.htm>
, the public accounts committee noted: “HMRC told us that its performance in 
addressing tax fraud was good. But HMRC’s assessment of the tax gap shows that 
the level of tax fraud has remained virtually static over the last five years. 
The impact that HMRC claims for its work far exceeds any reduction in the tax 
gap.”

Next Wednesday, top HMRC officials are to appear before the committee again 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/public-accounts-committee/>
 to answer questions about the tax office’s performance. “One of the areas 
where we’ll be focusing hard is on claims about [HMRC’s] compliance 
performance,” a source close to the committee said.

The “tax gap” is the shortfall between the amount of tax expected in Treasury 
coffers and the sums actually received. The figure includes estimates for 
losses caused by tax evasion, avoidance, the hidden economy, errors and other 
non-payments.

HMRC’s tax gap figure has been repeatedly criticised because it does not take 
into account estimates for tax losses caused by multinational corporations such 
as Google, Amazon, Apple and Starbucks. These international businesses are able 
to lawfully use complex structures to shift taxable income from the UK to their 
operations overseas.

A year ago, the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) 
said, based on extremely conservative estimates, profit-shifting by 
multinationals wascosting governments between  <http://www.oecd.org/ctp/beps/>
$100bn and $240bn <http://www.oecd.org/ctp/beps/> (£65bn to £160bn) a year in 
lost corporation tax – equivalent to between 4% and 10% of global corporation 
tax revenues.

Some independent estimates of Britain’s tax gap, including work by the tax 
campaigner Richard Murphy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/11/the-man-behind-corbynomics-an-accountant-from-leafy-norfolk>
, have suggested the figure could have reached as much as £119bn 
<http://www.taxresearch.org.uk/%20Documents/PCSTaxGap2014.pdf> in recent years, 
taking into account estimates of tax avoidance by multinationals.


Of HMRC’s £36bn tax gap estimate for 2014-15, £9.5bn was attributed to large 
businesses. Only £600m of that sum related to large business tax avoidance. 
That £600m estimate is equivalent to less than 1.5% of the£41.4bn of 
corporation tax revenues for 2014-15 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/446134/HMRC_Annual_Report_and_Accounts_2014-15__Print_version_.pdf>
.

Prem Sikka, a professor of accounting at University of Essex, who has advised 
the Labour party on tax reform, said: “HMRC’s measure of the tax gap is not 
credible as it excludes profit-shifting techniques used by Google, Microsoft, 
Apple and others.”

In a recent report for Labour,  
<https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=6&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwi7rau_r-nPAhXJJsAKHdQlCPEQFgg6MAU&url=http%3A%2F%2Ftaxwatch.org.au%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2016%2F09%2FReforming-HMRC-making-it-fit-for-the-twenty-first-century.pdf&usg=AFQjCNFxqTp6IEA12VvOY8giGc9dNQoaQQ&sig2=K1u3-29nZeqNK7EMDeGuzw&bvm=bv.136499718,d.ZGg>
Sikka said: “The [HMRC tax gap] estimate depends on the policies and practices 
that HMRC is willing to accept or challenge ... HMRC has not challenged 
[multinationals’] tax practices whereas other countries have shown a greater 
willingness to challenge the same.”


Alex Cobham, research director at Tax Justice Network, said: “ There is a real 
risk that this tax gap analysis may be taken seriously as the basis for policy 
– in which case HMRC would continue to ignore the major revenue risks 
represented by multinationals. It’s important for public confidence, as much as 
for better policymaking, that HMRC swiftly addresses this spurious estimate.”

But, on Thursday, the Treasury minister Jane Ellison said: “This government is 
committed to tackling tax evasion and avoidance wherever it occurs. The UK has 
one of the lowest tax gaps in the world. By investing £1.8bn since 2010 in 
boosting HMRC compliance capabilities, we’ve brought our tax gap down to its 
lowest ever level.”

The official tax gap estimate of £36bn – equivalent to 6.5% of expected tax 
revenues – is down from £37bn for 2013-14.


HMRC’s tax gap figure includes an estimate of losses caused by tax avoidance 
of £2.2bn. Meanwhile, the hidden economy and tax evasion caused further 
estimated losses of £6.2bn and £5.2bn, respectively.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fexperts-dismiss-hmrcs-shrinking-tax-gap-estimate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d666f4dafc41774cda6591d82bfa3b22b6b7ac4%2F0_3_801_481%2F801.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Experts%20dismiss%20HMRC's%20shrinking%20tax%20gap%20estimate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fexperts-dismiss-hmrcs-shrinking-tax-gap-estimate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Experts%20dismiss%20HMRC%27s%20shrinking%20tax%20gap%20estimate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fexperts-dismiss-hmrcs-shrinking-tax-gap-estimate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d666f4dafc41774cda6591d82bfa3b22b6b7ac4%2F0_3_801_481%2F801.jpg>
 Britain’s tax gap Photograph: HMRC 
In terms of which taxes involved the largest shortfalls, lost income tax, 
national insurance contributions and capital gains tax together contributed 
£15.5bn to the tax gap. Uncollected VAT, corporation tax and excise duty 
amounted to £12.7bn, £3.7bn and 2.8bn, respectively.


On Thursday it emerged that HMRC was looking into allegations, revealed in the 
Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/20/delivery-giant-hermes-faces-hmrc-inquiry-into-low-pay-allegations>
, concerning the delivery firm Hermes. Some of its drivers said they believed 
they had been wrongly classed as self-employed workers and so were not getting 
the same rights as employees.

“If we find that companies have misclassified individuals as self-employed, we 
will take all necessary steps to make sure they pay the appropriate tax, 
national insurance contributions, interest and penalties,” HMRC’s executive 
chairman, Edward Troup, said in a letter toFrank Field 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/frank-field>, chair of the Commons’ work 
and pensions select committee.
 