
The Football Association is expected to shortly announce the most lucrative 
kit deal in England’s history, withNike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nike> having agreed to pay in the region 
of £400m to make the national team’s strip for a further 12 years.

The American sportswear giant replaced Umbro in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/mar/20/umbro-nike-england-kits> and 
their decision to not only extend but also enhance their association with the 
FA comes as something of a surprise given England’sdisastrous exit from last 
summer’s European Championships 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/england-iceland-euro-2016-match-report>
 and therecent, ongoing sexual abuse scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/05/football-sexual-abuse>, which 
could have serious consequences for the governing body.

Sammy Lee leaves England role as Gareth Southgate assembles own staff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/06/sammy-lee-has-left-role-england-football-assistant-manager>
The deal represents a slight improvement on the one Nike signed with the FA 
three years ago and which runs out at the end of the 2018 World Cup in Russia. 
The Guardian understands that it will be formally announced either at the end 
of this week or early next and will see Nike continue to have responsibility 
for creating kits for everyEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> side.

For the first time, penalty clauses and bonuses will also be included in the 
contract, meaning Nike’s payment to the FA could reduce if the men’s senior 
team fails to qualify for a major tournament or increase if they qualify and go 
onto reach the latter stages, specifically the semi-finals or beyond.

The first tournament the terms of the new deal will relate to is the 2020 
European Championship, which is being held across Europe withthe semi-finals 
and final at Wembley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/sep/19/wembley-euro-2020-host-finals-semi-finals-fa-uefa>
.

The kit deal comes less than two months after the FA announced a six-season 
overseas broadcast rights deal for the FA Cup believed to be in the region of 
$1bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/24/football-association-sign-six-year-fa-cup-televsion-rights-deal>
. Beginning in the 2018-19 season, it will see the marketing agency Pitch 
International cover rights for western Europe, the Middle East and North 
Africa, with IMG covering the rest of the world.

Martin Glenn, the FA’s chief executive, described the tie-up as “hugely 
significant” and he will no doubt be further enthused by the fresh terms with 
Nike, which it is believed makes England second only to Germany in regards to 
financial size of national kit deal.

Nike also manufacture kits for various club sides, including Barcelona, and 
Manchester City. Last October, they also signed a£60m a season, 15-year deal 
with Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/13/chelsea-new-kit-deal-nike-60m>
 starting from the 2017-18 season and which is the most lucrative commercial 
tie-up in the history of the club.
 