
The Football Association is prepared to go to the court of arbitration for 
sport over Fifa’s insistence the poppy should be considered a political symbol 
and will appeal against the governing body’s decision to impose fines after 
players and supporters marked Armistice Day at theWorld Cup qualifier against 
Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/11/england-scotland-world-cup-2018-qualifier-match-report>
last month.

Fifa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa> imposed monetary sanctions on 
all the Home Nations’ associations on Monday relating to the commemorations at 
November’s World Cup qualifying fixtures.

The FA <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa> was handed the largest 
punishment at 45,000 Swiss francs (£35,308) for several incidents “including 
the display by the host association, the English team and spectators of a 
political symbol” as well as spectator misconduct. Both sets of players at the 
game at Wembley had worn poppies on armbands, with the Scottish FA duly fined 
20,000 Swiss francs (£15,692).

There is disbelief within the FA that its fine was actually more than the 
30,000 Swiss francs (£23,640) imposed on Chile for repeated homophobic chanting 
by their team’s supporters, or on Poland, Argentina, Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
Colombia, Panama, Mexico and Venezuela for “various incidents involving 
unsporting conduct by fans, including homophobic chants in some instances”. 
Downing Street has described Fifa’s decision to sanction the Home Nations as 
“disappointing” and is monitoring the situation.

Home countries’ FAs seeing red over poppies could have been avoided | David 
Conn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/19/home-countries-fa-seeing-red-fifa-over-poppies-could-have-been-avoided>
The FA and the SFA had been warned by Fifa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/19/home-countries-fa-seeing-red-fifa-over-poppies-could-have-been-avoided>
 that the displaying of political symbols at the games could be punishable but 
both went ahead as they consider the poppy to be a symbol of remembrance.

The SFA is “disappointed” and considering its next step while the English 
association is awaiting the written reasoning behind the disciplinary 
committee’s decision but has already indicated it intends to appeal, initially 
to Fifa’s appeals committee.

“We note the decision by the Fifa disciplinary committee, which we intend to 
appeal,” an FA spokesman said. “As a first step we have written today to Fifa 
requesting the grounds for the decision.”

The world governing body’s judgment suggests sanctions will be increased for 
future offences, with the FA determined to avoid a repeat of this situation 
wheneverEngland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> play in 
November. To that end, should it fail in its appeal to Fifa, it is prepared to 
ask Cas to rule whether or not the poppy should be considered a political 
symbol in a football stadium.

There were fines, too, for the Football Association of Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales> and the Irish Football 
Associations for their Armistice Day tributes. Their players had worn plain 
black armbands for their qualifiers against Serbia and Azerbaijan, but were 
sanctioned 20,000 Swiss francs (£15,692) and 15,000 Swiss francs (£11,769) 
respectively for displays of the poppy around the stadia. While all the 
associations are awaiting the full written verdicts from Fifa, the Northern 
Irish governing body has indicated it will seek legal advice before considering 
its own response.

Fifa had permitted England, Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scotland> and Wales players to wear 
poppies on black armbands during November internationals back in 2011, but 
their stance has become more hardline under the presidency of Gianni Infantino. 
“With these decisions, it is not our intention to judge or question specific 
commemorations as we fully respect the significance of such moments in the 
respective countries, each one of them with its own history and background,” 
said Claudio Sulser, the chairman of the Fifa disciplinary committee. “However, 
keeping in mind that the rules need to be applied in a neutral and fair manner 
across Fifa’s 211 member associations, the display, among others, of any 
political or religious symbol is strictly prohibited. In the stadium and on the 
pitch, there is only room for sport, nothing else.”

The sports minister, Tracey Crouch said: “It is disappointing that Fifa has 
not recognised the sentiment of the poppy, which is not a political symbol. 
Poppies are a poignant tribute to the bravery and sacrifice of our servicemen 
and women, and footballers and fans alike should be able to wear them with 
pride.” Asked whether the UK’s football associations should pay the fines, the 
spokeswoman said that the department of culture, media and sport was “looking 
at what happens next”. Labour’s sports spokeswoman, Rosena Allin-Khan, 
described the fines as “utterly disrespectful”.

During the row, it also came to widespread attention that the Republic of 
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/republicofireland> had worn 
shirts commemorating the Easter Rising in a friendly against Switzerland in 
March, with Fifa having now belatedly imposed a 5,000 Swiss francs (£3,923) 
fine on the Football Association of Ireland.

That was one of a swathe of sanctions announced by Fifa on Monday, which 
included those imposed on countries whose supporters had engaged in abuse, 
including homophobic chants. Together with their fine, Chile will not be 
permitted to play their World Cup qualifiers against Paraguay and Ecuador at 
the Estadio Nacional Julio Martínez Prádanos in Santiago. The fines issued to 
other national federations for similar offences ranged from 20,000 Swiss francs 
to 35,000 Swiss francs, all less than that imposed upon the FA.

David Squires on … football's poppy fury season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/picture/2016/nov/08/david-squires-football-poppy-fury-season> 