
It was always going to be a momentous Strictly Come Dancing final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/live/2016/dec/17/strictly-come-dancing-the-grand-final-live>
, and not just because Britain’s very own end-of-pier Fred Astaire, head judge 
and all-round score-bellowing legend (“SEVERRRN!”), Len Goodman, was leaving 
the show.

This was a momentous series in many ways, not least due to the phenomenon of 
former Shadow Chancellor,Ed Balls <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edballs>
. At one point tipped to win, Balls clung to his unexpected popularity like a 
famished baby monkey to a teat, until finally he was flung off the show the 
week after Blackpool, where he’d jived to “Great Balls of Fire” (Did you see 
what they did there?).

In Blackpool, Ed rather overdid the gurning: at one point looking as shocked 
as if he’d espied Tony Blair, wriggling suggestively towards him on the 
dancefloor, a rose clamped between his teeth. It also can’t have helped that 
Balls was dancing in a way that looked as though all the important bones and 
muscles had taken the night off from his body.

Ore Oduba and Joanne Clifton named winners of Strictly Come Dancing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/17/ore-oduba-and-joanne-clifton-named-winners-of-strictly-come-dancing>
So it was goodbye to Ed, though viewers did see him again in the final, 
group-dancing with the other 2016 contestants, and reprising his now-legendary 
Gangnam Style routine in a manner that cried out for urgent medical attention, 
and raised great existential questions (can a man’s hips be made of Lego?), but 
in a fun way.

The final was, as always, introduced by Tess Daly (Northern Lights Goddess), 
and Claudia Winkleman (Uber-Kohl-ed Goth-Baby), and judged by Goodman,Darcey 
Bussell <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/bussell>, Craig Revel 
(“Fab-u-lous!”) Horwood and Bruno Tonioli, who graced the panel in their 
inimitable styles, like a cross between a depleted lineup for the Last Supper 
and the crammed dressing room of a provincial repertory production ofHello Dolly
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fstrictly-ore-louise-redknapp-danny-mac-final-len-goodman-judge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11c690705eb7304afa45598a2748c8dd95b7ceb6%2F0_0_2048_1365%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fab-u-lous!%20Ore%E2%80%99s%20jive%20wins%20Strictly%E2%80%99s%20big%20night%20of%20magic%20and%20schmaltz&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fstrictly-ore-louise-redknapp-danny-mac-final-len-goodman-judge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fab-u-lous%21%20Ore%E2%80%99s%20jive%20wins%20Strictly%E2%80%99s%20big%20night%20of%20magic%20and%20schmaltz&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fstrictly-ore-louise-redknapp-danny-mac-final-len-goodman-judge%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11c690705eb7304afa45598a2748c8dd95b7ceb6%2F0_0_2048_1365%2F2048.jpg>
 Ed Balls (centre) performing during the live final Strictly Come Dancing. 
Photograph: Guy Levy/BBC/PA 
However, the night belonged to the finalists, singer turned presenter Louise 
Redknapp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/02/strictly-come-dancing-2016-bbc-all-the-contestants-ranked>
 and her partner Kevin Clifton; actor Danny Mac and his partner Oti Mabuse; and 
presenterOre Oduba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/17/ore-oduba-and-joanne-clifton-named-winners-of-strictly-come-dancing>
 and his partner (and Kevin’s sister) Joanne Clifton. While some might have 
perceived Oduba’s presence as helping (at least in part) to soothe the ongoing 
row about how black contestants get voted off more easily onStrictly, frankly, 
it was blindingly obvious that he was only there because he was so diabolically 
good.

Soon, it was time for the three finalists to strut through three dances, the 
first one selected by the judges. Gene Kelly’s widow, Patricia, turned up to 
applaud Ore’s Singin’ in the Rain, Louise once again donned the foxy Flashdance 
leg warmers for the chachacha, and Danny executed a quickstep that was so 
quick, fire extinguishers must have been at the ready in case his inner thighs 
caught fire.

So far so good, nobody had dislocated their shoulders, or choked on a runaway 
spangle, and if the floor was getting a bit slippery from the vats of fake tan 
melting beneath the lights, then this was nothing the finalists couldn’t 
handle, as they launched into their show-dances. All of which were brilliant – 
Ore and Joanne bringing chic Hollywood glamour, Louise and Kevin elegance and 
romance, and Danny and Oti, excitement and drama.

Then it was time for the finalists’ own personal favourite dances from the 
series. In this last group, Redknapp’s Argentine tango was all street lamps, 
slashed satin and a segment towards the end where she was dragged along on her 
toes by Kevin – which looked a little as though he was nicking a particularly 
ravishing rolled-up rug, but these are what classicStrictly moments are made of.

Then it was time for Ore to jive, kicking and flicking so incredibly fast that 
I was worried he was going to shatter his pelvis, and take Bruno’s eyes out.

After that, there came Danny’s ferocious samba – Danny sporting his winning 
shirt-not-done-up look, grinding away like a Ken doll on heat.

While the exhausted finalists paddled their way back through the small lakes 
of fake tan to their dressing rooms, there ensued a fair amount ofStrictly
-schmaltz as Goodman was given an emotional send-off, complete with a standing 
ovation, and the professional dancers delivering a truly magical routine that 
at one point looked as though all the tiny, pirouetting ballerinas had escaped 
from their jewellery boxes for the evening.

After that, all the non-finalist Strictly contestants lined up to bitch and 
carp about why it was all their professional partners’ fault that they’d not 
done better, how their feet were still oozing blood and blisters, and how they 
wished their good-for-nothing agents had never talked them into doing it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fstrictly-ore-louise-redknapp-danny-mac-final-len-goodman-judge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe537843079380fe4ad5b68a8aee7017cd9be6a50%2F0_96_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fab-u-lous!%20Ore%E2%80%99s%20jive%20wins%20Strictly%E2%80%99s%20big%20night%20of%20magic%20and%20schmaltz&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fstrictly-ore-louise-redknapp-danny-mac-final-len-goodman-judge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fab-u-lous%21%20Ore%E2%80%99s%20jive%20wins%20Strictly%E2%80%99s%20big%20night%20of%20magic%20and%20schmaltz&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fstrictly-ore-louise-redknapp-danny-mac-final-len-goodman-judge%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe537843079380fe4ad5b68a8aee7017cd9be6a50%2F0_96_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Ore Oduba and Joanne Clifton at the Strictly final on Saturday. Photograph: 
Guy Levy/BBC/PA 
Of course, none of that last bit actually happened. I just really wish that 
something like that would happen (just one year, just for the hell of it). In 
reality, as usual, everyone gushed and sobbed about what a wonderful time 
they’d had in the “Strictly family”, and how they’d never wanted it to end.

However, it had to end, and it did so with the announcement of Ore Oduba as 
the worthy winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/17/ore-oduba-and-joanne-clifton-named-winners-of-strictly-come-dancing>
, not least for the way he and Joanne Clifton risked life, limb, and the rest 
of their lives on hospital trolleys, jumping from one sparkly platform to 
another during their showdance.

What a winner, what a final, what a series. And the best thing is that it will 
never truly be over. As Ed Balls is going to find out: this kind of golden 
footage never dies – it just ends up on clip shows.

 * This article was corrected on 18 December 2016 to amend an incorrect date.  