
Facebook’s UK business generated an £11.3m tax credit last year, despite the 
world’s largest social network making a global profit of $6.19bn (£4.97bn), 
according tothe latest company accounts 
<https://beta.companieshouse.gov.uk/company/06331310/filing-history/MzE1OTA5MTk5OGFkaXF6a2N4/document?format=pdf&download=0>
.

The credit at Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> UK 
Ltd can be offset against future tax bills and is likely to raise further 
questions about whether the $370bn US company is paying its fair share towards 
Britain’s public finances.

Last week, the prime minister, Theresa May, told the Conservative party 
conference: “If you’re ... an international company that treats tax laws as an 
optional extra … I’m putting you on warning. This can’t go on any more.”

Until April, all Facebook’s UK advertising sales were routed through its 
operations in Dublin, reducing the UK tax bill. Activities at Facebook UK, 
meanwhile, were confined to selling “sales support, marketing services and 
engineering support” to other companies within the Facebook group.

But in that month, Facebook’s UK sales activity was transferred from Dublin to 
London, following the then chancellor George Osborne’s introduction of a
punitive rate of tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/18/osborne-targets-multinationals-and-tax-evaders-in-budget-crackdown>
 for multinationals deemed to be artificially shifting British sales overseas.

Ahead of the change, turnover at Facebook UK Ltd doubled in 2015 to £210m, but 
this did not include a penny of the hundreds of millions of pounds in sales 
income that the wider group is estimated to have received from British 
advertisers.

Losses for Facebook UK increased from £28.5m to £52.5m in 2015. As a result, 
the accounts showed that Facebook UK ended the year with a tax credit of 
£11.3m, compared with atax bill of £4,327 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2015/oct/11/facebook-paid-4327-corporation-tax-despite-35-million-staff-bonuses>
 in 2014.

The company reported a £4.2m tax charge for 2015, as well as £15.5m of 
deferred tax credits, linked to staff share awards. Last year, Facebook UK paid 
employees £71m in share awards.

The accounts show that Facebook UK expanded dramatically last year, doubling 
staff and turnover, in advance of the groupabandoning its controversial tax 
structure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/04/facebook-pay-millions-more-uk-tax-reports>
 for British advertising sales.

The number of people working for the business grew from 362 to 682 in 2015, 
including the addition of 200 staff within its software engineering team. Since 
then, a spokesman for the company said headcount has grown further, with more 
than 1,000 people employed by Facebook in the UK.

Staff have been taken on in part to help Facebook UK sell advertising directly 
to major clients, who had previously dealt with Facebook Ireland.

In a memo to UK staff <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-35724308> in March, 
Facebook said: “On Monday, we will start notifying large UK customers that from 
the start of April, they will receive invoices from Facebook UK and not 
Facebook Ireland.

“In light of changes to tax law in the UK, we felt this change would provide 
transparency to Facebook’s operations in the UK.

“The new structure is easier to understand and clearly recognises the value 
our UK organisation adds to our sales, through our highly skilled and growing 
UK sales team.”

As Facebook UK has taken greater control of sales to British customers, it has 
hired new staff, many of whom are expected to move into its new offices atOne 
Rathbone Square 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/11/facebook-move-uk-headquarters-london>
 in central London, when construction is finished next year.

These changes mean that Facebook UK’s next set of accounts are likely to show 
a more dramatic jump in revenues. There is also expected to be an impact on how 
much UK tax is paid, although a number of factors, including the £11.3m tax 
credit, could mean that it is some time before Facebook’s UK tax bill rises 
substantially.

In a statement, Facebook said: “We are proud that in 2015 we have continued to 
grow our business in the UK and created over 300 new high-skilled jobs ... We 
pay all the taxes that we are required to under UK law.”

In January, Facebook warned US investors 
<http://d1lge852tjjqow.cloudfront.net/CIK-0001326801/0c796377-fba3-4e40-b18a-3503901af1a4.pdf>
 in its annual report that the UK operation could face higher tax bills in the 
future.

“Many countries in Europe ... have enacted new laws that could significantly 
increase our tax obligations … or require us to change the manner in which we 
operate our business. For example, in 2015, the United Kingdom enacted the 
diverted profits tax … which could increase our tax obligations,” it said.

The reaction among large technology companies to Osborne’s diverted profits 
tax (pdf) 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/385741/Diverted_Profits_Tax.pdf>
 has been mixed. Google and eBay believe that they have found a way to continue 
sending UK sales overseas without falling foul, but Amazon and Facebook have 
chosen to unwind such arrangements.

When he first unveiled his efforts 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-britain-politics-osborne-tech-idUKKCN0HO15N20140929>
 to tackle multinational tax avoidance in 2014, Osborne said: “Some technology 
companies go to extraordinary lengths to pay little or no tax here ... If you 
abuse our tax system, you abuse the trust of the British people. And my message 
to those companies is clear: we will put a stop to it.”
 