
What would you do if you found yourself in a locked room with a dead body, and 
only an hour to solve the crime before you got framed for the murder yourself? 
That’s the premise of an ambitious interactive story called Framed, which will 
be played out onFacebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> at 
8pm tonight.

“It’s the world’s first interactive escape room murder mystery”, says Rachel 
Walker, Head of Production atSocial Life <http://youneedasociallife.co.uk/>, 
who have created the project withUKTV’s Alibi channel <http://alibi.uktv.co.uk/>
 to launch a new season of the crime drama Crossing Lines.

If the phrase “interactive escape room murder mystery” doesn’t exactly convey 
what you can expect, I got a chance to try a rehearsal version.

In Framed, you view the world through the eyes of a security guard, and pretty 
quickly you move from choosing his drink to discovering a body. You have to 
make sense of the clues littered around the room where the crime has taken 
place.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Ffacebook-live-hosts-ground-breaking-interactive-mystery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb77bac96c4b4ad5a3d791e2e752c2a90e280d6cb%2F232_296_1306_784%2F1306.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Facebook%20Live%20hosts%20groundbreaking%20interactive%20murder%20mystery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Ffacebook-live-hosts-ground-breaking-interactive-mystery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Facebook%20Live%20hosts%20groundbreaking%20interactive%20murder%20mystery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Ffacebook-live-hosts-ground-breaking-interactive-mystery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb77bac96c4b4ad5a3d791e2e752c2a90e280d6cb%2F232_296_1306_784%2F1306.jpg>
 Clues in the Framed crime scene. Photograph: Alibi TV 
For the test I was able to issue voice commands, which the character and 
narrator voiceover responded to. But the live event sounds far more complicated.

They are hoping thousands will take part, and the on-screen action will be 
guided in part by moderators picking out comments from the audience. Facebook’s 
reaction buttons will also be used to carry out snap polls of what the 
character should do next.

Framed was written by David Varela <https://davidvarela.wordpress.com/>, who 
says: “Escape room experiences are usually designed for small groups, so 
creating a story on this scale meant taking the game to another level. Allowing 
thousands of people to take part at once should produce really exciting 
results, and we’re looking forward to some heated arguments about the different 
choices our character can make.”

The story’s open-ended nature doesn’t faze Sam Pearson, a TV and Digital 
Content Producer at UKTV. Framed is intended to last from 8pm to 9pm, when 
Crossing Lines starts on linear TV – but the team are relaxed about the crime 
being solved sooner. “In a way that will just prove our premise, that the 
audience are a bunch of brilliant amateur detectives.”

Pearson said that one of the driving ideas behind Framed, which has taken a 
couple of months to put together, was that feeling, when watching detective 
shows, that the audience are always racing to try and solve the crime before 
the on-screen protagonists.

The project also builds upon an idea the team tested out in the summer, using 
the #Twurder hashtag to allow users to shape a murder myster story 
<http://alibi.uktv.co.uk/articles/article/theres-been-twurder/>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Ffacebook-live-hosts-ground-breaking-interactive-mystery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9cb65735b576350f904fe7953466534ea86ad62f%2F106_255_1374_825%2F1374.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Facebook%20Live%20hosts%20groundbreaking%20interactive%20murder%20mystery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Ffacebook-live-hosts-ground-breaking-interactive-mystery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Facebook%20Live%20hosts%20groundbreaking%20interactive%20murder%20mystery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Ffacebook-live-hosts-ground-breaking-interactive-mystery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9cb65735b576350f904fe7953466534ea86ad62f%2F106_255_1374_825%2F1374.jpg>
 Could you solve it? The crime scene in Framed interactive murder mystery. 
Photograph: Alibi TV 
Pearson is confident that the combined wisdom of the audience will get the 
main character off the hook. “If they go way off-beam, the story is constructed 
so the narrator can gently head them in the right direction. There’s a lot in 
there to be discovered, including some easter eggs hidden around the place.”


As text-based adventures go, it’s all come a long way from typing “Go north” 
into computers and getting frustrated thatThorin has sat down to start singing 
about gold <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GfDZ2eHCEnM>.

So how did I fare on the case?

Well, without giving any spoilers away, I expect to be inside for a very long 
stretch.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Ffacebook-live-hosts-ground-breaking-interactive-mystery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F119f5d8663f986df34eb0615209cdc71115d261e%2F0_34_2356_1103%2F2356.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Facebook%20Live%20hosts%20groundbreaking%20interactive%20murder%20mystery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Ffacebook-live-hosts-ground-breaking-interactive-mystery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Facebook%20Live%20hosts%20groundbreaking%20interactive%20murder%20mystery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Ffacebook-live-hosts-ground-breaking-interactive-mystery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F119f5d8663f986df34eb0615209cdc71115d261e%2F0_34_2356_1103%2F2356.jpg>
 The Guardian’s Martin Belam fails Alibi’s Framed interactive murder mystery 
Photograph: Alibi TV 
 * “Framed” launches on 13 October 2016 at 8pm on facebook.com/alibichannel 
<https://www.facebook.com/alibichannel>
 