
Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook>, Apple, Amazon and 
a host of top technology companies are planning to publicly urge the next US 
president to support a swath of new regulation that would make it easier for 
them to hire highly skilled workers for overseas, Reuters reports.

In an open letter expected to be published on Wednesday, a host of trade 
bodies representing technology firms will lay out 12 policy recommendations 
including pledging support for the controversial Trans-Pacific Partnership 
(TPP) trade deal, urging more “narrowly targeted government access to user 
data” and recognition of encryption as a “critical security tool”.

The groups are not aligning themselves with either of the two major political 
parties but have timed the letter to build a debate ahead of the Republican and 
Democratic conventions in July.

The coalition letter, signed by groups including the Internet Association, the 
Telecommunications Industry Association and the Information Technology Industry 
Council, is the first time a wide range of technology trade organizations have 
staked out a common platform during a presidential campaign, according to a 
person familiar with the initiative.

Mark Zuckerberg joins tech bosses in supporting Obama on immigration
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/08/mark-zuckerberg-joins-tech-bosses-in-supporting-obama-on-immigration>
It also calls for preventing censorship online by limiting unreasonable 
third-party liability for speech, support for the sharing economy, and an 
updated and simplified tax code, among other issues.


Backing for the TPP runs counter to positions taken by presumptive Republican 
candidate Donald Trump and Democratic frontrunner Hillary Clinton. Trump has 
made criticism ofinternational trade agreements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/05/be-rational-and-objective-china-cautions-us-after-trump-trade-tirades>
 and a call for tougher immigration policies central themes of his campaign.


 In a Republican debate in March the billionaire real estate developer shied 
away from arguing against more H-1B visas for skilled foreign workers, saying 
he was “softening the position because we need to have talented people in this 
country”.

 Clinton has not said if she would try to renegotiate TPP, which was signed in 
February but has not yet received congressional approval. She has said she 
supports expanding the number of visas for high-skilled workers.

Silicon Valley <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/silicon-valley> has 
struggled to notch policy wins in recent years on its legislative priorities, 
including immigration and patent reform, though the tech industry has succeeded 
in strengthening net neutrality protections and curtailing some government 
surveillance programs.

 Trump has urged the restoration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/dec/16/republican-debate-tough-talk-on-terror-isis-and-nsa-video>
 of the National Security Agency’s (NSA) bulk collection of US phone records, 
saying that US authorities should err on the side of protecting national 
security over privacy concerns.

 Trump also urged a boycott of Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/feb/19/donald-trump-calls-for-apple-boycott-video>
 during the company’s high-profile clash earlier this year with the FBI over
unlocking an encrypted iPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/28/apple-fbi-case-dropped-san-bernardino-iphone>
 linked to the gunman in theSan Bernardino shooting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/san-bernardino-shooting>.

 Clinton has supported some reforms to the NSA and has said a balance needs to 
be found between privacy and security in the encryption debate.

 Signatories also include Allied for Startups, BSA The Software Alliance, 
Computing Technology Industry Association, Computer & Communications Industry 
Association, Consumer Technology Association, Semiconductor Industry 
Association, Silicon Valley Leadership Group, Software & Information Industry 
Association, Technology CEO Council and TechNet.

Facebook did not immediately respond for comment, while Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> declined to comment.
 