
When Mark Zuckerberg <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mark-zuckerberg> 
launched Facebook in 2004, he pitched it as a way to get a date.

Opening his company’s annual F8 developer conference in San Francisco on 
Tuesday, Zuckerberg illustrated just how ambitious he’s become in 14 years. 
Facebook, he says, will now bring the world online, pioneerartificial 
intelligence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/05/facebook-ai-tag-pictures-blind-people-machine-learning>
 andperfect virtual reality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/07/facebook-oculus-virtual-reality-fears-spy-on-users-pass-on-data>
 (VR).


He introduced “bots” that would serve as robotic customer service reps for 
news, weather and retail companies, and showed how he wants to use virtual 
reality to put grandparents inside baby videos. He also brought on stage a 
carbon fiber tube fromFacebook’s Aquila pilotless plane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/31/facebook-finishes-aquila-solar-powered-internet-drone-with-span-of-a-boeing-737>
 that will beam wireless internet down to parts of the developing world.

Trump kids discover they can't vote for Dad in New York Republican primary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/11/donald-trump-ivanka-eric-miss-vote-deadline>
“If you had told me Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> 
was going to build a plane I would have told you you were crazy,” he said. The 
plane, which he said “weighs less than a small car”, will fly at 60,000ft 
(twice the height of commercial airliners) and be able to stay airborne for 
several months at a time.

Zuckerberg’s ambitions illustrate how technology companies are no longer 
content with getting people to visit their website or download their app; their 
future depends on being omnipresent in people’s lives.

In a thinly veiled attack on US presidential hopeful Donald Trump, Zuckerberg 
said: “I’m starting to see people and nations turning inward against this idea 
of a connected world. I hear fearful voices talking about building walls … It 
takes courage to chose hope over fear.”

The Facebook CEO has spent the past three years lobbying for more visas for 
foreign workers.

“Instead of building walls we can help build bridges. Instead of dividing 
people we can connect people. We do it one person at a time, one connection at 
time. That’s why I think the work we’re doing together is more important than 
it has ever been before,” he said.

Much of the buzz was around a seemingly nerdy new product: chat bots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/06/what-is-chat-bot-kik-bot-shop-messaging-platform>
. Bots are tools that send live, automated messages or images into Facebook’s 
chat tool Messenger, which is used by 900 million people every month and 50m 
businesses. For many users, it will be their first experience of interacting 
with an artificial intelligence.

Developers will be able to build new chat bots to work with Messenger. 
Zuckerberg demonstrated Facebook’s first bots including CNN, which will send 
articles to users with conversational teasers, and 1-800-Flowers which can 
order flower deliveries with personalized messages. Other bots will deliver 
weather and news updates, receipts and shipping notification.

What is a chat bot, and should I be using one?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/06/what-is-chat-bot-kik-bot-shop-messaging-platform>
For Facebook, the move is as much about making money as being social. If 
businesses use Facebook as a way to sell more, Facebook can make more money 
from them.

Speaking on stage, David Marcus, Facebook’s head of messaging and a former 
eBay executive, joked about how addictive it was to interact with businesses’ 
bots. “I guarantee you’re going to spend way more money than you want on this,” 
he said.

If bots are still foreign to normal people, they are the programming trend of 
the day here in Silicon Valley. After his speech, attendees struggled to fit 
inside a tent for a bots demo. “Is that us? Sweet!” he said as he marveled at 
the number of people trying to get in.

Customers have to opt in to engage with any company’s Messenger bot and, for 
now, companies aren’t supposed to use it for pure advertising.

Facebook’s other big push is more closely related to its original purpose for 
many consumers: as a place to post pictures. Except now, Zuckerberg says he 
imagines a future where consumers find ways to jump into their pictures. This 
year, the company started shipping its Oculus Rift virtual reality headsets and 
is working to develop “360-degree” cameras that capture all parts of a setting.

“You actually feel you’re right there with another person,” Zuckerberg said.


Gear VR, Facebook’s low-end virtual reality goggles, is part of a technology 
that Zuckerberg claimed is going to “change the way we all experience the 
world”. Customers have so far watched 2m hours of VR video, he said, and more 
than 50 games have been launched so far.

He also demonstrated an app that allowed two people to play together 
virtually, and said that in late 2016 Oculus, the Facebook-owned VR company, 
will launch a set of touch controllers which will allow users to touch and 
manipulate objects in virtual applications. “This will allow a whole new layer 
of immersion, a whole new set of social experiences across all these VR 
platforms … experiences you can’t have with any existing platform today.”

This will be paired with Facebook’s recent push into live video, which lets 
people broadcast whatever they’re doing from a smartphone.

“Just the other week, I saw a live video of a woman with her young kids skiing 
down the hill,” Zuckerberg said. “I really just want to make sure these kids 
get down this hill.”

Deep Drumpf: the Twitter bot trying to out-Trump the Donald
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/04/donald-trump-deep-drumpf-twitter-bot>
Zuckerberg also showed a mock-up of a pair of augmented-reality glasses that 
looked more like a normal pair of dark-rimmed specs. Augmented reality allows 
images and data to be overlaid on our view of the real world, and will mean 
that a lot of physical objects could potentially be replaced by an 
augmented-reality app, he said.


“In the future if you want to pull out your photos and make it as big as you 
want, you could pull out your AR glasses and make it as big as you want and 
show it to people … objects like your TV could be replaced by $1 apps in the AR 
app store.”

“But it will take a long time to make it work.”
 