
It would appear, after two rounds of the Six Nations, that the hemispheres are 
as far apart as ever. The northern players havecarried on performing without a 
pause 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/feb/19/six-nations-verdict-so-far-dean-ryan>
 since September and find themselves on grounds as damp and cold as ever in the 
European February. Any talk of changing the Six Nations through expansion, 
promotion, relegation, bonus points, play-offs or repositioning the entire 
caravan in warmer months has disappeared like a wren in a Cornish gale.

Meanwhile, having had a good rest after the World Cup, the players of Super 
Rugby are about to launch their new expanded competition, complete with single 
franchises from Japan and Argentina – the Sunwolves and the Jaguares – and a 
sixth South African franchise, the Southern Kings. There will be 18 teams, 
divided into two groups, subdivided into four conferences and the language of 
conference winners and wild cards is more from the glossary of the NFL than the 
RFU.

The Six Nations comes with familiarity and tradition; Super Rugby comes 
flushed with youthfulness and a willingness to experiment. The one is stodge; 
the other is basketball. TheSix Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations> is rich; Super Rugby is chasing 
money like an auctioneer pulling bids off the wall.

The difference in moods is hard to ignore, although the truer comparison may 
be between European Professional Club Rugby and Super Rugby. EPCR has at least 
been through a reconfiguration, a restructuring along lines drawn by England 
and France. For continuity of purpose – to obey the demographics – it is 
orderly that French and English clubs exclusively occupy the last eight places 
in the Champions Cup. Out in front, that is, just like England and France in 
the Six Nations.

Six Nations verdict so far: England show promise but Wales have quality to win 
title
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/feb/19/six-nations-verdict-so-far-dean-ryan>
Both have sterner tests ahead. England, after success on the road against 
Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/06/scotland-england-six-nations-match-report>
 andItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/14/italy-england-six-nations-match-report>
, now have Ireland and Wales at Twickenham. It will be interesting to see if 
the return to the place of theirWorld Cup ignominy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/04/england-rugby-world-cup-stuart-lancaster-10-reasons>
 throws fuel on the spirit of revival, ignited by the arrival and the style of 
Eddie Jones, or whether memories serve as a fire blanket.

The last quarter in Rome suggests England are more drawn to a sunlit future 
than haunted by their past. The indiscipline at the breakdown that they could 
not shake off was at least forgotten as they piled up the points. The little 
kick by Danny Care for the second of Jonathan Joseph’s three tries and the pass 
by Jamie George to Owen Farrell were delicate and artful, and in stark contrast 
to the defensive operation organised by Jones’s assistant Paul Gustard.

Italy had kept possession well in Paris in round one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/06/france-italy-six-nations-match-report>
 against a defence that was individually committed – nobody could ever accuse 
Guilhem Guirado of not selling himself in the tackle – but collectively 
stand-offish. The French like to usher and shuffle as a line, and Italy thanked 
them for the space and kept the ball.

England engaged and obliterated. Italy simply could not hang on to the ball 
against them. Rain caused the ball to squirt out of contact in the
France‑Ireland game in Paris in round two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/13/france-ireland-six-nations-match-report>
, but it was England’s extreme lust for contact that forced the ball free in 
dry Rome. Presumably Gustard is not going to ask his tacklers to ease up 
against Ireland next.

Ireland are victims of a fire they started. They play a simple style, full of 
forwards as carriers or with Conor Murray keeping the ball in an imaginary box, 
tight against the touchlines. They go from side to side only through the 
diagonal kicks of Jonathan Sexton. They charge and they chase furiously and do 
so with utter devotion – but it is hurting them. It may be bad luck but, from 
their World Cup gamesagainst France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/11/france-ireland-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
 andArgentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/18/ireland-argentina-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
 to their opening Six Nations encounters against Wales and France, they have 
been littering the field with medical staff and injured players.

Ireland are playing a game beyond their physical means and if they try to ram 
their way through England’s defence they will lose even more personnel. Joe 
Schmidt used to make subtle changes to his team’s approach on a game-by-game 
basis but has been consistently narrow for four games now. Perhaps his hand is 
forced by the injuries – the more he suffers the less easy it is to vary the 
style – but it’s a catch-22 situation that is stretching his match-day 23 to 
breaking point.

France now have to go on the road to Cardiff. They used to enjoy travelling 
there, perfectly willing to accept an invitation to free the shackles, in the 
knowledge that their forwards were inherently stronger and would provide a 
foundation that could tolerate a little folly elsewhere. Wales, though, now 
look to get the better of the breakdown and will thrive in the space won by 
such mastery and by France’s vegetarian collective defence.

If there is to be an outbreak of freedom at the pivotal point of the 
championship (and not just the last Saturday), it may well be in Cardiff. Wales 
are on the verge of release; France yearn to be sharp – or at least less blunt. 
The signs are not all set to disappoint: the roof will be shut and both teams 
have scored from quick ball from a scrum. Repeat: quick ball from a scrum. 
Channel one: Taulupe Faletau against Ireland and Maxime Médard against, hmm, 
Ireland. Is there something about Ireland’s defence? Or is it that 
improvisation off quick ball cannot be resisted?

Perhaps Scotland will show us in Rome. Their visit may be fraught with all the 
frustrations that go with the occasion being plunged yet again into a squabble 
over the wooden spoon, but they too stand on the verge of a change of pace and 
form – and luck. Expect Scotland to cut free at last.

So far, the Six Nations has been a little northern of soul. For the mercurial 
we may have to turn to the south. But oil flows too, and it has been applied to 
the cycles that must spin anew after each World Cup. Stand by, at the very 
least, for a wide range of contrasts in round three of the old immutable 
championship.
 