
Game of Thrones <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones>, 
the enormously popular fantasy series, became the most successful show in Emmy 
award history on Sunday night, with a total of 38 wins under its belt.

The Game of Thrones cast and creators walked away with 12 awards, winning in 
the categories for best drama and best script for a drama.

With its latest haul, the HBO programme – shown on Sky Atlantic in the UK – 
overtook the record held by the comedy show Frasier and proved that, despite 
being in its sixth series, it has lost none of the momentum gained since it 
first appeared in 2011.

The show is a global phenomenon and its success has surpassed even that of The 
Sopranos, previously HBO’s biggest drama.

Based on the books by George RR Martin, the sixth season drew in an audience 
of 25.1m in the US, with audiences clamouring to find out the fate of the 
character Jon Snow.

In the UK, the latest season was the most popular programme to be broadcast on 
Sky, drawing an average audience of 5m.

Talking recently about the show’s popularity, Sky Atlantic director Zai Bennett
 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/zai-bennett> described it as “insane”.

Game of Thrones: international success story crafted in Belfast shipyards
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/20/game-of-thrones-international-success-story-crafted-in-belfast-shipyards>
The show has been commissioned for two more seasons, concluding in 2018. The 
sixth season drew particular praise for its elevation of the women of Westeros 
to positions of power and dominance: Cersei is seen sitting on the Iron Throne; 
Daenerys marching to battle with the Dothraki; Sansa Stark sitting alongside 
her brothers as rulers of the North; and Arya on a mission for revenge.

Sophie Turner, who plays Sansa, suggested that Game of Thrones looked likely 
to continue to dominate next year.

“I was actually speechless,” she said of the season seven script. “This season 
is unbelievable and I think fans are going to be really satisfied. It’s crazy.”

Another HBO series, Veep <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/veep>, was 
named top comedy for the second straight year and its star, Julia 
Louis-Dreyfus, won best comedy actress for the fifth straight time and a 
record-setting sixth time in her career.

Veep was created by Briton Armando Iannucci, after his success with The Thick 
of It.

Louis-Dreyfus said: “I think that Veep has torn down the wall between comedy 
and politics. Our show started out as a political satire but it now feels more 
like a sobering documentary.”

2016 Emmys broke more than one trend: this was an awards show that didn't suck
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/19/emmy-awards-2016-review-game-of-thrones-people-v-oj>
FX’s dramatisation of the OJ Simpson trial, The People v OJ Simpson, won nine 
Emmys <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/emmys>, including best limited 
series.

Rami Malek and Tatiana Maslany won the top acting in a drama awards for Mr 
Robot and Orphan Black.

The night was a very successful one for British talent at the Emmys, with 
Sherlock, The Night Manager and Downton Abbey all picking up awards.

Sherlock: the Abominable Bride beat fellow BBC show Luther to win best limited 
series while Susanne Bier, the Danish director of the BBC’s John Le Carré 
adaptation The Night Manager, won for best directing in a limited series.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Ffantasy-made-reality-as-game-of-thrones-earns-record-emmy-haul%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a1dad15c4fd464c55e9ad273a22f19dd939269e%2F0_91_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fantasy%20made%20reality%20as%20Game%20of%20Thrones%20earns%20record%20Emmy%20haul&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Ffantasy-made-reality-as-game-of-thrones-earns-record-emmy-haul%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fantasy%20made%20reality%20as%20Game%20of%20Thrones%20earns%20record%20Emmy%20haul&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Ffantasy-made-reality-as-game-of-thrones-earns-record-emmy-haul%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a1dad15c4fd464c55e9ad273a22f19dd939269e%2F0_91_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
 Veep star Julia Louis-Dreyfus with other cast members at the awards. 
Photograph: Mike Nelson/EPA 
However, it was not as fruitful a night for the BBC as had been hoped. Despite 
its 22 nominations, the corporation picked up nothing in most major categories, 
and leading men Tom Hiddleston, Idris Elba and Benedict Cumberbatch all missed 
out.

On picking up the award for Sherlock, Steven Moffat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/stevenmoffat> – the show’s creator – 
mentioned the BBC’s recent loss of its most popular programme, The Great 
British Bake Off, to Channel 4.

“Thank you to the BBC who we love above all bakery. British people will get 
that,” he said.

Moffat hinted that his production company had also been approached by other 
channels wanting to buy Sherlock but, like Bake Off’s presenters Mel Giedroyc 
and Sue Perkins, his loyalty lay with the BBC.

“We have had offers, that’s not what it’s about,” he said. “I think the BBC 
was quite right not to reward greed. It’s wrong.”

Bier, the only woman nominated in the directing in a limited series category, 
hoped her win would be a step forward for women behind the camera.

“This is such a traditional men’s world, and I hope the fact a woman director 
has won this prestigious prize is going to mean that more non-conventional 
series and movies are going to be directed by women,” she said.

Maggie Smith won best supporting actress for a third time for Downton Abbey. 
The 81-year-old’s absence was noted by host Jimmy Kimmel.

“Maggie Smith, she’s been nominated for the Emmy nine times. She’s won the 
Emmy three times,” he said.

“How many times do you think she’s shown up to get the Emmy? That’s right, no 
times.

“We’re not mailing this to her. Maggie, if you want this, it will be in the 
lost and found.”
 