
Canvassing counties and alienating communities

Back in June, a little less than half a year and a little more than half a 
lifetime ago, Nigel Farage visited Headingley. It was the fourth day of 
Yorkshire’s match against Lancashire, but he had not come for the cricket so 
much as the opportunity to pose for a photos and press some flesh. He stopped 
off in the Long Room, where his assistants started handing around Ukip 
leaflets. Farage often talks about what a keen fan he is of the game. But here, 
perhaps, was a first clue that this may not be entirely true. Because anyone 
who understood the sport would surely know better than to try to proselytise 
Yorkshire fans while they were attending to the serious business of watching 
the Roses match.

Sign up to the Spin
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/sign-up-to-the-spin>
Farage was, apparently, told to either leave off or leave altogether. One of 
Yorkshire’s members wrote a fine follow-up letter to the club. “You only have 
to look at the newspapers which people read at Headingley to see that Yorkshire 
cricket supporters hold diverse political views,” he wrote, “but we are all 
united by a love of cricket in general and Yorkshire cricket in particular.” 
Headingley wasn’t the only cricket ground Farage campaigned at in the summer. 
He also held a rally at New Road in Worcester, stopped in at Lord’s, and had 
lunch at the Nevill Ground in Tunbridge Wells, where he spoke about how much he 
enjoyed the “very English scene”.

By his own account, Farage “grew up playing [cricket] as a kid” and “continued 
through to my mid-to-late teens”. He apparently “opened the batting, bowled a 
little, but my main interest was being captain”. The last time I used this 
quote I received an email from a reader who had been at school with Farage, who 
had clear memories of playing rugby with him, but none whatsoever of Farage 
“playing or watching cricket”. He added that in fact “the closest thing to a 
bat I saw him hold was a swagger stick”. Well, memory can of course be a 
treacherous and unreliable thing.

There is at least one description of Farage’s cricket online. It notes that he 
didn’t actually bat, bowl, or field, and that his most memorable contribution 
to the matchwas to turn up wearing a pith helmet 
<http://www.inequality.org.nz/the-day-i-played-cricket-with-nigel-farage/>. 
Regardless of whether or not he plays, it’s unsurprising to hear Farage wax on 
about his love of cricket, bound up as it is in nostalgia for an England that 
used to be; a country, in John Major’s well-worn quote, “of long shadows on 
county grounds, warm beer, invincible green suburbs, dog lovers and pools 
fillers and – as George Orwell said – ‘old maids bicycling to Holy Communion 
through the morning mist’”.

Major gave that very speech at a meeting of the Conservative Group for Europe, 
in which he argued for the case for the country being at “the heart of Europe”. 
When he reeled off this list, he was trying to persuade the Eurosceptics that 
“Britain will survive unamendable in all essentials”. And he included cricket 
among them because he knew that a certain type of English person sees it as 
being symbolic, in some small way, of our national character. As did Farage, 
which is why he toured the county grounds 20 years later.

It was refreshing then, to hear Zafar Ansari, born to an English mother and a 
Pakistani father,talk so openly about what he believes that character to be 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/15/zafar-ansari-cricketers-asian-heritage-england>
. Ansari doesn’t practise Islam, but still identifies as one of four British 
Muslims in the Test team, along with Moeen Ali, Adil Rashid, and Haseeb Hameed. 
“As a collective, as a group of four British Muslims, there is something in 
that,” he said on Tuesday. “There’s no doubt that’s really exciting and 
something we’re proud of. A lot of people outside the group clearly care about 
that and value that a lot. And that is a good thing in our society.”

No hiding place for Australia's embarrassment after latest batting shambles | 
Russell Jackson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/15/no-hiding-place-for-australias-embarrassment-after-latest-batting-shambles>
By simply “being themselves”, Ansari says, Hameed, Moeen, and Rashid are doing 
a fine job of “representing their communities”. Today, around 40% of the 
recreational cricketers in England have Asian heritage. The men and women who 
run the sport and finally started to realise the truth of what Mike Marqusee 
said back in 1998, when he wrote that British Asian cricket “represents an 
immense potential resource for English cricket, provided that English cricket 
is prepared to redefine its notions about what constitutes ‘Englishness’”.

English cricket has been wrestling with this since 1896, when the selectors 
were split over whether or not Kumar Ranjitsinhji was eligible for the Test 
team. Lord Harris, then president of the MCC, felt Ranji was just a “bird of 
passage” in this country, so shouldn’t be allowed to play. His decision was 
overturned three weeks later, when Ranji was picked for the Old Trafford Test, 
and made 62 in the first innings and 154 in the second. As Moeen once put it: 
“If I can play, and change the mind of one person about being a Muslim player 
and having a beard, then I’ll feel as if I’ve done my job.” Rashid has also 
spoken about how he “would definitely like to inspire more interest in 
Yorkshire cricket among Asians”.

On the ground around the country, the different communities of British cricket 
sometimes seem to mix as well as oil and water. And a recent survey 
commissioned by YorkshireCricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> 
Club found that two-thirds of casual British Asian players in Bradford and 
Leeds would like to play cricket more often, but feel they lack the opportunity 
and access to do so. So change has been slow and faltering in coming, and still 
has a long and difficult way to go. But it is undeniably under way. “The 
multiculturalism project has failed,” wrote Farage last January. But the very 
team he purports to support is, as Ansari says, proudly multicultural, together 
in both victory and defeat.

This is an extract taken from the Spin, the Guardian’s weekly cricket email. 
To subscribe just visit this page and follow the instructions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/sign-up-to-the-spin?utm_source=esp&utm_medium=Email&utm_campaign=The+Spin+2016&utm_term=197632&subid=1298530&CMP=EMCSPTEML942>
.
 