
‘The rest has been told exactly as it occured …’ 

We open the final episode with a roll call of all the bodies that have piled 
up aroundFargo <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/fargo> and Dakota over 
the last nine episodes – Simone, Bear, Floyd and the gang – until the camera 
comes to rest on Betsy Solverson’s face just long enough to break our hearts a 
little.

And then … she blinks, and oh, just a little glimmer of hope among all the 
blood in the Fargo snow. She’s not dead, it’s a just a reaction to those Xanadu 
pills. She’s tripping out, imagining a “magical future filled with wondrous 
devices”, shops filled with everything you could possibly want (er, ie an 
Amazon warehouse) and then Fargo jumps forwards into its own mythology and 
there’s the cast ofseason one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/fargo-episode-recaps>: grown 
up Molly! Lou! Colin Hanks! A proper Christmas Easter egg, as it were.

It’s to the show’s credit that it manages to make these scenes work with such 
warmth – in lesser hands it would be so cheesy; writerNoah Hawley 
<http://www.ew.com/article/2015/12/11/fargo-season-2> has got a real gift for 
switching tones throughout an episode. Of course, it helps when you’ve got 
something like the unleashed chaos of Hanzee to balance things out. The way he 
takes out a passing driver who stops to help the Blomquists is one of the 
coldest kills yet.


‘I don’t think we’re going to make it’

As they leave a trail of blood behind them, the Blomquists continue their 
escape, hiding out in that most Fargo of locations: a supermarket. They bust 
into a meat storage room, and Ed has got some real talk for Peggy: they’re not 
going to make it. As you’d expect, she’s not having it – but he’s talking about 
them, not the bullets flying. It’s about the way they communicate, the way 
Peggy is always looking for something more – for all her talk about being 
actualised, it’s Ed who really lives in the now, not Peggy.

The room fills with smoke – Hanzee has got them trapped. But it’s just in 
Peggy’s head (“just like a movie”) – and when she busts out, waving a long 
knife around, Hanzee is nowhere to be seen. Lou’s there, waiting for her. He 
looks into the room: Ed hasn’t made it.

‘You play golf?’

There’s kindness and cruelty in the kingdom of King Mike Milligan, but when he 
gets back to base to “bathe in the warm champagne that is corporate praise”, 
there’s one of the weirder twists this season: he’s promoted to … the 
accounting department. “This is the future,” he’s told by his boss (Adam Arkin 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0035060/reference> – who’s also the director this 
week). “The money business, just ones and zeros.” Mike looks bewildered by the 
prospect.

‘I thought maybe I could spend my time in California. Maybe see a pelican’

Peggy seems to be locked in a strange combination of shellshock and delusion – 
a great performance fromKirsten Dunst 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/kirsten-dunst>, who’s made her so much more 
than a loopy narcissist as the season has gone on. For all her Life Springs 
talk (“Be my own me”, “I’m a victim too”), as she wishes there were 37 hours in 
a day, Lou’s simple reminder seems to cut through, for a moment: “People are 
dead, Peggy.”

‘And so great empires fall and are forgotten’

Like a phoenix rising, Hanzee buys a black market Social Security card and 
becomes “Moses Tripoli” (a nice nod to some of Fargo’s biblical themes). As he 
contemplates his next moves, thinking about revenge and plastic surgery (“Kill 
or be killed, there’s the message”), he spots some kids signing to each other 
while tossing a ball around – and then getting beaten up by some bullies. He 
strolls over to break it up: that’s got to be the future Mr Numbers and Mr 
Wrench, the deaf hitman with his native American-style fringe jacket fromseason 
one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/apr/24/fargo-recap-season-one-episode-one>
, right?

‘Goodnight Mrs Solverson, and all the ships at sea’

Well, that’s it for another brilliant season of Fargo. What a relief to see 
Hank and the Solversons making it to the end. And just time for one last crazy 
off-beam “well, OK” story: the mystery of Hank’s study. Betsy gently asks him 
what he’s been up to and he reveals a gentle, strange story that seems 
perfectly in keeping with Fargo’s wider world. After his wife died, he started 
thinking about all the “senselessness, conflict, miscommunication” in the world 
and wondered: “What if here was one language, a universal language of pictures” 
that could solve it all? He’s been making his own language.

Lou makes storytelling sound so simple (“Start at the start, work your way to 
the end”), but there’s no doubt Fargo’s second season has been a sophisticated 
piece of television, warm, funny, dark and thrilling – it’s a joy to watch, 
from the acting to the split screen cinematography, the excellent soundtrack 
and lines like Lou’s “6,000 pounds of angry helicopter parts” and Betsy’s 
description of cancer, like a “hot poker through the heart; a half-mouldy 
peach”.

It might have just been pipped to the top ten in the Guardian’s top TV of 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ng-interactive/2015/dec/03/best-tv-shows-of-2015>
, but I’d guess that’s more to do with the sheer volume of decent shows around 
this year (everyone can’t see everything!) and the feeling that’s it’s more of 
a cult show in the UK than it deserves to be. Anyhow, thanks for joining us 
here and making it so much fun.

OK then…

“Gunfight interrupted by spacecraft.” – Great unwritten police reports of our 
times.

The final additions to the Fargo soundtrack (please can someone put this out 
ASAP!) includeWar Pigs by Black Sabbath 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LQUXuQ6Zd9w>, The Wedding Cake, written by 
Margaret Lewis <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ztZT3_nTvlY>, The Woman in Your 
Life by Alix Dobkin <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R9iW0E7RKac> and a great 
soul version of the Mamas & the Papas’ California Dreamin’.


“Get out of here – there’s a bad man coming!” Peggy keeps her explanations 
simple.


Betsy’s analysis of Camus is pretty great. 


Was that a “G” for Gerhardt on the eagle flag hanging in their living room?

“Fubar yah?” “Fubar.” Conversation of the week.


“People of earth … I’m home!” Mike Milligan is going to be wasted in that 
accounting department.


“Think we earned one. Or 10.” You betcha, Lou.
 