
As you will no doubt have noticed, Bob Dylan is the recipient of the 2016 
Nobel prize for literature 
<https://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/literature/laureates/2016/press.html> 
for “having created new poetic expressions within the great American song 
tradition”. It is perhaps worth noting that several songwriters have, in their 
different ways, done just that since the prize was inaugurated back in 1901. 
Off the top of my head, here are just a few: Cole Porter, Chuck Berry, Carole 
King, Curtis Mayfield, Brian Wilson, Randy Newman, Paul Simon and, of course, 
Lennon and McCartney. As far as I know, none of them has ever been in 
contention for the prize.

As we also saw last week, the very notion of a popular song, even a Bob Dylan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/bobdylan> song, being a work of literature 
remains a contested one. Likewise the notion of the songwriter as poet. It 
strikes me that the entire history of the Nobel prize for literature has been, 
until now, a refutation of these upstart notions. The times may indeed be 
a-changin’, but it is difficult to see last week’s decision as a precedent: 
more as an exception.

Why might this be so? Of Dylan’s contemporaries, Leonard Cohen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/14/leonard-cohen-giving-nobel-to-bob-dylan-like-pinning-medal-on-everest>
, who was an actual published poet before he embraced songwriting, could stake 
a claim to being more poetic in the literal sense, and thus more deserving of a 
literature prize. There is a case to be made, and I have made it, forJoni 
Mitchell’s musical and lyrical sophistication outstripping, for a time, that of 
her male counterparts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/26/joni-mitchell-blue-hissing-summer-lawns-court-spark-hejira-dylan>
, so she, too, is an obvious contender, but let’s not hold our breath.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fbob-dylan-deserves-nobel-laureate-literature-singular-talent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb213d1ad50c911c4c83982379ead8761b658e849%2F0_661_4474_2685%2F4474.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fascinating%2C%20infuriating%2C%20enduring%3A%20Bob%20Dylan%20deserves%20his%20Nobel%20prize&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fbob-dylan-deserves-nobel-laureate-literature-singular-talent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fascinating%2C%20infuriating%2C%20enduring%3A%20Bob%20Dylan%20deserves%20his%20Nobel%20prize&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fbob-dylan-deserves-nobel-laureate-literature-singular-talent%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb213d1ad50c911c4c83982379ead8761b658e849%2F0_661_4474_2685%2F4474.jpg>
 Joni Mitchell probably has as good a claim on a Nobel prize as Dylan. 
Photograph: Jack Robinson/Getty Images 
Dylan, though, occupies a singular and exalted place in the pop pantheon. He 
fascinates, he frustrates, but he endures; as does the myth of Dylan, despite 
all his attempts, to demolish it.

It was not always thus. Back when I belatedly purchased my first Dylan record 
in the early 1970s, glam rock and progressive rock were the two predominant pop 
genres, and Dylan was little more than a rumour. The record in question wasJohn 
Wesley Harding(1967), which I bought solely because it was on sale at a reduced 
price that matched my meagre means.

For the uninitiated, it is an austere collection of songs with 
stripped-to-the-bone musical accompaniment, written almost 50 years ago, so the 
story goes, with the King James Bible and the songs of Hank Williams as its 
spirit guides.

Perhaps because it was my first encounter with Bob Dylan, it intrigues me 
still in a way that other much more groundbreaking and critically lauded Dylan 
albums do not. It seems a good place to begin to try to make sense of why the 
Nobel academy broke with tradition to canonise a songwriter rather than a 
novelist or dramatist.

Unbeknown to me when I first encountered it in the early seventies, John 
Wesley Harding was the first evidence of Dylan’s long retreat from his earlier 
era-defining music and his own mythology. The albums that followed it, from the 
wilfully perverse easy listening of Self Portrait (1970) to the mildly 
intriguingPlanet Waves (1974), seemed designed, first and foremost, to confound 
the very idea of Bob Dylan. In retrospect, I was fortunate to begin my journey 
into Dylan withJohn Wesley Harding. Though pared down musically and lyrically, 
it is a record steeped in allusion, from the opening song, which makes 
reference to the radical 18th-century thinker, Tom Paine, to I Dreamed I Saw St 
Augustine, which remains, as far as I now, the only pop song to namecheck the 
controversial 4th-century Christian theologian.

John Wesley Harding was also, I later found out, the follow-up to Blonde on 
Blonde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/31/three-albums-1966-beatles-revolver-bob-dylan-blonde-on-blonde-beach-boys-pet-sounds>
, a double album from May 1966 of baroque, hallucinatory songs that is now 
generally regarded as the creative apex of Dylan’s most fertile period. It 
began in March of the previous year with the electric surge ofSubterranean 
Homesick Blues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/13/bob-dylan-subterranean-homesick-blues-50th-anniversary>
 – beat poetry tied to a Chuck Berry riff – which openedBringing It All Back 
Home like a statement of intent. In July, the astonishing six-minute single, 
Like a Rolling Stone, was issued, shortly followed by his explosive appearance 
as a dandy with a Stratocaster at the Newport folk festival. The world of pop 
had shifted on its axis. As the American music writer Greil Marcus has noted, 
Dylan’s creative momentum in this short, 16-month period ranks with the most 
intense outbreaks of 20th-century modernism.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fbob-dylan-deserves-nobel-laureate-literature-singular-talent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0d2633399e2619a71da2d3ee61d7d78924a7e2a%2F0_0_1732_1729%2F1732.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fascinating%2C%20infuriating%2C%20enduring%3A%20Bob%20Dylan%20deserves%20his%20Nobel%20prize&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fbob-dylan-deserves-nobel-laureate-literature-singular-talent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fascinating%2C%20infuriating%2C%20enduring%3A%20Bob%20Dylan%20deserves%20his%20Nobel%20prize&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fbob-dylan-deserves-nobel-laureate-literature-singular-talent%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0d2633399e2619a71da2d3ee61d7d78924a7e2a%2F0_0_1732_1729%2F1732.jpg>
 In the beginning: an unused shot for the cover of Dylan’s second album, the 
Freewheelin’. Photograph: BBC 
In the debate inevitably fuelled by the Nobel prize about whether Dylan songs 
can be regarded as literature, one inevitably thinks of the sheer ambition of 
songs such as the insular, mysterious Visions of Johanna or the epic, 11-minute 
ballad, Sad Eyed Lady of the Lowlands. On them, Dylan went where no one had 
gone before or has gone since in terms of the pop song; 50 years on, they may 
still be the most forceful arguments in his favour. For me, though, the austere 
Dylan songs still cast a spell, and my other favourites include the haunting 
Tears of Rage and the faith-driven Every Grain of Sand, songs that seem as 
powerful in their rigour and restraint as the more extravagant outpourings from 
the mid-60s.

Back then, though, having stretched the pop song – and himself – almost to 
breaking point, Dylan had little option but to retreat and rethink. Where he 
went in the process was back, not just into Hank Williams and the Bible, but 
deeper into the tangled, darkly mysterious, still relatively unexplored, 
terrain of the traditional American folk song. The austere ballads onJohn 
Wesley Harding emerged out of the psychic clearing house that is The Basement 
Tapes(1975), the slew of songs that he recorded on primitive home equipment in 
Woodstock after his motorcycle crash. OnThe Basement Tapes Complete 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/02/bob-dylan-the-basement-tapes-full-fabled-bootleg>
, remastered and finally released in their entirety in 2014, these 
old-sounding, wilfully primitive, often strange songs are the first unsteady, 
confusing steps on a voyage to rediscover – and reinvent – himself that 
continues to this day.

It is the singular nature of that voyage, I would like to think, that also 
guided the arbiters of the Nobel prize. What makes Dylan different is not just 
the quality of his best songs, but his insistence on aligning himself to an 
older, deeper songwriting tradition that precedes pop and exists as a 
historical continuum outside our current somewhat blurred notions of culture 
and entertainment. In his characteristically elusive sleeve notes toWorld Gone 
Wrong, an acoustic album of covers of old folk and blues songs from 1993, Dylan 
applies the word “masterpiece” to Broke Down Engine, a song by the great blues 
singer Blind Willie McTell, which he also describes as a song about “trains, 
mystery ... variations of human longing ... revival ... ambiguity”.

This comes close to describing the mysterious place whose existence he has 
made it part of his life’s mission to alert us to: what Marcus memorably called 
“the old weird America” sketched out in so many traditional folk, blues and 
country ballads about heartbreak, longing, love, desire, obsession, death and 
murder. Dylan is drawing on a deep well even if, of late, the end results do 
not quite come close to the mystery and allusion of his older songs. For Dylan, 
it is the journeying itself that counts, as evinced by his constant, often 
perverse, live re-readings of classics from his back catalogue.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fbob-dylan-wins-nobel-prize-for-literature-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bob%20Dylan%20wins%20Nobel%20prize%20in%20literature%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fbob-dylan-wins-nobel-prize-for-literature-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bob%20Dylan%20wins%20Nobel%20prize%20in%20literature%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fbob-dylan-wins-nobel-prize-for-literature-video-report&media=>
Bob Dylan wins Nobel prize in literature 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/oct/13/bob-dylan-wins-nobel-prize-for-literature-video-report>
In 2009, when asked why he didn’t do what a lot of other performers of his 
generation do – play the same songs in the same way night after night – Dylan 
replied: “I couldn’t if I tried. Those guys you are talking about all had 
conspicuous hits ... mainstream stuff that played into the culture on a 
pervasive level. My stuff is different from those guys. It’s more desperate ... 
They made perfect records, so they have to play them perfectly exactly the way 
people remember them. My records were never perfect. So there is no point in 
trying to duplicate them. Anyway, I’m no mainstream artist.”

That much is certain, despite the various attempts by the mainstream or, 
indeed, the academy, to claim or canonise him – and what is the Nobel prize 
except the latest attempt to do just that?

However well intentioned the accolade, it will do nothing to alter the fact 
that Bob Dylan exists in a world of his own, stubbornly out of step with the 
prevailing culture just as he once singlehandedly defined it. He is not a 
songwriter in the classic sense, nor a poet in the traditional sense, nor does 
he create literature in the accepted sense of the word; that, in fact, is the 
whole point – he has sidestepped these definitions on his singular journey. 
He’s Bob Dylan.
 