 So, another year, another gaudy Pamela Anderson flick? Far from it. American 
Beauty is the first blast of highbrow films we'll see this century. It features 
Kevin Spacey as Lester Burnham, a docile, corporate employee cum suburban 
father - the picture of white-collar American 'bliss'.
 Hang on. Isn't Spacey more used to playing the bad guy, like he did as the 
satanic Verbal Kint in The Usual Suspects ? Quite. This marks a new departure 
for Spacey, and by all accounts, he's quite good at being nice, particularly 
when it's satirical.American Beauty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-beauty> is a scathing attack on the 
drab conformity of middle America. The film opens with Lester lying prostrate 
on his bed, mourning his dull life. The next scene finds him tending to himself 
in the shower, describing this self-gratification as the 'highlight of [his] 
day'. True to his dysfunctional neighbourhood, Lester is infatuated with Angela 
Hayes (Mena Suvari), a local cheerleader and friend of his daughter Jane, 
played by Thora Birch. Next door lives the teenage voyeur Ricky Fitts (Wes 
Bentley) and, on the other side, the two Jims, a tax lawyer and anaesthetist 
who describe themselves as 'partners', and who are constantly being asked what 
business it is they're in together. Faced with all this, Jane resorts to the 
usual teenage irreverence, Ã  la Christina Ricci. For example, when her father 
asks, 'So Janie, how was school?', the sarcastic reply is, 'It was spectacular, 
Dad.' To top it all, Lester's marriage is loveless, and turning poisonous.

 How does anyone survive all this torpor?  Well, Lester finds a new lease of 
life through weight lifting, insulting his employers, smoking weed with Ricky 
Fitts, buying a red 1970s Firebird, and laying down the law with his selfish 
wife Carolyn (Annette Bening).

 So, who's responsible? The vacuity of modern capitalism, of course. 

 No, no. Who made the film? It's the directing debut of Sam Mendes, UK 
theatre's hottest export. He's the man behind the Broadway spectacular The Blue 
Room - sadly better known for Nicole Kidman's nude antics than for its dramatic 
qualities. According to Entertainment Weekly, American Beauty is an 
'exquisitely designed, rather kinky tragicomedy'. The New York Times found it 
'brilliantly staged', and so far, it is an early favourite for the Oscars. And, 
if it wins, it will even spare us Gwyneth Paltrow's acceptance speech blubbing.
 