
The Financial Conduct Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/financial-conduct-authority> has said it 
is prepared to intervene to increase competition and reduce charges to the 25 
million customers of Britain’s £6.6tn investment management industry.

On Wednesday, the City regulator set out the terms 
<http://www.fca.org.uk/your-fca/documents/market-studies/ms15-02-1-asset-management-market-study-tor>
 of its inquiry into the sector, which includes £2.1tn of pension fund 
investments and £1.2tn of retail investment products, such as personal pensions 
and Isas. The FCA said the industry could face a regulatory crackdown and that 
it may punish individual firms if necessary.

The inquiry will examine how asset managers compete to provide value for 
customers, whether they are willing or able to control costs passed on to 
consumers, and the role of consultants who advise pension funds but also sell 
them investment services.

The FCA announced in February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/feb/19/fca-launches-inquiry-into-investment-banking-services>
 that it planned to investigate the sector to make sure customers were getting 
value for the charges they pay to fund managers. The industry has been
criticised over many years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/dec/17/treasury-warned-over-traders-fees>
 for high fees that eat into savers’ pensions, even as the government is 
encouraging people toset aside more money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/oct/03/how-is-your-auto-enrolment-pension-faring>
 for old age.

The watchdog said it wanted to make sure products were easy to understand, 
with clear charges that let consumers shop around. The regulator will also 
examine the expense and difficulty involved if people want to move their money 
to a different investment manager.

Be a nifty 50 – take financial advice and make your money go further
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/nov/14/50-financial-advice-money> 
The FCA said: “If we conclude that competition is not working well and there 
is a need to take action, we may intervene to promote effective competition 
using a number of possible measures.”

Actions could include new rules, issuing additional guidance for the industry 
and proposing new self-regulation. Individual firms could be barred, publicly 
censured, fined or forced to pay compensation to customers.

The FCA may also remove rules that deter new asset managers from setting up 
and refer matters to the Competition and Markets Authority, the regulator that 
ensures consumers are not left out of pocket because of weak competition.

The size of the investment management market means a small reduction in total 
charges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/jan/18/investing-charges-where-put-isas-pensions>
 would have a big effect on investors’ overall returns, the FCA said. Someone 
who invested £20,000 for 20 years would be almost £13,000 better off if they 
paid 0.3% in fees instead of a typical 1.5%, it found.

If competition increased, 14.2 million pension savers could benefit and 11 
million retail investors would be better off, the FCA said. The regulator added 
that it would start gathering information to publish interim findings next 
summer and a final report in early 2017.
 