
Luaty Beirão is an Angolan rapper known for his political activism. But since 
June, the 33-year-old has become a hero in the country, held up as a symbol by 
those who oppose President José Eduardo dos Santos’s government, now in power 
for 36 years.

Reading the revolution: the book club that terrified the Angolan regime
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/30/angola-book-club-dos-santos-arrests>
Four months ago, Beirão gathered with 12 friends as part of a book group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/30/angola-book-club-dos-santos-arrests>
 in the capital to discuss politics and read about non-violent protest. But 
before their meeting finished, they were arrested by the police and detained.

They have now been held for 118 days, well past the legal limit, and indicted 
for “preparing acts pursuant to a coup d’etat”.

To protest against the charge and his continued imprisonment, Beirão has gone 
on hunger strike <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-34522351>, which is 
now in entering its 26th day, and reports are circulating that his health is now
quickly deteriorating <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-34522351>. 

In Lisbon, London and Berlin, people have been marching in solidarity with the 
rapper and his fellow detainees, while inAngola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/angola> protests and vigils have been 
organised by friends and family of the group.

Interviewed by the Portuguese newspaper Público in March 
<http://www.publico.pt/mundo/noticia/basta-tem-que-se-ir-embora-e-preciso-uma-ruptura-em-angola-1711155>
 about the 40th anniversary of Angola’s independence, due to be celebrated on 
11 November, Beirão said it’s time for urgent change in the country. “We need 
new blood, new ideas and new people who have the courage to do things 
differently.”

“The problem is already identified: the elite has nothing more to give, they 
should recognise that they served the country, they took advantage of it and 
now it’s time to hand it over,” he explained.

In the video, Beirão explained that he was aware he could become a persona non 
grata, words that carry particular poignancy since his hunger strike has 
entered a critical stage, and his health is severely compromised.


“Because I took a clear position against the current state of things, and 
pointed out people’s names. I wasn’t the first one to do it. But all you need 
is someone who wants to please the boss and says: ‘This boy needs to be 
punished, he needs to learn that he shouldn’t mess up with the almighty Angolan 
state and with the almighty MPLA [the party in power].”

Watch out Angola – repression only generates more dissent
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/13/angola-repression-generates-more-dissent-politics-mpla>
Beirão has previously talked about the personal difficulties he has had for 
standing up as a member of the opposition. The son of João Beirão, a politician 
closely aligned to President Dos Santos, Beirão said doesn’t support his 
father’s views and was not a “child of the regime”.

“Genetics has nothing to do with the views I endorse ... I don’t understand 
how that forces me to follow my father’s line of thought.”

Also known as Ikonoklasta 
<http://www.okayafrica.com/stories/ikonoklasta-angola-framed-drug-smuggling/>, 
the rapper has frequently criticised politicians during his concerts, and has 
been picked up by the police and detained more than once for his outspoken 
views.

In March 2011, following the Arab Spring, Beirão was imprisoned with a group 
of young people in Luanda for organising a protest march.

Video for Público by Ricardo Rezende and Frederico Batista
 