
The UN agency responsible for ending deaths in childbirth is facing a $140m 
(£98m) shortfall in its budget this year, putting the lives of tens of 
thousands of women at risk.

The UN population fund, UNFPA, had been expecting about $482m (£335m) from 
member states this year for its core budget, which funds operational costs. But 
huge cuts from some of the agency’s largest donors means it will now receive 
around $340m (£237m).

If cuts continue, says the agency, the shortfall could increase to more than 
$500m (£348m) over the next four years.

The impact of this year’s shortfall could result in the closure of 80 clinics 
staffed by midwives in Afghanistan while in Mozambique, the cuts will slow down 
its family planning programmes, which aim to reduce almost 1 billion unintended 
pregnancies by 2020.

The UN estimates that globally 303,000 women – almost all in poorer countries 
– die as a result of complications from pregnancy and childbirth each year. 
Most of these deaths are preventable. The figure has fallen considerably from 
532,000 in 1990, butprogress has begun to plateau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/12/un-report-maternal-deaths-slow-recent-progress-calls-for-action>
.


Access to the life-saving services of a midwife is a gender rights issue | 
Isabella Lövin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/05/life-saving-services-midwife-gender-rights-reproductive-health-isabella-lovin-sweden>
In September, the UN general assembly agreed to reduce the global maternal 
mortality ratio to less than 70 per 100,000 live births 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs348/en/>. The ratio currently 
stands at 239 per 100,000 live births in developing countries and 12 in 
wealthier countries.

Klaus Simoni Pedersen, chief of UNFPA’s resource mobilisation branch, said the 
funding shortfall would have “direct implications at country level as it will 
cut into country programmes”. Asked if the cuts could put women’s lives at 
risk, he said: “Definitely. No question.”

The news comes as more than 5,000 government officials, business leaders and 
campaigners convene in Denmark on Monday for the start of the four-dayWomen 
Deliver <http://www.womendeliver.org/> conference, held every three years to 
discuss the reproductive health, rights and wellbeing of girls and women.

Denmark has halved its funding to UNFPA’s core budget this year – from 240m 
krone (£25m) last year to 108m this year.

Finland, which two years ago was UNFPA’s third largest donor, has reduced its 
core funding to the agency from €33.55m (£26.3m) last year to €19m this year, 
as part of its swath of cuts to UN bodies.

Elisha Dunn Georgiou, vice-president of programmes at PAI <http://pai.org/>, 
an NGO that advocates improving access to family planning and reproductive 
healthcare, said the gap for this fiscal year is “exceptionally urgent”.

Helen Clark, the head of the UN development programme, UNDP, and candidate to 
be the next UN secretary general 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/05/helen-clark-former-new-zealand-prime-minister-confirms-bid-for-united-nations-top-job>
, said a lot of UN agencies are experiencing a drop in their core funding. “It 
seems we are in a perfect storm for long-term development funding … Just about 
every currency is down against the dollar … Donors are subtracting money for 
refugee resettlement … We’re seeing a huge call on humanitarian budgets, so a 
number of things are coming together that do not make it easy now.”

She said while UNDP is better able to deal with cuts to its core budget, 
smaller agencies like UNFPA, which does critical work, will find it harder to 
cope.

Clark, who will be in Copenhagen for Women Deliver 
<http://www.womendeliver.org/>, said access to decent maternal healthcare was a 
woman’s right. Asked why such a high number of women still die giving birth, 
she said: “We’re getting to the last mile. Unfortunately, the last mile is 
still quite long.” Cutting the numbers will require concerted action to keep 
girls in school and stop them getting married while still children. “It’s about 
the empowerment of women and girls. Girls need to be in school, finish their 
education, determine their own futures.”

She said women’s rights and maternal health – both the “burning passion of my 
life” – would be a priority if she became secretary general.

Sierra Leone's fight to reduce maternal mortality – in pictures | Misha Hussain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/jul/17/sierra-leone-maternal-mortality-in-pictures>
Katja Iversen, CEO of Women Deliver <http://www.womendeliver.org/>, believes 
the economic argument for saving women’s lives needed to be given more emphasis 
if countries are to substantially reduce maternal deaths.

“Of course it’s a human right … but it’s not just that which decides what a 
ministry of finance is going to invest in, because everyone has rights to 
everything,” said Iversen. “That’s why making the investment case is so 
important. Do I like it? Not particularly. Does it work? Yes it does. It 
becomes a tactic.”

She said when a women dies it harms her family, the community and the national 
economy. “Twist it around and we can say when a women survives and thrives, the 
family benefits, because a women invests more in the family, and the community 
benefits and there are national and economic benefits.”

Last year research from the McKinsey Global Institute 
<http://www.mckinsey.com/global-themes/employment-and-growth/how-advancing-womens-equality-can-add-12-trillion-to-global-growth>
 found that $12tn could be added to the global GDP by addressing gender 
inequalities. Researchers identified maternal and reproductive healthcare as 
one of the 10 areas where action would be needed to reach this goal.

But Angelika Arutyunova, programme director for feminist movement building at 
the Association of Women’s Rights in Development (AWID), cautioned against 
turning women’s empowerment into a purely economic issue. “While adding that 
economic benefits can and should be part of the gains, it cannot be the 
ultimate reason to invest or not invest in financing prevention of maternal 
death or any other issues affecting women’s and girls’ lives.

“It is important that finance ministries indeed engage and budget the 
resources needed for them to meet their commitments made to gender equality and 
women’s rights. But too much confidence seems to be placed on philanthropy and 
the private sector as potential sources of finance, diverting attention away 
from strengthening domestic public finances and official development 
assistance.”
 