
There is a theory about “political correctness” – one hewed to by Donald Trump 
and his legions of fans – that is based on the assumption that everyone is 
actually racist and sexist, but that they are too cowed by women and people of 
color to say what they really think. The conceit is that no onereally believes 
the “politically correct” things we all say, but we’ve somehow arrived at a 
tacit agreement not to say them.


The reality, though, is that the term “political correctness” has been 
co-opted and redefined, eroded in meaning to the point that the kindest 
interpretation merely implies being “oversensitive”, which is still dangerous 
and stunted.


If we are living in a time when racial, cultural and gender awareness is 
synonymous with being oversensitive, then we are in pretty deep trouble. And if 
the antithesis of some dreaded oversensitivity is spewing vile, hateful and 
venomous rhetoric about people who are leading movements both big and small to 
strengthen and enhance all of humanity, then, at a bare minimum, we are going 
to need a little more sensitivity.

But there is the fear of “political correctness”, and then there is the 
reality of what’s considered politically acceptable. It is not politically 
correct to recognize and honor the lives of undocumented immigrants and their 
children in this day and age; Republican candidates have been forced out of the 
presidential race for far less.


It is not politically correct to object to the gender pay gap; there’s a whole 
conservative cottage industry dedicated to proving there is no pay gap 
<https://www.google.com/webhp?sourceid=chrome-instant&ion=1&espv=2&ie=UTF-8#q=there+is+no+gender+pay+gap>
.

It is not politically correct to highlight the fact that black and brown 
people are violently profiled, discriminated against and underrepresented in 
government and industry; young black activists who have protested on our 
streets and rallied on social media have been arrested, had their patriotism 
and motives questionedeven in the mainstream media  
<http://www.dailydot.com/politics/elisabeth-hasselbeck-fox-news-black-lives-matter-hate-group/>
and even shouted at bycrowds of liberals 
<http://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/politics/black-lives-matter-protesters-shut-down-bernie-sanders-rally/>
.


Republicans have breathed political life into their very own Trump-enstein | 
Megan Carpentier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/11/republicans-breathed-political-life-into-trump-enstein>
It is not politically correct to ensure that transgender people are the 
arbiters of their own experience, and believe that they should be deferred to 
on matters of their safety and livelihood; students, with their parents’ 
support, have been applauded for trying to restrict a transgender classmate’s
access to the bathroom 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/02/us/teenagers-protest-a-transgender-students-use-of-the-girls-bathroom.html>
, and liberals and conservatives alike feel free to openly question transgender 
people’s right to exist at all 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/sarah-ditum/2015/01/if-you-believe-trans-lives-matter-dont-share-leelah-alcorns-suicide-note-social>
.

It’s also not rocket science that we ought to be sensitive to these issues. 
It’s being a decent human; it’s shifting paradigms; it’s working to change our 
culture so that there is equity and equality for everyone.


I understand that it’s not always easy to demand actual political correctness 
from others. During a recent tour of a potential middle school for my son – 
while parents were asking questions about homework and high school prep courses 
– I wondered if there were any immediate plans to make the school’s currently 
gender binary bathrooms gender neutral. Not because my son is transgender or 
gender fluid, but because I have friends and colleagues who are. I didn’t ask, 
though, out of concern that I might come across as too “politically correct”.

I’m already perceived by many white parents in my neighborhood as a militant 
racial justice warrior for speaking out and loudly about proper racial 
representation and inclusion in certain Brooklyn public schools. So I stayed 
quiet because given the tenor of the crowd – one parent said, after asking 
about the policy on hand-holding: “I don’t care if they’re going through 
puberty, you have to nip that sexuality in the bud” – it didn’t seem like the 
right moment for a conversation about gender neutral bathrooms.


Victimhood is a real, brutal fact, and Ben Carson's Holocaust logic denies 
that | Gayatri Devi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/11/victimhood-is-real-ben-carson-holocaust-denies-that>
Being “politically correct” has had consequences for me before. Last year I 
had a friendship collapse over the use of the word “hobo” – I felt my friend 
was being too facile in her definition (“a bum with a handkerchief tied to a 
stick”), she felt I was being too politically correct by suggesting that the 
term was offensive to actual homeless people.


There are members of my (white) family who refuse to talk to me about race 
because they do not think of it as part of the national conversation that it is 
and needs to be, but believe that I’m demanding that they feel badly about 
being white.

The people who cling to the idea that “political correctness” is a bad thing 
are afraid: afraid of how they’ll be perceived by those less reverent to 
outdated hierarchies, afraid of the power that true equality can give the 
historically disenfranchised, afraid of having been wrong. But if we know 
nothing else about America, we know that we can make space for everyone; we 
know that equality of opportunity was never meant to be an empty phrase.


The well of opportunity will not run dry if we learn what “PGP” means 
(preferred gender pronoun) and start using them; the economy won’t collapse if 
we get rid of a racist NFL team name and logo, take down the Confederate flag; 
people will still fall in love and get married and have kids if we stop using 
the word “tomboy” or referring to sexually active adult women as “sluts”. We 
are more interesting and nuanced as a culture and a society when we both 
recognize and value our variances and seek to include rather than exclude.


Right now, that feels a little politically incorrect to say.
 