
The trustees in charge of the British Steel pension scheme, whose members 
include thousands ofTata <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tata> Steel 
staff, have vowed to do all they can to keep it from being folded into the 
government’s pensions lifeboat.

The future of the scheme, which has 130,000 members and a deficit of £485m, 
has been thrown into doubt by the Indian conglomerate Tata’sdecision to sell 
its struggling UK operation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/29/tata-set-to-announce-sale-of-uk-steel-business-port-talbot>
.

While there are seven potential buyers in the running for Tata Steel UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/09/tata-steel-seven-bidders-uk-operations>
, they are understood to be keen to avoid taking on the burden of the £15bn 
scheme, raising fears about its future.

Allan Johnston, the chair of the scheme’s trustees, said he would do 
everything possible to avoid calling on the Pension Protection Fund – the 
government’s safety net for schemes with an unmanageable deficit.

Johnston, who has been in talks with the government and Tata, said this could 
involve changing the law to allow the terms of the pension scheme to be 
adjusted. He said that entry into the PPF would mean future pension increases 
being significantly reduced, while 58,000 members who have not reached 
pensionable age would see their payments fall by “at least 10%”.

“The trustee has been discussing with government officials ways in which the 
scheme could remain outside of the PPF,” said Johnston. “As an alternative to 
entry into the PPF, a change in the law applying to the scheme would allow 
modified benefits to be paid indefinitely on a low-risk basis.

Tata Steel says seven firms in frame to bid for rest of UK operations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/09/tata-steel-seven-bidders-uk-operations>
“Whilst this would entail future pension increases being cut back from their 
current level, benefits would be more generous than those provided by the PPF 
for the vast majority of scheme members. The trustee takes the view that scheme 
assets are better used in paying member benefits than potentially swelling a 
PPF surplus or insurance companies’ profits.

“These measures, which have the support of the trade unions and the whole 
trustee body, would result in a better and fairer outcome for members.”

Alternatives under discussion include ringfencing the fund from the PPF, as 
well as reducing the rate at which the pension payments accrue by linking it to 
the consumer price index.

The scheme is currently linked to the retail price index measure of inflation, 
which runs at a higher rate.
 