
The Federal Reserve <https://www.theguardian.com/business/federal-reserve> 
chairwoman, Janet Yellen, said interest rates could rise “relatively soon” in 
her first public comments since the election of Donald Trump as the next US 
president.


Yellen said Trump’s victory had caused no significant change in the outlook 
for US growth, and signaled that the US central bank could move to hike 
benchmark rates at its meeting next month.

“The evidence we have seen since we met in November is consistent with our 
expectation of strengthening growth and improving labor markets and inflation 
moving up,” she said in testimony on Capitol Hill on Thursday. “I do think the 
economy is making very good progress toward our goals.”


The US Federal Reserve has created a 'false economy', Trump says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/06/trump-us-federal-reserve-false-economy-interest-rates>
She said there was still “room to run” in the US recovery and it “could well 
become appropriate relatively soon”. Yellen said she favoured gradually 
increasing rates.

Yellen said the job market had “stepped up” and inflation, while still below 
the Fed’s 2% target, was picking up. The Fed has not raised its benchmark rate 
since last December, when it rose from near zero to the current level of 
0.25-0.5% – the first interest rate rise in seven years.

Yellen said she intended to see out her full term at helm of the Fed until 
January 2018, despite Trump repeatedly calling for her to leave the position 
early due to her hesitancy to raise rates, which he claims has been 
artificially slowing down the economic recovery.

Trump has not addressed his concerns about Yellen since the election, but 
during the campaignhe accused 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/blog/live/2016/nov/09/stock-markets-on-edge-as-us-presidential-election-heads-for-tense-climax?page=with:block-58237493e4b0822c310ec7f2#block-58237493e4b0822c310ec7f2>
 her of creating a “false economy” by keeping interest rates artificially low 
to help Barack Obama and the Democratic candidate, Hillary Clinton.

In September, Trump said Yellen “should be ashamed of herself”. “I used to 
hope that the Fed was independent,” he said in an interview with CNBC. “And the 
Fed is obviously not independent. It’s obviously not even close to being 
independent.”

Before the election, economists had thought that a Trump victory would 
probably delay at rate rise. But since his victory the odds of a rate rise in 
December have shortened due to the “Trumpflation” rally in the stock market and 
his pledge for massive investment in America’s ageing infrastructure.

In her testimony, Yellen did not mention the economic impact of Trump’s 
spending plan or his promise of big tax cuts, but said the Fed’s models would 
be adjusted when it became clear exactly what the new administration has 
planned. “When there is greater clarity about the economic policies that might 
be put into effect, the [Federal Open Market Committee] will have to factor 
those assessments of their impact on employment and inflation and perhaps 
adjust our outlook,” she said.

The pricing of federal fund futures contracts imply that there is a greater 
than 95% chance of the FOMC raising rates at its next meeting, on 13-14 
December in Washington.
 