
Hold onto your ovaries folks, womb transplants are here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/29/10-women-receive-go-ahead-for-first-ever-womb-transplants-in-uk>
. Ten UK women have been approved for the procedure, and babies born from 
donated uteruses could crawl among us as early as next year.

Leaving aside the ethical considerations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/30/womb-transplants-medical-necessity-lifestyle-choice>
 of womb transplantation, our ability to gestate humans in novel locations is 
developing so quickly that it’s worth looking ahead to the next development: 
artificial wombs, or ectogenesis.

The seven priorities for young feminists today | June Eric Udorie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/29/seven-priorities-young-feminists-suffragette>
What would it mean for the uterus – and therefore, the biological necessity of 
women’s reproductive labour – if it were to become obsolete?

Unlike other contested biotechnologies like human cloning, the demand for 
surrogacy speaks to a natural community of probable supporters for ectogenesis.

Not having to contend with the biological limitations of ordinary pregnancy 
would be a gift to those suffering from infertility, gay men, trans women, and 
many other groups whose longing for children is circumscribed to varying 
extents. Our cultural understanding of family grows ever more inclusive, and 
access to reproductive technology could play a large role in supporting that 
pluralism.

It seems doubtful, in the face of such sympathetic demand, the technology 
could be completely restricted for too long.

Depending on who uses artificial wombs and under what circumstances, the 
impacts could be profound, asSamantha Allen argues 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2014/08/12/the-artificial-womb-will-change-feminism-forever.html>
:

[The] separation of gestation from a woman’s body will have earth-shattering 
consequences for the contemporary feminist movement ... Ectogenesis will pry 
open every gendered fault-line in contemporary cultural politics, from 
workplace politics to the men’s rights movement to an increasingly virulent 
abortion debate.

The possibility of these profound effects depends less on the technology 
itself, and more on the ways it would interact with existing social conditions. 
Put another way, the important thing to analyse is the ends to which 
ectogenesis might be put – many of them perverse.

Because pregnancy occurs inside the body, it has a level of existing privacy 
that resists control in societies that value individual rights. This is not to 
say reproductive justice is an already-existing state of affairs; many 
jurisdictions exercise shocking power over women’s bodies – especially in the 
US, where Republicans consistently attempt to make trans-vaginal ultrasounds 
and other invasive procedures mandatory for women seeking a termination.

Feminists still have good reason to be bloody angry | Helen Lewis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/30/feminists-end-of-history-women-rights>
The influence of class 
<http://www.latimes.com/opinion/op-ed/la-oe-1006-bruenig-contraception-welfare-20151006-story.html>
 andrace 
<http://www.trustblackwomen.org/our-work/what-is-reproductive-justice/9-what-is-reproductive-justice>
 over whose sexual activities, pregnancies, abortions and children are 
considered undesirable or criminal cannot be overstated. Nevertheless, growing 
humans outside women’s bodies raises the prospect of new forms of surveillance, 
control and coercion.

Our most accepted rationale for abortion rests on the pregnant person’s right 
to control over her own body – what we call bodily autonomy. So what happens 
when it’s possible to extract a foetus from a uterus without killing it, and 
place it in the WombPro9000 for the remaining gestational period?

This question is explored by academics Vernellia and Tshaka Randall in a 2008 
paper 
<http://works.bepress.com/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1000&context=vernellia_randall>
 that imagines states might intervene on behalf of the unborn baby by enforcing 
ectogenesis.

Mothers who test positive for drugs are already being thrown in prison for 
“chemical endangerment” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/07/alabama-chemical-endangerment-pregnancy-amanda-kimbrough>
. What if states had the power to remove children from “unfit parents” before 
birth? It’s hard to imagine it wouldn’t be used – like institutionalisation, 
incarceration, and underpaid employment – to discipline poor and non-white 
communities, and people with disabilities.

Market forces may also play a role in the use of artificial wombs. The need 
for women to earn an income already hasa big impact 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/20/does-the-coalition-support-families-after-the-ppl-debacle-who-can-say>
 on our collective reproductive choices. Many women delay or avoid pregnancy 
because employment is structured according to the social needs of the male 
householder, not the working mum.

This is frequently justified on the grounds of individual choice, but the 
prospect of lost earnings or poverty hardly makes it a free decision.

These pressures also influence our demand for childcare. Artificial wombs 
might function in a similar way: as a kind of pre-birth childcare, minimising 
pregnancy’s inconvenient tendency to disrupt employment.

Some women may choose to use ectogenesis because they sincerely want to avoid 
being pregnant, as Shulamith Firestone imagined in her 1970 radical feminist 
classicDialectic of Sex 
<http://io9.com/5939856/rip-futurist-shulamith-firestone-who-promoted-artificial-wombs-and-cybernetics-as-tools-of-liberation>

But for many others, artificial gestation may become an economic necessity if 
it costs less than an ordinary pregnancy. From an employer’s perspective, 
pregnancy and childbirth represent massive external costs that can’t be 
rationalised out of existence (until they can).

At the risk of sounding like I’ve watched Gattaca 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gattaca> one too many times, economic 
rationalisation and technological innovation have transformed and corroded 
institutions like the nuclear family, the school and the church in the pursuit 
of economic growth.

Why shouldn’t these forces continue to do the same to the bodies of women? 
Artificial wombs might be just the sort of tool that would allow the state and 
the market to completely subsume one of the most sacred human activities into 
the logic of efficiency, without the messy mum-to-be part getting in the way. 

Don’t ask me if I’ve got a family
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/10/dont-ask-me-if-ive-got-a-family>
A regime like this might eventually come to regard “natural” in utero 
pregnancies like our cultureregards homebirth 
<http://midwifethinking.com/2014/01/02/the-future-of-midwives-and-homebirth-in-australia/>
: a risky option, the preserve of extreme hippies who do it on purpose, poor 
people who are to be pitied, andsensational, accidental borderline cases 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-3002365/Mother-didnt-know-pregnant-gives-birth-toilet-SECOND-time-baby-born-bathroom-floor.html>
.

Visible pregnancies may eventually become novel or even stigmatised, 
associated with poverty, ignorance or irresponsibility. In other words: 
pregnancy is about to be disrupted, and we should be ready for it when it 
happens.
 