
British holidaymakers face some of the highest ferry prices in Europe, 
according to a Guardian Money price check, with the worst fees on the routes 
out of Portsmouth to Normandy and Brittany.

A British family of four hoping to take their car abroad at peak time in 
August, departing on a Saturday, will pay £723 return if they book the Brittany 
Ferries Portsmouth-St Malo route this week, a distance of 150 nautical miles.

Book a Brittany Ferries ticket from Portsmouth to Caen in Normandy and the 
basic family return fare – without cabins but with reserved seats, a must for 
an overnight ferry – is £718, for a crossing of 100 nautical miles.

These fares are nearly twice the rates paid by European holidaymakers 
travelling at the same time in August with a car and four people.

We picked what will be the most in-demand travels dates this summer – leaving 
on Saturday 30 July and returning two weeks later on 13 August – right in the 
middle of the school holidays. We checked the popularFerrysavers.com 
<http://www.ferrysavers.com/> website, and the ferry firms’ own sites.

A French family departing Nice for Corsica will pay just £363 for 126 nautical 
miles each way. A Spanish family travelling from Valencia to Mahon on Menorca 
will pay £575, but the distance is 233 nautical miles in each direction – more 
than twice the Portsmouth-Caen journey.

Between Gothenburg in Sweden and Frederikshavn in Denmark, a peak-time return 
costs just £263 for a distance that is the same as Portsmouth-Caen, for which 
Brittany Ferries this week also wanted more than £700.

British holidaymakers taking the car to Ireland face even bigger charges, 
looked at from a per-nautical-mile basis. On the Holyhead-Dublin route, Irish 
Ferries will charge up to £653 return for peak-time journeys for a family plus 
car, yet the journey is just 58 nautical miles. Switch to a ferry that departs 
the UK at 14.10 and one that arrives back in the UK just after midnight (not 
ideal for travellers with young children) and the fare drops to a more 
manageable £329. But the costs are still breathtaking compared with ferry 
prices in Europe.

On the southern Irish route, Fishguard-Rosslare, the prices are no cheaper. 
Our family travelling on the same peak-time dates in the summer holiday will 
pay around £350. The two carriers that operate the route, Stena and Irish 
Ferries, offer almost identical pricing, with the latter slightly cheaper, 
albeit for ferries that leave in the middle of the night on the outward bound 
leg.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fferry-companies-overcharging-british-travellers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1df90703dbc37eca3ec2a5f6fb2d8fb1b2015bab%2F0_41_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ferry%20firms%20go%20overboard%20in%20charging%20British%20travellers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fferry-companies-overcharging-british-travellers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ferry%20firms%20go%20overboard%20in%20charging%20British%20travellers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fferry-companies-overcharging-british-travellers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1df90703dbc37eca3ec2a5f6fb2d8fb1b2015bab%2F0_41_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
 British holidaymakers taking the car to Ireland face high charges, looked at 
from a per-nautical-mile basis. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
The biggest ferry rip-off, though, is for holidaymakers heading to the Isle of 
Wight. The Red Funnel service from Southampton to Cowes would cost our family 
up to £165 for a peak-time return if booked this week. But the distance is just 
10 nautical miles each way. If the price was based on the per-nautical-mile 
rate paid by the French family to get to Corsica it would be just £29 return.

So what can holidaymakers do to cut the cost of their ferry journeys?

Roads to freedom: top driving tours from European ferry ports
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2010/may/22/ferries-road-trips-europe> 
The main saving is achieved by heading to the Kent and Sussex ports for travel 
to France, although that won’t be attractive to anyone living in the west of 
Britain, and there will be petrol to pay. Brittany Ferries offers an “Economie” 
service out of Portsmouth to Le Havre but that only saved £100 return – the 
fare this week was still more than £600.

By switching to the DFDS crossing from Newhaven into Dieppe, holidaymakers can 
more than halve the fares charged for Portsmouth-Caen. DFDS would charge £380 
return for a 9am morning departure, and a return at midnight, on a 64-nautical 
mile crossing.

If you are prepared to drive further, Dover-Calais will cost a car and its 
occupants £177 return – again with DFDS.

Eurotunnel – which offers quick entry and exit, and a no-sea sickness 
guarantee – costs around £240-£250 for a family at peak times.

Other ways to cut ferry costs 

• Book early – just as the low-cost airlines offer discounted fares to tempt 
early bookers, so do ferry companies.

• Avoid Saturdays and travel midweek. If our family departed on the overnight 
of Tuesday 26 July and back two weeks and a day later, Brittany’s 
Portsmouth-Caen return falls to £390. The DFDS Newhaven-Dieppe route falls to 
£262 for a midweek crossing.

• Take ferries late at night. For example, our family’s Dover-Calais crossing 
will cost £161 for a Saturday departure just after midnight – or £100 return by 
going midweek, and late at night – in August.

• Consider flying and hiring a car, particularly if driving a long way. French 
tolls can add up: a round-trip from Caen to Bordeaux will cost around £86 just 
for the tolls – £175 for the tolls and petrol. Meanwhile, a Ryanair flight to 
Dublin is cheap even in peak summer, and vehicle rental can be good value.

• This article was amended on 31 May 2016 to correct the distance on the ferry 
route from Southampton to Cowes and the calculation of a fare based on cost per 
mile.
 