
The number of UK companies struggling to stay afloat has fallen in a further 
sign that the economy is holding up after the Brexit vote.

In the three months after the referendum on 23 June, the number of firms in 
significant financial distress fell 6% to 248,916 from the preceding quarter, 
according to the insolvency company Begbies Traynor. The number of distressed 
companies fell 2% from a year earlier.

Businesses across the UK economy showed resilience with the biggest 
improvement in the construction sector, where the number of distressed firms 
fell 11% from the previous quarter. Distressed professional services firms 
reduced by 10% as work flowed in from clients seeking advice on Brexit, Begbies 
Traynor said.

Ric Traynor, executive chairman, said: “The UK economy appears to be in a 
stronger position than expected following the EU referendum result. While we 
wait to see whether the government opts for a ‘hard’ or ‘soft’ Brexit strategy, 
businesses at least appear to be better placed to tackle any new challenges on 
the horizon.”

Big rise in UK firms struggling financially, warns insolvency expert
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/15/big-rise-in-uk-firms-struggling-financially-warns-insolvency-expert>
The survey cements indications that a much-feared slump in economic activity 
prompted by uncertainty over Brexit has so far failed to materialise.Economists 
expect growth to have more than halved in the third quarter but for the economy 
to have avoided a recession in the second half of the year when GDP figures are 
released on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/23/uk-avoid-recession-2016-despite-growth-slump-ons-figures-show>
.

The relative resilience of the economy since the Brexit vote has largely been 
attributed toconsumer willingness to keep spending 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/10/uk-household-spending-rose-in-september-figures-show>
 andstrength in the services sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/05/services-sector-growth-brexit-vote-uk>
. Surveys soon after the referendum suggested a sharp drop in activity but warm 
weather and recovery from the initial shock of the vote have supported spending 
by businesses and households.

Some economists still expect a sharp and possibly prolonged slowdown even if 
Britain avoids a technical recession of two quarters or more of contraction.
With divisions in her cabinet over the terms for leaving the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/23/tories-cutting-each-others-throats-on-theresa-mays-leaking-ship>
, Theresa May, the prime minister, has said she will start formal separation, 
known as article 50, by the end of March 2017.

Traynor said: “Given that the details of the future Brexit deal are as yet 
unknown, it is still too early to tell what longer-term impact the leave 
decision might have on the UK economy. Clearly though, the stronger the UK 
economy becomes pre-Brexit, the better it will be able to withstand any 
post-Brexit shocks.”
 