
In the heart of Sydney’s inner-west, at the Parramatta Road end of Norton 
Street in Leichhardt, is an institution of Sydney football. Bar Sport is 
dripping in football – Sydney FC fans stickers decorate the fire-engine red 
espresso machine, the walls are covered with Socceroos and Italy memorabilia, 
and on the counter Alessandro Del Piero’s autobiography sits alongside a 
doorstop, collectors’ edition ofGazzetta Dello Sport. On the wall closest to 
the coffee machine is an enormous blackboard with Serie A fixtures and scores; 
opposite is a large television which broadcasts games from around the world.

The owner, Joe Napoliello, is a mad Juventus fan and a life member of APIA 
Leichhardt, but Bar Sport is home to football people of all sorts: 
ex-professional players, fans of overseas clubs,A-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> supporters, parents of junior 
players coming through the state leagues. Balmain Tigers coach Joe Di Giulio 
has his morning coffee here with the same group of friends. “Every morning for 
the last 20 years,” he says with a grin, “It’s good here, because we talk 
politics and sports. It’s exactly the same, maybe just the chairs have changed!”

In the past fortnight, a few new posters have appeared at Bar Sport, 
advertising Tuesday night’sFFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ffa-cup> match between Balmain Tigers’ 
and Melbourne Victory. The game will be held just down the road at Leichhardt 
Oval. Inside the cafe, tickets have been available for sale behind the counter, 
and the excitement in the area has been steadily growing. “It’s constant now,” 
says Di Giulio, who has quickly become hot property.

What I want is for the players to enjoy it, to get the most out of it, because 
it could be once in a lifetime experience
Joe Di Giulio 
The challenge facing Balmain Tigers is enormous – this is the lowest ranked 
club in the FFA Cup final 32 against the defending A-League champions. Victory 
have thousands of members, unparalleled corporate support and three A-League 
titles to their name. They have arguably the best striker in the country, 
Besart Berisha, as well as Archie Thompson, one of Australia’s all-time leading 
goal-scorers.

 Balmain Tigers are a small, community club run on the sweat of a few 
volunteers. “Look we don’t have great players,” says Di Giulio. “We got a bunch 
of players who are pretty much the same, we don’t have a great scorer. We’ve 
got a few players who can score, a good hardworking midfield and a good 
defence, so we’re pretty balanced.” Probably their most experienced player at 
this level is goalkeeper Anthony Costa, who played in last season’s FFA Cup 
match for Sydney United against Sydney FC, but three of Balmain’s starting XI 
are ineligible for selection for this match, and two more are out injured or 
suspended. “That’s my predicament,” shrugs Di Giulio.

Balmain play in the third tier of football in NSW. They train just two nights 
a week – Tuesdays at Birchgrove Oval and Thursdays in Caringbah – and play 
their home games at Wentworth Park in Glebe. But they couldn’t hold this match 
at Wentworth Park because there are no floodlights. They couldn’t even host it 
at Lambert Park in Leichhardt, their second choice, because the lighting was 
not deemed sufficient for the television broadcast. They’re hoping to break 
even from the game, although they’ll have to forfeit thousands of dollars in 
potential revenue in order to meet FFA’s strict requirements. This is a classic 
David versus Goliath scenario.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F04%2Fffa-cup-david-plays-goliath-as-balmain-tigers-coach-seeks-unlikely-upset%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93a8e2f241e78cdee0e4f93f0946692ccc06af45%2F0_0_4608_3456%2Fmaster%2F4608.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=FFA%20Cup%3A%20David%20plays%20Goliath%20as%20Balmain%20Tigers%20coach%20seeks%20unlikely%20upset%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F04%2Fffa-cup-david-plays-goliath-as-balmain-tigers-coach-seeks-unlikely-upset%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=FFA%20Cup%3A%20David%20plays%20Goliath%20as%20Balmain%20Tigers%20coach%20seeks%20unlikely%20upset%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F04%2Fffa-cup-david-plays-goliath-as-balmain-tigers-coach-seeks-unlikely-upset%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93a8e2f241e78cdee0e4f93f0946692ccc06af45%2F0_0_4608_3456%2Fmaster%2F4608.jpg>
 Joe Di Giulio, the Balmain Tigers coach , photographed at Bar Sport, where he 
has been going for 20 years. Photograph: Joe Gorman / The Guardian 
Di Giulio arrived in Australia in 1974 from Argentina. He was born in Italy 
before his parents moved to Buenos Aires, and so he grew up supporting River 
Plate. By 16 he was going every weekend to watch the Onega brothers and Oscar 
Más play forLos Millonarios, but at 18 the family migrated again, this time to 
Australia. We were actually going to go to Canada,” he says, “but then we find 
out about the temperature in winter, so we decided to come here.”

When he first started to learn English, he would take a note on the bus, 
instructing the driver to notify him at the correct stop. His first job at a 
factory also helped him familiarise himself with the language, as did 
completing his accounting degree.

 Football was always a passion. His favourite National Soccer League sides 
were Blacktown City and Marconi, and by 1990 he got his first coaching gig with 
a South American team in SBS’s Ethnic World Cup, losing the grand final to a 
Portuguese side.

The FFA Cup returns with a seven-goal extra-time thriller at Hume City | Paul 
Connolly
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jul/30/ffa-cup-returns-with-a-bang-as-hume-city-edge-seven-goal-extra-time-thriller>
Family took him away from football, and then brought him back again. His own 
playing days finished when he met his wife, and he spent less time on the field 
and more time with the family. “She didn’t like sport at all, so that was the 
end of my soccer career,” he says with a grin. When his son Leonardo turned 
six, however, he was back in the game as his son’s coach.

Leonardo, 23, and James Kiosidis have been with Di Giulio since the Under-6s, 
and if it wasn’t for Leo’s broken leg, they’d both be playing tonight against 
Melbourne Victory. “All the way through it’s been a bonding experience with my 
son,” says Di Giulio, who has been with Balmain since 2011. “For me it’s not 
about coaching in NPL1 or A-League. It’s a bit late for me now, I always did it 
because my son was involved.”

There are a couple of juicy backstories to this match. First, while Di Giulio 
is polite and gentle off the field, he’s also a fierce competitor. Two seasons 
ago he was arrested in Mudgee in a wild state league match against Western NSW 
Mariners, after being sent off by the referee and then pouring a bottle of 
water on the groundsman’s head. I ask whether Victory coach Kevin Muscat,
infamously known 
<http://www.smh.com.au/sport/soccer/kevin-muscat-named-footballs-dirtiest-player-20131212-2z8r4.html>
 as “the most hated man in football” and a referee’s nightmare, may yet meet 
his match. Di Giulio chuckles and shakes his head: “I’m very calm these days”.

Second, many of the Balmain Tigers players are Sydney FC fans, and a couple 
are regulars in The Cove, Sydney FC’s active support group. The chance to play 
against one of Sydney FC’s main rivals will be a moment for them to savour, and 
more broadly, part of the romance of this new cup competition.

“Look, obviously it’s going to be hard to get a result and win,” says Di 
Giulio. “What I want is for the players to enjoy it, to get the most out of it, 
because it could be once in a lifetime experience.”
 