
A guerrilla screening of secretly obtained film footage showing an 
unprecedented view of Australia’s offshore refugee detention camps was 
projected on to the outside of the Australian high commission in central London 
on Wednesday night.

The building became the backdrop to the screening of 20 minutes of footage 
from Chasing Asylum, a 1.5 hour documentary which breaks Australian law by 
using hidden-camera footage and testimony from whistleblowers inside the camp 
to describe for the first time the assaults, sexual abuse, self-harm attempts, 
child abuse and living conditions endured by asylum seekers held by the 
Australian government. The picture they paint is one of routine dysfunction and 
deliberate cruelty.


“If women aren’t being raped in these detention camps, if children aren’t 
being abused and men aren’t losing their minds onNauru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/ng-interactive/2016/aug/10/the-nauru-files-the-lives-of-asylum-seekers-in-detention-detailed-in-a-unique-database-interactive#incident=sca150253>
 and Manus, then why can’t journalists and independent observers go into the 
camps to see what’s going on?” said Eva Orner, the Academy and Emmy 
award-winning Australian documentary-maker who madeChasing Asylum 
<https://whatson.bfi.org.uk/lff/Online/default.asp?BOparam::WScontent::loadArticle::permalink=chasingasylum>
.


Orner calls her documentary “the film Australia doesn’t want you to see”. No 
journalist has ever been allowed to visit the two detention centres where 
intercepted refugees are taken. Both camps are far from Australia: one inNauru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nauru>, a small, impoverished Pacific island 
republic; the other in Papua New Guinea.

The Nauru files: the lives of asylum seekers in detention detailed in a unique 
database – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/ng-interactive/2016/aug/10/the-nauru-files-the-lives-of-asylum-seekers-in-detention-detailed-in-a-unique-database-interactive>
 The documentary’s footage was clandestinely filmed during riots at the Manus 
and Nauru camps, which resulted in beatings and the death of Iranian asylum 
seekerReza Berati 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/10/man-accused-of-asylum-seeker-reza-baratis-recaptured-by-png-police>
. The media is banned from both centres. In the middle of filming, the 
Australian government passed theAustralian Border Force Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/27/immigration-detention-doctors-challenge-border-force-acts-secrecy-clause-in-court>
, which made it a crime, punishable by two years’ imprisonment, for 
whistleblowers to speak publicly.

“Why is it a crime with two years’ imprisonment for employees to talk about 
what goes on there? Why am I and my whistleblowers in breach of the law for 
telling the truth in our documentary?” said Orner, whose documentary features 
exclusive footage from inside Nauru and Manus detention centres and new 
whistleblower interviews.

The Guardian published all 8,000 leaked pages of the Nauru Files 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/nauru-files> – the largest cache of 
leaked documents released from inside Australia’s immigration regime, 
containing the personal accounts of sexual abuse, torture and humiliation 
inflicted on children held by Australia in offshore detention camps – earlier 
this year.

A short history of Nauru, Australia’s dumping ground for refugees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/10/a-short-history-of-nauru-australias-dumping-ground-for-refugees>
In August, the International Alliance Against Mandatory Detention 
<http://london.carpediem.cd/events/779738-close-the-camps-now-at-australia-house-the-strand/>
 organised a10-hour reading of the 2,000 leaked incident reports  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/26/nauru-asylum-seeker-protest-australia-house-london>
from the Nauru detention camp outside the high commission.

Chasing Asylum has already been a national and international triumph 
<http://www.vice.com/tag/Eva%20Orner>: it has won multiple awards, has secured 
European TV deals and will have US and UK deals soon. There are DVDs, an iTunes 
release and streaming releases coming up as well as an announcement in the 
coming weeks concerning further international releases.

The documentary is to have its UK premiere this week with two screenings of 
the work at the London Film Festival. Orner is in talks with the United Nations 
for screenings in Geneva and New York. It will be screened at the New York 
University law school later this year.

“Projecting our film on the Australian high commission isn’t just a stunt,” 
said Orner. “This film has already been seen by thousands of people across 
Australia and will shortly be released far more widely and publicly, in a way 
that will mean it’s seen by millions of people in every corner of the globe. 
I’ll be able to announce the details over the next month but it’s going to be a 
very widely watched film.

“But despite us continuously asking the Australian government to comment on 
the claims made in our film about what’s happening on Nauru and Manus islands, 
the only time our politicians will comment is when theinternational media run 
the story 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/24/opinion/australias-offshore-cruelty.html>, 
specifically the Guardian, theBBC <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p03vkv44> 
and the New York Times 
<https://twitter.com/nytimescohen/status/735642573663023105>. But even then, 
they refuse to engage properly 
<https://twitter.com/nytimescohen/status/735643150979608578>: they’ve never 
answered the claims we make in the film.

“By projecting our film on to the high commission building in the centre of 
London, I’m hoping to goad Alexander Downer, the Australian high commissioner 
to the UK – who was an architect of the Pacific Solution and is a vocal 
supporter of them – to finally engage in a debate about what’s going on in 
them,” she said.

 Last month, a young Iranian refugee, Omid Masoumali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/03/asylum-seekers-set-themselves-alight-nauru>
, set himself alight on Nauru and died in a Brisbane hospital. Soon after, a 
21-year-old Somali refugee, identified only as Hodan, set herself on fire and 
was taken in critical condition to Brisbane.

“I hope this film helps to educate and galvanise people to stand up and say 
this is unacceptable and to pressure the government to change its policies,” 
said Orner.




 