
Motormouth Tracey Gordon is a brilliant comic creation. Brought up by a 
hellfire-and-damnation mother (“My dear, your vagina is holy. I command you to 
leave your nether regions be”), the 24-year-old is desperate to lose her 
virginity ( “We will wait till we die if it brings you glory,” her Pentecostal 
Christian fiance says in his prayers), and best friends with the most worldly 
girl on the estate (“Just sit on his face”). Innocent, filthy, funny, oafish, 
she is, you might assume, an exaggerated version of her creator, Michaela Coel. 
She isn’t. Tracey – played by Coel in the new E4 series Chewing Gum – is very 
much a censored version of the real thing.

We meet at a cafe that doubles as a church in east London’s Brick Lane, close 
to the estate where Coel grew up. In her mustard halter-neck, shorts and 
platforms, she looks younger than her 27 years. Yet when she talks about her 
past, it often feels as if she’s already lived many lives. There’s the girl 
who, like Tracey, grew up with her mother and older sister (her Ghanaian 
parents split up before she was born). Young Michaela Ewuraba Boakye-Collinson 
(she changed her surname to Coel when she was told that would never catch on) 
was the only black pupil in her year at primary school in Tower Hamlets, an 
isolated girl who bullied others. “I was very unhappy at one point and dealt 
with my unhappiness by hitting people.”

There is secondary school Michaela, at a tough comprehensive, finally feeling 
she belonged with her group of black girls, laughing till she cried at the 
chatter and jokes. There’s the young woman who went to university twice and 
quit twice (the first time after three weeks, the second after studying English 
for a year and getting a 2:1, despite attending only one lecture). And there’s 
the driven Michaela who went to drama school and emerged as a poet, singer and 
actor (she has appeared in Channel 4’sTop Boy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/oct/30/top-boy-reviewed-by-hackney-residents-panel>
, and at the National in Medea).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fmichaela-coel-chewing-gum-e4-comedy-series-men-and-sex%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F2%2F1443782661726%2F38f8bab5-4d7f-4674-836a-21054066bcd4-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Filthy%2C%20funny%20and%20Christian%3A%20the%20many%20sides%20of%20Chewing%20Gum's%20Michaela%20Coel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fmichaela-coel-chewing-gum-e4-comedy-series-men-and-sex%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Filthy%2C%20funny%20and%20Christian%3A%20the%20many%20sides%20of%20Chewing%20Gum%27s%20Michaela%20Coel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fmichaela-coel-chewing-gum-e4-comedy-series-men-and-sex%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F2%2F1443782661726%2F38f8bab5-4d7f-4674-836a-21054066bcd4-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Danielle Walters as Candice and Michaela Coel as Tracey in Chewing Gum. 
Photograph: Dave King 
And perhaps most significantly, there is Michaela the evangelising Christian. 
Coel was 18 when she found God. A friend took her to dance classes. When Coel 
discovered they were church-run, she kept shtum. “I wouldn’t say that I wasn’t 
Christian because I wanted to dance, so I just pretended.” Is she a good liar? 
“If you don’t know me very well, I am a good liar. If you know me very well, 
you’d definitely know I’m a shit liar.”

When a friend took Coel to her church, a girl asked her name. “She said, ‘God 
is saying to you you haven’t got to know Him for yourself.’ And I was like OK, 
thanks, bye.” But the words resonated and she went back. “They did an altar 
call where they say, ‘If you know Jesus is your lord and saviour, put your hand 
up.’ And I shot my hand up! I ran to the front and broke down in tears. Proper 
breakdown! From that day on, I became a Christian. I was a very extreme 
Christian.”

She tucks into her courgette cake, pulls a face, opts for my chocolate cake 
and smiles approvingly. “It’s a bit like hypnotism,” she says, chewing. “If 
you’re in an open place, you’ll be hypnotised. And if you’re not, you won’t. I 
was at a place where I didn’t know what to do with my life. It was either end 
up pregnant in a council flat or ... I didn’t have another option.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fmichaela-coel-chewing-gum-e4-comedy-series-men-and-sex%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F2%2F1443782806331%2F98e101c3-bd1f-4ed6-b716-00b03aa52d61-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Filthy%2C%20funny%20and%20Christian%3A%20the%20many%20sides%20of%20Chewing%20Gum's%20Michaela%20Coel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fmichaela-coel-chewing-gum-e4-comedy-series-men-and-sex%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Filthy%2C%20funny%20and%20Christian%3A%20the%20many%20sides%20of%20Chewing%20Gum%27s%20Michaela%20Coel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fmichaela-coel-chewing-gum-e4-comedy-series-men-and-sex%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F2%2F1443782806331%2F98e101c3-bd1f-4ed6-b716-00b03aa52d61-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Michaela Coel, centre, and the rest of the cast of Chewing Gum. Photograph: 
Dave King 
Coel was hardly a woman of the world, but she was not a virgin (“Hi Dean! Hope 
you’re well”). She finished with Dean and became celibate. She also became 
preachy and intolerant. She soon lost the secondary-school friends, which still 
causes her pain. The thing is, she says, she was so happy that she wanted 
others to experience her joy. She admits she didn’t go about it the best way. 
“I would be shouting at them in their houses, ‘What are youdoing? Jesus loves 
you! You are not happy with your life! Why won’t youlisten?’” And she really 
does shout.
 What did her family think about her conversion? “Mum thought I was in a cult, 
and my sister was scared. Everyone was very worried.” At the time, neither her 
mother nor her sister were religious; now they belong to the same Pentecostal 
church, even though Coel has since left. Her conversion led to a creative 
flowering. She wanted to put her feelings about Jesus into words so she became 
a performance poet. In Sorry I’m a Christian, she tells prospective admirers 
why she’s off limits because she’s saving herself for Jesus.

Chewing Gum Dreams review: An effervescent look at adolescence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/19/chewing-gum-dreams-theatre-review>
It’s interesting, I say, that so much of her writing is a battle between 
godliness and desire. “Yeah!” she shouts. “Isn’t that life, though?” Does she 
like the person she became? “No, I don’t like that person.” How would she 
describe herself? “Militant, judgmental.” Coel performed her poetry at Hackney 
Empire, where she was spotted by the playwright and directorChé Walker 
<http://www.chewalker.co.uk/>, who invited her to the masterclasses he did at 
Rada for free. From there, she went to Guildhall drama school and that was the 
end of religion. “I became best friends with gay people and I was like, ‘Oooh, 
I don’t feel compelled to tell you that you need Jesus because I don’t think 
you do.’”

In many ways, this is the world that her six-part comedy series portrays. It 
started life as a one-woman play, performed at Hackney Wick’s Yard Theatre then 
transferred to the National, Manchester’s Royal Exchange and Holland’s National 
Theatre. In Chewing Gum Dreams, Coel played 14-year-old Tracey and all the 
other characters on her London estate. The title referred to aspirations left 
splattered like discarded gum. Her influences range from Keats, Nina Simone and 
Tina Fey toCourttia Newland <http://courttianewland.com/>. “He wrote novels 
about black working-class London at the time So Solid Crew were popping up, and 
it seemed to me the only literature that was echoing the life I was living.”

Chewing Gum is beautifully written, its dialogue outlandish and thoroughly 
believable. This is modern, working-class city life: a world where skin colour 
is invisible for some (Tracey’s best friend is mixed race and her sisters are 
white, but it is never discussed) and omni-present for others; a world of 
absent fathers and dominant mothers. It’s also a refreshingly optimistic world, 
in which people believe they can achieve anything, whatever their background. 
Again, this is shaped by Coel’s experience. Her mother worked as a cleaner for 
many years before doing a degree, and then a masters in psychology. She now 
works as a mental health liaison officer. “She’s pretty awesome,” Coel says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fmichaela-coel-chewing-gum-e4-comedy-series-men-and-sex%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F2%2F1443782952847%2F3358ce32-2f63-4a2f-8336-d981e22b70ee-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Filthy%2C%20funny%20and%20Christian%3A%20the%20many%20sides%20of%20Chewing%20Gum's%20Michaela%20Coel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fmichaela-coel-chewing-gum-e4-comedy-series-men-and-sex%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Filthy%2C%20funny%20and%20Christian%3A%20the%20many%20sides%20of%20Chewing%20Gum%27s%20Michaela%20Coel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fmichaela-coel-chewing-gum-e4-comedy-series-men-and-sex%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F2%2F1443782952847%2F3358ce32-2f63-4a2f-8336-d981e22b70ee-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Michaela Coel: ‘I am disciplined to the point of danger.’ Photograph: David 
Levene for the Guardian 
The one thing all Chewing Gum’s characters have in common is that they are 
relatively poor. Over the years, says Coel, she has come to realise that what 
she assumed were race issues are actually more about class. “Inequality starts 
in the womb,” she says, telling me about a report that documents how the stress 
and hardship a pregnant mother experiences affects the child’s life.

Although it is five years since she left the church, Coel says she has lost 
none of her capacity for extreme behaviour. These days, it just finds 
expression in her work and personal politics. When she was commissioned to 
write Chewing Gum, she found herself a 24-hour cafe and made it her home. “I 
would sit there for two days straight, working to my deadlines. The staff would 
come in, do their shift, leave, sleep, come back in, and I’d still be there. 
That’s not sensible. It’s very disciplined, but it’s also completely crazy. 
That is me. Disciplined to the point of danger.” She thinks about it. “I am 
really weird.”

I tell her I like the fact nothing is taboo in Chewing Gum – when Tracey’s 
having her period, we sure get to know about it. Absolutely, she says. “We 
fart, we shit, we bleed, I’m always like ...” She trails off, wondering whether 
she should tell the following story, but of course she does (the only 
concession being that she whispers it). “I was on my period and my ex-boyfriend 
wanted to have sex, and I was like, ‘I’ve got a tampon in.’ He was like, ‘Take 
it out.’ And I was like, ‘If you want to have sex, you’ve got to take it out 
yourself.’ And he did. Women have got to do that.” She acts out the whole scene 
for me: “‘This is the vagina. You either want to know it or you don’t.This is 
the vagina!’” By now she’s shouting passionately.

She apologises and bursts out laughing. But this is the great thing about 
Coel. She’s writing about the stuff that many of us think but won’t articulate. 
As we leave, she mentions that after she walked out on the Pentecostalists, she 
used to pray in this cafe, then she stopped attending church altogether. She 
still thinks herChristianity <https://www.theguardian.com/world/christianity> 
has been a force for good in her life. “It gave me confidence and I haven’t 
lost that yet.” She pauses. “I still actually talk to God.” So you’ve not 
entirely lost your faith? “No, I’m just uncertain. I don’t know what ‘It’ is. 
But I do say thank you for everything.”

• Chewing Gum 
<http://www.channel4.com/info/press/programme-information/chewing-gum> starts 
on E4 on 6 October.
 