
In 2011, Guardian News & Media (GNM) announced that it would undergo a 
five-year transformation programme designed to ensure that it is sustainable in 
the long-term, despite the inexorable decline of print sales and advertising. 
In order to fund the creation of new digital platforms, it announced its 
intention to make cost savings of £25 million.

While the community programme remains a priority for GNM, the financial 
pressure the organisation is under led to a reduction in the community budget 
for 2011-12 and it will fall again in 2012/13.

Spending on community projects, including salaries, fell from £140,000 in 
2010-11 to £85,000 for the last financial year. Of this, £55,000 was spent 
directly on community projects and support in 2011-12, with this figure 
expected to fall to £33,000 in the current financial year (excluding 
volunteering week costs).

Given these constraints, the sustainability department has been looking for 
innovative ways of supporting our partners, leading to more creative 
collaborations such as matching volunteer skills to organisations and a better 
use of existing resources, for example allowing partners to use conference and 
meeting rooms for events.

Project highlights during the last financial year included the Live Magazine 
summer project <http://www.guardian.co.uk/sustainability/live-north> and the 
co-delivery of a Level 2 Business BTEC withGlobal Generation 
<http://www.globalgeneration.org.uk/>.

There were also a number of smaller projects such as Age UK Camden's Great 
Croft centre 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sustainability/sustainability-report-age-uk-camden> 
teaching staff how to make Christmas decorations for the company Christmas tree 
and sessions run in ourEducation centre 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/gnmeducationcentre> with Social Mobility Foundation 
<http://www.socialmobility.org.uk/>, Opening Doors 
<http://www.openingdoorslondon.org.uk/>, Global Generation and the construction 
trainees from Bemerton Villages Management Organisations. To read more about 
this year's projects, see theoverview of year's activities section 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sustainability/sustainability-report-2012-community-partners-overview>
.

The sustainability team is not just focused on creating new ways to engage the 
organisation with its communities but also on ensuring that it demonstrates how 
these activities benefit our colleagues. We will be developing targets for 
2012-15 that will help us achieve this deeper integration with business aims 
and objectives by helping to develop new skills within GNM.

The last year saw the first independent monitoring and evaluation of the 
community programme, which was a key objective for 2011-12. You can read more 
about how Acona's methodology was developedhere 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sustainability/blog/community-sustainability-shared-value>
 and the findings from this year's report are discussedhere 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sustainability/sustainability-report-2012-community-monitoring-evaluation>
.

Overall, the number of staff volunteers fell during the last financial year to 
210 people, who contributed 1,741 hours. This is equivalent to 13% of staff 
volunteering. This compared with 307 volunteers and 4,268 hours the previous 
year when 24% of staff volunteered.


This was largely due to the postponement of volunteering week 2012 from March 
to September because of company-wide restructuring that took place in March 
2011. As a result, the department was unable to meet two key objectives for 
2011/12 – to grow volunteers and hold volunteering week.

However, if the numbers from volunteering week for 2010-11 are excluded, the 
figures for 2011-12 show a similar number of staff volunteering for projects 
that form our community programme. The figure for 2011-12 of 210 staff compares 
with 207 staff volunteering in 2010-11.

For 2011-12, this figure breaks down to 166 staff volunteering for projects 
that form part of our ongoing community programme and with 49 taking part in 
team away days.

One highlight of the year was a major award for our payroll-giving scheme, 
which is one of the most popular in the country. GNM was awarded the platinum 
award quality mark in recognition of the fact that 26% of staff supported 195 
charities, giving a total of £83,320.08. GNM also supported individual staff 
fundraising through £8,000 worth of match-funding donating.

Guardian and Observer Christmas appeal 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/christmas-charity-appeal-2011>

Generous readers raised a total of £416,406 for eight youth charities featured 
in the Guardian and Observer's2011 Christmas appeal 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2012/feb/10/guardian-observer-2011-christmas-appeal>
.

The annual appeal distributed the cash equally between the charities, all of 
which help marginalised young people to turn their lives around.

The sum includes £24,000 pledged in one day during the Guardian and Observer 
journalists' "telethon" in December.

The charities are Street League 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/blog/2011/dec/14/christmas-charity-appeal-street-league>
,The Boxing Academy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2011/dec/09/christmas-charity-appeal-boxing-academy-london>
,Tomorrow's People 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2011/dec/18/christmas-appeal-tomorrows-people>
, Just for Kids Law 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2011/dec/16/christmas-charity-appeal-just-for-kids-law>
,Magic Me 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2011/dec/20/christmas-charity-appeal-magic-me>
,Community Links 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2011/nov/25/community-links-christmas-charity-appeal>
,Fare 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2011/nov/27/christmas-charity-appeal-bannatyne-house-glasgow>
 andSt Giles Trust 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2011/dec/02/guardian-christmas-charity-appeal-st-giles-trust>
. All eight work with disadvantaged youngsters to help them develop the life 
skills and confidence to get a job, training or further education, and enable 
them to steer away from gangs, crime or addiction.

The Guardian editor-in-chief, Alan Rusbridger 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/alanrusbridger>, said: "I'd like to pay 
tribute to our readers' incredible generosity. These are excellent charities 
which make a real, positive difference to the lives of the young people they 
support."
 