
People who advocate “having more fun” in life are, generally speaking, the 
kind of people you (all right, I) want to punch. They’re theDavid Brent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/apr/01/favourite-tv-show-the-office-ricky-gervais-david-brent>
-like bosses who make everyone do excruciating icebreaker exercises on office 
awaydays; they’re the train guards and cabin crew who mistakenly believe all 
passengers love it when they dosilly voices 
<http://mashable.com/2016/09/04/flight-attendant-looney-tunes/>. One especially 
annoying technology trend, “gamification”, tries to turn mundane tasks into 
games with points and prizes, so that your trip to the gym becomes a “fitness 
quest”, or housework a matter of fighting“chore wars” 
<http://www.chorewars.com/> with your spouse. In my experience, these efforts 
to add a cheesy overlay of fun always fail, not least because they’re a 
constant reminder that the underlying activity is so boring. If it weren’t, why 
would you be trying so hard to make it fun in the first place?

The American game designer and critic Ian Bogost <http://bogost.com/> wouldn’t 
dispute the cringeworthiness of this enforced jollity, but the real problem, he 
argues in a new book,Play Anything 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/play-anything.html>, is that we don’t 
understand the nature of fun. We imagine that the way to relieve life’s tedium 
is to escape from it, or try to pretend it’s not happening. But true fun 
involves diving in and “taking the world at face value” – embracing the 
situation you’re in, not pushing it away, and grappling with its built-in 
constraints. Bogost recalls dragging his four-year-old daughter through a 
crowded shopping mall, faster than her legs could carry her, and noticing that 
she was pulling against him, slowing down so that her feet never touched the 
cracks between floor tiles: a familiar children’s game, made more challenging 
by her father’s forward propulsion. She hadn’t chosen her situation, but by 
creatively exploiting its limitations, she turned it into a playground.

Time or money? That’s a question of value | Oliver Burkeman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/30/time-or-money-question-of-value-oliver-burkeman>
All of which goes to show that external constraints aren’t antithetical to 
fun, but rather a precondition of it: a game with no limiting rules is no game 
at all. One curious consequence of this is that fun isn’t always, or even 
usually, pleasurable. Ask any serious player of chess, golf or video games, and 
they’ll concede it’s often a struggle – otherwise, why bother playing? Fun, 
from this perspective, isn’t a matter of enjoying yourself in the moment, but 
of looking back with satisfaction at having found creative new possibilities in 
whatever constraints you’re facing.

Still, Play Anything isn’t really just an argument for turning dull tasks into 
games. (Although it did make me feel better about the way I clean up after 
dinner, mentally dividing the kitchen into “zones”, then clearing each one, 
like a military unit securing the area. I’m guessingAlan Partridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/alan-partridge> does the same.) It’s a 
manifesto for a different attitude to the world. We’re constantly trying to 
deal with the bits of everyday life we dislike by changing them, or changing 
ourselves. But what if we saw them with fresh eyes, as collections of 
constraints – like the rules of a game – and then asked what “moves” they might 
make possible? You might not enjoy them more. Yet, strangely, you’ll probably 
have more fun.

oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com>
 