
The proportion of first-time buyers in England who are single has fallen by 
half over the past two decades, as high house prices make it increasingly 
difficult to go it alone in the property market.

Figures from the latest English Housing Survey 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/539256/First_Time_Buyers_and_Potential_Home_Owners_Report.pdf>
 show that in 2014-15 just 14% of first-time buyer households were made up of 
single people, compared with 29% in 1994-95. The change comes despite growth in 
people living alone, which the Office for National Statistics said accounted 
for 29% of UK households in 2015.

Over the same 20-year period, the share of the market that comprised couples 
rose from 63% to 80%, and the proportion of couples with children increased 
from 20% to 31%. The remaining 6% of buyers were loan parents or those buying 
in larger groups.

Andrew Montlake of mortgage brokers Coreco said: “You’ve seen house price 
rises during that time and the number of people who can afford to purchase a 
property on their own has fallen ... unless you have parental help it’s very 
difficult to be a single buyer, particularly in London.”

Between the summers of 1994 and 2014 the average price of a home in the UK 
rose from £51,731 to £188,810, according to figures from Nationwide. Over the 
same 20-year period, the median income of first-time buyer households went up 
from £18,600 to £43,200 – £16,000 more than the typical household income across 
England.

The majority were aged between 25 and 34, but the average age increased from 
30 to 33, and the proportion of new buyers aged between 35 and 44 almost 
doubled – from 11% to 20%. The increase in average ages may also mean that 
people are more likely to be in a couple before they buy, Montlake said.

The survey shows that the number of first-time buyers dropped from 564,000 in 
1994-95 to 300,000 in 2014-15 despite an increase in the number of households 
in the same period. First-time buyers were especially hit by the credit crunch 
in 2008, with banks and building societies withdrawing mortgages for those with 
small deposits, but they have come back into the market since the government’s
help-to-buy scheme was launched in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/mar/20/budget-2013-osborne-offers-homebuyers-help-to-buy>
.


The new housing minister, Gavin Barwell, said: “We are determined to ensure 
that anyone who works hard and aspires to own their own home has the 
opportunity to do so.”

He said that since 2010 more than 300,000 households had been helped into home 
ownership through government-backed schemes.

“The groundbreaking Housing and Planning Act will allow us to go even further 
delivering our ambition to build an additional 1m homes,” he added.

However, housing charity Shelter said the large amount of money needed to get 
on the property ladder was a “glaring reminder” of the lack of affordable homes.

Its chief executive, Campbell Robb, said: “More and more people on ordinary 
incomes have no choice but to face a lifetime of expensive, unstable private 
renting, unless they’re lucky enough to have help from friends and family.

“The new government has a real chance to ease the pressure on young people and 
families in these uncertain times by making housing a top priority, and 
bringing forward measures to quickly start building homes that people on 
ordinary incomes can actually afford to rent or buy.”

Figures from mortgage lenders and HMRC show that gross mortgage lending and 
the number of sales completed both rose in June.


The Council of Mortgage Lenders said its members advanced £20.7bn during the 
month, 16% more than in May and and 3% more than in June 2015. The figure, 
which includes remortgages and does not take into account repayments, is the 
highest June figure for eight years.

Meanwhile, HMRC reported that the number of residential property transactions 
for homes costing more than £40,000 increased by 4.9% between May and June to 
94,550.The seasonally adjusted figure was, however, 10.2% lower than in June 
2015.

Doug Crawford, chief executive of conveyancing firm My Home Move said: “The 
question now is what the impact will be for the rest of the year ... There have 
been anecdotal reports of a slight slowdown in July from the estate agents we 
work with, but it is impossible to tell how much of this is Brexit related and 
how much is down to a normal summer slowdown.

“The picture will only start to be clearer in September, after the holiday 
season.”
 