
First-time homebuyers in the UK would benefit from a vote to leave the EU, 
according to a leading ratings agency.

Moody’s said a fall in house prices triggered by a Brexit would make it more 
affordable for people trying to get on the property ladder for the first time.

“First-time buyers would benefit from lower competition for housing, as house 
price and rental inflation would slow down if immigration is curbed,” said Gaby 
Trinkaus, a vice president and senior analyst at Moody’s.
Guardian explained: young people and the referendum 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/06/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?sheet=intermediate&id=young_people>
Trinkaus added that whatever the outcome of next month’s referendum, the 
outlook was picking up for first-time buyers in the capital.

“Regardless of the referendum vote, the ambitious affordable housing agenda 
for London following the mayoral election will help those looking to get on the 
housing ladder,” she said.

Last week, Christine Lagarde, managing director of the International Monetary 
Fund,said a vote to leave the EU at next month’s referendum could cause a house 
price and stock market crash. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/13/imf-warns-stock-market-crash-house-price-fall-eu-referendum-brexit>

“We have looked at all the scenarios. We have done our homework and we haven’t 
found anything positive to say about a Brexit vote,” she said.

Estate agents also claimed thousands of pounds could be wiped off the value of 
UK houses if Britain votes to leave the EU.

Prices in London could fall by as much as £7,500, while homeowners in the rest 
of the country could lose £2,300, the National Association of Estate Agents 
said.

However, Moody’s suggested Brexit would be positive for cash-strapped 
first-time buyers who are currently priced out of the market.


UK prices rose in March at their fastest monthly rate since 2004, the latest 
official figures showed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/17/stamp-duty-rush-boosts-march-house-prices-ons>
, boosted over the month as buy-to-let investors rushed to complete purchases 
ahead of a stamp duty rise in April.

Rents and property values would drop after Brexit, say landlords
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/19/rents-property-values-drop-after-brexit-landlords-house-prices-eu-referendum>
House prices increased 2.5% over the month, taking the average price of a home 
to £291,820 according to the Office for National Statistics.

Moody’s said London’s property market could be more affected by Brexit, and 
that landlords could struggle to pay mortgages because of falling rental demand.

Trinkaus said: “A decline in rental demand could hit landlords’ ability to pay 
their mortgages on buy-to-let properties if London becomes less attractive to 
foreign nationals.”

Moody’s also warned that self-employed people in Britain would be more at risk 
than employees from fluctuating pay in the event of Brexit, potentially 
affecting their ability to make mortgage repayments.

The agency said that should a vote to leave the EU have a bigger negative 
impact on the UK economy than it is expecting, mortgage arrears would increase 
among self employed borrowers.

“The highest risk would apply to those borrowers with additional risk 
characteristics such as poor payment history, high loan-to-value or 
interest-only features,” Moody’s said.

It added that London had the highest concentration of self-employed people in 
the UK, at 17.3% in 2014.

The number of self-employed swelled in Britain during the financial crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/aug/20/self-employment-uk-highest-level>
, as many people who could not find permanent work or sufficient hours opted to 
work for themselves instead.

Self-employment reached the highest level since records began 40 years ago, 
with the proportion of the total workforce self-employed rising to 15% in 2014 
– or 4.6m people - compared with 13% in 2008, and 8.7% in 1975.
 