
In the historic centre of Ferrara, an imposing statue of Girolamo Savonarola 
confronts passersby. Savonarola, a local boy, was a 15th-century preacher of 
fire and brimstone, making his name denouncing secular vanity, pagan idols and 
the corruption of clerical elites. The monument hails him as “the scourge of 
corrupt and slavish times, full of vice and tyrants”.

Savonarola was hanged for his troubles in 1498, but his brooding, disruptive 
presence in modern Ferrara seemed apt this month as the city, in northernItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy>, hosted a group of modern iconoclasts 
with their own mission to “clean up” the country.

On a bitterly cold evening, MPs and senators representing the Five Star 
Movement (M5S), launched byBeppe Grillo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/beppe-grillo>, the comedian-turned-political 
rabble rouser, implored a packed piazza to use a referendum on the constitution 
on Sunday 4 December to send the prime minister, Matteo Renzi, packing.

Renzi, the telegenic, youthful leader of the centre-left Democratic party 
(PD), has placed his authority behind proposals to limit the powers of the 
senate, Italy’s second chamber.His plan 
<https://constitution-unit.com/2016/10/13/all-you-need-to-know-about-the-italian-constitutional-referendum/>
 involves cutting the number of senators from 315 to 100, all of whom would be 
appointed – rather than elected, as at present – and restricting their power to 
influence legislation.

Since 1948 the Italian constitution has preserved a perfect balance of powers 
between the two houses of parliament, frequently leading to legislative 
gridlock in Rome. Renzi claims that slimming down the role of the senate will, 
along with other reforms to strengthen executive power, finally free 
governments to govern. Crucially, he has indicated he will step down if the 
vote goes against him.

In other eras, a dry and technical debate might have preoccupied a few 
constitutional cognoscenti. But these are not ordinary times in western 
democracies. In Ferrara’s Piazza Trento e Trieste, Alessandro Di Battista, a 
rising star of Grillo’s movement, issued a populist call to arms. Renzi’s 
referendum, he told the crowd, was just the latest gambit by a political class 
determined to insulate itself from the people it should serve.

“This unelected senate will be constituted by the arselickers of the various 
parties”, said Di Battista, “and by those who are in trouble with the courts 
and need parliamentary immunity. They’re sealing the system off so it can’t be 
changed in the future.”

Such a devious manoeuvre should, he said, come as no surprise: “There are two 
Italys: on the one side the very wealthy few who look after themselves, and on 
the other the masses who live every day with problems of transport and public 
health.” As his audience launched into a favourite Five Star chant, “A casa! A 
casa!” (“Send them home”), Di Battista referenced the political earthquake that 
was in everyone’s mind.

“The election of Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>
 is the American people’s business,” he said. “But what that election does show 
is that so many citizens are simply not taking the establishment’s bait any 
more.”

Eventually it was time for the Five Star “I say No’’ tour and its participants 
to move on to the next event in nearby Bologna. As one helper turned to collect 
technical equipment from the stage, the slogan on the back of his blue Vote No 
sweatshirt became visible. For veterans of Brexit and observers of the election 
of president-elect Trump, it carried an eerily familiar ring: “Sovereignty 
belongs to the people.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fmatteo-renzi-politics-italy-european-union-brexit-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc30dc7f251bc9fc6f578719fe23594bd7cd96c03%2F0_134_3896_2338%2F3896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=First%20Brexit%20then%20Trump.%20Is%20Italy%20next%20for%20the%20west%E2%80%99s%20populist%20wave%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fmatteo-renzi-politics-italy-european-union-brexit-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=First%20Brexit%20then%20Trump.%20Is%20Italy%20next%20for%20the%20west%E2%80%99s%20populist%20wave%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fmatteo-renzi-politics-italy-european-union-brexit-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc30dc7f251bc9fc6f578719fe23594bd7cd96c03%2F0_134_3896_2338%2F3896.jpg>
 Matteo Renzi, the prime minister, is in danger of becoming yesterday’s man at 
41. Photograph: Campanini/AGF/REX/Shutterstock 
Italy’s referendum was not meant to pan out this way. The last polls permitted 
before the vote give the No campaign a five-point lead. Yet to paraphrase David 
Cameron’s famous jibe at Tony Blair, Renzi was the future once. Last April, 
when both the lower and upper houses of parliament comfortably approved the 
prime minister’s constitutional package,the votes were celebrated as a historic 
breakthrough <http://time.com/4291740/italian-constitution-reform-matteo-renzi/>
. A pragmatic non-tribal figure, Renzi, 41, was seen as the young technocratic 
leader who was finally reforming baroque structures of governance and rendering 
them fit for purpose. The markets, the European commission and Confindustria, 
the Italian equivalent of the CBI, warmly applauded the idea of a streamlined 
parliament with a more powerful executive. But, fatefully, Renzi decided he 
also wanted the backing of the people and called a referendum to rubber-stamp 
the changes. His vow to stand down if the reforms were rejected was an 
indication of his confidence.

That already feels like a different era. The winds of change in western 
democracies have since whipped up into a storm and, as the Brexit vote and the 
election of Trump demonstrated, voters have stopped giving the answers their 
politicians expect.

At an August rally in the coastal town of Giulianova, Grillo declared with 
characteristic asperity: “Today saying no is the most beautiful and glorious 
form of politics … whoever doesn’t understand that can go screw themselves.”

The Five Star leader has since jubilantly drawn connections between American “
Trumpismo” and the grassroots populism of his own movement, which stands at 30% 
in the polls, level pegging with Renzi’s party. “This is mad stuff,” Grillo 
wrote on his blog. “It’s an apocalypse for the big papers, the intellectuals, 
the journalists. This is a huge general ‘Fuck off’.”

On the hard right, Matteo Salvini, leader of the anti-migrant Lega Nord, is 
also surfing the wave, describing Trump’s triumph as a strike against 
globalisation: “It’s the revenge of the people, of courage, of pride, of the 
desire for work and security; and it’s one in the eye for the bankers, the 
speculators and the journalists.”

Salvini’s No referendum rallies have been “Trumpified”, accompanied now by 
supporters waving blue placards 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.it/2016/11/12/salvini-premier-berluscon_n_12927168.html>
, emblazoned “Salvini Premier”, designed to imitate those familiar from 
American town hall meetings. At a recent rally of 30,000 in Florence, he even 
wore a Trump trademark baseball cap, sporting a No slogan.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fmatteo-renzi-politics-italy-european-union-brexit-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7c3b276ef7a81bde3564566ba551773dba03e6b%2F18_0_2364_2953%2F2364.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=First%20Brexit%20then%20Trump.%20Is%20Italy%20next%20for%20the%20west%E2%80%99s%20populist%20wave%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fmatteo-renzi-politics-italy-european-union-brexit-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=First%20Brexit%20then%20Trump.%20Is%20Italy%20next%20for%20the%20west%E2%80%99s%20populist%20wave%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fmatteo-renzi-politics-italy-european-union-brexit-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7c3b276ef7a81bde3564566ba551773dba03e6b%2F18_0_2364_2953%2F2364.jpg>
 Matteo Salvini during the protest against Renzi in Florence. Photograph: 
Anadolu Agency/Getty Images 
As the air of insurgency becomes unmistakable, the technical debate over 
reforming a 70-year-old constitution is in danger of becoming a sideshow. 
Perhaps the most disturbing poll for Renzi found last week that only 40% of 
Italians say they will vote on the reform package; 56% consider their vote to 
be more a verdict on the prime minister, his government and, by implication, 
the state of the nation.

If that bigger picture still dominates come polling day, it is hard to see 
anything but defeat for a man once billed as Italy’s Blair. After 13 years of a 
flatlining economy, Italians are battered, bruised and looking for somebody to 
blame. Unemployment is running at 11%, but is close to 40% among the young, who 
made up the bulk of the 107,000 who left the country last year to seek work 
abroad. The aftermath of the financial crash is estimated to have wiped out 
about a quarter of Italian industry. The average family income is less now than 
it was in 2007.

Traditionally among the most enthusiastic proponents of European integration, 
ordinary Italians are furious at the EU’s failure to share the burden of the 
huge migration surge to their southern shores. Lectures from Brussels on the 
need to cut public spending and balance budgets, given the desperately 
straitened times, have added insult to injury. It is no coincidence that a 
current bookshop bestseller –1960: The Best Year of Our Lives – is a nostalgic 
evocation of the Italian postwar economic miracle, when the country’s growth 
was judged to outstrip Germany’s.

As initially strong support for his constitutional reforms has plummeted, 
Renzi has tried to turn the tide. In an attempt to woo an increasingly 
Eurosceptic electorate, he has begun to talk tough to Brussels, temporarily 
abandoning austerity targets and threatening to veto the EU budget unless other 
member states show more solidarity over migration.

Resorting to what opponents describe as scare tactics, he has also drawn 
attention to a recent spike in the interest rates on government bonds 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.it/2016/11/14/spread-italia-sale_n_12953034.html>. 
The markets have become decidedly uneasy at the prospect of Italy becoming the 
next country to deliver a seismic shock at the polls. “The yield will get 
bigger if uncertainty grows,” noted the prime minister. “That’s not a threat: 
it’s just a fact.”

A sharp rise in the cost of financing Italy’s colossal public debt could spell 
disaster. But just as the so-called fear factor failed to keep Britain in the 
EU, there are few signs that Renzi’s economic warnings are having the desired 
effect.

Paola Battistini, a shopworker from Ferrara who attended the Five Star rally, 
says: “We have already been screwed by the banks. The least of our problems is 
what the markets think about a No vote or a Renzi resignation. This country 
needs to start thinking again about focusing on the needs and lives of 
citizens, not the banks.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fmatteo-renzi-politics-italy-european-union-brexit-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F586fa749ccf215e1affce1b52be2e52dc2b1e15c%2F0_120_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=First%20Brexit%20then%20Trump.%20Is%20Italy%20next%20for%20the%20west%E2%80%99s%20populist%20wave%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fmatteo-renzi-politics-italy-european-union-brexit-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=First%20Brexit%20then%20Trump.%20Is%20Italy%20next%20for%20the%20west%E2%80%99s%20populist%20wave%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fmatteo-renzi-politics-italy-european-union-brexit-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F586fa749ccf215e1affce1b52be2e52dc2b1e15c%2F0_120_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 Lega Nord leader Matteo Salvini with France’s Front National leader Marine Le 
Pen at the first meeting of the Europe of Nations and Freedom congress in Milan 
this year. Photograph: Giuseppe Cacace/AFP/Getty Images 
Just when he needs his political friends and allies, Renzi does not seem to 
have many, at least in his own party. During his two years in office, the prime 
minister has made himself deeply unpopular among sections of the left through 
two reforms in particular. Intended to free up the country’s labour market, the 
liberalising Jobs Act made it easier for employers to hire and fire workers. 
The move incurred the wrath of the unions, but has so far failed to achieve any 
significant rise in permanent employment, especially for the young.

The educational reform package, the buona scuola, handed new powers over 
hiring and salaries to headteachers, and became deeply unpopular among 
teachers, another core section of PD support.

Such moves were always going to be a tough sell with more traditional party 
members. Combined with a perceived autocratic “presidential” style, they have 
lost Renzi a great deal of goodwill. One of the PD’s elder statesmen, former 
prime minister Massimo D’Alema, has already declared he will vote No, 
condemning the referendum as a distraction from Italy’s real problems.

In Bologna’s university quarter – scene of faculty occupations and violent 
clashes in 1977 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ebgoakjzKBI> – the walls of 
Via Zamboni are covered with posters advocating a No vote. The arts and 
humanities building has become a hub of “No Renzi” activity. Sara Agostinelli, 
an art graduate who is likely to vote yes to the constitutional reforms, says: 
“How PD supporters vote is going to be vital. What are they going to do? If 
Renzi doesn’t win, it will be big trouble down the line.”

Her friend, Silvia Mimmotti, who is training to be a psychologist, agrees and 
laments the prime minister’s lack of strategic nous. “Renzi made a big mistake 
to put himself and his future at the centre of this. It’s not about him – it’s 
about Italy. But he has made it about himself and so he’s uniting the factions 
against him.”

If the orthodox left has failed to unite behind the prime minister, the right 
is also in a state of ferment, as it plots eagerly for a post-Renzi era that 
could arrive before Christmas. Inspired by Trump, the anti-euro Lega Nord 
leader Salvini has distanced his party from the more liberal, pro-European 
Forza Italia, which still looks to Silvio Berlusconi, now 80, as its spiritual 
leader.

Salvini has long attempted to model the Lega on France’s Front National 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zceey0beYrA>, led by Marine Le Pen, with an 
emphasis on border controls, protectionism and an “Italians first” philosophy. 
In the wake of events in the US, he has now repudiated the centre-right label 
altogether, telling journalists: “I don’t want to talk any more about the 
internal dynamics of what used to be the centre-right. I won’t be using that 
term any more. What we need now is a sovereignty project. Renzi will be in 
power for a few more weeks. Whoever wishes to govern with us needs to know that 
the euro must be destroyed. We have to take back control of our currency.”

The Lega Nord, as its name indicates, is a northern rather than a national 
power, with its main strongholds in the north-eastern Veneto region. As Italy’s 
economy stagnates and the country struggles to cope with the influx of more 
than 120,000 migrants and refugees this year, the Lega’s aggressive nationalism 
and calls for closed borders are finding a bigger audience. But it is the 
prospect of a Grillo-generated “fuck off” moment in 2017 or early 2018, if 
Renzi loses his referendum, that is the stuff of nightmares in Rome and 
Brussels.

If the prime minister carries out his threat to resign, it will be up to the 
Italian president, Sergio Mattarella, to decide whether to appoint a caretaker 
government or call a general election. The former is more likely, but elections 
must in any case take place by early 2018 and Grillo will be perfectly placed 
to seize the moment.

“The Five Star Movement can take support from both the right and the left,” 
said Gianfranco Baldini, professor in European politics at the University of 
Bologna. “In the case of a No vote, they will be the big beneficiary.”

Formed only seven years ago, Five Star has become one of Europe’s biggest 
populist organisations and is now the main opposition in Italy. Still defining 
itself as a movement rather than a party, it attracts rightwing voters through 
a tough line on immigration and idealistic leftwingers through a devotion to 
direct democracy and the environment. Passionate denunciations of corruption in 
public life appeal across the political spectrum.

Apart from Grillo, 68, who cannot stand for parliament because of a conviction 
for manslaughter following a car accident in 1980, Five Star’s leaders are 
young, inexperienced and more used to protest than office. Since June, its 
newest star,Virginia Raggi, has endured a rocky few months after being elected 
mayor of Rome 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/20/world/europe/virginia-raggi-rome-five-star-movement.html?_r=0>
. But if the Five Star Movement becomes a government, the roller coaster ride, 
for Italy and for Europe, will have only just begun.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fmatteo-renzi-politics-italy-european-union-brexit-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feab721fec307d9f2aaee1c8234e56d96f4e3608c%2F0_211_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=First%20Brexit%20then%20Trump.%20Is%20Italy%20next%20for%20the%20west%E2%80%99s%20populist%20wave%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fmatteo-renzi-politics-italy-european-union-brexit-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=First%20Brexit%20then%20Trump.%20Is%20Italy%20next%20for%20the%20west%E2%80%99s%20populist%20wave%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fmatteo-renzi-politics-italy-european-union-brexit-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feab721fec307d9f2aaee1c8234e56d96f4e3608c%2F0_211_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Virginia Raggi, Five Star’s mayor in Rome. Photograph: 
Dadi/AGF/REX/Shutterstock 
Like Salvini, Grillo has called for a vote on leaving the euro – an “Italeave” 
referendum – in order that “the people can decide on monetary sovereignty”. 
Should that ever come to pass, one of the founder members of the EU would 
become the epicentre of a eurozone crisis that they can scarcely afford. A 
banking meltdown would become a genuine possibility; concern has been mounting 
throughout the year over the fragile finances of major Italian banks and 
one-fifth of loans in the banking system are categorised as troubled.

Not surprisingly, given the stakes, centrist politicians of various stripes 
are closing ranks ahead of next Sunday’s moment of truth. Delivering a 
passionate call to arms last week, Pier Ferdinando Casini, a senior figure in 
the senate and former president of the chamber of deputies, said: “Today, 
moderates have only one choice: help Renzi in order to prevent Italy falling 
into the hands of Grillo and the populists.”

During the past few weeks, as the referendum campaign has neared its climax, 
Baldini has combined his academic work with travelling around the central 
region of Emilia-Romagna, delivering talks on the constitutional reforms.

Author of Great Britain after Brexit, he has been struck by the parallels 
between the Italian and British referendums. “Both campaigns have been 
polarised and divisive,” he said. “Both have seen very bleak scenarios depicted 
by either side in attempts to scare the electorate, for example with the idea 
that a yes vote will usher in a very authoritarian regime.”

In his presentations, Baldini, who will vote yes, tries to go to what he sees 
as the nub of the issue. “The present constitution was drawn up in 1948,” he 
says. “It was a different world: an Italy that had emerged from a civil war 
between fascists and communists and one with deep divisions. It needed very 
strong checks and balances, which is why the senate was made so powerful. It’s 
not the same situation now.”

Unfortunately for Baldini, it is proving difficult to make that argument 
stick, such is the suspicion towards anything coming out of Rome. “In a small 
town [in Emilia Romagna] called Bagnolo-in-Piano,” he recalls, “an elderly man 
came up to me and said, ‘I enjoyed the discussion but I just don’t trust 
anybody any more. I want to keep hold of my vote for the senate.’ I responded 
that it’s common for the second chambers in European democracies to be 
appointed, but he didn’t care about that. And he’s not alone. People don’t 
trust leaders any more.”

Baldini points out that it would be a mistake to think the grassroots revolt 
against elites, led principally by Grillo, is a complete novelty in Italy. He 
cites the rise of the anti-politics Common Man’s Front, which took a million 
votes in the election of 1946 (motto: “Get off My Case”). In the 1970s, Marco 
Panella’s Radical party was influential in marshalling opposition to the 
“partitocracy” dominated by the then Christian Democrats and in championing 
civil rights on issues such as divorce and abortion. More recently, with the 
memory of thetangentopoli corruption scandal still fresh, Berlusconi won power 
as an “outsider” pledging to clean up politics and run Italy like a business.

“There have been regular crises of legitimacy in Italian politics – and waves 
of populism,“ says Baldini. “It goes in cycles.”

Nevertheless, he agrees that the referendum carries a significance far beyond 
the updating, or not, of Italy’s constitution. “In a way the stakes are even 
higher in Italy than for Brexit. The prime minister has gambled everything and 
there is no one in the wings to take his place if he goes.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fmatteo-renzi-politics-italy-european-union-brexit-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2863ae02bd71edfa773a459df7b9a9e88b2fe235%2F78_0_3969_4961%2F3969.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=First%20Brexit%20then%20Trump.%20Is%20Italy%20next%20for%20the%20west%E2%80%99s%20populist%20wave%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fmatteo-renzi-politics-italy-european-union-brexit-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=First%20Brexit%20then%20Trump.%20Is%20Italy%20next%20for%20the%20west%E2%80%99s%20populist%20wave%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fmatteo-renzi-politics-italy-european-union-brexit-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2863ae02bd71edfa773a459df7b9a9e88b2fe235%2F78_0_3969_4961%2F3969.jpg>
 Guglielmo Giannini. Photograph: Mondadori/Getty Images 
Waves of Italian populism

Common Man’s Front
In the chaotic aftermath of the second world war, Roman writer Guglielmo 
Giannini founded the Fronte dell’Uomo Qualunque (Common Man’s Front). Claiming 
to represent the beleaguered ordinary Italian, battered by Nazi occupation and 
the civil war between fascists and communists that followed, it stood against 
the major parties in 1946 elections and won more than a million votes. Fiercely 
anti-communist and popular in the south, it campaigned against “professional” 
politicians and in favour of the monarchy. Though shortlived, it left a legacy 
in the wordqualunquismo, signifying an anti-political attitude.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fmatteo-renzi-politics-italy-european-union-brexit-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6221d9872364c1cd072dffb029223bb0a5355239%2F0_103_2669_3302%2F2669.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=First%20Brexit%20then%20Trump.%20Is%20Italy%20next%20for%20the%20west%E2%80%99s%20populist%20wave%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fmatteo-renzi-politics-italy-european-union-brexit-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=First%20Brexit%20then%20Trump.%20Is%20Italy%20next%20for%20the%20west%E2%80%99s%20populist%20wave%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fmatteo-renzi-politics-italy-european-union-brexit-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6221d9872364c1cd072dffb029223bb0a5355239%2F0_103_2669_3302%2F2669.jpg>
 A woman with a sign supporting the right to abortion without gynaecological 
exams, Italy, 1970s. Photograph: Keystone-France/Gamma-Keystone via Getty Images
The Radical party
In an era when Italian politics was dominated by three parties – the Christian 
Democrats, the Communists and the Socialists – civil rights activist and 
journalist Marco Pannella found a niche with the creation of the liberal 
Partito Radicale, and was influential in the battle for divorce and abortion 
rights. Pannella was a crucial player in one of the most significant moments in 
postwar Italian democracy, when a referendum on divorce was held in 1974. 
Voters were asked whether they backed the repeal of a law passed three years 
earlier permitting divorce for the first time in Catholic Italy. Alongside the 
growing feminist movement, Pannella passionately campaigned against the 
proposal, which was eventually rejected.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fmatteo-renzi-politics-italy-european-union-brexit-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5850e4bef9e806061928d3f55cbe8da91a2591f%2F0_78_2873_1724%2F2873.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=First%20Brexit%20then%20Trump.%20Is%20Italy%20next%20for%20the%20west%E2%80%99s%20populist%20wave%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fmatteo-renzi-politics-italy-european-union-brexit-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=First%20Brexit%20then%20Trump.%20Is%20Italy%20next%20for%20the%20west%E2%80%99s%20populist%20wave%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fmatteo-renzi-politics-italy-european-union-brexit-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5850e4bef9e806061928d3f55cbe8da91a2591f%2F0_78_2873_1724%2F2873.jpg>
 Silvio Berlusconi. Photograph: Langevin Jacques/Sygma via Getty Images 
Berlusconi’s ‘clean up’
As Italy reeled from a huge political corruption scandal in the early 1990s, 
media mogul Silvio Berlusconi declared that he intended toscendere in campo 
(get out there - literally “enter the pitch”) to clean up the political system. 
Only three months after he had founded the Forza Italia party, which he still 
leads, Berlusconi became prime minister. Although he lost the 1996 general 
election, he returned to power as leader of a rightwing coalition in 2001 and 
became the dominant political figure of the next 10 years, despite being 
plagued by court cases relating to his businesses.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fmatteo-renzi-politics-italy-european-union-brexit-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc14d9d3de682f0103a34790ac902c066f17dcc40%2F438_271_3002_1801%2F3002.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=First%20Brexit%20then%20Trump.%20Is%20Italy%20next%20for%20the%20west%E2%80%99s%20populist%20wave%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fmatteo-renzi-politics-italy-european-union-brexit-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=First%20Brexit%20then%20Trump.%20Is%20Italy%20next%20for%20the%20west%E2%80%99s%20populist%20wave%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fmatteo-renzi-politics-italy-european-union-brexit-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc14d9d3de682f0103a34790ac902c066f17dcc40%2F438_271_3002_1801%2F3002.jpg>
 Beppe Grillo with Rome’s mayor Virginia Raggi during a ‘No’ march. Photograph: 
Remo Casilli/Reuters 
Grillo and Five Star
In 2007 popular comedian Beppe Grillo staged a day of rallies, called 
Vaffanculo (Fuck Off) Day, across Italy, calling for the reform of Italian 
politics, including fixed terms for members of parliament and an end to 
political immunity for MPs with criminal convictions. The response was enormous 
and the Five Star Movement (M5S) was born. Though not a formal party, the M5S 
is now Italy’s main opposition. As well as limited terms for MPs, Grillo has 
called for a referendum on the euro and a tough line on immigration.
 