
First-time buyers <https://www.theguardian.com/money/firsttimebuyers> in parts 
of south-east England are having to wait seven years longer to get on to the 
housing ladder than those in some other areas of the UK, according to figures 
from the UK’s largest mortgage lender.

Across the UK, the average age of a first-time buyer is now 30, but Halifax 
said this masked a big gap between the ages at which people were able to buy in 
different parts of the country. In Carlisle and Torfaen in south Wales, the 
average first-time buyer age is 27, but this rises to 34 in several boroughs in 
and aroundLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>.

The figures, based on mortgages approved by Halifax together with official 
data on earnings, show that the 10 areas with the youngest first-time buyers 
all have property prices below the national average of £200,754. In Carlisle, 
the typical first-time buyer property costs £122,826, or just under 
four-and-half times local earnings; in Torfaen, the average price is just over 
four times earnings, at £113,123.

In contrast, in Ealing, west London, where the average age of a first-time 
buyer is 34, homes cost more than 10-and-a-half times earnings, at an average 
of £410,763. The story is similar in many of the other areas where buyers are 
the same age.

Mortgage lending climbed in August, says CML
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/22/mortgage-lending-august-cml-housing-market-eu-vote>
Halifax’s figures show that the average age of first-time buyers has not 
increased as much as some might expect: in 1983, when its records began, the 
average age across the UK was 28 and this had risen to 29 by 2006. In London, 
the average has risen by three years over that period, from 29 to 32. In the 
south-east, it is four years higher than in 1983, at 32.

Lenders pulled out of offering 95% loan to value (LTV) mortgages following the 
financial crisis, making it hard for first-time buyers to enter the market. The 
government’s help-to-buy scheme helped to kickstart the market, boosting 
mortgage lending across the board. However, recent data has shown first-time 
buyers are now out in force – the latest data ongross mortgage lending showed 
it reached its highest August figure since 2007 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/22/mortgage-lending-august-cml-housing-market-eu-vote>
.

 The mortgage guarantee element of the help-to-buy scheme is due to finish at 
the end of the year. TheBank of England has told the government that the end of 
the guarantee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/22/help-to-buy-closure-will-not-impact-those-with-small-deposits-bank>
 will not have detrimental effects on the supply of home loans.

The Bank’s governor, Mark Carney, said use of the scheme had declined 
significantly and just 3% of mortgage lending was conducted through the scheme 
in the first quarter of the year. “Total lending at high LTV has has not 
declined,” Carney said. “Instead, more high LTV has taken place outside the 
scheme, as the availability of high LTV has recovered from its crisis lows.”

However, the Intermediary Mortgage Lenders Association (Imla), which 
represents lenders who offer home loans through brokers, said it had concerns 
about the provision of high LTV loans after the closure of help to buy.

 Imla’s executive director, Peter Williams, said: “Higher LTV products are 
vital in helping some first-time buyers on to the housing ladder, especially at 
a time when house prices and earnings are increasingly out of sync and deposits 
are hard to raise. By ending the scheme and not lining up an alternative, 
policymakers are closing off a not unimportant avenue to prospective first-time 
buyers.”

Figures from property firm Hometrack are likely to offer little comfort to 
prospective first-time buyers hoping to buy homes in any of the UK’s major 
cities. Although the pace of growth has slowed, prices across the 20 cities it 
tracks were up by 8.4% year-on-year in August.

Bristol continues to register the fastest rate of annual growth, at 13.1%, 
followed by London where prices rose by 10.4% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/19/uk-first-time-buyers-hit-by-steeper-rises-in-starter-home-prices>
. In Cambridge, the annual rate of growth fell from 16% in March to 6% in 
August. Hometrack said it expected London’s market to follow a similar path.

Richard Donnell, insight director at Hometrack said: “Record unaffordability, 
tax changes impacting investor demand and high stamp duty costs are all 
combining to reduce market activity in the face of rising supply.”

 * This story was amended on 23 September to clarify that the mortgage 
guarantee element of the help-buy-scheme is due to finish at the end of the 
year, and not the scheme itself.
 