
Do you remember when you were young enough to say: “When I grow up I want to 
... have a house with a garden/be a vet/fly to space/get married?” It was a 
lighthearted conversation encouraged by older generations to inspire ambition. 
But now you’ve grown up, how many of the more moderate goals have you achieved? 
And how many have you filed under “unobtainable”?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fmillennials-talks-to-their-parents-about-drugs-sex-and-jobs-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Millennials%20talks%20to%20their%20parents%20about%20drugs%2C%20sex%20and%20jobs%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fmillennials-talks-to-their-parents-about-drugs-sex-and-jobs-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Millennials%20talks%20to%20their%20parents%20about%20drugs%2C%20sex%20and%20jobs%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fmillennials-talks-to-their-parents-about-drugs-sex-and-jobs-video&media=>
Millennials talks to their parents about drugs, sex and jobs – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/mar/10/millennials-talks-to-their-parents-about-drugs-sex-and-jobs-video>
Young adults’ incomes are now as much as 20% below the national average, as 
revealed bya Guardian investigation this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/07/revealed-30-year-economic-betrayal-dragging-down-generation-y-income>
. Low incomes, coupled with rising living costs, debt and a lack of employment 
mean that some of us are not only unlikely to fulfil our more inventive 
childhood fantasies, but will fail to meet even the basic milestones of 
adulthood: a full-time permanent job, a life partner, a home, a pension and 
earning enough every month to put something into a savings account.

Here Guardian readers share their experiences of missing milestones.

1. Living alone, or owning a home
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Ffive-markers-of-adulthood-millenials-have-had-to-give-up-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd695f11bae36d94f21052a04160fba7078589a1a%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20markers%20of%20adulthood%20millennials%20have%20had%20to%20give%20up%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Ffive-markers-of-adulthood-millenials-have-had-to-give-up-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20markers%20of%20adulthood%20millennials%20have%20had%20to%20give%20up%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Ffive-markers-of-adulthood-millenials-have-had-to-give-up-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd695f11bae36d94f21052a04160fba7078589a1a%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
 Stable, secure housing is becoming more and more out of reach for young single 
people. Photograph: Sara Lynn Paige/Getty Images/Flickr 
I worry that I will never be able to afford stable, secure housing as a single 
person on a low income who works in London. This week I learned that my 
landlord is putting the rent up by 20% in the house-share I share with three 
other people. I already pay half my monthly income just to live in this 
house-share. There is nowhere in London I could afford to rent a place on my 
own on my income, not even in zone 6 (and even if I found a studio flat I could 
just about afford on the outskirts of London, commuting costs would then tip it 
back into unaffordability).

Will my only choice be to endure the stress of a constantly rotating stream of 
housemates, moving house every time a landlord decides to spike the rent or 
sell? Since moving to London five years ago to find work, I have already lived 
in five different flats and had 16 different housemates. I don’t care about 
owning property, I just want some stability.

The only way I could potentially afford to move to a one-bedroom flat is if I 
was in a position to cohabit with a partner, but I’m currently single and that 
really doesn’t feel within my control. If it did happen I would like it not to 
be driven by economic compulsion.” – Catherine, 30, London

That I will never be able to provide a home for my two children. I work three 
jobs and I earn quite a lot of money – above the national average. But on a 
single income, I can’t get a mortgage for a two-bed flat. I need to stay near 
London where my work is and the children’s father lives. I want to have a 
stable affordable home for my children, but that seems increasingly out of 
reach. Each time I get a better-paid job, the housing market jumps further out 
of reach. I did all the things we were told to do – I went to a top university 
and graduated with a good degree. I have trained and upskilled and taken every 
opportunity possible. I am well-paid and in secure employment, but on a single 
income, housing is my nightmare.” – Jane, 29, Essex

I gave up long ago the dream of owning my own home and realise I will never be 
able to decorate where I live and have my own furnishings. It is also stressful 
to realise that I will always be competing with others for the best-value 
places to rent, as others will be in the same situation. The fact that I’ve not 
been able to afford enough driving lessons to get to pass my test, so far, 
limits my choice, as I have to rent somewhere that is walking distance to the 
hospital where I work, as public transport is not available on some of the days 
I need to work. Inevitably this means my rent costs will be high, even though I 
gave up the idea of being closer to my parents and other family members in the 
south-east.

Having to rent does stop you making changes that would help you save costs, 
for example my studio flat has poor insulation and only an electric heater, so 
the electricity costs are higher than I would like.” –Kirsty, 26, Nottingham

2. Finding a long-term partner, and living together
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Ffive-markers-of-adulthood-millenials-have-had-to-give-up-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2d2bcb91c5252fd5e7536543b73271791c17609%2F0_373_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20markers%20of%20adulthood%20millennials%20have%20had%20to%20give%20up%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Ffive-markers-of-adulthood-millenials-have-had-to-give-up-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20markers%20of%20adulthood%20millennials%20have%20had%20to%20give%20up%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Ffive-markers-of-adulthood-millenials-have-had-to-give-up-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2d2bcb91c5252fd5e7536543b73271791c17609%2F0_373_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Party time at the Dalston Superstore club in Hackney, London. Photograph: Alamy
The idea of having a stable relationship and building a family any time soon 
seems like a very distant dream due to the geographical mobility I have had to 
have to get my career to this point.

By all measures I had things much better than my parents did up until I was 
about 22 years old. However, a few years down the line and I cannot help but 
think I’m now falling behind their generation.

The house that they bought when they were my age is far beyond my financial 
reach despite me having a better-paid job than they had. Saving for a deposit 
is near impossible while paying extortionate rents for barely habitable 
flatshares.

I have to ask myself, after trying to do the ‘right’ thing throughout my teens 
and early 20s (study hard, get a career, travel and broaden your mind), is it 
ever really going to pay off?” – Ben, 27, Southampton

Through a combination of a frugal lifestyle and family support, I’m now in a 
position to buy my own home, and yet I’m stalling. I’ve gotten comfortable with 
shared living, and I dread the thought of returning to an empty house every 
night.

My job takes up a lot of my time, and while I’ve made some good friends 
through work it’s not the sort of environment where I’m likely to meet anyone 
special. In the short term I can replace these interactions, but I dread the 
hard landing of finding myself alone at Christmas, the awkwardness of 
explaining why I’m not going on holiday this year. I have no one to go with, no 
one to be with, and I hate it.


I had relationships at university, but nothing stuck. Since moving to a new 
city I’ve just not made those connections and now I’ve been single so long the 
idea of dating is terrifying.” – Jonathan, 28, Manchester

I rarely see this ‘millennial worry’ mentioned. I’ve done very well for 
myself, worked hard, have an excellent job and even managed to buy a property 
with a little help from my family. This has been at the expense of my personal 
relationships though, and I’m moving into a stage of life where there is no 
slack that can be picked up by a partner in the home. I am the only person 
cooking, cleaning, taking care of the bills, etc. and it is exhausting. Even 
finding time to date and rectify the situation is exhausting. I’ve had to be 
upfront and say on Tinder that I’m a workaholic to explain why I frequently 
cancel dates.

I remember in the late 80s and early 90s there was a stereotype on TV of the 
successful career woman with an unfulfilling home life. My home life isn’t 
unfulfilling, I date and have friends and mostly enjoy myself, but it feels as 
though my work etc. expect me to have a partner who’ll do things like make me 
dinner when I’ve been working for 12 hours straight. As it is, the takeout 
drivers know me very well.”

3. Working in a full-time, permanent job
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Ffive-markers-of-adulthood-millenials-have-had-to-give-up-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0777e0daccc46a0be2fe375b7c6b97e8ee32b663%2F0_368_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20markers%20of%20adulthood%20millennials%20have%20had%20to%20give%20up%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Ffive-markers-of-adulthood-millenials-have-had-to-give-up-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20markers%20of%20adulthood%20millennials%20have%20had%20to%20give%20up%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Ffive-markers-of-adulthood-millenials-have-had-to-give-up-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0777e0daccc46a0be2fe375b7c6b97e8ee32b663%2F0_368_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Office workers during the morning rush-hour in Southwark in central London. 
Photograph: Toby Melville/Reuters 
Job instability is my greatest worry. I used to say I hoped to own a small 
house of my own with a small garden, in a small town with a train station – and 
I can’t see even that much happening now.

At the moment, I’m working on a freelance and casual basis, while volunteering 
on the side to increase my skillset. This is the way jobs in my sector are 
going, but as soon as I can I’ll want to get at least a part-time permanent job 
to support my other work – but I don’t know when that’ll happen.

My parents were already married with a house by this point. I’m very fortunate 
that they are allowing me to live at home at the moment, or I don’t know how 
I’d manage.” – Caroline, 23, Kent

I’m lucky to have a decent job, but I’ve never had a contract that lasts 
longer than a year as they’ve always been fixed term. I think this means 
there’s little investment in me as an employee because they know I won’t be 
around for long. After about eight months I have to start thinking about 
applying for jobs, which is such a soul-destroying and confidence-sucking 
process.

Until today though, I don’t think I’d realised just how precarious my 
existence is; I went to the dentist and I need to get three fillings. I don’t 
actually think I can afford them. As with many of the other people sharing 
their stories here, I don’t have a savings safety net. If I lost my job or 
something went wrong I wouldn’t be able to last a month without having to ask 
my parents for help.” – Faye, 25, Oxford

On one side, I have the people I knew while growing up becoming shelf-stackers 
and mailmen, telling me I won’t make it. On the other hand, university friends 
becoming solicitors, bankers and civil servants, telling me I can and I have no 
idea who to believe. However, there’s one distinction: the ones being 
successful either come from established professional families who guided them 
or they had a lucky break. I have had neither. At this point I’m tired, all I 
want is an office job, any office job. After all of that, I’ll see my friends 
and family and if they ask, everything is going well. I keep my mouth shut and 
I keep trying, but at the end of every day before going to bed, I lie there 
staring at the ceiling, thinking ‘What am I doing?’” – Julius, 24, London

My biggest worry is never having a permanent job. Since graduating from 
university in 2014, I have gone from six-month contract to six-month contract, 
with a period of unemployment in the middle. I now have a slightly more secure 
job with an 18-month contract, but how am I even going to get a phone on 
contract or sign a lease on a flat if I don’t know if I’ll have a job in two 
years? I still live at home, and at 23, I’ve managed to accrue lots of 
belongings that my childhood bedroom is simply too small for. I yearn to escape 
and begin my adult life, but I feel like a reluctant Peter Pan.” – Lauren, 23, 
Glasgow

4. Having children
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Ffive-markers-of-adulthood-millenials-have-had-to-give-up-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18dfa6c05827966260ed50ce239294e4e24e84c0%2F0_0_5120_3413%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20markers%20of%20adulthood%20millennials%20have%20had%20to%20give%20up%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Ffive-markers-of-adulthood-millenials-have-had-to-give-up-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20markers%20of%20adulthood%20millennials%20have%20had%20to%20give%20up%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Ffive-markers-of-adulthood-millenials-have-had-to-give-up-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18dfa6c05827966260ed50ce239294e4e24e84c0%2F0_0_5120_3413%2F5120.jpg>
 Starting a family is becoming an unaffordable ambition for some young people. 
Photograph: Cultura Creative/Alamy 
I want a family but don’t see how I’ll ever be able to afford one. I can’t 
even afford a one-bed flat! I don’t have family to help me with that, so after 
the end of full maternity pay childcare would be more than my income. I hate 
that as a woman I’m so preoccupied with this, but there is an actual fixed time 
period in which I can do this and it’s looking like I won’t be able to. We need 
women my age to have kids. We need there to be a future generation. But how?” – 
Kat, 27, London

I worry how on earth I will afford to have the children I so desperately want 
while still progressing my career and having a stable place to live. As a 
woman, of course, I have a limited time frame to have children – but I don’t 
see how it’s possible to save enough to support a family in the next few years. 
I was always told that if I worked hard at school and university I would be 
able to get a good job with a good salary and have a good career. But it took 
me three years after graduating of internships and volunteering to get the 
experience all starting jobs seemed to require before I finally got on the 
first rung of the career ladder: an extremely high-pressured job for a charity 
in London that paid £18,000 a year. I was led to believe that my starting 
salary upon graduating at 21 would be around £22,000! Now, at the age of 29, 
I’m finally on a salary that enables me to start saving – but I don’t feel I 
have enough time to save enough to have children. And buying a house? Forget 
it!” – Ellie, 29, London

5. Saving for the future
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Ffive-markers-of-adulthood-millenials-have-had-to-give-up-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fc925e1398a0db5ff68c7f7f8e1c00136d9bb82%2F866_471_4254_2936%2F4254.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20markers%20of%20adulthood%20millennials%20have%20had%20to%20give%20up%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Ffive-markers-of-adulthood-millenials-have-had-to-give-up-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20markers%20of%20adulthood%20millennials%20have%20had%20to%20give%20up%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Ffive-markers-of-adulthood-millenials-have-had-to-give-up-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fc925e1398a0db5ff68c7f7f8e1c00136d9bb82%2F866_471_4254_2936%2F4254.jpg>
 Student debt is a big worry for many graduates. Photograph: Alamy 
My biggest worry is never being able to get out of the debt I’ve got myself 
into. I dropped out of university within six weeks of my course starting due to 
a mental health issue for which I got no support. I was unemployed for a year 
after, feeling as though I’d never get a job after getting rejection upon 
rejection, all down to my lack of experience. I couldn’t get out of my 
accommodation contract, meaning I went well into my overdraft, which 
fortunately I was not charged interest on, and I left it six months before I 
finally started ‘on the dole’ as I really didn’t want to have to rely on JSA 
[jobseeker’s allowance] and was worried I’d end up lost in the system. I’ve 
been in my current job for 18 months, but I’m not earning enough to get out of 
the hole I’m in. I probably won’t be for some time to come and my overdraft 
ceases to be interest-free come the summer.” – Jason, 21, Doncaster

I worry that everyone else has more savings than me even though I feel like I 
save harder than anyone I know. It took me two years to land a proper job after 
graduating from university in 2010, and because of the competitive and 
exploitative industry I work in, I’ve only just started to be paid over £20,000 
a year (although I now live in London, which makes up for the difference). 
Despite all this, I have managed to save £5,000. But I worry that it’s not 
enough, or anywhere near as much as I should have by this age.” – Laura, 27, 
London

I suppose my main worry is money, always being in debt and never having the 
feeling of being safe and secure, with some savings behind me. I am fortunate 
to have a career I love and am unlikely to find it difficult to find work – I’m 
a nurse. However, I do not get enough money to fund my living costs and clear 
my overdraft debt, let alone fund anything that will develop my quality of 
life. It is only a £1,500 overdraft, but it would just be nice not to have one 
and open up a savings account instead. I end up having a positive bank balance 
only for a short time each month as rent and other costs put me straight back 
into my overdraft. Once we rent somewhere together it may save some costs, but 
I can still imagine it will be difficult to clear my debt.” – Kirsty, 26, 
Nottingham
 