
1 Beyond Caravaggio

The shockingly beautiful naturalism of Caravaggio puts real people on canvas 
with an immediacy unparalleled in art, so it’s not hard to imagine why this 
dangerous maverick inspired a crowd of imitators. What is more surprising is 
how well their paintings stand up to his. The handful of Caravaggio 
masterpieces in this fascinating exhibition open a door into the rich realism 
that energised European art in the 17th century. Powerful works by the likes of 
Artemisia Gentileschi, Jusepe de Ribera and Georges de La Tour light up the 
shadows.

National Gallery, WC2, to 15 Jan 
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/whats-on/exhibitions/beyond-caravaggio>

2 William Kentridge

This is a superb showing of one of the most intelligent and imaginative 
artists of the 21st century. Kentridge puts himself in the picture – you’ll see 
his melancholy self-portrait flickering through the films here – but sees 
himself as a figure in a larger history of his own South Africa as well as the 
entire modern world. The Russian Revolution and the dada movement are among the 
memories he visits.

Whitechapel Gallery, E1, to 15 Jan 
<http://www.whitechapelgallery.org/exhibitions/william-kentridge/>

3 South Africa: The Art Of A Nation

The story of art in South Africa is a moving epic of creativity, cruelty, 
injustice and hope that stretches from awe-inspiring rock art to the work of 
William Kentridge and Mary Sibande. The earliest work in this exhibition is a 
stone shaped like a human face that was picked up by early human ancestors 3m 
years ago. Meanwhile, remains from Blombos Cave show the start of painting as 
homo sapiens started to migrate out of Africa.

British Museum, WC1, to 26 Feb 
<https://www.britishmuseum.org/whats_on/exhibitions/south_africa.aspx>

4 Yves Klein

The simplicity and intensity of Klein’s art is a bolt from the blue in this 
survey. His rich and absorbing planes of blue may seem empty but they are as 
poetic as the sea and the sky. His fire paintings are scorched enigmas that 
evoke the beginning of the universe. Above all, Klein’s most controversial 
paintings, in which women agreed to imprint their bodies in blue, are revealed 
here as dreamlike modern marvels.

Tate Liverpool, to 5 Mar 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-liverpool/exhibition/yves-klein>

5 Hepworth Prize For Sculpture

It takes a well-conceived art prize to rival the Turner in its very first 
year, but the Hepworth has achieved just that. It announced Helen Marten as its 
winner a couple of weeks before she won the Turner. Thus, Tate Britain looked 
as if it was playing catch-up to this Yorkshire gallery. What adds to the 
prize’s authority is that rather than focusing solely on the new, it includes 
artists of all ages, including the likes of David Medalla and Phyllida Barlow.

The Hepworth, Wakefield, to 19 Feb <http://www.hepworthwakefield.org/prize/>
 