
1 James Yorkston

It’s been an eventful 2016 for the Fife songwriter: earlier this year he put 
out Everything Sacred, a collaborative album with double bass player Jon Thorne 
and sarangi player Suhail Yusuf Khan, then followed it up with his debut novel 
3 Craws. Clearly no slacker, he’s working right up to the festive wire.

Milton Keynes, Sat; Hebden Bridge, Sun; Birmingham, Mon; London, Tue 
<http://www.jamesyorkston.co.uk/live-dates/>

2 Be



There was no other record like Be’s One this year: a meditative drone symphony 
featuring a choir of 40,000 bees. And there will be no other gig like this, 
which not only involves the bees but interactive visuals and unique scents 
created by perfumiers Haeckels. This is no novelty act, though; it’s music not 
just about bees but existence itself.

St Mary’s Church, Nottingham, Sat 
<https://stmaryschoirnottingham.com/2016/11/14/be-play-live-at-st-marys/> 

3 Ella Mai 

Declared the “new queen of the breakup anthem”, this 22-year-old Brit trades 
in real talk. “I hope the next girl you love ends up fucking you over,” she 
sings on A Thousand Times, which spells things out more clearly than your 
average Adele mope-fest. LA producer DJ Mustard has sunnied up her West Coast 
R&B sound, but she’s back in freezing London for a hometown show this week.

Hoxton Square Bar & Kitchen, N1, Mon 
<http://www.seetickets.com/event/ella-mai/hoxton-square-bar-kitchen/1046462>

4 Pale Waves

Despite studying in Manchester, Pale Waves don’t subscribe to the stereotype 
of music that mirrors the city’s rain-soaked streets. Instead they embrace 
tropical indie-pop with catchy choruses and sunny 90s stylings. It’s early days 
for them, but they boast a naive charm reminiscent of the Sundays.

The Deaf Institute, Manchester, Sat 
<http://www.thedeafinstitute.co.uk/event.php?id=1412&d=2016-12-17>

5 Madness

The days of peak Madness, when the nutty boys would dress as police and cause 
the Clash to flush their drugs down the toilets, have long gone. But the Camden 
band’s latest album, Can’t Touch Us Now, made the top five and their live shows 
are rarely without some suitably bonkers moments.

Barclaycard Arena, Birmingham, Sat 
<http://www.barclaycardarena.co.uk/whats-on/madness>
 