
What is it? A really, really, really, really bleak version of Miranda.

Why you’ll love it: No, really, Fleabag 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p040tlqx> is just like Miranda. It’s a sitcom 
about a tall, painfully middle-class woman struggling with a difficult family 
and a job that cannot possibly fund her lifestyle. She also seems compulsively 
unable to stop herself from making snarky remarks to camera when nobody is 
looking.

'Am I still a feminist if I watch porn?' Meet Phoebe Waller-Bridge, the 
British Lena Dunham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/08/phoebe-waller-bridge-fleabag-britains-lena-dunham>
Fleabag does have one tiny difference to Miranda, of course, in that it 
couldn’t be any more depressing if it was set in a palliative care unit for 
wounded puppies.

On paper, you absolutely should not watch Fleabag. It’s a squalid little story 
of a life gone wrong. The lead character owns a cafe that terminally 
haemorrhages cash. Her boyfriend keeps leaving her thanks to her habit of 
masturbating to Barack Obama speeches, and she fills the void with meaningless 
sexual encounters with objectively terrible people. When her mother died, her 
father moved in with her awful godmother. Her best friend was just killed in a 
semi-intentional traffic accident. She keeps having flashbacks of a memory 
that’s too traumatic to process. Oh, and the opening titles are basically just 
two seconds of abrasive free jazz skronk. If you’re still interested in Fleabag 
after reading this, you should be commended for your bravery.

But, by God, that bravery will be paid off in spades when you actually start 
watching it.Phoebe Waller-Bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/08/phoebe-waller-bridge-fleabag-britains-lena-dunham>
 – who created and wrote the series based on her stage monologue of the same 
name, as well as starring as the lead – has come up with something truly 
indelible here. None of the characters are even close to being likable. Aside 
from the dead best friend, who is briefly seen in flashbacks, none of them ever 
seem particularly happy. They are all defeated and broken, and all their energy 
is spent deflecting whatever life attempts to throw at them. Which is 
hilarious, obviously.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Ffleabag-a-hilarious-sitcom-about-terrible-people-and-broken-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe8b94a7c6ebb433a4ecd96f0eb412727927a257%2F44_0_1330_798%2F1330.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fleabag%3A%20a%20hilarious%20sitcom%20about%20terrible%20people%20and%20broken%20lives&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Ffleabag-a-hilarious-sitcom-about-terrible-people-and-broken-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fleabag%3A%20a%20hilarious%20sitcom%20about%20terrible%20people%20and%20broken%20lives&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Ffleabag-a-hilarious-sitcom-about-terrible-people-and-broken-lives%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe8b94a7c6ebb433a4ecd96f0eb412727927a257%2F44_0_1330_798%2F1330.jpg>
 Going supernova... Phoebe Waller-Bridge. Photograph: BBC 
The script (Peep Show’s Jesse Armstrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jesse-armstrong> is credited as a 
consultant) is peppered with bitter one-liners. In a nice running gag, 
Waller-Bridge keeps her cafe afloat largely by charging her sporadic customers 
such arbitrarily vast sums of money for their sandwiches that all they can do 
is tut the word “London” in exasperated resignation.

The cast, including Olivia Colman, Bill Paterson and Brett Gelman, commits 
itself commendably to its worst impulses. But the stand-out performer is 
Waller-Bridge herself. Her self-loathing is so ferocious, and it bubbles to the 
surface in such unexpected ways, that you can never fully take your eyes off 
her. This is her second series of the year – she also created and wrote Channel 
4’s slightly underwhelmingCrashing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/19/crashing-review-frank-filthy-sad-and-weird-a-millennial-flat-share-comedy-with-edge>
 – but you get the sense that, if Fleabag doesn’t go supernova for her, 
something else will soon.

I’ve seen all but one episode of the series and, while it doesn’t have the 
relentless narrative sweep of something likelast week’s choice Crazy 
Ex-Girlfriend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/29/crazy-ex-girlfriend-rachel-bloom-comedy>
, I found myself caught up in it purely by the strength of characters alone. 
They’ve all got such unexplored depths that, unless the final episode ends with 
them all driving a bus off a cliff, I could happily watch them wallow in misery 
for years to come. Forget Miranda. This is so much better than that.

Foul-mouthed, frank, funny: generation rent finds its comic voice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/10/phoebe-waller-bridge-crashing>
Where: iPlayer <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p040tlqx>

Length: One series of six 30-minute episodes. Three are currently available, 
with new episodes weekly.

Stand-out episode: Annoyingly for you, it’s next week’s episode. The action 
leaves London for the first time, and we get to hear a staggeringly beautiful 
monologue from – of all people – Hugh Dennis.

If you liked Fleabag, watch: Transparent (Amazon), Crashing (All 4).
 