
The new sitcom Fleabag is likely to remind many viewers of another recent hit: 
E4’s Bafta-winning Chewing Gum. Both are graphically confessional accounts of 
the social and sexual lives of young women, covering issues such as first-date 
anal sex, threesomes and malfunctioning sex toys.

 It’s hard to imagine many viewers of those shows also being fans of Mrs 
Brown’s Boys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/jan/29/mrs-browns-boys-worst-comedy-ever-made-smash>
. But the trio certainly have something in common: each was adapted from a 
successful stage show.

 Writer-star Phoebe Waller-Bridge performed the theatrical version of Fleabag 
at the Edinburgh fringe and then in London, while Chewing Gum has its origins in
Chewing Gum Dreams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/19/chewing-gum-dreams-theatre-review>
, which Michaela Coel wrote and performed at venues from the Yard Theatre to 
the National Theatre. Before Mrs Brown’s Boys reached TV in 2011, Brendan 
O’Carroll had spent years touring stage shows featuring the foul-minded Dublin 
widow, which is why he was so unruffled by the show’s recent live episode on 
the BBC.

'Am I still a feminist if I watch porn?' Meet Phoebe Waller-Bridge, the 
British Lena Dunham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/08/phoebe-waller-bridge-fleabag-britains-lena-dunham>
 The key question for any stage-to-screen transfer is how much to change once 
the fourth wall has become protected glass rather than curtain. Both Fleabag 
and Chewing Gum Dreams were monologues, so they required significant 
re-engineering to become six half-hours of TV, although Waller-Bridge and Coel 
both opted to retain a significant level of direct address.

 Waller-Bridge confides asides to the camera (at one point, literally behind 
the back of the actor playing her sister, telling us that her sibling is 
“uptight and borderline anorexic”) and at times flashes the viewer wry or sly 
looks, in a manner handed down from Eric Morecambe to Miranda Hart. Moments 
that were anecdotes on stage – a one-night stand that ends in anal sex, a 
relationship breakup caused by being caught masturbating to a Barack Obama 
speech – become dialogues with a male actor, but, daringly, Waller-Bridge tells 
the tale of rectal penetration to the screen, like a newsreader, as the action 
happens behind her.

In Chewing Gum, Coel engages us face-to-face at times of intimate crisis 
(commenting on the progress of a sexual encounter, for example), with the 
result that both Chewing Gum and Fleabag often feel like filthy twists on 
Miranda.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Ffleabag-mrs-browns-boys-why-riskiest-tv-comes-from-stage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef671910c637d5e01a80510a283a00d946009790%2F0_205_2835_1702%2F2835.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fleabag%20to%20Mrs%20Brown's%20Boys%3A%20why%20the%20riskiest%20TV%20comes%20straight%20from%20the%20stage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Ffleabag-mrs-browns-boys-why-riskiest-tv-comes-from-stage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fleabag%20to%20Mrs%20Brown%27s%20Boys%3A%20why%20the%20riskiest%20TV%20comes%20straight%20from%20the%20stage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Ffleabag-mrs-browns-boys-why-riskiest-tv-comes-from-stage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef671910c637d5e01a80510a283a00d946009790%2F0_205_2835_1702%2F2835.jpg>
 A filthy twist on Miranda … Chewing Gum. Photograph: Channel 4 
 Mrs Brown is another female protagonist who flashes dirty looks and lines 
directly through the screen. Since the start of the TV version in 2011, 
O’Carroll has been even more insistent than Coel and Waller-Bridge in 
maintaining theatricality, recording in front of a live audience with whom he 
often interacts.

 In such moments, the ancient live performance device of the soliloquy becomes 
televisually experimental – which is ironic, since a fear of seeming “stagey” 
is the reason plays have generally ranked far behind novels, movies and 
real-life stories as source material for TV.

Filthy, funny and Christian: the many sides of Chewing Gum's Michaela Coel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/04/michaela-coel-chewing-gum-e4-comedy-series-men-and-sex>
Crossover was more common in the past, when TV dramas were often shot in 
studios with cinematic aspirations. From the 60s to the 80s, TV drama 
departments routinely scouted in theatres, making it common for a hit play – 
such as Trevor Griffiths’ Comedians – to be transferred almost intact to Play 
for Today.

 Admirers of Mike Leigh’s TV work often don’t realise that Abigail’s Party 
started life at Hampstead Theatre. One of the standout modern TV dramas, the 
political epic Our Friends In the North (1996), was expanded by Peter Flannery 
from a 1982 stage play for the RSC, although a decision to rewrite and reshoot 
the opening episode, because it was considered too close to the stage script, 
shows the nervousness about such transfers.

 The traffic has been even less frequent in comedy. British sitcoms have often 
been cast from West End comedy specialists (during one series of The Good Life, 
for instance, Penelope Keith, Felicity Kendal, Richard Briers and Paul 
Eddington were all also appearing in an Ayckbourn or Frayn stage hit). Despite 
this, theatre comedies have only rarely become successful sitcoms. Rising Damp, 
with Leonard Rossiter as the misanthrophic landlord Rigsby, was initially 
written as a play called The Banana Box. Three members of the TV cast played 
the equivalent parts on stage, although the surname of the main character was 
changed from Rokesby for TV. In the mid-90s, Richard Harris’s West End 
long-runner about a village cricket team, Outside Edge, gave ITV three 
high-scoring innings on television.

However, until the recent threesome, the stage door has rarely opened into a 
TV studio. Strikingly, what unites Mrs Brown’s Boys with Chewing Gum and 
Fleabag – apart from their greasepaint birthplaces – is that all three are more 
verbally explicit and more playful with form than British comedy shows tend to 
be. This suggests that theatre writers may naturally proceed with a greater 
freedom and inventiveness, and that a straitjacketing formality can descend 
when creating a comedy directly for television.Comedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/comedy> commissioners should reflect on 
this. Perhaps they need to get out more.
 