
Atlantic City may be forced by New Jersey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/new-jersey> into an unprecedented state 
takeover of its water as the result of a bailout, something experts have warned 
has worrying echoes of the ongoing water crisis in Flint, Michigan, and could 
result in price hikes.

The near-bankruptcy of the financially ailing resort town was caused in part 
by the failures of casinos such as those previously owned by Republican 
presidential nomineeDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>.

Trump and Atlantic City: the lessons behind the demise of his casino empire
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/02/donald-trump-atlantic-city-casinos-taj-mahal-plaza-bankruptcy>
Casino closures over the past five years opened a cavern in Atlantic City’s 
budget, asproperty values plummeted and tax revenues plunged 
<http://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/issue-briefs/2015/08/atlantic-citys-watchdogs>
. However, Governor Chris Christie – now also chair of Trump’s White House 
transition team –refused earlier this year to allow Atlantic City to formally 
go bankrupt 
<http://www.nj.com/politics/index.ssf/2016/03/christie_i_wont_let_atlantic_city_file_for_bankrup.html>
 to shed or restructure debt.

Instead, a harsh $73m bailout loan was signed by the city and state, which 
required Atlantic City to dissolve its independent water utility andhold the 
infrastructure as collateral for the bailout loan 
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/3123636-JG-atlantic-city-loan-agreement.html#document/p9/a320691>
. Christie, a water privatization proponent, has said he would “sell” the 
city’s assets if Atlantic City failed to meet its loan obligations, a promise 
that could result in a private company owning or leasing the city’s 
infrastructure.

Separately, the Guardian can reveal that while two of Trump’s Atlantic City 
casinos were under his control, the mogul failed to pay more than $146,000 in 
water bills between 2012 and 2014 until March this year.

“It’s highly unusual for the state to step in on a municipality’s finances at 
all,” said Daniel J Van Abs, a Rutgers University professor and expert in water 
policy. “The sort of deal that was established for Atlantic City is even more 
unusual, if you will. The notion that they should be required to privatize 
their utility – I have not seen the state take that action previously.”


Advocates of public water were blunt about the loan’s terms.

“It’s undemocratic and un-American,” said Mary Grant, a water privatization 
expert at Food &Water <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/water> Watch, an 
advocacy group that monitors corporate water takeover attempts.

“The relationship to Flint is very compelling,” Grant said. “An emergency 
manager came in and made decisions about the water system against the wishes of 
the local elected officials, and that resulted in theFlint water crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/flint-water-crisis>, because they put 
money before health and human lives.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fatlantic-city-bankruptcy-bailout-private-water-flint-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff00364334ef2d2e6039106d5c652ef1853cb262b%2F0_93_2600_1560%2F2600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Flint%20warnings%20as%20Atlantic%20City%20may%20be%20forced%20into%20state%20takeover%20of%20water&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fatlantic-city-bankruptcy-bailout-private-water-flint-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Flint%20warnings%20as%20Atlantic%20City%20may%20be%20forced%20into%20state%20takeover%20of%20water&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fatlantic-city-bankruptcy-bailout-private-water-flint-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff00364334ef2d2e6039106d5c652ef1853cb262b%2F0_93_2600_1560%2F2600.jpg>
 Atlantic City Mayor Don Guardian waves at a local walking the boardwalk as he 
passes the huge shuttered Revel casino. Photograph: Michael S Williamson/The 
Washington Post 
Customers of private water companies routinely pay more for water 
<http://www.commondreams.org/newswire/2016/02/16/new-rate-survey-500-us-water-systems-finds-private-water-providers-charge-58>
, and under privatization the people of Atlantic City would lose democratic 
control of their water and rates, as the people of Flint did when an emergency 
manager madebroad changes to the city’s source water 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/16/flints-water-crisis-what-went-wrong>
 in 2014 that resulted inwidespread lead contamination 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/24/flint-children-water-crisis-lack-of-data-lead>
.

A change in source water is unlikely in Atlantic City, but residents would 
have little say in rates or improvements. Currently, a local board supervises 
Atlantic City’s water utility. If a private company took over, only the state’s 
public utility board, which has limited power, could intercede to mitigate 
hefty rate hikes.

In September, Atlantic City violated a key term of New Jersey’s $73m loan by 
failing to dissolve its municipal utility authority, and this month it sailed 
past the most recent state-imposed deadlines. New Jersey’s division of 
community affairs, which administers the loan, refused to comment.

While it remains unclear when and if the state might enforce the terms of the 
loan agreement, a2014 law signed by Christie 
<http://www.njspotlight.com/stories/15/02/05/with-stroke-of-pen-christie-makes-it-easy-sell-off-water-wastewater-facilities/>
 assured an easy transfer of Atlantic City’s water into private hands, and the 
governor has made his intentions clear.

“I want it secured by every asset they have, so that if they don’t pay it, I 
get to take the assets, sell them and pay you [the taxpayer] back,” Christie 
said at a public appearance in August, according to thePress of Atlantic City 
<http://www.pressofatlanticcity.com/news/breaking/atlantic-city-begins-dissolving-water-utility-for-million-loan/article_9bdfa650-55fa-11e6-8c6f-ab79300c9957.html>
.

“They sent [the loan agreement] back all marked up, ‘We want to change this, 
we want to change this,’” he said of Atlantic City lawmakers. “Excuse me? 
You’re asking for $74m to stay alive, you should just say, ‘Where do I sign? 
Thank you, sir.’”

Over the past few years, Christie has laid the groundwork for the lease or 
sale of New Jersey water utilities. The2014 Water Infrastructure Protection Act 
<http://www.njspotlight.com/stories/15/02/05/with-stroke-of-pen-christie-makes-it-easy-sell-off-water-wastewater-facilities/>
 eliminated the requirement for apublic referendum 
<http://www.nj.gov/dep/wipa/general.html> when water infrastructure is sold or 
leased to a private company in “emergent conditions 
<http://www.nj.gov/dep/wipa/general.html>”. The law also eliminated the public 
utility board’s review of rate hikes from water system purchases, an expert at 
the rate counsel of New Jersey said.

In other words, if Atlantic City’s water supply is purchased for $100m, a price
repeatedly cited in public debate 
<http://www.npr.org/2016/01/30/464961028/new-jersey-steps-in-to-turn-around-atlantic-city-s-luck>
, corporate buyers could lawfully pass on that cost to ratepayers in increased 
water rates – not just in Atlantic City, but anywhere across the state that the 
corporation owns water.

“The bill suggests that costs get automatically passed to ratepayers,” said 
Stefanie Brand, the director of the rate counsel of New Jersey, about the Water 
Infrastructure Protection Act, which passed into law. Though she said her 
organization would fight such an increase, she admitted it was “unclear” 
whether the rate counsel could triumph.

At least two of the largest private water companies in America have lobbied 
heavily in New Jersey: Suez North America, a French multinational corporation, 
and American Water.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fatlantic-city-bankruptcy-bailout-private-water-flint-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a5ca7de1fc127e64282a00a20777bb55dbfb00f%2F0_308_4946_2974%2F4946.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Flint%20warnings%20as%20Atlantic%20City%20may%20be%20forced%20into%20state%20takeover%20of%20water&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fatlantic-city-bankruptcy-bailout-private-water-flint-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Flint%20warnings%20as%20Atlantic%20City%20may%20be%20forced%20into%20state%20takeover%20of%20water&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fatlantic-city-bankruptcy-bailout-private-water-flint-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a5ca7de1fc127e64282a00a20777bb55dbfb00f%2F0_308_4946_2974%2F4946.jpg>
 Chris Christie has laid the groundwork for the lease or sale of New Jersey 
water utilities. Photograph: Mel Evans/AP 
New Jersey American Water, a subsidiary of American Water, spent $708,750 from 
2011 to 2015 lobbying New Jersey lawmakers on “utility business issues”, 
according to state lobbying disclosures. Exactly which lawmakers were lobbied 
is not disclosed.

The company is already Atlantic City’s largest bulk water customer, purchasing 
around $1.7m in water each year, according to apublic bond filing 
<http://emma.msrb.org/IssueView/IssueDetails.aspx?id=EP355229>. The same bond 
filing detailed Trump’s delinquent water bills, which the Atlantic City tax 
collector’s office said were finally collected in March.

New Jersey American Water also hired the lobbying firm 
<http://articles.philly.com/2011-09-14/news/30154637_1_trenton-consulting-top-law-firms>
 ofPhilip Norcross 
<http://articles.philly.com/2016-07-16/news/74496936_1_energy-company-holtec-international-economic-opportunity-act-tax-credits>
, the brother of one of south Jersey’s most well-known power brokers, insurance 
executive George Norcross III.

Many in New Jersey politics consider George Norcross III the most powerful 
unelected leader in the state 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2014/02/04/never-heard-of-george-norcross-heres-why-you-need-to/>
.The New Yorker <http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/04/14/crossing-christie>
 described him as the “most influential Democratic political boss” in New 
Jersey, and a man who could unify south Jersey voting blocs across the state 
assembly and senate from his base in Camden, where hechairs the board 
<http://www.cooperhealth.org/about-us/board-trustees> of Cooper University 
Hospital. Governors, including Christie, have courted his favor.

Norcross was also invited 
<http://www.pressofatlanticcity.com/communities/atlantic-city_pleasantville_brigantine/governor-s-mansion-meeting-charted-a-c-future/article_5b5e0864-cc58-11e5-bd4f-97ac37b6de6d.html?utm_source=Sailthru&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=New+Campaign&utm_term=Wake+Up+Call+NJ>
 to a February meeting at Christie’s governor’s mansion, where county and state 
officials “went around and around and around, talking about taking over parts 
of Atlantic City for hours”, Atlantic County chairman Frank Formica told the 
Press of Atlantic City.

Between 2011 and 2015, American Water increasingly gave more business to 
Philip Norcross’s lobbying firm, Optimus Partners, increasing the amount it 
spent from $54,000 annually in 2011 to $126,000 last year.

In 2016, Christie’s Economic Development Authority approved a $164m tax break 
<http://articles.philly.com/2016-07-16/news/74496936_1_energy-company-holtec-international-economic-opportunity-act-tax-credits>
 for American Water to move its headquarters from Voorhees, New Jersey, to 
Camden, a 25-minute drive within state borders. The tax break was championed by 
another Norcross brother, US congressmanDonald Norcross 
<http://www.njbiz.com/article/20160725/NJBIZ01/160729887/with-dnc-nearby-officials-talk-camden-investment>
.

And although Trump frequently paints himself as a political outsider, he also 
has ties to Norcross 
<http://www.wnyc.org/story/trump-self-proclaimed-outsider-began-new-jersey-political-insider/>
, first reported by WNYC. Norcrossattended Trump’s third wedding 
<http://www.phillymag.com/articles/they-have-no-choice/> and toured Florida 
real estate 
<http://articles.philly.com/2006-04-26/news/25394785_1_palm-beach-home-web-site-commerce-national-insurance>
 where Norcross eventually bought a home, about two miles from Trump’s 
Mar-a-Lago resort.

Some lawmakers claimed Trump’s ties to Norcross stopped state regulators from 
questioning the viability of Trump’s indebted casinos 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2003/06/22/nyregion/on-politics-mcgreevey-s-ace-in-the-hole-turns-out-to-be-the-donald.html>
 when they were up for relicensing in 2003 – casinos that would later fail and 
help pitch Atlantic City into its current predicament.

Water corporations have found advocates in federal New Jersey lawmakers as 
well. Democratic senators Robert Menendez and Cory Booker recently held a press 
conference in front of aSuez water treatment plant 
<http://www.northjersey.com/news/with-flint-crisis-in-mind-upgrades-to-water-systems-get-new-push-1.1508112>
 to promote a bill that would given corporate water investors tax breaks, 
citing Flint as justification for a law they said would improve America’s water 
infrastructure. Booker co-sponsored the bill last session; Menendez had 
previously introduced it in the Senate.

Although the city proposed a plan to keep the water utility under local 
control, by selling a downtown tract of land calledBader Field for $100m 
<http://www.njspotlight.com/stories/16/09/26/atlantic-city-s-100m-gamble-to-keep-its-water-utility-in-public-hands/>
, it seems highly unlikely the state will accept the proposal, or that the 
utility could evenfind a loan 
<http://www.northjersey.com/news/atlantic-city-bankruptcy-is-a-virtual-certainty-analyst-says-1.1562681>
 to finance the deal. The utility’scredit rating was quickly downgraded 
<http://finance.yahoo.com/news/atlantic-city-water-utility-cut-165243902.html> 
after it became entangled in the city’s financial woes.

The state of New Jersey’s division of community affairs, which financed the 
$73m loan to Atlantic City, declined to comment.
 