
There is a scene in White Girl, the first feature directed by Elizabeth Wood 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm2559080/>, in which Leah, the heroine, visits a 
lawyer after her boyfriend is busted for drug dealing. Leah, a college student, 
is broke, high and in a state of shambolic collapse most of the time, but she 
is also a middle-class girl with certain expectations of the world, one of 
which is that if you get into trouble, you throw yourself at the nearest man 
who looks like your dad and everything gets better from there. That it doesn’t 
work out in this case is less interesting to the film-maker than the meaning of 
that expectation itself.

Wood, 33, is sitting opposite me in a cafe in downtown Manhattan, where she 
lives with her husband and two-year-old son, many miles from the New York 
neighbourhood in which the film is set. White Girl – the title is also slang 
for cocaine – draws heavily on Wood’s experiences of moving to New York from 
Oklahoma 15 years ago, to take up a college place and do much of what Leah does 
in the movie: move to a crime-ridden Puerto Rican district where, the locals 
told her, they’d “never seen a white girl, except for that one crackhead”; set 
about partying herself into near oblivion, hanging out with small-time drug 
dealers and realising that, for the people living around her, the world worked 
completely differently – that is, without the “safety net” of racial advantage.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Felizabeth-wood-director-white-girl-film-morgan-saylor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49221fea835f0186dc6e5dbc7de6c8c98d3ed96f%2F113_121_1598_959%2F1598.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Flirting%20with%20disaster%20%E2%80%93%20Elizabeth%20Wood%20on%20her%20explosive%20film%20debut&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Felizabeth-wood-director-white-girl-film-morgan-saylor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Flirting%20with%20disaster%20%E2%80%93%20Elizabeth%20Wood%20on%20her%20explosive%20film%20debut&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Felizabeth-wood-director-white-girl-film-morgan-saylor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49221fea835f0186dc6e5dbc7de6c8c98d3ed96f%2F113_121_1598_959%2F1598.jpg>
 ‘In many ways she’s the bad guy’ … Morgan Saylor with Brian Marc in White Girl.
The film, which attracted attention at Sundance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sundancefilmfestival>, asks a lot of good 
questions about race, class and gender discrimination, but if it causes a 
firestorm when it comes out onNetflix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> later this year, it will be because 
of the sex scenes – there is a lot of teenage shagging in the backs of cars, up 
against walls and in club toilets.

None of these scenes, for which the film has drawn inevitable comparisons to 
Harmony Korine’s Kids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/22/harmony-korine-kids-20th-anniversary>
, feel angled to shock, with the exception of a rape scene that is by necessity 
brutal. The reason for this, apart from the subtlety of the script, isMorgan 
Saylor <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm2838320/>, best known for her role as Dana 
Brody inHomeland <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/homeland>, who is 
spectacular as Leah, by turns silly, naive, infuriatingly childish, 
compassionate and brave. In a lesser film, she might have been a 2D vehicle for 
Wood’s desire to tell off the world, but instead she’s a complex figure: 
neither wholly exploiter nor victim. Her idiocy has dire consequences for her 
boyfriend, so that, says Wood, “in many ways she’s the bad guy”. But the price 
she pays for it is so steep it is hard not to sympathise.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzXDr-mZkRTQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzXDr-mZkRTQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzXDr-mZkRTQ&media=>
The male lead, Brian Marc <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm6891629/>, is a Puerto 
Rican singer who’d barely acted before he won the role and plays the drug 
dealer, Blue, with a subtle and heartbreaking brilliance, while his buddy, 
played byAnthony Ramos <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm6853061/?ref_=fn_al_nm_1>, 
is currently wowing audiences nightly on stage in the Broadway hit,Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/hamilton>. Even Wood was surprised when she 
managed to persuadeChris Noth <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0636562/> to join the 
cast as the lawyer – particularly after greeting him on the phone with what she 
says is Noth’s least favourite form of address, “Mr Big 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2004/nov/07/foodanddrink.features5>
!!!” He said yes after reading the script and in spite of the tiny budget and 
frenetic four-week filming schedule. “These people are literally working for 
pennies to make my dream come true for a month.”

White Girl review: sex, drugs and moral peril in a stylish Sundance 
button-pusher
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/24/white-girl-review-sex-drugs-and-moral-peril-in-a-stylish-sundance-button-pusher>
Unlike, say, Lena Dunham’s Girls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/girls>, White’s female leads are not 
sophisticated New Yorkers mired in the existential angst of late adolescence. 
Instead, she is writing of the specific experience of coming to New York from 
the middle of the country and promptly losing one’s head, a form of 
self-indulgence she understands well. “It’s easier for kids who come from very 
stable backgrounds to take these risks than kids who grew up used to these 
things and don’t see the allure.”

Wood’s parents – father a psychologist, mother a speech therapist – are 
stalwart members of the Church of Christ, where her father is a minister. Wood 
relays this information with a smile that acknowledges the discomfort she has 
put them through, over the years. (When her parents saw the film for the first 
time at Sundance, Wood felt obliged to issue an advance warning: “Dad, about 
seven minutes in there’s a blow job.”) They have the advantage, she says, of 
having a good sense of humour and also being the most liberal people in the 
church. “They support everything I do and hug and smile and are my biggest 
cheerleaders. But still.”

A result of this stability in her background was to make her go even more 
crazy in her late teens and early 20s. In Wood’s case, she did well at school 
but also partied hard so that, she says, “my mum was convinced I was not going 
to graduate from high school. I remember her saying, ‘Life is not a party!’ 
Then the next day I was valedictorian and gave a speech. I think I confused 
them. ‘Are you unstable, or not?’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Felizabeth-wood-director-white-girl-film-morgan-saylor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa4b50353e163f519d80fbe8898e747dc689eccf%2F204_14_1071_643%2F1071.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Flirting%20with%20disaster%20%E2%80%93%20Elizabeth%20Wood%20on%20her%20explosive%20film%20debut&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Felizabeth-wood-director-white-girl-film-morgan-saylor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Flirting%20with%20disaster%20%E2%80%93%20Elizabeth%20Wood%20on%20her%20explosive%20film%20debut&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Felizabeth-wood-director-white-girl-film-morgan-saylor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa4b50353e163f519d80fbe8898e747dc689eccf%2F204_14_1071_643%2F1071.jpg>
 Silly, naive, childish, compassionate and brave … Morgan Saylor as Leah 
Wood always had a vague conviction that one way or another she would “figure 
it out”, an assumption that, when she came to write the movie, she turned 
around to interrogate and found rooted in white privilege. For Wood, in the 
early days in New York, this manifested as a certain detachment – the ability 
to live in an impoverished neighbourhood, safe in the knowledge she would have 
the option one day to move out. She regarded the scene with a gimlet eye. 
“While it was happening, I was like, ‘This is going to be my first movie.’ I 
had the journal where I drew a picture of a scene out of the window, and I 
framed it and I always had it out of my desk.”

She may have looked lost at times, but for reasons both personal and 
structural she was a long way from being in any really irreversible trouble. As 
a result, she says, it was a fun time. “It really felt like a family 
neighbourhood. Everyone was always outside; there were barbecues and ice cream, 
and we were struggling students and we had this nice apartment.”

I’m trying to examine my privilege, and this may leave a bad taste in people 
of colour’s mouths

Wood hung out with the guys on the street and her then roommate, with whom she 
is still good friends, had a baby with the man she was then dating. Everything 
contrived to keep them apart, which Wood would later use in the film. “The 
judicial system, economic and family background, just logistics of how you can 
move around in this world. It’s like Romeo and Juliet: there was no way these 
two people were going to be together, even if they wanted to be. There was no 
way these kids could figure it out.”

The rape scene, which was informed by the experience of a friend, is shot in 
such as way as to convey the rapist’s corrupt logic: the rationale of, “We’re 
wasted, we’re partying, this is what we were going to do anyway.” That idea – 
of flirtation being read as an unspoken invitation to have sex – is one that, 
says Wood, “I know in my life has happened millions of times and it’s the same 
for many women. ‘I didn’t think I was promising to sleep with you! I thought I 
was just having a good time! I thought I was in control of this situation!’ But 
there are moments when you find yourself where you’ve gotten too far.”

It is with dry amusement that Wood acknowledges the rape scene as yet another 
plot point in a film already overloaded with things that could “go wrong and 
offend people”. For a first feature, she has picked a story that throws up just 
about every flashpoint, save for abortion, in US contemporary culture. The way 
Wood got around her anxiety about this was through prep and more prep. She had 
to be absolutely sure she knew what she was trying to say, before anyone else 
jumped aboard to accuse her of saying it wrong. “I feel like I’m trying to 
start a conversation, ask questions, I’m trying to examine my privilege, and 
this may leave a bad taste in people of colour’s mouths: ‘Oh, you’re trying to 
examine it? But that’s our work, our shit to do.’ They’ve had to examine it 
their whole lives.”

Yesterday, construction workers were harassing me, so I started filming them

Before the film was even finished, the title was already causing problems. “I 
had a teacher in grad school who told me I could never call my film that. She 
said these girls would never go into that neighbourhood and date these guys. 
She couldn’t deal with it. One day in class I burst into tears and said, 
‘Actually this is a personal story.’” As for the title, she says: “It is bold 
like the film.”

In the years since college, Wood has moved and is now in Manhattan. But even 
now, she finds it useful to remove herself and see a scene from above. “Do I do 
things for a story? I don’t know. Maybe I just like excitement. Yesterday, 
construction workers were harassing me. They weren’t being rude, but they were 
engaging with me, calling after me, and I started filming them, which I always 
do. It made them take a step back.”

Their cajoling didn’t stop, but Wood’s experience of it changed, because she 
knew she would put the scene to use afterwards. “Telling our stories makes us 
feel powerful.”
 