
It’s been a long time since a stinking hot wind blew up my old denim shirt. A 
heatwave not seen since those devastating days of extreme hot weather that 
caused the deadly Black Saturday bushfires. Thankfully I was on the coast. Not 
that I'd been so forward-thinking as to organize it that way, that’s just how 
it ended up. The warm weather made conditions perfect for a spell of surf 
fishing. I would wade out to the break, swing back that big old surf rod and 
release it with all my fury. I'd spend hours in the water, attentively fishing, 
waiting for a tug on the line; the hint of some fresh oceanic delights for 
dinner. Most days the waves were big, and around me other holidaymakers surfed 
and swam. I really felt like the odd man out, the lone fishermen, determined to 
catch some fish, while people around me frolicked .

A few short tugs and away I went, feverishly winding in my reel, salt water 
spitting from the wet line. I yank at the rod to feel for life at its end and 
Yes! Only a mullet, but edible nonetheless. A few more of these and I would 
have a good feed. A little later I pulled in a salmon – a decent size, nothing 
compared to those I catch down in Tasmania, but at well above legal size it 
would provide a pair of nice fillets for the pan.

Australian salmon <http://goodfishbadfish.com.au/?fish=australian-salmon> are 
shore fish and don’t seem to head out too far – they often come in large 
schools, and when they're on its crazy fishing. Don't be deceived by the name, 
these fish are definitely not from the salmonoid family – instead they’re 
related to Australian herring. But apparently when the first settlers arrived 
they caught a few, and with their sea weary eyes reminisced of the fish back 
home and used the similarity to create the name.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Faustralia-food-blog%2F2014%2Fjan%2F22%2Ffood-in-season-surf-fishing-in-january%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F1%2F22%2F1390360508137%2Fa4659128-db83-4abd-ac48-35a5afff1542-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Food%20in%20season%3A%20surf%20fishing%20in%20January&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Faustralia-food-blog%2F2014%2Fjan%2F22%2Ffood-in-season-surf-fishing-in-january%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Food%20in%20season%3A%20surf%20fishing%20in%20January&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Faustralia-food-blog%2F2014%2Fjan%2F22%2Ffood-in-season-surf-fishing-in-january%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F1%2F22%2F1390360508137%2Fa4659128-db83-4abd-ac48-35a5afff1542-1020x612.jpeg>
 Summer sunset. Photograph: Rohan Anderson 
I love catching these fish, and every one of them is bound for the pot. I've 
bumped into fishermen who detest these fish – whether it’s the flavour or the 
texture, it seems they do whatever they can use to find fault with this 
species. But for me, it's the fish I target. I love the way they fight. I love 
their sleek build. Their silver colour and clear eyes. To me, they’re the 
perfect surf fish: easy to fillet, easy to cook, and they taste delicious.

With a handful of fish in the bucket, I head back to our little caravan to 
clean, scale, fillet and cook. When I'm away camping on the beach I don't like 
to bring the whole kitchen with me. There is something about getting away from 
the everyday conveniences and forcing yourself to make do with what you have on 
hand. There can be real taste benefit to this approach too: instead of masking 
food with an array of flavours, you’re forced to really appreciate the subtle 
qualities of the food.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Faustralia-food-blog%2F2014%2Fjan%2F22%2Ffood-in-season-surf-fishing-in-january%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F1%2F22%2F1390362298276%2Ffeceb17b-0707-4873-8c65-07ebfa6bbdf1-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Food%20in%20season%3A%20surf%20fishing%20in%20January&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Faustralia-food-blog%2F2014%2Fjan%2F22%2Ffood-in-season-surf-fishing-in-january%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Food%20in%20season%3A%20surf%20fishing%20in%20January&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Faustralia-food-blog%2F2014%2Fjan%2F22%2Ffood-in-season-surf-fishing-in-january%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F1%2F22%2F1390362298276%2Ffeceb17b-0707-4873-8c65-07ebfa6bbdf1-1020x612.jpeg>
 View from the caravan. Photograph: Rohan Anderson 
When fish is this fresh, there really isn't any benefit in mucking around – 
its own flavour does the talking. A little glug of olive oil, a knob of butter 
and the fillets go into the pan skin-side down. A few minutes on each side 
until the fillet is cooked through, and you’re ready to serve with a little 
seasoning of salt and pepper, and a squeeze of lemon.

As basic as the preparation was, that fish was better than any high-end 
restaurant could provide. When it comes to eating fish, there is nothing like 
catching your own and cooking it with simplicity. Pure summer joy.

• For more information on choosing sustainably caught fish see our Australian 
sustainable fish guide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/australia-food-blog/interactive/2013/dec/23/australia-sustainable-fish-seafood-interactive>
 