
Summer! It really is here! It’s not only the veil of bushfire smoke that 
indicates the height of the Australian summer, it’s the produce in the 
vegetable garden that’s a dead giveaway.

There are many places in Australia where produce can be grown almost every day 
of the year – the central coast of NSW comes to mind – but here in the central 
highlands of Victoria the conditions are not as favourable. It’s imperative 
that I grow all those warm-loving vegetables while the sun is shining.


There is a glitch in this system though. The window of opportunity for the 
summer season is a handful of months; three, maybe four, depending on the 
weather. The idea is to plant as much as you can in the space you have 
available. The outcome is almost always a glut of produce. Vegetables are 
funny, time-wasting things: at first I plant the seed, then it’s all waiting. 
Waiting for signs of germination, for strong growth; watching if the transplant 
will take; waiting for the first flowers, the formation of a bulb deep in the 
soil. It is all centred around the passing of time.

But like all things, its time will come to an end. And in most cases, it all 
comes at once. A trickle and a hint and then a thunderous explosion of food 
arrives. Zucchini that reach maturity daily, tomatoes in their thousands, 
carrots, beetroot and baskets of corn. It’s brilliant and stupid at the same 
time.

I find there are weeks of eating just vegetables, maybe with the odd hint of 
chorizo or jamon. Autumn and winter, when I do most of my hunting, is meaty 
season. But for now, I cherish and welcome my inner vegetarian – and this 
seasonal reality that for so many of my adult years I had missed. I love that I 
have to wait a year to eat eggplant, or tomato. I love that certain varieties 
of fruit and vegetables are only around for a few months a year, eventually 
replaced by something new in season.

Many seasons ago (in my previous life) I would never have eaten a great 
variety of veg – some green-leaf salads, tomatoes, the odd zucchini, perhaps. 
Since I’ve been a home grower I’ve embraced the variety of veg. Can you believe 
that I never ate broccoli? Madness. Its such a fresh, green-tasting plant!

Maybe my palate was woken by what I was experimenting with growing; maybe I 
started to teach myself to cook with more of a spirited nature. But for 
whatever reason, I’m glad my eyes (and mouth) have opened. My body, my mind and 
– according to some recent research – my sex drive are all happier for it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Faustralia-food-blog%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F13%2Ffood-in-season-eating-off-the-land-in-february%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F2%2F13%2F1392254498863%2Ff09e40d2-51da-4097-b79b-a30ead144911-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Food%20in%20season%3A%20eating%20off%20the%20land%20in%20February&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Faustralia-food-blog%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F13%2Ffood-in-season-eating-off-the-land-in-february%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Food%20in%20season%3A%20eating%20off%20the%20land%20in%20February&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Faustralia-food-blog%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F13%2Ffood-in-season-eating-off-the-land-in-february%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F2%2F13%2F1392254498863%2Ff09e40d2-51da-4097-b79b-a30ead144911-1020x612.jpeg>
 Eating locally and seasonally means embracing new foods. Photograph: Rohan 
Anderson 
I’m also thankful for constantly discovering foods that in the past I didn’t 
enjoy. These past few weeks I’ve been experimenting with cauliflower. 
Previously I would only eat it smothered in some cheap sauce at a Chinese 
restaurant, but now I’ve discovered a way to cook it that makes me look forward 
to seeing it on the plate. Roasted cauliflower just seemed weird, but embracing 
the weird can garnish good results. So into the oven it went.

Chopped into rough chunks, tossed with some olive oil and salt, I roasted the 
cauliflower for about 40 minutes on medium-high, checking it periodically (I 
also took that opportunity to give it a toss, making sure of excellent olive 
oil coverage). The cauliflower eventually browned, and even blackened. I snuck 
out a little piece and tasted it. Nice and nutty, and that cauliflower texture 
had softened. I gave it a whizz with a stick blender, added a handful of fresh 
parsley from the garden, grated in a cup of cheese, squeezed in some lemon and 
seasoned with salt and pepper. Finally a vigourous mix with a spoon and the 
mash was ready. It tasted great!

If you commit to a lifestyle of eating locally and seasonally, you’ll know 
that you have to embrace some new foods. Seemingly simple experiences like the 
cauliflower event add yet another ingredient to the home cook’s repertoire; a 
set of opportunities for exciting new meals. Cauliflower. I still can’t believe 
it.

• Read more from Rohan Anderson on his blog, Whole Larder Love 
<http://wholelarderlove.com/>. His book of the same name is published by Penguin
 
<http://www.penguin.com.au/products/9780670076918/whole-larder-love/311295/q-rohan-anderson>
.
 