
Maybe you could hide in a hollow log, maybe you could take a flight to a 
Pacific island, or maybe you could just get snug under a wool blanket and get 
cosy in front the fire. I choose the latter. I don’t want to run away from 
winter, I want to embrace it.

It’s not just the comforts a roaring fire can give, it’s also the glass of 
red, the smell of a hearty meal in the kitchen and the taste of warming winter 
soul food. I worked hard from last spring all the way through to autumn, 
growing, harvesting, gutting, skinning, preserving and curing.In the freezer I 
have two deer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/australia-food-blog/2014/may/06/food-in-season-on-the-hunt-for-wild-deer>
, a lamb, some pork, roosters,wild ducks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/australia-food-blog/2014/mar/24/food-in-season-duck-hunting-march>
, quail, trout and a few geese. It may seem like a lot of protein but winter is 
pretty hard in the central highlands of Victoria. It’s not Antarctica but it’s 
severe enough to slow the nature stuff down to a grinding halt.

 To get by I apply the age old combo of root vegetables, protein and dried 
beans. It’s a system that's worked for peasants in Europe for centuries, so why 
not for we Victorians? The climate is not that dissimilar to the hill country 
of many places in Europe, and we have the same opportunities here in regards to 
growing crops, raising animals and hunting.

Years ago I moved here to embrace this kind of lifestyle. Not just a physical 
relocation, but a shift in my state of mind. That’s what drives me. The belief 
that I can really provide food for my family – and I’m not talking about buying 
it from the local supermarket.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Faustralia-food-blog%2F2014%2Fjul%2F11%2Ffood-in-season-winter-comfort-food%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F11%2F1405041679140%2Fd50e2d07-94a4-409d-b7aa-1f0b5bbec160-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Food%20in%20season%3A%20winter%20comfort%20food&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Faustralia-food-blog%2F2014%2Fjul%2F11%2Ffood-in-season-winter-comfort-food%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Food%20in%20season%3A%20winter%20comfort%20food&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Faustralia-food-blog%2F2014%2Fjul%2F11%2Ffood-in-season-winter-comfort-food%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F11%2F1405041679140%2Fd50e2d07-94a4-409d-b7aa-1f0b5bbec160-1020x612.jpeg>
 The wood blewit mushroom: a vision in lilac. Photograph: Rohan Anderson 

 This time of year is definitely about enjoying all that effort made over the 
previous, warmer months. And keeping to the peasant tradition, almost 
everything ends up getting utilised in some way. A few days ago I slow-cooked a 
goose in a broth of homemade goodies. The basics: onions, carrots, garlic, 
passata and rainwater. The bird simmered away for three hours or so until the 
meat just departed from the bone. I used the meat to make a bunch of tacos, 
which worked a treat. Not at all traditionally Mexican, but then I’m not a 
traditional Mexican.


What was left over was a goose-flavoured broth. Not wanting it to go to waste 
I poached some dried beans I grew over summer in it. A gentle simmer seems to 
work best; they soaked up all the flavour from the slow-cooked goose and root 
vegies.

 For years I’ve relied on the fuel from winter-cooked beans. They’re easy to 
grow in summer, prolific and easy to dry and store for ever. A perfect source 
of tucker for a peasant. As for taste, they’re like an apple: no variety will 
taste the same. The texture is different, the flavour varies. Regardless of 
culinary differences, trust me, they just taste great.

 Even though it may seem that winter refuses to let up and not much is growing 
in the patch, there are still gems that have the ability to survive this 
environment – in fact they thrive in the cold. I’m talking about thewood blewit 
<http://pruefreefood.wordpress.com/2012/06/10/the-problem-with-wood-blewits/>, 
a delicious winter mushroom. Its a new mushroom for me: I’ve been wanting to 
find it for years, and only this winter have located a few reliable picking 
spots. It's a great mushroom, full of flavour, and smells like a mushroom 
should. It has a texture that may put some people off, but not this fella. I 
think they’re a real treat, and every time I find a new spot I let out a joyous 
noise akin to a schoolboy's pubescent sqwark. Not only are they a treat to eat, 
but just look at them. Who couldn’t appreciate such a beautiful lilac fungus as 
this?
 