
On Sunday, Australian rules football side North Melbourne Kangaroos ran 
through a giant banner that read “NMFC welcomes refugees”. It followed the 
“Refugees Welcome” banners unveiled by football fans in England over the 
weekend, who in turn took inspiration from supporters in Dortmund, Hamburg, 
Bremen and Wolfsburg in Germany’s Bundesliga.

In February, Western Sydney Wanderers fans displayed a similar banner at 
Parramatta Stadium. With the A-League kicking off next month, let’s hope we see 
more. The political climate remains precarious – we havecolumnists referring to 
refugees as invaders 
<http://blogs.news.com.au/heraldsun/andrewbolt/index.php/heraldsun/comments/the_new_invasion_of_europe/>
 and a government that locks them away in privatised, secretive detention 
centres.
Ben Williams (@BenitoWill) 
Just saw this. Great stuff, @NMFCOfficial <https://twitter.com/NMFCOfficial>. 
#AFLFinals <https://twitter.com/hashtag/AFLFinals?src=hash> #refugeeswelcome 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/refugeeswelcome?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/sQ2olGZ8v2 <http://t.co/sQ2olGZ8v2>
 <https://twitter.com/BenitoWill/status/642964191750389764> September 13, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/BenitoWill/status/642964191750389764> 
Banners, of course, won’t change this, but there are deeper, historic reasons 
for Australian football fans to welcome refugees. Perhaps more than any other 
country in the world, in Australia football as we know it today was built on 
the entrepreneurial skill, the passion and hard work of refugees and migrants.

On one boat in December 1949, three men arrived in Australia who would go on 
to play a crucial role in the development of the game. They were Andrew Dettre, 
a Hungarian, Denes Adrigan, also a Hungarian, and Branko Filipi, a Croat. Back 
then they were called “Displaced Persons”, not refugees, but their 
circumstances were the same as those today – they were fleeing poverty and 
political persecution.

Dettre became a football journalist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2013/dec/12/the-forgotten-story-of-andrew-dettre-and-soccer-world>
, perhaps our greatest ever. He was a gifted writer, intellectually 
stimulating, humorous and at times profound. His vision and contribution to the 
Australian game cannot be underestimated.

Premier League clubs consider best approach to help refugees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/05/premier-league-clubs-help-refugees-west-brom-arsenal>
Adrigan was an pioneering coach, part of the so-called “Hungarian mafia” of 
football in the 1960s. He became a founder of the Australian Coaches 
Federation, the first of its kind. He coached thousands of juniors across 
Australia and Oceania, and in 1980 was awarded a British Empire Medal for his 
services to soccer.

Filipi settled in Adelaide, becoming president of Adelaide Croatia (now 
Adelaide Raiders) and later Melbourne Croatia (now Melbourne Knights). At 
Adelaide Croatia he became a friend and staunch supporter of the great 
Aboriginal leader Charles Perkins, who in the early 1960s was their captain and 
star player.

These are just three of thousands of similar stories in Australian football.

Current FFA chairman Frank Lowy, the man who started an Australian national 
league not once but twice, was a refugee. Les Murray, for decades the face of 
Australian football along with Johnny Warren, arrived as a young boy from 
Budapest. He too was a refugee, and to this day,he maintains 
<http://www.smh.com.au/national/my-people-smuggler-my-hero-les-murray-20111105-1n14g.html>
: “my people smuggler was always my hero.”

Then there’s our national coach, who arrived on the migrant ship Patris in 
1970. His parents were economic migrants, not refugees, but as Ange Postecoglou 
told me last October: “it certainly wasn’t a better life for them, because all 
I can remember is them working”. The better life they were seeking was for 
Ange. Earlier this year, he led Australia to win the Asian Cup, surely the 
greatest achievement by any Australian national coach. We are indeed lucky that 
Jim and Voula Postecoglou decided to get on that boat.

When we watch the A-League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league>, we 
are watching the children and grandchildren of refugees and migrants. Some, 
like Kosovo-born Newcastle Jets striker Labinot Haliti, came to Australia as 
refugees themselves. Awer Mabil, who earlier this year moved from Adelaide 
United to Danish club FC Midtjylland, lived in a refugee camp in Kenya until 
2006.

“It’s important for us to understand refugees, what they go through, how hard 
it is for them to make such a decision,” said Les Murray in 2010. “Dislocating 
yourself from your culture, your history, from your traditions, from your 
family, and going somewhere where you don’t know what awaits you.”

For decades, it has been football that has awaited refugees in Australia. Part 
of the game’s unique and often misunderstood role in this country has been to 
provide sanctuary and opportunity – either as fans, players, coaches, officials 
or journalists – to those displaced from their homelands.


The welcome banners, both here and abroad, show that A-League and W-League 
clubs can play a role.Rory Smith wrote for ESPN 
<http://www.espnfc.com.au/blog/espn-fc-united-blog/68/post/2601286/refugee-crisis-requires-football-clubs-to-unite-and-help>
 that welcoming refugees is part of football’s “social responsibility”. In 
Australia, it is more than that – refugees not only make a positive 
contribution to Australian football, they are part of the game’s very DNA.
 