
Serious doubts have been cast over the evidence about the Hillsborough disaster
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hillsborough-disaster> given in a 
statement by the former Premier League chairman, Sir Dave Richards, which 
included a notorious allegation against some Liverpool supporters.

Trevor Hicks, whose two teenage daughters, Sarah and Vicki, were among the 96 
people unlawfully killed at the 1989 FA Cup semi-final betweenLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> and Nottingham Forest, has 
called for Richards’s evidence to be investigated by Operation Resolve, the 
current police investigation into the disaster.

Analysis of Richards’s evidence, together with new research casting doubt on 
other allegations made against Liverpool supporters by South Yorkshire police, 
are included in a documentary,Hillsborough: Smears, Survivors and the Search 
for the Truth, to be shown on ITV on Monday night (10.40pm). Richards was at 
Hillsborough – Sheffield Wednesday’s home ground – as a spectator and went on 
to the pitch with a doctor, Christopher Rigby, who tried to save several 
victims of the lethal crush, including three young men who died.

In his statement, Richards said that they also attended to a woman who died 
and that some Liverpool supporters made an obscene remark about her. “There 
were some lads behind the perimeter fence who shouted to us to throw her to 
them,” his statement said. “They made comments like: ‘Throw her in here, we’ll 
fucking fix her up.’ There were 10 or 12 of them. I was shocked by this and 
stood there.”

That alleged episode was similar to another allegation that spectators made a 
lewd remark about a female victim, which was one of the stories told by South 
Yorkshire officers that were published in theSun on 19 April 1989. That 
edition, which carried the front-page headline “The Truth”, caused great 
distress to bereaved families and survivors and led to a boycott of the 
newspaper on Merseyside.

Along with other police allegations of misbehaviour now proved to have been 
untrue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/26/how-the-suns-truth-about-hillsborough-unravelled>
, theSun reported: “A gang of Liverpool fans noticed that the blouse of a girl 
trampled to death had risen above her breasts. As a policeman struggled in vain 
to revive her, the mob jeered: ‘Throw her up here and we will **** her.’ ”

In October 2014 at the new inquests, a former South Yorkshire police 
inspector, Gordon Sykes,acknowledged that he had been the original source of 
that story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/oct/10/hillsborough-inquest-police-admit-sun-report-fans-looted-corpses-false>
. Michael Mansfield QC, representing 75 families whose relatives died, accused 
Sykes of having lied and made it up. Sykes maintained that it had happened, 
then Fiona Barton QC, representing South Yorkshire police, advanced Richards’s 
statement and read it out in court, as corroboration for the story alleged by 
Sykes.

Richards, a supporter of Sheffield Wednesday at the time of the disaster, 
became the club’s chairman soon after and then, in 2000, chairman of the 
Premier League, a role he held until hestepped down, aged of 70 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jun/18/sir-dave-richards-leicester-city>
, in 2013.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fhillsborough-football-chief-under-fire-dave-richards-evidence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe23daee0bca696f73fc8cb6578a0eb3eae2e02e6%2F381_0_922_1152%2F922.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20chief%20under%20fire%20for%20%E2%80%98smear%E2%80%99%20on%20Hillsborough%20supporters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fhillsborough-football-chief-under-fire-dave-richards-evidence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20chief%20under%20fire%20for%20%E2%80%98smear%E2%80%99%20on%20Hillsborough%20supporters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fhillsborough-football-chief-under-fire-dave-richards-evidence%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe23daee0bca696f73fc8cb6578a0eb3eae2e02e6%2F381_0_922_1152%2F922.jpg>
 Sir Dave Richards claimed fans made lewd remarks. Photograph: Don Mcphee for 
the Observer 
Analysis of his statement has now revealed discrepancies in the detail with 
known facts about the disaster. Rigby himself did not say he had attended to 
any women on the pitch, but Richards gave a detailed description – that the 
woman was aged between 27 and 30, wearing a short-sleeved blouse and a 
multicoloured skirt, and that Rigby had told him she was dead.

Seven female victims were among the 96 people who died at Hillsborough and 
none was wearing a skirt. All were wearing jeans or trousers.

Richards’s statement described Rigby pulling the skirt down and checking for a 
pulse in the woman’s groin, but Rigby said he checked for a pulse in necks and 
wrists and it was “unlikely” he would check the groin area. The doctor did not 
mention hearing any such obscene remark during his and Richards’s time 
attending to people on the pitch. Richards was never called as a witness to the 
inquests and he has not responded either to ITV’s or theObserver’s questions 
about these discrepancies.

Doubt has also been cast on the evidence of another witness to the alleged 
obscene remark, who claimed to have been told of it by other Liverpool 
supporters. The witness, Cherry Daniels, told this story to West Midlands 
police, who were appointed to investigate the disaster in 1989, but her 
statement did not disclose that she was in fact the daughter of a South 
Yorkshire police officer, Chief Inspector David Sumner, who was Sykes’s 
superior in the force.

Hillsborough victims posthumously awarded freedom of Liverpool
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/22/hillsborough-victims-posthumously-awarded-freedom-of-the-city-of-liverpool>
Daniels did not respond to the Observer’s questions about this but did reply 
to ITV. She said that she did tell West Midlands police at the time, and the 
Independent Police Complaints Commission in 2014, that she was Sumner’s 
daughter, but these investigators had said it was not relevant and not included 
it in her statement. The IPCC has told theObserver, however, that it has found 
no evidence that Daniels disclosed she was Sumner’s daughter.

The statement of another witness, Anthony Garratty, a steward at Hillsborough 
who attended to many people who died or were injured, also included that he 
overheard a lewd remark from Liverpool supporters. Interviewed for the 
documentary, Garratty said that he never related such a story and believed West 
Midlands police officers must have inserted it. The IPCC has said that it is 
investigating similar allegations by survivors of the disaster, that West 
Midlands police officers altered their statements, failed to reflect what they 
had said, or put improper pressure on them.

These witnesses now include Ray Lewis, who was the referee for the semi-final, 
which he abandoned at 3.06pm when he was alerted to the crisis in the Leppings 
Lane end. Lewis’s handwritten statement includes the observation that: “I saw 
some spectators walking in good humour. They were mixed.” In the typed version, 
which Lewis said he did not see until the current IPCC investigation 25 years 
later, the word “mixed” is changed, and the sentence reads: “They were pissed.” 
Lewis has told the programme that he believes this was clearly changed by West 
Midlands police and should be investigated. The West Midlands force is not 
commenting on any detail while investigations continue.

The programme also casts doubt on another story told against Liverpool 
supporters, which was included as an accepted fact by Lord Justice Taylor in 
his August 1989 report into the cause of the disaster: that a police horse was 
burned by cigarettes. A South Yorkshire police constable, David Scott, faced no 
disciplinary action for striking out at Liverpool supporters caught in the 
crush outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles, partly because it was accepted that 
his horse had been burned with a cigarette. One of the UK’s most senior 
veterinary consultants, Prof Derek Knottenbelt, of the Equine Hospital at the 
University of Liverpool, has viewed the footage of Scott on his horse and 
concluded from the horse’s lack of severe reaction that it cannot have been 
burned in the manner described. Although Scott said he had informed his senior 
officer, Insp Paul Hand-Davies, in fact Hand-Davies never mentioned a horse 
being burned and told South Yorkshire police’s own press office at the time 
that it had not happened.

Scott declined to answer questions from the Observer.

The bereaved families and survivors argued that stories of drunkenness, 
obscenity and other alleged misbehaviour by supporters at the match were smears 
put out by South Yorkshire police to avoid responsibility for their failings 
which caused the lethal crush, and shift blame on to the victims. The jury at 
the new inquests determined in April this year thatthe 96 people were 
unlawfully killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/26/hillsborough-inquests-jury-says-96-victims-were-unlawfully-killed>
 due to gross negligence by the South Yorkshire police officer in command, 
Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield, that there were several other serious 
police failings,and that no behaviour by supporters contributed to the 
dangerous situation.

Hicks told the Observer: “I believe that the reliability of Sir Dave 
Richards’s evidence about this alleged incident should now be investigated by 
Operation Resolve. The smears found their way into theSun so that the police 
could deflect responsibility and blame innocent supporters and Richards’s 
evidence was advanced at the inquests to support one of those stories.”

Some research for the ITV programme was originally carried out by people who 
as teenagers survived the crush at Hillsborough and are now applying 
professional skills in the search for the truth.

Hillsborough: ‘Finally, we got justice’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/01/hillsborough-inquest-survivor-adrian-tempany> 