
Back in 2010 Uefa cut a financial fair play deal with the “whole football 
family” to end “greed” and “reckless spending 
<http://www.uefa.org/protecting-the-game/club-licensing-and-financial-fair-play/news/newsid=2067210.html>
”. The sort of greed and reckless spending Uefajust can’t stand 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/football/2016/09/20/uefa-risks-backlash-as-michel-platini-tipped-to-receive-seven-fi/>
. It meant, they reckoned, a new era of fewer transfers, less speculation, and 
bad times for The Mill.

Aston Villa prepare to announce Steve Bruce as new manager
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/11/steve-bruce-new-aston-villa-manager>
But six years on, the family have rallied: weighing up the spirit of Uefa’s 
FFP and deciding the future is all about€222m auctions for Neymar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/11/football-transfer-rumours-psg-to-make-a-move-for-222m-neymar>
, a £1.17bn transfer window, and another £100m-plus on moving Chelsea a couple 
of places up the table. So this winter that’ll be Antonio Conte spending “at 
least” £50m on Milan’sAlessio Romagnoli, £35m on Atlético Madrid’s Yannick 
Carrasco,more on Lazio’s Felipe Anderson, and Kalidou Koulibaly in 
part-exchange for Michy Batshuayi.

And it’s all made sweeter by this from Willian, who says he never fancied a 
move to PSG in the summer, and reckons The Press Make Some of This Stuff Up: “I 
read some things in the press on this topic but personally, I never received a 
concrete offer. My family feels good in London, I am growing in a team that 
plays beautiful football … It would be a privilege to finish my career at a 
club as big as Chelsea.”

Elsewhere, Valencia fancy £40m-rated Javier Hernández, who left Old Trafford 
last year for £7.3m “to feel important and happy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/01/javier-hernandez-manchester-united-bayer-leverkusen>
” – but their Grealish-haired teenFran Villalba could be heading to United. 
“[They made contact] with me,” says agent Vicente Forés. “Just a contact to 
know his situation. They’re already aware. I don’t know about Valencia. But I 
reckon they will make it hard.”

Xherdan Shaqiri’s agent and brother Edrin has hinted his client and brother 
may try to do one from Stoke in January, Juventus are monitoringSanti Cazorla’s 
Arsenal contract talks, and Sevilla are uppingSteven N’Zonzi’s wages to stop 
him joining Everton.

Leicester owner Vichai Srivaddhanaprabha has signed a new £11m yacht 
<http://www.leicestermercury.co.uk/leicester-city-owner-splashes-out-on-11-million-super-yacht/story-29798838-detail/story.html>
; literature’sSteve Bruce is off to Villa today 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/11/steve-bruce-new-aston-villa-manager>
; Liverpool keeperSimon Mignolet has opened a coffee shop in Belgium called 
TwentyTwo Coffee “in homage to his shirt number”; and new Cardiff aceMarouane 
Chamakhhas had a haircut 
<http://www.cardiffcityfc.co.uk/news/article/2016-17/bluebirds-complete-chamakh-signing-3357271.aspx>
.
 