
Exceptionally for a modern political leader, Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> does not employ a designated 
speechwriter. This singular fact about May’s Downing Street says many things 
about the way this prime minister works. The contrast with her recent 
predecessors is deliberate, and the explanation is obvious: May doesn’t employ 
a speechwriter because she doesn’t make many speeches.

Theresa May plans major speech to defuse Brexit criticism
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/05/theresa-may-plans-major-speech-defuse-brexit-criticism>
The woman who David Cameron’s aides called “Submarine May” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/06/brexit-theresa-may-parliament-mps>
 prefers doing politics in private. When it comes to speeches, her clear 
preference is to confine herself to those that go with the job. She gives a 
speech to her party conference,another to the lord mayor’s banquet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/mays-banquet-speech-out-blinged-by-farages-trump-tower-snaps>
 in the City, and those required at formal functions and on foreign visits. 
That’s about it.

Most of May’s speeches and statements to MPs are written by officials. The 
political parts of her speeches are mainly entrusted to Chris Wilkins, the No 
10 strategy director – back in 2002 he was an author of May’s“nasty party” 
speech <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2002/oct/08/uk.conservatives2002> 
– and toNick Timothy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/15/may-appoints-former-advisers-as-joint-chiefs-of-staff>
, her joint chief of staff. Both advisers share May’s disdain for what they see 
as the frantic, headline-chasing initiatives of Cameron’s No 10.

But the significance of May’s reluctance to speak in public has not been 
widely grasped. Unlike Tony Blair, Gordon Brown and Cameron, May does not aim 
to use what Americans call the bully pulpit to shape public debate. It is one 
of the many changes of tone and practice that this unshowy politician has 
brought to the prime ministership. Her regime is marked by a lack of display 
that in some ways harks back to a more deferential political culture. Whether 
the approach works in the madhouse of the digital era has yet to be proved.

All this underlines why the speech May will make about Brexit policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/05/theresa-may-plans-major-speech-defuse-brexit-criticism>
 this month will be so unusual and important. May would not be making the 
speech unless she had been forced to. But ever since the House of Commons voted 
at the start of December forKeir Starmer’s Labour motion demanding a published 
government plan for exit negotiations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/07/tory-backbenchers-demand-brexit-plans-theresa-may-government-article-50-anna-soubry>
 with the EU, she has had no choice. Now the speech has been turbo-charged with 
fresh significance, afterIvan Rogers resigned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/03/the-guardian-view-on-ivan-rogers-resignation-a-loss-at-a-crucial-time>
 as the UK’s ambassador to the European Union this week.

The exact date of the speech has not yet been set, but it is seen in No 10 as 
the only one on the subject that May will make beforetriggering article 50 of 
the Lisbon treaty in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/01/theresa-may-to-propose-great-repeal-bill-to-unwind-eu-laws>
. One delicate question is whether May will make the speech before or after the 
supreme court hands out its long-awaited ruling on thegovernment’s appeal over 
parliament’s role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/parliament-must-trigger-brexit-high-court-rules>
 in that process. But the Rogers resignation, combined with the Commons vote 
and the supreme court ruling, means that May has to regain the Brexit 
initiative on multiple fronts.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Ftheresa-may-immigration-matters-economy-brexit-speech%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33995a22c49e999cfd6e96b01be74357371a013c%2F0_31_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=For%20Theresa%20May%2C%20immigration%20matters%20more%20than%20the%20economy%20%7C%20Martin%20Kettle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Ftheresa-may-immigration-matters-economy-brexit-speech%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=For%20Theresa%20May%2C%20immigration%20matters%20more%20than%20the%20economy%20%7C%20Martin%20Kettle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Ftheresa-may-immigration-matters-economy-brexit-speech%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33995a22c49e999cfd6e96b01be74357371a013c%2F0_31_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 The resignation of Sir Ivan Rogers as the UK’s ambassador to the EU ‘means 
that May has to regain the Brexit initiative’. Photograph: Thierry Roge/EPA 
It is one thing to report that May intends the speech to regain the 
initiative. It is another thing for this to happen. The political realities, 
after all, have not changed. These realities remain, first, that control over 
EU migration is not compatible with membership of the single market; second, 
that there is no reliable Tory majority at Westminster either for restricting 
freedom of movement or for staying in the single market; and third, that Brexit 
is a multilateral negotiation involving 27 EU member states and the European 
institutions. These things all remain true. The idea that May can solve all 
these fiendishly difficult problems with a single speech is absurd.

It is also very unlikely that she will say something different in early 2017 
to what she said in 2016. To do so would open her to the charge of 
flip-flopping, and would anyway be out of character. According to those 
familiar with her thinking, it is therefore best to return to her last 
substantive speech on Brexit as a guide. To do so is to see the immensity of 
the moment towards which the UK is now hurtling.

At the start of the Tory party conference, using the same phrase that Rogers 
unleashed this week in his resignation memo to staff, the prime minister 
derided a choice between hard and soft Brexit as“muddled thinking” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/oct/02/conservative-conference-may-to-explain-brexit-great-repeal-bill-in-marr-interview-politics-live?page=with%3Ablock-57f11d1ce4b015be63833667>
. There would be no trade-off between controlling immigration and trading with 
Europe, she said. Britain would leave the EU, would take control of 
immigration, and would remove itself from the jurisdiction of the European 
court of justice.

That speech was widely interpreted as a hard Brexit statement, not least in 
the rest of the EU, because that is exactly what it was. This month’s speech 
will not, perhaps cannot, budge from those objectives. That’s because, more 
than anything else, May has to be able to turn round to British voters and say: 
“Look. You voted to leave the EU – and we have left it.”

The litmus test for that approach remains migration controls. Doubtless May 
would like to sugar the pill for economic pessimists, as she did in the 
conference speech, by saying that trade-offs with the EU will be part of the 
outcome, and that there will be areas of compromise and cooperation, including 
law enforcement, security and some aspects of trade. Yet a lot of this feels 
like wishful, if not muddled, thinking – which was presumably the breaking 
point for Rogers.

In the end, the core political reality of the Brexit negotiation remains the 
one inflicted by the referendum. That result, for May, means leaving the EU on 
terms that the voters will accept. The prime minister, and many others, believe 
this can only mean UK controls on EU migration. The chancellor, Philip Hammond 
– and maybe even May herself – hope the door can remain open for certain 
privileged categories. But the bottom line is to stop, and to be seen to stop, 
migration flows.

May may be reluctant to say it in a speech, but the facts point in one 
direction. She wishes not just to deliver a Britain that is out of the EU, but 
a Britain that puts border controls above today’s mix of global 
macro-prosperity and widening inequality.

The course she is on means putting the interests of leave voters above the 
economic interests that have always shaped the Tory party. If she has to say to 
voters that the price of controlling migration may be economic hardship, she 
will have to say it. From one perspective this is utterly muddled and 
illogical. But from another, it seems very clear indeed.
 