
There was something almost poetic, while simultaneously heart-obliterating, 
that a hate crime against black and brown LGBTQ folks dancing and celebrating 
at a club called Pulse would coincide with a night full of pageantry centered 
on the genius and vitality of black and brown theater folk.

It was all the more wrenching for being so unsurprising. Every time we have a 
“moment” when white America gets excited about the collective artistic talents 
of black and brown people, I feel conflicted. On the one hand, the 
acknowledgement is great, the accolades certainly well deserved, and the sheer 
joy of being swept up in the whirlwind of favorable consideration is 
intoxicating. For the first time this year, all four musical acting Tonys were 
awarded to actors of color, andHamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/hamilton> swept the evening. They emerged 
alive, feted and known.

On the other hand, it’s almost impossible to believe that the focused 
appreciation will last, or that it’s ever truly real to begin with. Because 
every time we accomplish something extraordinary that garners appreciation and 
approval from mainstream America, we are being asked to trust a fundamentally 
untrustworthy source of ratification. Unlike the newest Tony winners, the 
beautiful 49 murdered amid shattered strobe lights, fleeing for their lives, 
praying for that next unpromised moment, did not survive.

Not surprisingly, the Orlando massacre clearly weighed on everyone’s mind 
during the Tonys on Sunday night. But as palpable was the exceptional 
resilience, compassion and solidarity offered by the Broadway community both in 
their performances and acceptance speeches. The theater is a longstanding ally 
and safe haven for the LGBTQ community. Almost every winner devoted their 
speeches to the victims in Orlando.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Ftony-awards-highlights-hamilton-wins-big-as-corden-acknowledges-orlando-attack-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hamilton%20wins%20big%20as%20Corden%20acknowledges%20Orlando%20attack%20%E2%80%93%20Tony%20awards%20highlights%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Ftony-awards-highlights-hamilton-wins-big-as-corden-acknowledges-orlando-attack-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hamilton%20wins%20big%20as%20Corden%20acknowledges%20Orlando%20attack%20%E2%80%93%20Tony%20awards%20highlights%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Ftony-awards-highlights-hamilton-wins-big-as-corden-acknowledges-orlando-attack-video&media=>
Hamilton wins big as Corden acknowledges Orlando attack – Tony awards 
highlights video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/video/2016/jun/13/tony-awards-highlights-hamilton-wins-big-as-corden-acknowledges-orlando-attack-video>
This tragic parallelism reveals America, yet again, to be a country born out 
of paradox – founded on freedom and built on slavery, we have emerged as a 
dichotomous nation with only the extraordinarily wealthy and the exceedingly 
poor. We’re a country that boasts constitutional human rights but can’t come 
together on the fact that human is human is human, no matter whether we pee 
standing up or sitting down, sleep with men or women or both, choose to have an 
abortion or to kneel with our heads to the ground when we honor our god.

And finally, we have risen as a nation with the audacity to call itself a 
global leader but cannot – no: will not – enforce gun control that would 
prevent United States citizens from being able to purchase assault weapons.

What is both genius and devastating about Hamilton is that it rewrites the 
history of our white founding fathers through the lens of black and brown 
Americans. How stirring it is to see and imagine the decisions being made by a 
black and brown leadership: “Look around, look around, how lucky we are to be 
alive right now.”

Fast forward two and a half centuries, how poignant that lyric and sentiment 
is – because for black and brown America, there will always be the sense that 
we are lucky to be alive right now. To be sure, the massacre in Orlando was a 
hate crime against the LGBTQ community, but their identity is intertwined with 
the color of their skin.

Queer Muslims exist – and we are in mourning too
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/12/queer-muslims-mourning-orlando-nightclub-shooting>
A few days out from both the massacre and the Tonys, America is still raw and 
grieving the former, quietly celebratory about the latter. One wonders how the 
country would be different today if were founded in the black and brown image 
of Lin Manuel-Miranda’s creation. In the end, Alexander Hamilton and the 
founding fathers of America, however brilliantly and charismatically embodied 
by the actors who swept the awards, were still white men who made a country 
where in 2016 black and brown folks are still not safe, no matter how lucky we 
feel to be alive right now.
 