
For how long is it reasonable to leave a TV audience waiting for justice? In 
the case ofThe Fall <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-fall>, it is 
now more than three years since we first metJamie Dornan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/mar/18/jamie-dornan-i-keep-playing-sick-psychopaths-it-worries-me>
’s serial killer Paul Spector, and almost two since we saw DSI Stella Gibson 
finally meet him over the interview table, then later witness his shooting. Did 
he survive? Did his victim, Rose, locked in the boot of her car for four days? 
Does anyone even care any more, save those people who weirdly get off on 
fancying a killer Dornan?

None of these questions currently feel pressing; unsurprisingly, given writer 
Allan Cubbitt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/jun/07/the-fall-allan-cubitt-women-violence>
’s entirely relaxed attitude to answering them in the confines of his series. 
The last outing finished less on a cliffhanger than a demand to the BBC to 
renew the series.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fthe-fall-paul-spector-must-die-gillian-anderson-jamie-dornan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e378df77ecd218a09f4491c3fa818b0fd9ccbff%2F0_0_2825_4246%2F2825.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=For%20The%20Fall%20to%20get%20off%20TV's%20critical%20list%2C%20Paul%20Spector%20must%20die&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fthe-fall-paul-spector-must-die-gillian-anderson-jamie-dornan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=For%20The%20Fall%20to%20get%20off%20TV%27s%20critical%20list%2C%20Paul%20Spector%20must%20die&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fthe-fall-paul-spector-must-die-gillian-anderson-jamie-dornan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e378df77ecd218a09f4491c3fa818b0fd9ccbff%2F0_0_2825_4246%2F2825.jpg>
 Stella performance … Gillian Anderson returns as DSI Gibson. Photograph: Helen 
Sloan/BBC 
Which they obligingly did. And so Gibson is back: persuading us in stylish 
trailers to reinvest in The Fall by reminding us that it is unlike anything 
else on television. Largely that’s because ofGillian Anderson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/24/jane-bond-gillian-anderson-next-007-twitter>
’s complex – if not unproblematic – performance as the detective consumed by 
her mission. Unrushed, deliberate, she’s almost hypnotic to watch; a 
distinctive detective in an overcrowded televisual landscape. The question is: 
will the third series be able to match and develop the character Anderson 
created?

The Fall is divisive: it is accused (rightly, in my opinion) of being 
misogynistic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/nov/16/the-fall-misogyny-gillian-anderson-tv>
, of glamourising violence, and of some of its characters being in thrall to 
its perpetrator’s sexy braininess. But the first season was truly gripping; the 
second, much less so. There were undoubtedly moments – such as the shifting 
power balance in theinterview room 
<http://www.ew.com/article/2015/02/03/the-fall-allan-cubitt-season-2-finale> as 
Gibson and Spector eyeballed each other at last – but it also had a terribly 
judged subplot with the teenage babysitter, and an episode where Spector 
literally hid in Gibson’s wardrobe, a flashing warning that things might have 
been stretched just that bit too far.

So what do we want from season three? No more of the latter stuff. In fact, 
I’d be thrilled if Spector died in the ambulance, and we could watch Gibson 
make sense of it all without the sexualised strangulations or cat-and-mouse 
antics, and in the knowledge that she will never bring him to justice. But we 
do know Spector gets as far as hospital —or so the trailer tells us 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eKWjuz0trgU> – and Stella, of course, is only 
in Belfast on a mini-secondment, which leaves us all in a bind: without the 
case she presumably has to go home; with the case, the show could be heading 
down a dead end. Six more hours of drawing parallels between Gibson and Spector 
– their desire for control, their emotional restraint – doesn’t sound like 
appointment TV. We must see a shift in the dynamic.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fthe-fall-paul-spector-must-die-gillian-anderson-jamie-dornan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cd17a17d05210ad8ac765067e3a17aa1d67282a%2F0_112_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=For%20The%20Fall%20to%20get%20off%20TV's%20critical%20list%2C%20Paul%20Spector%20must%20die&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fthe-fall-paul-spector-must-die-gillian-anderson-jamie-dornan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=For%20The%20Fall%20to%20get%20off%20TV%27s%20critical%20list%2C%20Paul%20Spector%20must%20die&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fthe-fall-paul-spector-must-die-gillian-anderson-jamie-dornan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cd17a17d05210ad8ac765067e3a17aa1d67282a%2F0_112_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
 Ambulance chasing … Jamie Dornan as Paul Spector in The Fall. Photograph: 
Helen Sloan/BBC 
The team clearly have confidence that they’ve pulled off this third act: even 
before it has aired, Anderson has saidshe expects to play Gibson again next year
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/20/bbc-the-fall-allan-cubbitt-gillian-anderson-dci-stella-gibson>
, and Cubbitt sayshe’s thinking of storylines beyond Spector 
<http://www.digitalspy.com/tv/the-fall/news/a807281/the-fall-writer-hints-at-a-fourth-series-as-new-pictures-of-jamie-dornan-and-gillian-anderson-debut/>
. Here’s hoping he manages to have them here. Getting rid of the powerplay 
between detective and killer would give Stella space to grow as a character 
beyond theperfectly pressed silk shirts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/tvandradioblog/2014/dec/19/-sp-the-fall-an-anatomy-of-dci-stella-gibsons-series-2-blouses>
 and dream journalling, while Paul’s absence would allow Rose to own her story, 
should she survive, and allow his family – and their babysitter – to rebuild 
their lives. That really would be a twist no one saw coming.

The Fall returns on Thursday at 9pm on BBC2. 

 