
Wonga charges an APR of 1,509%, QuickQuid 1,270%, while doorstep seller 
Provident -Financial quotes 1,068%. Yet there is an alternative source of loans 
for hard-pressed individuals without a good credit history, and where interest 
rates start at just 12.7%.

Credit unions <https://www.theguardian.com/money/credit-unions> – 
co-operatively managed “run by you, for you” organisations – offer savings and 
loans products starting at just £50, and after years in the shadows are finally 
making more of an impact in England.

They now serve 1.2 million -people, including 128,000 junior savers, across 
England, Wales and Scotland, with assets of almost £1.3bn – and on -average, 
126 new members join every day. And they take a very different approach to the 
loan sharks that prey on Britain’s poorest.

The credit union has really changed my life – I could never save and now they 
do it for me
Husyin Yorganci 
At the London Capital Credit Union offices in Archway, chief executive Martin 
Groombridge cheerily greets customers by name as they come through the door. He 
wears black jeans and white plimsolls and says the no uniform policy is to show 
that those who work there are no different from the clients – they’re all 
members. Jokes circulate at the same speed as the jar of bourbon biscuits, and 
computer screens swivel right the way around so that customers can see exactly 
what’s going on.

A new client comes in to set up his account and is passed a leaflet with the 
title “Important, we are not a bank – talk to us if you need help with money”. 
Groombridge tells him to not be shy to admit if he’s struggling to pay back a 
loan: “If you can’t pay it back – tell us. If your washing machine breaks and 
you need some more, let us know. And if you lose your job we’ll freeze the 
interest.”

As the new customer leaves, a young man comes in and asks for a loan form. One 
of the office volunteers is beckoned over to help him fill it out because he 
struggles to write due to his dyslexia.

His name is Husyin Yorganci and he works in the recycling department of 
Haringey council, earning £16,500 a year. He often used to run out of money 
before the end of the month and became a target for doorstep lenders. In 2011 
he found himself wound up in debt as he was forced to take out more and more 
high-interest loans to pay back his previous ones.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Foct%2F24%2Fforget-payday-lenders-better-way-to-borrow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d9f5e2ba27571a5627b6347ad5de31541d3bafc%2F0_171_2921_1751%2F2921.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Forget%20payday%20lenders%20%E2%80%93%20there%E2%80%99s%20a%20much%20better%20way%20to%20borrow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Foct%2F24%2Fforget-payday-lenders-better-way-to-borrow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Forget%20payday%20lenders%20%E2%80%93%20there%E2%80%99s%20a%20much%20better%20way%20to%20borrow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Foct%2F24%2Fforget-payday-lenders-better-way-to-borrow%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d9f5e2ba27571a5627b6347ad5de31541d3bafc%2F0_171_2921_1751%2F2921.jpg>
 Husyin Yorganci: ‘I’m not allowed to get at the savings until I’ve paid off 
the loan’ 
“It was really getting out of hand,” he says. “For example, there was one time 
when I borrowed £400 just to tide me over until payday and they wanted me to 
repay £530. I could afford the original sum, but not the interest. I had to get 
another loan for £200 so that I could pay them off.”

Four years ago, London Capital came to his work with some flyers and he 
decided to join. He now has a -standing order that comes straight out of his 
wages: most of the money goes to -paying back his loan, but a sixth is sent to 
his savings account. “I’m not allowed to get at the savings until I’ve paid off 
the loan; this means that once I’ve paid my debts I’ll still have money in my 
account.” He shudders at the memory of the payday lenders he was using before: 
“It was like daylight robbery. But the credit union has really changed my life 
– I could never save and now they do it for me.”

Credit unions operate all over the UK. There are around 362 of them across 
England, Wales and Scotland. Molly Zacharias is a member of the Cardiff & Vale 
credit union. She now works as financial administrator for a UN charity and 
lives in a two-bedroom flat on the outskirts of the city with her son Jackson. 
This hasn’t always been the case – in the past she’s been homeless, jobless and 
badly in debt. She thanks the credit union for allowing her to work her way out 
of poverty.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Foct%2F24%2Fforget-payday-lenders-better-way-to-borrow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd6d87f2bdcfe2c4727ffc040a50adc6361a7a23%2F0_0_4000_2399%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Forget%20payday%20lenders%20%E2%80%93%20there%E2%80%99s%20a%20much%20better%20way%20to%20borrow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Foct%2F24%2Fforget-payday-lenders-better-way-to-borrow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Forget%20payday%20lenders%20%E2%80%93%20there%E2%80%99s%20a%20much%20better%20way%20to%20borrow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Foct%2F24%2Fforget-payday-lenders-better-way-to-borrow%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd6d87f2bdcfe2c4727ffc040a50adc6361a7a23%2F0_0_4000_2399%2F4000.jpg>
 Molly Zacharias: ‘I never had savings; the credit union got me into that’ 
“If it wasn’t for them I’d never have been able to provide a stable life for 
myself and my son,” she says. “The first loan I took out was for £1,000 and it 
bought me driving lessons and helped me get a car. Having a driving licence on 
my CV got me a job. Also, without that car I wouldn’t have been able to ferry 
my son to his special needs school seven miles away.

“The way in which I had to repay the loan was helpful. I had a weekly standing 
order of £20 – £12 of this went to the loan and £8 to my savings account. It 
took 102 payments until I’d paid the whole sum [with interest] of £1,224. 
Because I paid it gradually and built up my savings it wasn’t too bad. If I’d 
taken one of those Wonga-esque loans we’d have starved trying to pay it back.”

Zacharias shows me a spreadsheet of her weekly costs, laughing that her life 
used to be about music and parties, but now revolves around meticulous expenses 
charts – she says the credit union is responsible for changing her once 
reckless financial behaviour. “I never had savings – the credit union got me 
into that. Now I am planning to take out one more loan to pay for the last 
module of my accountancy qualification.”

April McCann’s financial behaviour also changed dramatically after becoming a 
member of the 1st Alliance Credit Union in Ayrshire, Scotland. She was in dire 
debt, which got worse when she developed an online gambling habit. Her income 
was disappearing fast and she was unable to pay back her loans. She remembers 
lenders coming to her door to ask for repayments. “When I didn’t have the money 
to pay them back they were sometimes all right about it – and at other times 
quite abrupt, but there was nothing I could do.”

McCann says she was lured by the speed and ease with which she would receive 
the money. “They would just turn up, make you fill out a form and give it you.”

She now has a pre-paid debit card that helps her budget, its access blocked 
for online gambling sites. “The credit union treated me like family when I 
needed them the most. Sometimes I do try and gamble on the card but it doesn’t 
let me. I no longer worry about feeding my family,” she says.

The credit union sector in the UK is growing, but there is some way to go 
before loan sharks are driven out of existence. In the US, 46% of the 
population belong to a credit union; in Australia 30%; and in Ireland an 
impressive 75%. Support from the whole community, not just those in financial 
hardship, would help unions to grow further and reach more of those in need.

Case studies
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Foct%2F24%2Fforget-payday-lenders-better-way-to-borrow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56031bdecea723cf93d7b201f8fc831fc6212d76%2F376_0_2067_2003%2F2067.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Forget%20payday%20lenders%20%E2%80%93%20there%E2%80%99s%20a%20much%20better%20way%20to%20borrow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Foct%2F24%2Fforget-payday-lenders-better-way-to-borrow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Forget%20payday%20lenders%20%E2%80%93%20there%E2%80%99s%20a%20much%20better%20way%20to%20borrow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Foct%2F24%2Fforget-payday-lenders-better-way-to-borrow%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56031bdecea723cf93d7b201f8fc831fc6212d76%2F376_0_2067_2003%2F2067.jpg>
John Shipman, 59, street sweeper for council

Took out a £500 loan to pay for an operation to get new teeth in time for his 
son’s wedding. He found an appointment that he otherwise wouldn’t have been 
able to afford as it fell before his payday.



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Foct%2F24%2Fforget-payday-lenders-better-way-to-borrow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe80d3d7a5ea187b9005fe7c088fb6006fc98c050%2F663_0_1501_1552%2F1501.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Forget%20payday%20lenders%20%E2%80%93%20there%E2%80%99s%20a%20much%20better%20way%20to%20borrow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Foct%2F24%2Fforget-payday-lenders-better-way-to-borrow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Forget%20payday%20lenders%20%E2%80%93%20there%E2%80%99s%20a%20much%20better%20way%20to%20borrow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Foct%2F24%2Fforget-payday-lenders-better-way-to-borrow%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe80d3d7a5ea187b9005fe7c088fb6006fc98c050%2F663_0_1501_1552%2F1501.jpg>
Angela Quarm, 49, chair of Stonegrove community group in Edgware

Publicises credit unions to people on her estate as lots of doorstep lenders 
were coming in. She wants to help those in her community become responsible 
savers and reduce the number getting into long-term debt. She finds the credit 
union helpful herself, as you can pay in small amounts and save little bits.



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Foct%2F24%2Fforget-payday-lenders-better-way-to-borrow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc931baae8f03411ce5f96e336c056b87220802b%2F653_0_2261_1938%2F2261.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Forget%20payday%20lenders%20%E2%80%93%20there%E2%80%99s%20a%20much%20better%20way%20to%20borrow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Foct%2F24%2Fforget-payday-lenders-better-way-to-borrow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Forget%20payday%20lenders%20%E2%80%93%20there%E2%80%99s%20a%20much%20better%20way%20to%20borrow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Foct%2F24%2Fforget-payday-lenders-better-way-to-borrow%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc931baae8f03411ce5f96e336c056b87220802b%2F653_0_2261_1938%2F2261.jpg>
Jemma Burbridge, 30, business doing hair pampering parties for children

 She ran into trouble when her partner left, and was relying on child benefit 
money. Inspired by her daughter she decided to set up a business designing 
hairdos for girls at parties. She took out an £800 loan to get her business 
going.

How do I find one?


Website FindYourCreditUnion <http://www.findyourcreditunion.co.uk/home> will 
locate the closest ones to your home or workplace, writes Patrick Collinson. 
Many credit unions are confined to particular geographical areas or related to 
types of jobs or professions.

How much will a loan cost?

Like every lender, credit unions charge different interest rates dependant on 
the sum borrowed and how the borrower proposes to make repayments. For example, 
London Mutual Credit Union charges 13.7% on its Premier loans of up to £7,500 
for people who are in employment.

Its CUOK.uk  <http://www.cuok.co.uk/>arm also offers payday loans at a 
fraction of the cost of commercial operators, but still promises an instant 
loan decision and same-day payment. It says a £400 loan repaid over a month 
will cost just £12 in interest, compared to the £96 you could pay via a 
commercial payday lender.

The Association of British Credit Unions has a loan calculator on its site at 
abcul.coop/loan-calculator <http://www.abcul.coop/loan-calculator>

Aren’t they a bit pricey compared to the cheapest personal loans?


It’s true the best-buy personal loan at the moment is around 3.5% from M&S 
Bank, and not much more from the likes of Nationwide, Tesco and Clydesdale 
Bank. But these deals are reserved for people with excellent credit scores. If 
you are not in that bracket the rates suddenly jump, making credit union deals 
very attractive.

What interest do they pay on savings?

Credit unions tend to pay a dividend to members rather than a specific 
interest rate. These are not great, but are no worse than the commercial banks 
– and sometimes better. For example, theGlasgow Credit Union 
<http://www.glasgowcu.com/savings/dividend-and-rates/> paid 1.5% on balances 
last year, and 2.5% in 2013.

Are they safe?


Like banks, credit unions are regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority and 
are fully covered by the Financial Services Compensation Scheme 
<http://www.fscs.org.uk/what-we-cover/products/credit-unions/> (FSCS) up to the 
standard limit of £85,000 per individual – which is dropping to £75,000 on 1 
January 2016.
 