
A winter coat, a pair of jeans, a shirt for work, boots and a pair of socks – 
that’s the clothes shopping done for at least the next 30 years, maybe even for 
life.

Buying clothes that last a lifetime is a concept that is fast gaining 
popularity. As brands launch “lifetime guarantees”, there are now shirts on 
sale that will apparently last until 2046, and ever-lasting pairs of pants.

Buy any of these garments and if a zip sticks or a waist band snaps, the 
company will repair or replace the item for free, even if you have owned it for 
years – though some of the brands claim their goods are so durable that you 
probably won’t need to.

According to the Valuing our Clothes report by Wrap 
<http://www.wrap.org.uk/sites/files/wrap/VoC%20FINAL%20online%202012%2007%2011.pdf>
, the waste reduction charity, extending the average life of items by three 
months would lead to a 5%10% reduction in each of the UK’s carbon, water and 
waste footprints that can be attributed to clothing.

So these new products represent a tick for anyone wanting sustainable fashion. 
However, the concept is also likely to appeal to anyone who is sick of spending 
money on knitwear that bobbles or shoes that fall apart. And that will be many 
of you, says Tara Button, founder ofBuy me Once <http://www.buymeonce.com/>, a 
website which promotes durable products. “Consumers are understandably 
frustrated. Manufacturing methods are being downgraded while prices are staying 
high and many items simply don’t last anymore,” she says.

Feet first
 A boot from the Dr Martens For Life collection 
Button’s team is currently researching the quality of shoes and finding that 
many popular brands fall apart very quickly. She points to Dr Marten’s as a 
good example of better practice. It offers awarranty for life on its Dr 
Marten’s For Life <http://drmartensforlife.com/> range – as long as your shoes 
or boots haven’t been broken on purpose (Dr Martens says it will be able to 
tell) it will repair them, and if it can’t you will get a replacement pair. To 
activate the guarantee you must register your footwear within 60 days of 
purchase.


“The price as well as the warranty compares well to other boots, which can 
easily cost as much and not offer a guarantee,” says Button. The range includes 
boots priced at £165 and shoes at £145 – not cheap, but less than twice the 
price of many of the firm’s standard range.
 Darn Tough women’s trekking sock 
Similarly, with Darn Tough you pay more than for a standard pair of socks, but 
you geta guarantee for life <https://darntough.com/about-us/our-guarantee>. If 
you manage to wear out a pair you can send them back (they’re made in the US 
but you only need post them to an address in the UK) and get them replaced. The 
socks can be bought from outdoor clothing stores, and online at places such as
Trekitt <http://www.trekitt.co.uk/brands/darntough.aspx> and Openair 
<http://www.openair.co.uk/darn-tough-m59>. Prices start at about £12.80 for the 
lightest, short socks, but expect to pay around £20 for a pair of chunky winter 
ones.

Underwear to outerwear

Underwear doesn’t perhaps spring to mind as a lifetime purchase, but Sloggi 
pantshas a form to fill in on its website if you have any problems 
<http://www.sloggi.com/uk-en/guarantee.html>. You can send them back and get 
them replaced with an equivalent pair. As guarantees go, it’s not bad for items 
that start from £7.

 Patagonia women’s M10 jacket 
Coats are always a bit of an investment purchase, so the cost of buying one 
with a guarantee may not seem so steep an outlay. Patagonia sells jackets with a
guarantee that says it will repair or replace them for 100 years 
<http://eu.patagonia.com/enNL/patagonia.go?assetid=9068> after the date of 
purchase, with starting prices of £130. It trains in-store staff to carry out 
small repairs and pops up at festivals to run repair clinics.

The rest of your outfit

Swedish brand Nudie Jeans, meanwhile, has two dedicated repair shops in London 
where you can get your denims mended for free until they wear out.If you are 
not nearby, you can get hold of a repair kit 
<https://www.nudiejeans.com/page/this-is-nudie-jeans>. It doesn’t mean you get 
a pair for life, but it should make a pair last a lot longer. Cost-wise they 
compare well to other designer jeans, rather than to the high street’s cheapest 
denim. A pair will set you back at least £89 and some styles cost as much as 
£270.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fclothes-boots-last-forever-lifetime-guarantee%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd30cba8fce51edfd1a22f91fe1d41220a279de9b%2F0_0_1200_1600%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Forget%20diamonds%20%E2%80%A6%20how%20about%20clothes%20and%20boots%20that%20last%20forever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fclothes-boots-last-forever-lifetime-guarantee%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Forget%20diamonds%20%E2%80%A6%20how%20about%20clothes%20and%20boots%20that%20last%20forever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fclothes-boots-last-forever-lifetime-guarantee%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd30cba8fce51edfd1a22f91fe1d41220a279de9b%2F0_0_1200_1600%2F1200.jpg>
 Grim Tim Dry Bamboo Selvage-Swedish brand Nudie Jeans 
Another brand aiming for a similar market is Tom Cridland – it’s offering a “
30-year sweatshirt 
<http://www.tomcridland.com/collections/the-30-year-sweatshirt>” in a range of 
colours. They initially cost £65 and the company offers free mending if 
anything goes wrong during that three decades. “We’ve sold over 10,000 
sweatshirts and only one has needed a repair so far,” says the company’s 
eponymous founder. “We’re making them built to last.”

It offers the same promise on a range of jackets starting at £199 and T-shirts 
costing £35.

However, one-off purchases do require discipline and careful consideration 
before you commit. Dr Rebecca Collins, lecturer in human geography at Chester 
University, who researches consumption, says: “I’ve come to the conclusion that 
the quest for novel really drives consumers. If we want longer-lasting fashion 
we need an element of novelty within the garment. It has to be easily 
changeable and capable of being worn in different ways.”

Alternatives

Buy well A price tag used to be a sign of quality, but that’s no longer the 
case. However, there are some ways to check for the quality of the materials. 
For example, are the buttons tightly sewn on and do the button holes have tight 
stitching? When you gently pull the seams of a garment you can see if it’s been 
closely sewn (lots of stitches are a sign that it’s well made) or if there are 
gaps in the stitching (cheaply made). And always check the washing care 
instructions on the label. Natural fibres such as cotton and silk are likely to 
stand up better to repeat washes, as long as you follow the care advice.

Fix them There are sewing workshops and repair cafes (where skilled people 
will help you fix items) in many places, fromManchester’s Stitched Up  
<http://www.stitchedup.coop/186-2/>to Bristol’s Repair Café 
<https://repaircafe.org/en/locations/repair-cafe-bristol/>, and there tons of 
videos online which can help you carry out your own alterations and re-shaping.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fclothes-boots-last-forever-lifetime-guarantee%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F313380aa0c854a398339960de7d27e24bb44b3c5%2F6_0_1509_1509%2F1509.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Forget%20diamonds%20%E2%80%A6%20how%20about%20clothes%20and%20boots%20that%20last%20forever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fclothes-boots-last-forever-lifetime-guarantee%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Forget%20diamonds%20%E2%80%A6%20how%20about%20clothes%20and%20boots%20that%20last%20forever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fclothes-boots-last-forever-lifetime-guarantee%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F313380aa0c854a398339960de7d27e24bb44b3c5%2F6_0_1509_1509%2F1509.jpg>
 Stitched Up in Chorlton, Manchester. 
Borrowing clothes Some clothes are only ever worn occasionally. How many times 
do you wear a cocktail dress, for example? Or a morning suit for a wedding? So 
it may not be cost-effective to ever own these items. There are plenty of dress 
exchange and suit hire options on the high streets, while online sites such as
Chic-by-choice <https://chic-by-choice.com/en> and Girlmeetsdress 
<http://www.girlmeetsdress.com/hire> offer women’s items for hire, and men’s 
suits can be found at places likeSlaters <https://www.slaters.co.uk/>.

On Instagram, the hashtag #ShareWear allows you to search for shareable items. 
If you’re first to post a comment on an itemyou can wear the clothes for a week 
<http://sharewear.se/borrow> before passing them on to the next person. It’s an 
initiative by VisitSweden and the Swedish Institute, a Swedish tourism agency. 
There are occasionallyitems by Swedish designers <http://sharewear.se/howto> on 
the hashtag, which you wear for free for a week.

 Another way to extend your wardrobe is to borrow clothes from a Library of 
Things. There’s one inLondon <http://www.libraryofthings.co.uk/>, one in Frome 
<https://sharefrome.org/>, and another is being started in Cardiff. For a small 
donation you can borrow anything on the shelves.
 