
In the latest blow to Vinyl, the music industry series, HBO announced it is 
parting company with the venerated show runner Terence Winter. A head no doubt 
had to roll:Vinyl <http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/tv-and-radio/vinyl> is the sort 
of show the word “flawed” was invented for – oddly paced, all over the place 
and as unsure of its plotlines as its fictional record company, American 
Century, are about what constitutes a hit.
But it would be a shame if the personnel controversy, poor ratings and shonky 
attempts to recreate rock history obscured Vinyl’s true strength: its treatment 
of addiction.

When Vinyl <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/vinyl> started, one of 
the things that irritated me most was the way we were supposed to find the lead 
character, Richie Finestra (Bobby Cannavale), charming. We were constantly 
being told that he was a genius at his job. That he had a golden ear. That he 
was the man everyone wanted to be. Except this clearly wasn’t the case. That’s 
where things began to get interesting.

Richie’s record company, American Century, was slowly revealed to be in 
trouble, with a roster of middle-of-the-road musicians. His gang of sycophantic 
record men might hang off his every word, but they barely seemed to notice that 
their boss was in the middle of an almighty tumble off the wagon. Meanwhile, 
his relationship with his wife Devon (Olivia Wilde) was revealed as at best, 
built on lies and at worst, downright abusive.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fforget-the-music-hbos-vinyl-is-a-brave-and-bitterly-honest-depiction-of-addiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F567712d1e5fae23f116fe1eebd631aa3d3db13bf%2F0_360_5470_3282%2F5470.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Forget%20the%20music%3A%20HBO's%20Vinyl%20is%20a%20brave%20and%20bitterly%20honest%20depiction%20of%20addiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fforget-the-music-hbos-vinyl-is-a-brave-and-bitterly-honest-depiction-of-addiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Forget%20the%20music%3A%20HBO%27s%20Vinyl%20is%20a%20brave%20and%20bitterly%20honest%20depiction%20of%20addiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fforget-the-music-hbos-vinyl-is-a-brave-and-bitterly-honest-depiction-of-addiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F567712d1e5fae23f116fe1eebd631aa3d3db13bf%2F0_360_5470_3282%2F5470.jpg>
 We first meet Richie on an almighty bender, after years of sobriety. 
Photograph: HBO 2016 
Most dramas about white male anti-heroes from The Sopranos to Mad Men and 
Breaking Bad cut their leading man some slack. Yes,Tony Soprano 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2013/jun/20/james-gandolfini-gangster-sopranos>
 is a ruthless killer but we empathise with his existential angst, his family 
dramas, and his struggles to get by.Don Draper 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2014/03/-em-mad-men-em-s-creator-don-draper-represents-american-society/284519/>
 might be a liar and adulterer, but we admire his smarts and his charm. Walter 
White goes from mild-mannered chemistry teacher to murderous drug kingpin and 
we can’t help but cheer him on. We knowHeisenberg 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/movies/news/why-audiences-still-root-for-walter-white-20130927>
 shouldn’t survive but a small, dark part of us hopes that he will.

By contrast, Richie Finestra is failing: at life, where he has been unable to 
stay sober; at his marriage, where he won’t talk to his wife; and at his job, 
where he is reduced to randomly throwing out ideas desperately hoping one will 
stick. And this is what makes Vinyl so watchable.

We first meet Richie on an almighty bender, after a few years of sobriety. The 
addiction swiftly takes hold and before long he’s alienating colleagues, 
assaulting secretaries and managing to lose one of the few big-name stars – all 
while shovelling half of Colombia’s finest up his nose and chasing it down with 
a double Bourbon on the rocks. So far, so standard – your typical male 
anti-hero angst. Except that where Vinyl differs is that it doesn’t seem to 
want us to forgive Richie. This is what addiction is really like, Winter is 
saying: this ability to cheat everyone, insult everyone, walk away from 
everyone in pursuit of your poison of choice.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fforget-the-music-hbos-vinyl-is-a-brave-and-bitterly-honest-depiction-of-addiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff3bdf7761b5e35cf3469838c69ff84fdcaf7d4a%2F0_68_1555_933%2F1555.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Forget%20the%20music%3A%20HBO's%20Vinyl%20is%20a%20brave%20and%20bitterly%20honest%20depiction%20of%20addiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fforget-the-music-hbos-vinyl-is-a-brave-and-bitterly-honest-depiction-of-addiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Forget%20the%20music%3A%20HBO%27s%20Vinyl%20is%20a%20brave%20and%20bitterly%20honest%20depiction%20of%20addiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fforget-the-music-hbos-vinyl-is-a-brave-and-bitterly-honest-depiction-of-addiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff3bdf7761b5e35cf3469838c69ff84fdcaf7d4a%2F0_68_1555_933%2F1555.jpg>
 Cleaning up his act … Richie with Elvis in The King and I. Photograph: Sky 
Atlantic 
Thus episode seven, The King and I, starts with Richie supposedly cleaned up, 
and for 50 minutes Vinyl lulls us into believing this is true. Richie off drugs 
and drink turns out to be everything the show claimed he could be: smart, 
funny, charismatic and good at his job. Except that he’s still an addict with 
an addict’s needs. The final 10 minutes exposes that with a bitter honesty 
rarely shown on TV.

First, we learn that Richie took the money he and colleague Zak got for the 
sale of the company’s private plane and gambled it away. Then, more brutally, 
the reveal that Richie lets Zak believe that the money’s loss is his fault for 
taking two women up to his room for sex and that they must have stolen the 
cash. That decision to turn the screw is bleakly brilliant. It says that Richie 
is not an anti-hero but an addict. He’s a man who would rather let one of his 
oldest friends carry the can for something he didn’t do than admit the extent 
of his problem. At the core of his being lives a grasping monster that needs to 
be sated, and he will do absolutely anything to do so.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fforget-the-music-hbos-vinyl-is-a-brave-and-bitterly-honest-depiction-of-addiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c7a62f41d1be814bde9ab1a58635a6e5d6261e7%2F0_0_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Forget%20the%20music%3A%20HBO's%20Vinyl%20is%20a%20brave%20and%20bitterly%20honest%20depiction%20of%20addiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fforget-the-music-hbos-vinyl-is-a-brave-and-bitterly-honest-depiction-of-addiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Forget%20the%20music%3A%20HBO%27s%20Vinyl%20is%20a%20brave%20and%20bitterly%20honest%20depiction%20of%20addiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fforget-the-music-hbos-vinyl-is-a-brave-and-bitterly-honest-depiction-of-addiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c7a62f41d1be814bde9ab1a58635a6e5d6261e7%2F0_0_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 ‘I built this company when I was on drugs, it’s when I got sober that it 
turned to shit’ … Richie being his typically charming self. Photograph: HBO 
The following week’s episode is riddled with an addict’s desire for 
self-justification. Richie tells his colleagues he has to take drugs because 
“he needs to focus”, adding: “I built this company when I was on drugs, it’s 
when I got sober that it turned to shit.” He tells his estranged wife that he 
got clean, barely flinching when she fires back: “For how long? A day?” He lies 
to everyone and he lies to himself, continuing to peddle the myth that his drug 
use is a byproduct of the terrible time he’s having rather than the root cause.

Anyone who has ever been or lived with an addict can tell you those moments 
ring horribly true. Addiction is a disease and those caught in its grip behave 
thoughtlessly and cruelly and selfishly. Too often, television sanitises it, 
making it a very special storyline that covers a couple of episodes before 
rehab beckons and it’s never really talked of again.

Vinyl, so far, has taken a different, far braver route, choosing instead to 
show how no amount of money, charm or ability can save you from your demons 
when they crawl in and beg to be fed. It asks you not to like or judge or pity 
Richie Finestra, but to accept that this is his reality. He will continue to 
hurt those he loves and continue to find ways to escape the consequences of his 
actions. As the show reaches its conclusion it will be interesting to see 
whether this unflinching gaze holds steady, or whether the writers instead will 
pull back and sanitise Richie at the last. It would be a shame if they do. 
Vinyl might be an overstuffed mess as a music drama, but as a portrait of an 
addict it’s second to none.

 * Vinyl concludes on HBO, Sunday at 9pm EST and Monday, Sky Atlantic at 9pm 
BST
 