
I have taken over the financial affairs of an elderly dementia sufferer. In 
March 2013, he signed up with Money Club and paid an annual fee of £98. At that 
time he had just started losing his memory and he does not own a computer or 
have the mental capacity to use the service, so I’m baffled as to how it sold 
him the membership. Another £98 was taken in March 2014 and since then a 
further 20 payments have been taken by direct debit totalling £2,148. I have 
attempted to contact Money Club without success. He should only have been 
charged three payments of £98 from 2013 to 2016.JS, Manchester

The Money Club has a habit of cold calling with the offer of a free trial, 
then committing householders to an annual subscription without them being fully 
aware of what they are signing up to. Calling itself “the UK’s premier shopping 
club”, it runs a discount and cashback website. Several Cash readers have found 
themselves paying way over the odds as the annual £98 subscription is randomly 
debited. One reader recently told me an account had been debited 29 times in 
five years.

The Money Club blames a computer upgrade. “The frequency of his payments, 
which should have been set to annually, was left blank and, as a result, 
collections have been made on a fairly arbitrary basis,” it says. “We can find 
no trace of him using the club, which is probably why the error has not been 
picked up.”

It is refunding all the payments, but you should make sure the direct debit is 
cancelled.

If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk  
<mailto:your.problems@observer.co.uk>or write to Your Problems, The Observer, 
Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number.
 