
The escalating story of sexual abuse in football is now threatening to take in 
Newcastle United after a former player contacted the police to allege he was 
another victim on the back of growing concerns about a possible paedophile ring 
in the sport.

The ex-player, whose identity is known to the Guardian, has named George 
Ormond as the offender, claiming that he was sexually abused by a man who has 
already had a six-year prison sentence for a string of convictions involving 
boys from the club’s youth system over a 24-year period.

Pictured: serial paedophile Barry Bennell in his time as Manchester City 
talent-spotter
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/barry-bennell> 
The complainant has been inspired to report the alleged abuse after the 
Guardian brought to light abuse suffered by former players elsewhere. That 
began when the former Crewe Alexandra defender Andy Woodward waived his right 
to anonymity last week toreveal the harrowing accounts  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/andy-woodward>of the sexual 
abuse he endured from the coach, scout and serial paedophile Barry Bennell. 
Another former Crewe player,Steve Walters, followed suit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/steve-walters-andy-woodward-crewe-alexandra>
 to tell the Guardian a story of disturbing similarity.

David White, best known for his long association at Manchester City, has 
subsequently come forward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/23/david-white> to reveal he was 
another of Bennell’s victims and another former England international,Paul 
Stewart, has said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/paul-stewart-sexual-abuse-coach>
 he was targeted by a separate man who was working in junior football in the 
Manchester area.

A spokesman for Northumbria Police told the Guardian: “We have received a 
report in relation to an allegation of historic [sic] sexual offences in 
Newcastle. We are working closely with, and supporting, the victim and 
enquiries are ongoing.” Ormond was branded a “predatory abuser” by the judge at 
Newcastle crown court when he was imprisoned, aged 46, in 2002 at the end of a 
trial that heard how a man once regarded as a highly respected coach in youth 
circles used his standing to bring youngsters under his power.

His case has similarities in that respect with Bennell’s time as a youth-team 
coach at Crewe and White’s ordeal at Whitehill FC, a junior team affiliated to 
Manchester City. Bennell, who also had links with Stoke City, coached sides in 
Greater Manchester, Cheshire, Staffordshire and Derbyshire, but it is only now 
that the full extent of his crimes is becoming apparent.

Woodward believes there could be hundreds of victims and a new NSPCC hotline 
for footballers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/24/nspcc-launches-hotline-for-sexually-abused-footballers>
, opened with the support of the Football Association, received more than 50 
calls in the first two hours.

Wayne Rooney, the England and Manchester United player and an NSPCC 
ambassador, said: “It’s awful that some of my colleagues have suffered this way 
whilst playing the sport that I and they love. Andy has been really brave to 
come forward and I would encourage anyone who has or is suffering from abuse to 
call the NSPCC’s new football helpline. It’s important that people know that 
it’s ok to speak out, there is help available and that they don’t need to 
suffer in silence.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Ffootball-child-abuse-victim-steve-walters-victoria-derbyshire-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20child%20abuse%20victim%3A%20it's%20time%20for%20justice%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Ffootball-child-abuse-victim-steve-walters-victoria-derbyshire-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20child%20abuse%20victim%3A%20it%27s%20time%20for%20justice%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Ffootball-child-abuse-victim-steve-walters-victoria-derbyshire-video&media=>
Football child abuse victim Steve Walters: it’s time for justice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/nov/25/football-child-abuse-victim-steve-walters-victoria-derbyshire-video>
Last week two other former players, speaking to the Guardian, independently 
named another man from the football world who had abused them, and Cheshire 
police reported on Wednesday that 11 people had contacted them to talk about 
the Bennell case. The Guardian is aware of many others who have been abused but 
chosen not to come forward, including one case where the victim has decided it 
would be too upsetting for his elderly mother to find out.

Ormond denied 15 charges of indecent assault on seven boys, five of whom were 
under the age of 16, between 1975 and 1999. He was convicted of 12 indecent 
assaults and one attempted indecent assault after having earlier been acquitted 
of the other attacks on the directions of the judge.

The police investigation into his crimes began after one of the victims 
secretly recorded a conversation between them, more than a decade after the 
attacks, and Ormond could be heard apparently apologising. The court was told 
that Ormond, who argued he was the victim of a conspiracy among his accusers, 
was “wholly preoccupied with sex” and carried out his attacks at various 
locations including youth-club changing rooms, his car and at the homes of some 
victims.

Sentencing Ormond, the judge, Esmond Faulks, told him: “The evidence 
demonstrates you were a predatory abuser of young boys. You used your position 
as a football coach to target vulnerable young children. You ingratiated 
yourself with their parents and prevented disclosure by the power you wielded 
over them as their coach.”

Newcastle issued a statement on Friday which said: “At this time, the only 
information we have is that which appeared in the Guardian newspaper. Clearly 
Newcastle United will cooperate fully with the police and relevant authorities 
and provide every assistance we can if or when the club receives further 
information.

“The club would encourage anyone with information about possible child abuse 
in our game to report their concerns to the police, the football authorities or 
the NSPCC. The FA has commissioned in conjunction with the NSPCC a specific 
helpline for individuals who wish to come forward with further information.”

• The NSPCC’s hotline is 0800 023 2642 and Child Line for children and young 
people can be contacted on 0800 1111.

• NAPAC, the National Association for People Abused in Childhood, can be 
contacted on 0808 801 0331.

• In the UK, The Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the 
National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis 
support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14.
 