
David White, the one-time England international, is among the former 
footballers whose “life was torn apart” by Barry Bennell and is now willing to 
go public about his ordeal at the hands of a serial paedophile who worked in 
junior and professional football more than three decades.

White, best known for his long association with Manchester City, was targeted 
by Bennell, the coach he had “hero-worshipped”, when he was 11, playing for one 
of the teams run by a man regarded as one of the best junior coaches and 
talent-spotters in the country.

Second footballer reveals abuse by serial paedophile Barry Bennell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/steve-walters-andy-woodward-crewe-alexandra>
White’s story has disturbing similarities to the ordeals suffered by Andy 
Woodward <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/andy-woodward>and 
Steve Walters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/steve-walters-andy-woodward-crewe-alexandra>
, two other former players, who have waived their right to anonymity to tell 
the Guardian how Bennell preyed on them when they were in Crewe Alexandra’s 
youth system.

Paul Stewart, the former Manchester City, Tottenham Hotspur and Liverpool 
player, has also come forward toallege he was sexually abused 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/paul-stewart-sexual-abuse-coach>
 by another coach in the north-west from the ages of 11 to 15. Stewart, who 
began his career at Blackpool and won three England caps in the early-1990s,
told the Daily Mirror 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/paul-stewart-sexually-abused-coach-9313094>
 it led to him turning to drink and drugs after he had stopped playing.

White, whose career also included spells at Leeds United and Sheffield United, 
said: “Given recent press stories I wish to confirm that I was sexually abused 
by my former football coach Barry Bennell in the late 70s and early 80s – this 
abuse took place while I was attached to Whitehill FC Junior team based in 
Manchester.

“For a number of reasons, and for nearly two decades, I kept my ordeal secret 
from my family and friends. While I believe throughout my football career I 
have come to terms with what had happened, I now realise the effects of 
Bennell’s actions were much more far-reaching than I knew then.”

White intends to tell his story in a book, entitled Shades of Blue: The Hidden 
Torment of a Football Star 
<http://www.amazon.in/Shades-Blue-Hidden-Torment-Football/dp/1782437703>. 
Joanne Lake, whose husband, Paul, played in the same City team, is 
collaborating with him on the book.

“Last year I made the decision to gather my thoughts, reflect on my experience 
and tell my life story in my own words,” White said. “I did not set out to 
write a story about the abuse, but knew I would have to include it.

How to contact the Guardian securely
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/2016/sep/19/how-to-contact-the-guardian-securely>
“In doing so I have come to terms with the fact that Bennell’s actions 
influenced almost every event and relationship in my life. The process of 
writing the book became sometimes painful, always cathartic and incredibly 
liberating. I would like to say that I do not feel brave.

“This is just my story and I am now happy to tell it because despite the 
profound effects of 1979-80 I feel like one of the lucky ones.

“Circumstances took me away from the abuse before it escalated. I salute Andy 
Woodward, Steve Walters, and Paul Stewart for so bravely revealing their 
personal tragedies. The physical abuse they and others suffered was certainly 
more extreme and prolonged than my ordeal, and I cannot be sure that I would 
have their courage.”

White, now 49, was a member of City’s “golden generation” that won the FA 
Youth Cup in 1986 and made his first-team debut at the age of 18, going on to 
play for them for the next seven years as well as winning an England cap in a 
1992 friendly against Spain.

Andy Woodward showed great courage – but is his story just the tip of the 
iceberg? | Daniel Taylor
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/andy-woodward> 
The book’s publisher, Michael O’Mara Books, said: “David’s parents had given 
this coach their blessing, believing that his attentions would hugely benefit 
their son’s football progress. They were, however, utterly unaware that this 
popular, 20-something, highly regarded coach – who David hero-worshipped – was 
in fact a prolific and predatory paedophile.”

Bennell, who coached leading junior teams in Manchester, Derbyshire, 
Staffordshire and Cheshire, helped to bring through several first-team players 
at Maine Road as well as various other international footballers at other clubs.

Now 62, he was sentenced to nine years in prison in 1998 after admitting 23 
specimen charges of sexual offences against six boys aged nine to 15, with 
another 22 offences left on file. He previously served a four-sentence in 
Florida for offences against a boy on a football tour and was jailed for two 
years in May 2015 for molesting a 12-year-old in Macclesfield in 1980. He is 
currently out on licence and believed to be living in Milton Keynes.

Eleven people have contacted Cheshire police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/23/cheshire-police-expand-football-sexual-abuse-inquiry-more-come-forward>
 on the back of Woodward’s interview when the former Crewe, Bury and Sheffield 
player revealed he had been sexually abused for several years, from the age of 
11, by a man described by the American authorities as having “almost an 
insatiable appetite” for young boys.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffootball-sexual-abuse-scandal-could-be-worse-than-jimmy-savile-case-says-andy-woodward-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20sexual%20abuse%20scandal%20could%20be%20worse%20than%20Jimmy%20Savile%20case%2C%20says%20Andy%20Woodward%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffootball-sexual-abuse-scandal-could-be-worse-than-jimmy-savile-case-says-andy-woodward-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20sexual%20abuse%20scandal%20could%20be%20worse%20than%20Jimmy%20Savile%20case%2C%20says%20Andy%20Woodward%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffootball-sexual-abuse-scandal-could-be-worse-than-jimmy-savile-case-says-andy-woodward-video&media=>
Football sexual abuse scandal could be worse than Jimmy Savile case, says Andy 
Woodward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/nov/23/football-sexual-abuse-scandal-could-be-worse-than-jimmy-savile-case-says-andy-woodward-video>
. 
The FA is setting up a hotline for other potential victims and six more people 
who were previously coached by Bennell contacted Woodward directly on Tuesday 
after Walters went public to reveal how he had also been targeted by his former 
coach.

• The NSPCC’s helpline is 0808 800 5000 or Child Line for children and young 
people can be contacted on 0800 1111.

• NAPAC, the National Association for People Abused in Childhood, can be 
contacted on 0808 801 0331.

• In the UK, The Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the 
National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis 
support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14.
 