
A former Imperial Wizard of the Ku Klux Klan has boasted that the group’s 
members played a “huge role” in Donald Trump’s US presidential victory.


“This is one of the most exciting nights of my life,” David Duke tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/DrDavidDuke/status/796249464826687488> as the result was 
confirmed. “Make no mistake about it, our people have played a HUGE role in 
electing Trump!” He added Trump’s campaign hashtag #MAGA, which stands for 
“Make America Great Again”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%202016%20US%20election%20night%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%202016%20US%20election%20night%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video&media=>
How the 2016 US election night unfolded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/how-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video>
Members of America’s alt-right reacted with glee to the news of Trump’s 
victory. The provocative conservative movement, largely active online, has been 
closely associated with Trump’s campaign.

“We just blew up the Death Star!” tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/RealAlexJones/status/796249279748833282> the rightwing 
radio presenter Alex Jones. He laterretweeted an image 
<https://twitter.com/libertytarian/status/796259180940292096> from the Wizard 
of Oz showing the Wicked Witch of the East flattened by a house, with the 
caption: “BREAKING video of#Hillary 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Hillary?src=hash> shows why she can’t make a 
concession speech to President Trump.”

Donald Trump wins US election: Clinton to deliver concession speech – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-us-election-2016-live-reactio>
Michael Savage, a shock jock who was banned from entering the UK in 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/may/06/michael-savage-sue-jacqui-smith>
 as he was considered “likely to cause inter-community tension or even 
violence”,posted on his Facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/drmichaelsavage/?fref=ts> the message “WE DID IT”, 
alongside an image reading: “Scorched earth. Restoring the country after Obama.”

On Breitbart, a news site at the forefront of the alt-right movement, the 
front-page headline <http://www.breitbart.com/> declared: “Shock – and awesome: 
Movement of ordinary Americans stun global elite.”


Richard Spencer 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/06/us/white-supremacists-extend-their-reach-through-websites.html>
, who is president of the white nationalistNational Policy Institute 
<http://www.npiamerica.org/>, tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/RichardBSpencer/status/796212554397794304> “The Saxon has 
awoken”and <https://twitter.com/RichardBSpencer/status/796219846715379712> “The 
alt-right just won!”




Mike Cernovich, a pro-Trump author, posted a clip of Clinton supporters 
weeping as the result was confirmed, with the message:“Cry more!” 
<https://twitter.com/Cernovich/status/796291642000973824>

• This article was amended on 16 November 2016 to remove a quoted individual 
who was mistakenly included.
 