
Former prison governor Eoin McLennan-Murray looks well for a man who’s just 
retired after 37 years working for the prison service. He has governed all 
types of prisons during the course of his career – from category A – the 
highest security, to category D, the lowest; worked with female prisoners at 
Holloway and Bullwood Hall and for five years was the president of thePrison 
Governors Association <http://prison-governors-association.org.uk/>. It was in 
that role that he warned of a “perfect storm” in the prison system in the 
summer of 2014 .

“There had been a dramatic reduction in resources for the service,” he 
explains. “That had quite an impact on regimes and decency. The service was, 
and still is, under incredible strain. We had a lot of anti-prisoner political 
rhetoric; there’s beenan increase in suicide rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/05/prison-funding-cuts-are-putting-vulnerable-prisoners-at-risk>
; we’ve had record levels of violence prisoner on prisoner and prisoner on 
staff; record deaths in custody;lengthening sentences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/08/cameron-prisoner-numbers-sentencing>
; restrictions on Release on Temporary Licence (ROTL). We’ve had a real 
downturn – if we compare it to theWoolf agenda [Lord Woolf’s recommendations 
following the 1990 Strangeways riot] we’ve completely gone against that 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/apr/01/lord-woolf-strangeways-prisons-still-crisis>
. That has left prisons reeling in many ways. I can’t think how the position 
could have been any worse. How we got through that and why we didn’t have mass 
disorder is a remarkable achievement.”

Gove plans to give prison governors more powers to educate and reform
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/03/michael-gove-plans-to-give-prison-governors-more-powers-to-educate-and-reform>
Last week, David Cameron announced that he wanted prisoners to be seen as 
“assets” rather than “liabilities” and for prison governors to have more 
autonomy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/08/cameron-give-more-power-governors-prisons-shakeup>
. Does McLennan-Murray sense that the storm might be starting to calm? “It 
helps that we’ve got a new secretary of state.Mr Grayling  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/29/chris-grayling-interfere-prison-reports-nick-hardwick>
has gone, Mr Gove has come in and he’s a breath of fresh air in many ways,” he 
says. “He and the prime minister are talking about redemption and investing in 
prisons to try to change lives for the better. It’s great to have that 
rhetoric. In the past prisoners were used to help maintain the prison and also 
help with local building projects. To maximise the ability of prisoners to be 
assets, governors will need to have more discretion about releasing prisoners 
[on temporary licence] so that they can do things in the community and external 
prison grounds. Letting governors actually govern is a move that’s long 
overdue. The dead hand of central control has stifled local initiative and 
institutionalised risk aversion.”

But he is critical of Cameron’s idea to introduce prison league tables based 
on reconviction rates. “It would be a nightmare trying to establish which 
prison was responsible for the success or failure of a prisoner who had been to 
a number of different prisons on his sentence. Individual prisons being 
league-tabled is silly, targets for a cluster of prisons or a national target 
is a better way forward.”

What was sadly missing from Cameron’s speech, he adds, were proposals on 
community sentences for short-term prisoners and proposals to dramatically 
reduce the female population.

It was an incredibly successful resettlement prison - prisoners changing for 
the better, year after year after year

McLennan-Murray was at the centre of one of the most controversial events in 
modern prison service history when, on 5th May 2000, he was summarily removed 
from his post as governor of HMP Blantyre House hours before a raid on his 
prison by a battalion of 84 prison officers, many wearing full riot gear, 
wielding staves, crowbars and sledge hammers. The raid officers were supposedly 
looking for ammunition, explosives and drugs.

All 130 prisoners were drug-tested, yet all were negative. A prison service 
investigation determined that the raid produced nothing of significance. At the 
time Blantyre House had the lowest reoffending rate for released prisoners in 
the country and there were suspicions that the motive behind the raid had more 
to do with an attack on its rehabilitation-focused ethos than with the stated 
aims of its instigators. A fullhome affairs select committee inquiry later 
concluded that the raid was “a self-inflicted injury by the prison service” 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm199900/cmselect/cmhaff/904/90403.htm>
.

Though completely exonerated from any wrongdoing or mismanagement, it took 
some time before McLennan-Murray recovered sufficiently to resume his career 
and take charge of Lewes prison in East Sussex.

So why was Blantyre House targeted, did he think? “It was an incredibly 
successful resettlement prison 
<http://hansard.millbanksystems.com/lords/2001/jan/17/hm-prison-blantyre-house>
. It was the pinnacle of my career. It was an entire cohort of prisoners 
changing for the better, and it was year after year after year. I’ve never 
experienced that level of success on such a scale. It was about human 
relationships, about giving people hope, treating people as responsible adults, 
making them take decisions about their own lives. And letting the prisoners 
themselves develop a prosocial culture, rather than the usual prison antisocial 
culture. Trust underpinned that. The trust that existed between staff and 
prisoners was phenomenal. Prisoners didn’t abuse that trust, not because of 
threat or punishment, but because they believed that would be the wrong thing 
to do. They wanted the regime to succeed, they saw how it benefited them and 
could change their lives.

Even though it was low security, it was the most secure prison I’d ever worked 
in because the prisoners made it that way. I didn’t have to use coercion. 
Anyone who abused the three golden rules: no alcohol; no drugs; no violence – 
well, they were immediately shipped back to the closed system.”

He says the raid was devastating. “It was smashing up something that was so 
good. The purported reason for doing it was that there was a belief that staff 
were corrupt, that I was corrupt, that prisoners were running everything. That 
was how it was cast. I found it incredibly hurtful. It was just a lie. History 
proves it. They just made things up, because someone, had a view that this 
shouldn’t work. I was accused of falsifying my drug-testing return figures 
because the results were so good. They were that good because prisoners took a 
conscious decision for themselves not to be involved with drugs. You couldn’t 
get better security than that. It wasn’t believed that you could trust a 
prisoner to act responsibly.”

He looks crestfallen when I ask him how he managed to recover. “To tell you 
the truth I didn’t think I had a future. I was one individual taking on the 
might of the prison service, the civil service. It was kind of David and 
Goliath. There was no-one to rescue me in the service. People distanced 
themselves from me. I was damaged goods, contaminated. Only a few notable 
individuals supported me, the Board of Visitors at Blantyre – fantastic. Those 
people, along with my wife and family – they saw me through the darkest days. 
But the saving grace was the home affairs select committee. Without their 
intervention and the prison inspectorate under Sir David Ramsbotham I would 
have been finished – because of them I couldn’t simply be killed off.”

He believes Gove’s priority should be ditching the many counterproductive 
measures that Grayling put in place 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/21/prison-suicides-chris-grayling>
 and investing in rehabilitation opportunities for prisoners. “You’ve got to 
invest in a regime, keeping prisoners active and engaged. And you’ve got to 
provide sufficient staff so they can interact with prisoners in a constructive 
way.”

McLennan-Murray says: “Put simply we’ve got to grow up when it comes to 
prisons if we want them to serve us properly. It seems the government has 
finally understood that.”
 