
Angola <https://www.theguardian.com/world/angola> is celebrating 40 years of 
independence on 11 November. Now, however, people are no longer just asking for 
peace, democracy and bread, but also freedom.

In the face of President José Eduardo dos Santos’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/aug/30/angola-jose-eduardo-dos-santos> 
36-year rule, one slogan has emerged among Angola’s informed youth:Liberdade Já 
<http://liberdade-ja.com/en> (Freedom Now).


On the same day, the ruling People’s Movement for the Liberation of Angola 
(MPLA) will celebrate 40 years in power. Angolans have only known two kinds of 
rule: Portuguese colonialism and the authoritarian regime of MPLA.


During those years, the MPLA has chosen to perpetuate the worst practices of 
the very regime it claims to have replaced – the Portuguese colonial state. 
Economic extraction, the central objective of the colonial state, has become 
the means for the Angolan elite to assimilate into the Portuguese elite. The 
prime example is the president himself. His first born,billionaire Isabel dos 
Santos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/25/isobel-dos-santos-africas-first-female-billionaire>
, is a major investor in Portugal.


The process of extraction is no longer about raw materials. It is about the 
plundering of Angolan state assets, primarily transferred to Portugal by way of 
investments in banking, the takeover of floundering companies, real estate and 
media among others. These investments provide the veneer of respectability, 
public relations and other resources for Portugal to be the laundromat for the 
Angolan regime, and to maintain its open door to international markets and 
diplomacy.

But the Portuguese are beginning to have second thoughts about their 
partnership with a dictator.

The Portuguese media reported extensively on the arrest of 15 young Angolans 
in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/30/angola-book-club-dos-santos-arrests>
, while they were discussing literature on non-violence at a bookstore. 
Initially, the attorney general and the president himself publicly accused the 
young people of plotting a coup. In September, they were finally charged with 
the crime of rebellion and attempting to assassinate the president. They remain 
in detention, and will be tried on 16 November.

The arrests brought an outpouring of national and international solidarity 
that has overshadowed any official celebrations of the regime’s achievements. 
The young people have become the heroes and, for the first time, the president 
the villain.


One the youngsters, rapper Luaty da Silva Beirão 
<http://mg.co.za/article/2013-05-24-00-luaty-da-silva-beirao-is-prepared-to-take-the-rap>
, who has dual Angolan-Portuguese citizenship, went on a 36-day hunger strike 
to protest against their illegal detention. In Portugal he became the unifying 
symbol of Angolan and Portuguese struggles against the MPLA regime and its 
Portuguese backers.Liberdade Já has become the motto of Portuguese civil 
society.

MPLA leaders have hit back with a propaganda campaign aimed at the Portuguese 
and the Angolan public.


Recently, I participated in a television debate with the former Portuguese 
minister of foreign affairs,António Martins da Cruz 
<http://www.portalangop.co.ao/angola/en_us/noticias/politica/2015/7/35/Angola-must-international-political-and-economic-player-Jurist-Carlos-Feijo,d9518ce6-e7e6-4a4c-a330-955361b31d4a.html>
,a paid consultant for the MPLA regime 
<https://docs.google.com/viewerng/viewer?url=http://www.club-k.net/images/pdf/consultores-legais2.pdf>
. He argued that human rights issues could only be discussed at the UN human 
rights council. With him making these arguments, and through selective editing, 
Angolan state media was able to present the debate as a success for the regime.


Meanwhile, Dos Santos dispatched his newly appointed tsar for propaganda 
abroad, ambassador-itinerant António Luvualu, to Portugal to deliver a message 
that any challenge to the Angolan president’s authority would be a declaration 
of war.

Luvualu claimed that the 15 young people were planning for “Nato or some of 
its member countries 
<http://www.rtp.pt/noticias/mundo/embaixador-angolano-acusa-luaty-beirao-de-tentar-provocar-intervencao-da-nato_v872405>
 to participate in an attack against Angola, to bring about the same horror 
unfolding in Libya or which happened and is still ongoing in Tunisia”. The 
comparison is surprising, given that theTunisian national dialogue quartet 
received the 2015 Nobel peace prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/15/tunisia-national-dialogue-quartet-nobel-peace-prize-2015>
 for ensuring a successful and peaceful transition.

Recently, Luvualu attempted to disavow the arguments of celebrated Angolan 
writerJosé Eduardo Agualusa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/booksblog/2015/feb/03/best-books-angola-review-world-library>
, because of his dual Angolan-Portuguese citizenship. Agualusa has been an 
ambassador for freedom of expression and respect for human rights in Angola. 
Luvualu’s comments are odd, given many members of the Angolan government have 
dual citizenship.

The MPLA’s propaganda keeps criticising Portugal for allowing its media and 
citizens to take a stand for freedom of expression and human rights in Angola, 
suggesting that this is a sign of Lisbon’s colonial mindset.


However, the colonial mindset seems to be more instilled in the MPLA regime 
than in the Portuguese public. Portugal remains the mirror for the Angolan 
elite, making it impossible for Angolans to forge a country in their own image. 
Angola is trapped in an independence in which the ruling elite still yearns for 
Portuguese acceptance through a colonial perspective of assimilation.

As a result, the promises of independence have yet to be realised. Liberdade Já
is the first step to be taken towards fulfilling those promises.


 <> 
 