
There were a lot of tributes after the horror in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris-attacks>. It has to be said that 
Trafalgar Square is an odd choice of venue to show solidarity with France; 
presumably Waterloo was too busy. One of the most appropriate tributes was 
Adele dedicatingHometown Glory <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BW9Fzwuf43c> to 
Paris, just as the raids on St-Denis started. A song about south London where, 
10 years ago, armed police decided to hysterically blow the face off a man just 
because he wasa bit beige 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jun/03/de-menezes-family-take-case-to-european-court>
.

In times of crisis, we are made to feel we should scrutinise our government’s 
actions less closely, when surely that’s when we should pay closest attention. 
There’s a feeling that after an atrocity history and context become less 
relevant, when surely these are actually the worst times for a society to go on 
psychopathic autopilot. Our attitudes are fostered by a society built on ideas 
of dominance, where the solution to crises are force and action, rather than 
reflection and compromise.

If that sounds unbearably drippy, just humour me for a second and imagine a 
country where the response toParis <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> 
involved an urgent debate about how to make public spaces safer and 
marginalised groups less vulnerable to radicalisation. Do you honestly feel 
safer with a debate centred around when we can turn some desert town 3,000 
miles away into a sheet of glass? Of course, it’s not as if the west hasn’t 
learned any lessons from Iraq and Afghanistan. This time round, no one’s said 
out loud that we’re going to win.

People seem concerned to make sure that Islam gets its full share of the 
blame, so we get the unedifying circus of neocons invoking God as much as the 
killers. “Well, Isis say they’re motivated by God.” Yes, and people who have 
sex with their pets say they’re motivated by love, but most of us don’t really 
believe them. Not that I’m any friend of religion – let’s blame religion for 
whatever we can. Let’s blame anyone who invokes the name of any deity just 
because they want to ruin our weekend, starting with TGI Friday’s.

The ringleader, Abdelhamid Abaaoud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/19/abdelhamid-abaaoud-suspected-paris-attacks-ringleader-was-killed-in-raid>
, evaded detection by security services by having a name too long to fit into 
one tweet. How could the most stringent surveillance in the world not have 
picked up Abdelhamid Abaaoud before? I mean, they’d have got him even if they 
just went through lists of terrorists alphabetically.

We’re always dealing with terror in retrospect – like stocking up on Imodium 
rather than reading the cooking instructions on your mini kievs. The truth is 
that modern governments sit at the head of a well-funded security apparatus. 
They are told that foreign military adventures put domestic populations at risk 
and they give them the thumbs up anyway. Charitably, the safety of their 
populations just aren’t of great concern to them. Realistically, domestic 
terrorist attacks play into their agenda: they allow them to grab ever more 
authoritarian powers with which to police their increasingly unequal and 
volatile societies. Of course, no one wants to believe that our government 
isn’t interested in our safety, just like everyone really wanted to believe 
that Jimmy Savile cared about whether kids got to meet Duran Duran.

Britain clings to its bombing addiction with the weary rationale of a junkie | 
Frankie Boyle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/20/britain-clings-bombing-addiction-weary-rationale-junkie-frankie-boyle>
It’s not an insult to the dead to wonder why France, a $2tn economy, couldn’t 
make a better offer to its disenfranchised youth than a bunch of sick bullies 
grooming them on the internet. It’s not apologism to try to understand why 
something happened.When Syria’s drought kicked in 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/capital-weather-gang/wp/2013/09/09/drought-and-syria-manmade-climate-change-or-just-climate/>
, 25% of the population became unemployed. The vast majority of the country’s 
livestock has died over the past decade. A lot of Isis are farmers with nowhere 
to go, their entire industry destroyed – you’d think they’d have more sympathy 
for journalists. Those who think radicalising a youngster has nothing to do 
with climate – have you seen Tatooine?

No one is saying climate change causes terrorism. Stop thinking that a global 
death cult is caused by one thing – it’s a complex situation involving several 
different countries and ideologies, not a rattling sound in your washing 
machine. Personally, I think that for all our blaming religion, there will be 
peace in the Middle East when the oil runs out. But knowing their luck, then 
somebody will invent a way of making fuel by mixing sand and falafel.

Maybe the west’s approach is right. After all, if you’ve got a massive fight 
in, say, a pub car park, the best way of solving it is clearly standing well 
back and randomly lobbing in fireworks. You can’t get rid of an ideology by 
destroying its leaders; you’d think if there’s anything “Christian” countries 
should know, it’s that. Europe has rejected the death penalty on moral grounds, 
and yet we relax this view when it comes to a group who want to be martyred. 
You can’t bomb ideas. If your kid shits on the carpet, you can’t stop them by 
bombing the person who invented shit – though it would tidy up ITV’s Saturday 
night schedule.

Andrew Neil went viral with an impassioned eulogy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2015/nov/20/andrew-neil-islamist-scumbags-isis-paris-video>
 that, like most eulogies, was just inaccurate nonsense in the form of nice 
memorable words strung together with angry sad words. A speech that would have 
made those named within it proud, but only because a good few of them were 
nihilistic absurdists. Listing the great French thinkers in a tribute to 
nuclear power showcased the worst aspect of historical fame: these were figures 
Neil could name but appeared to know nothing about.

For a list supporting the French government’s foray into bombing its former 
colony he choseSatie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/01/erik-satie-a-life-less-ordinary>
, a composer so questioning of state he put a question mark into La 
Marseillaise;Zola <https://www.theguardian.com/books/emilezola>, a man so 
adamant about the function of a fair and full trial he may have been murdered 
for his beliefs;Rousseau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2014/jan/20/rousseau-compassionate-intense-relevant-philosopher>
 – “Those who think themselves masters of others are greater slaves than they”;
Ravel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/mar/06/ravel-radio3-small-is-beautiful>
, who rejected all state honours;Gauguin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gauguin>, a passionate defender of 
indigenous peoples; and Camus, the great Algerian-born philosopher, who died in 
1960, a year before he would’ve been thrown into the Seine at the orders of the 
Nazi head of the Parisian police.

Out of his list of peacenik, thoughtful, anti-government icons, one of the few 
who might have been in favour of bombing Syria wasSartre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/22/jean-paul-sartre-refuses-nobel-prize-literature-50-years-books>
, and that’s only because he thought we were all dead anyway. Of course, we 
mustn’t forgetCoco Chanel 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/today/hi/today/newsid_9567000/9567657.stm>, who Neil 
threw on to the list in such a blatant “if we don’t include a woman we’ll get 
into trouble” rush, he didn’t notice a quick wiki would reveal her to be a Nazi 
spy. These are the people who made France great, because what they asked of 
France was to question, to look death in the eye, to commit to full trials and 
never resort to military force, to step away from government, away from 
indigenous lands, to never see themselves as superior, and most, most of all, 
for people to stop regurgitating rhetorical cliches and think for themselves.

Neil asked us to consider who will be remembered in 1,000 years, and the 
answer of course is Thkkkkkkkzzzzxrrkksd, the insane Cockroach Emperor, who 
revolutionised the mining of our bones for fuel. But let’s go with his conceit. 
A thousand years is a long time; the first book published in French wasn’t 
until 1476. Goodness knows what an Islamic caliphate would have been doing 
1,000 years ago? They built the House of Wisdom in Baghdad, one of the first 
universities in the world; they asked scholars of all faiths to translate every 
text ever written into Arabic; they demanded the first qualifications for 
doctors, founded the first psychiatric hospitals and invented ophthalmology. 
They developed algebra (algorithms are named after their Arab father) and a 
programmable machine … a computer. They introduced Aristotle to Europe, 
Al-Jahiz began theories of natural selection, they discovered the Andromeda 
galaxy, classified the spinal nerves and created hydropower using pumps and 
gears.

And Neil is right – we don’t remember any of that. Not to say that this is 
what Isis want – Isis are like the group that closed the House of Wisdom, the 
next caliphate who decided science was irreligious. Isis want to destroy the 
knowledge that Islam is a beautiful, scientific and intelligent culture, and we 
are way ahead of them.

We want Paris to be remembered in 1,000 years and we don’t remember the names 
of the victims 10 minutes after reading them – we don’t rememberAmine 
Ibnolmobarak 
<http://moroccantimes.com/2015/11/17089/amine-ibnolmobarak-paris-moroccan-architect-performed-graduate-study-pilgrimage-mecca>
, a Moroccan émigré who was designing an architectural solution to the 2,000 
deaths at Mecca; we don’t rememberElsa Delplace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2015/nov/16/paris-attack-victims-lives-cut-cruelly-short>
 and her mother Patricia San Martin, who died shielding Delplace’s young son 
from bullets. We remember that the female terrorist was blond and one had no 
pants on. We remember that the terrorists came in with refugees even though 
they don’t seem to have done, especially since they were all French or Belgian. 
We expect our descendants to remember Daft Punk and we don’t even remember that 
invading Iraq caused the birth and rise of Isis. And we won’t remember any of 
this once the new series of Britain’s Got Talent starts.

 