
After the second world war, Melanesian 
<http://www.britannica.com/place/Melanesia> islanders formed cargo cults near 
abandoned airfields. They thought that if they carried out the rituals they had 
observed the troops performing at the American air force bases, planes would 
land. So they would march up and down in improvised uniforms performing parade 
ground drills with wooden rifles, believing that if the rites were performed 
correctly the planes would return and bring them cargo. I only mention this as 
a useful point of comparison for theLiberal Democrat conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/libdemconference>. An isolated tribe 
going through the formal motions of something they think will bring votes, 
failing to understand that their actions are meaningless and vestigial. In 
fact, it’s more like the tribe had recently been allowed to fly a plane and had 
smashed it right into a mountain and nobody was ever going to let them anywhere 
near a plane again until the world was over.

Labour’s conference <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labourconference> 
featured quite an impressive run-up by Jeremy Corbyn, tackling TV interviewers 
like a soothing GP talking to a hypochondriac. There was remarkably little 
infighting at the conference, as happens when a party realises it needs to put 
divisions aside and show solidarity to become electable, or, indeed, when two 
separate halves of a party loathe each other so much that they have to go to 
different sets of meetings.

Corbyn took to the stage with his head like a haunted tennis ball, and the 
general air of a pigeon that had inherited a suit. His speech lasted 59 
minutes, one minute for every Labour MP who would like to see him fed into a 
sausage machine. The newLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> 
leader insisted, “Leadership is about listening.” If leadership is about 
listening, the great political speeches would have been a little different. 
Churchill saying, “Can you tell me what you’d like to do on the beaches?” Or 
Martin Luther King, surrounded by civil right activists at the Lincoln 
Memorial: “Did everyone hear that? He said a dog came into his bedroom but it 
had the head of his dead mother … it sang the Camptown Races and then all his 
teeth fell out. That’s a great one. OK, hands up who’s got another dream?”

Many in the party think Corbyn won’t last the full term, especially if we have 
a couple of cold winters. Actually, I have high hopes for him and his deputy 
Tom Watson, who could be mistaken, in a low light, for a chest of drawers with 
a telly on top. Perhaps their contrasting styles will complement each other. 
Corbyn looks like he will be killed by a mole from the secret services, Watson 
by a roll from the motorway services. Corbyn even came to the rescue of a 
speaker at the conference when her wheelchair became stuck while on stage. If 
it had been the Tories, she would have been removed by Iain Duncan Smith 
side-kicking her into the orchestra pit.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Ffrankie-boyles-conference-roundup-haunted-tennis-ball-slytherin-chancellor-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444233854861%2F7c6b06b6-b170-41c2-9c10-5b13d5bb486f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Frankie%20Boyle%E2%80%99s%20conference%20roundup%3A%20Labour%E2%80%99s%20haunted%20tennis%20ball%20and%20the%20Slytherin%20chancellor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Ffrankie-boyles-conference-roundup-haunted-tennis-ball-slytherin-chancellor-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Frankie%20Boyle%E2%80%99s%20conference%20roundup%3A%20Labour%E2%80%99s%20haunted%20tennis%20ball%20and%20the%20Slytherin%20chancellor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Ffrankie-boyles-conference-roundup-haunted-tennis-ball-slytherin-chancellor-politics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444233854861%2F7c6b06b6-b170-41c2-9c10-5b13d5bb486f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Tom Watson: a chest of drawers with a telly on top. Photograph: Leon 
Neal/AFP/Getty Images 
Corbyn has had trouble persuading his MPs that nuclear weapons are bad. Then 
again, he hasn’t had much success persuading his MPs that Tories are bad. There 
seems to be a real split on Trident in the party between extreme elements who 
don’t think we should recommission it, and more moderate voices who want to 
retain the ability to heat hundreds of thousands of people’s skeletons to the 
surface temperature of the planet Mercury, in case 1970s Russia tries to attack 
us through some kind ofStargate 
<http://vignette4.wikia.nocookie.net/stargate/images/3/31/Stargate-wallpaper.jpg/revision/latest?cb=20140530004847>
.

Len McCluskey announced that the union Unite would block plans to scrap 
Trident in an attempt to protect jobs. It’s a tough call, jobs over a potential 
nuclear holocaust. But perhaps McCluskey is right; if there is an accident, 
there will be jobs aplenty. Full employment for the six people left in the UK. 
And they’ll be happy to pay their Unite dues when they find out they have got a 
job for life (which may only be for less than a week) as they become their own 
farmer, cook, builder, doctor. All, of course, taking second fiddle to their 
main career of collecting their own teeth and keeping them safe inside the 
skull of a labrador.

Some accused shadow chancellor John McDonnell of attacking British business by 
suggesting that he would “chase down” companies suspected of tax evasion. Which 
is a bit like screaming “police brutality” when a traffic light turns red. He 
told Scots who voted for the SNP that, “Now is the time to come home.” He 
clearly hasn’t got the measure of the Scots, as a similar text message from his 
own wife, “7cm dilated”, wouldn’t get your average Scotsman out of the pub.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Ffrankie-boyles-conference-roundup-haunted-tennis-ball-slytherin-chancellor-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444233064806%2F91725356-1067-4215-bce5-0c854d2b06a5-1784x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Frankie%20Boyle%E2%80%99s%20conference%20roundup%3A%20Labour%E2%80%99s%20haunted%20tennis%20ball%20and%20the%20Slytherin%20chancellor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Ffrankie-boyles-conference-roundup-haunted-tennis-ball-slytherin-chancellor-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Frankie%20Boyle%E2%80%99s%20conference%20roundup%3A%20Labour%E2%80%99s%20haunted%20tennis%20ball%20and%20the%20Slytherin%20chancellor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Ffrankie-boyles-conference-roundup-haunted-tennis-ball-slytherin-chancellor-politics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444233064806%2F91725356-1067-4215-bce5-0c854d2b06a5-1784x2040.jpeg>
 Jeremy Corbyn: can he survive a couple of cold winters? Photograph: Mark 
Thomas/Rex Shutterstock 
The press headlines fear that Labour plans to hammer the middle classes. I 
think they’re too late. The middle classes are completely hammered already, and 
are the perfect group to go after as they are the least likely to notice. Most 
of them don’t plan on sobering up until the youngest has gone to university and 
they have plucked up enough courage to ask for a divorce. Until then, the sun 
will always be over the yardarm, the days a hungover blur, the evenings like a 
free bar at a tramp’s funeral, and the bank statements all shredded unopened.

There are obviously huge differences between Ed Miliband and Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>, and it’s refreshing to 
see a leader mess up some of his speech not because he’s a freakshow, but 
because he simply doesn’t care. As I watched the standard conference procedure 
of people applauding things they would fast forward on YouTube, it occurred to 
me that this conference may have accidentally stumbled upon the one message 
that might reassure British voters: that you can have enormous change without 
puncturing the boredom.

The Conservatives <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> held 
theirs in Manchester. For the prostitution industry, this is the equivalent of 
being selected to host the Commonwealth Games. There was a ring of steel around 
the conference. Ironically, it’s the last steel the north will be seeing for a 
very long time. Tory conference seemed to be all about saying how much you 
believe in British values, then immediately contradicting yourself: “This 
country has always welcomed migrants … but we’re full up.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F28%2Fjeremy-corbyn-helps-wheelchair-user-labour-conference-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F28%2F1443451561425%2FKP_503820_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jeremy%20Corbyn%20helps%20wheelchair%20user%20at%20Labour%20conference%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F28%2Fjeremy-corbyn-helps-wheelchair-user-labour-conference-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jeremy%20Corbyn%20helps%20wheelchair%20user%20at%20Labour%20conference%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F28%2Fjeremy-corbyn-helps-wheelchair-user-labour-conference-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F28%2F1443451561425%2FKP_503820_crop_640x360.jpg>
Jeremy Corbyn to the rescue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2015/sep/28/jeremy-corbyn-helps-wheelchair-user-labour-conference-video>
The first big hitter to take the stage was George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne>, a man who is not afraid 
to bark at his hairdresser, “Demented syphilitic emperor!” and his tailor, 
“Prom night at Slytherin!” The best part of Osborne’s speech was the eerie six 
seconds of complete silence after the applause had ended but before he started 
to talk; presumably the demons who speak through him were arguing about who got 
to go first. For his ambitions as leader, it was a mistake to start with the 
election: it seemed to stir a dim memory in the gathering that this was someone 
who during elections is usually nailed into a coffin and thrown on to an Arctic 
exploration vessel.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fgeorge-osborne-party-conference-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=George%20Osborne%3A%20heir%20to%20the%20Tory%20throne%3F%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fgeorge-osborne-party-conference-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=George%20Osborne%3A%20heir%20to%20the%20Tory%20throne%3F%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fgeorge-osborne-party-conference-video&media=>
George Osborne: heir to the Tory throne? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2015/oct/05/george-osborne-party-conference-video>
Osborne insisted that the Conservatives are the “party of labour”, to a 
television audience largely consisting of the unemployed. Osborne wants to “fix 
the roof while the sun is shining”. It’s like he has never even visited 
Britain. When the sun shines in Britain, that’s when we stop working. When the 
sun is shining in Britain, no one is fixing a roof, they are in a beer garden 
drinking 10 pints of cider, the roof the least of their worries as they are no 
longer able to find their own house. Why hasn’t Osborne joined the accusations 
that Jeremy Corbyn is a neo-communist threat to national security? Possibly he 
has been too busy trying to get the Chinese to build our nuclear reactors. I’m 
not judging his plan to cut tax credits; the cleanup required after next 
summer’s riots might actually be a Keynsian master stroke. Overall, he drew a 
lukewarm response that highlighted the fine line between a standing ovation and 
wanting to be first to the bar.

Of course, it’s absurd that we trust the Tories with our day-to-day reality, 
as so many of them don’t really inhabit it. Why elect people to run our schools 
and hospitals who choose not to go to those schools and hospitals? I certainly 
don’t trust them on public transport. Many have a subliminal loathing of buses 
based on suppressed memories of boarding school. One cry of “room for a few 
more on top” and they’re right back in the dorm, the randiest future 
captain-of-industry thwarting their desperate escape with a well-thrown handful 
of marbles. Admittedly, the Tories will never let the rail system completely 
disintegrate. As, in a few years, they’ll need it to get benefit claimants into 
their camps.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Ffrankie-boyles-conference-roundup-haunted-tennis-ball-slytherin-chancellor-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444233532750%2F3639dbe8-f1a8-4b81-9fb8-581af28765e9-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Frankie%20Boyle%E2%80%99s%20conference%20roundup%3A%20Labour%E2%80%99s%20haunted%20tennis%20ball%20and%20the%20Slytherin%20chancellor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Ffrankie-boyles-conference-roundup-haunted-tennis-ball-slytherin-chancellor-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Frankie%20Boyle%E2%80%99s%20conference%20roundup%3A%20Labour%E2%80%99s%20haunted%20tennis%20ball%20and%20the%20Slytherin%20chancellor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Ffrankie-boyles-conference-roundup-haunted-tennis-ball-slytherin-chancellor-politics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444233532750%2F3639dbe8-f1a8-4b81-9fb8-581af28765e9-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Theresa May: a help to the vulnerable? Photograph: Phil Noble/Reuters 
Admittedly, the Conservatives are generally more persuasive orators than their 
Labour counterparts, perhaps a skill developed by spending school holidays 
trying to lure father out from behind his Daily Telegraph. Jeremy Hunt said 
that he wants Britain’s workers to work harder, like the Chinese. Hunt’s wife 
is Chinese, and is often heard muttering, “Christ, this is hard work.” Then 
came Theresa May, a woman who exudes all the compassion of stage 4 bone cancer, 
talking of her party’s “proud history” of helping vulnerable people. They have 
never helped vulnerable people and they are very proud of that.

The whole sorry season finished with David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron>, of all people, giving a 
speech about equality. A speech blatantly at right angles to everything he has 
ever said or done. A speech where he yelled that London is the greatest city in 
the world, in the middle of Manchester. Cameron said: “There are parts of 
Britain today where you can get by without ever speaking English.” Yes, 
Newcastle. He said the Tories were the party that, “doesn’t care where you come 
from, but only where you’re going”. Which basically sums up Theresa May’s 
immigration policy.

It was a speech he could give because he knows it simply doesn’t matter. TTIP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/03/ttip-what-why-angry-transatlantic-trade-investment-partnership-guide>
 will come in soon and all of this will be rendered symbolic. Our new rulers 
will be corporations. Looking down at Britain from business class, all the 
party conferences – and the protests marching up and down outside them – will 
look like little cargo cults. We will be allowed to keep our political rituals 
because they have an entertainment value, and because somebody needs to give 
speeches and answer questions. That’s not something our new rulers will be 
doing. They will be glimpsed only occasionally, stepping briskly into waiting 
cars. Our elected officials will soon fill a function much like the one the 
media fills now, as mere agents of a greater power. With no other role to play, 
our politicians will continue doing what they know: waving to the cameras, 
forcing a smile, hoping to keep us paying attention to their strange, dull 
ceremonies.
 