
It began as a celebration of sorts, marking the safe return of sport to 
St-Denis and a welcome to the new age of French rugby under Guy Novès, complete 
with the coach’s promise to create a new atmosphere. There was an atmosphere, 
but not exactly what he had in mind as the Stade held its breath and watched 
Italy rumble and drive into drop-goal range. They trailed by two points and the 
clock was past the 80-minute mark as none other than Sergio Parisse dropped 
into the pocket and swung his boot.

It turned out to be an inelegant swing, the first clumsy stroke by the captain 
and No8 on the day he won his 115th cap. The ball flew squiffily way to the 
left of the target, the referee, JP Doyle, blew his whistle and the Novès era 
was off to a winning but far from convincing start.

France 23-21 Italy: Six Nations 2016 – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/feb/06/france-v-italy-six-nations-2016-live>
Working backwards from the missed drop-goal attempt, Parisse had been involved 
in the incident that allowed France to take the lead. He led a charge to the 
halfway line, where he was tackled high by Yacouba Camara, on for Louis 
Picamoles who limped off after quarter of an hour. Parisse did not think he was 
held and rose to run again. When the whistle went he must have thought it was 
for the high tackle. Instead, it was against him.

Up stepped Jules Plisson and banged the ball over from halfway and wide out. 
That was the fly-half’s third successful kick and made the decision to hand the 
kicking duties to Sébastien Bézy slightly mystifying. The new scrum-half missed 
three shots at goal.

France were off-target all over the place, their collective strength more than 
countered by the Italian pack. Francesco Minto was tireless as the invisible 
complement to Parisse’s obvious involvement. Edoardo Gori was intelligent and 
industrious at scrum-half and Carlo Canna was a revelation at 10, their problem 
position ever since Diego Domínguez departed 13 years ago.

Canna opened his account with a drop goal and presumably would have dared 
shove Parisse out of the way at the other end of the game. Unfortunately, he 
had just limped off, replaced by Guglielmo Palazzani, a scrum-half. Kelly 
Haimona was at fly-half and had landed a penalty to put Italy ahead before 
Plisson’s long-range effort – but he never looked as if he wanted to take 
responsibility for the final drop attempt.

Canna performed admirably on many fronts, his highlight being the try in the 
early minutes of the second half. He took a high pass with one hand, crossed 
and converted to put Italy eight points ahead. Parisse in the buildup had 
nearly scored his second try – his first was from a rapidly advancing maul 
after a lineout – but had been prevented from touching down by Virimi Vakatawa. 
Much more of him later.

Gori dug the ball out from the Parisse near-miss and found Canna. The try put 
Italy firmly in the driving seat and France would have to score at least twice. 
It is to the credit of the home team that they succeeded, with Hugo Bonneval 
crossing in the corner after Alessandro Zanni stepped in to take Jonathan Danty 
– who made many good runs – and left Bonneval free on the outside. Plisson 
converted from the touchline and then added a penalty to put France ahead.

That was as good as it ever was for France. Before this comeback they had 
played in fits and starts and the crowd was eminently restless long before 
half-time. The air of celebration soon faded. The only time they rallied was 
when the ball came Vakatawa’s way. The wing from Fiji was selected by Novès 
straight from the sevens’ circuit and at times he looked ill at ease in the 
large pile-ups that go with the full version.

But out in the daylight he was sensational, running with strength and yet 
finely balanced and always looking to pass the ball – held like a pea in one 
hand – out of contact. He scored the first try, dancing within a millimetre of 
the touchline, and his other runs were largely instrumental in giving France a 
two-point lead at half-time.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F06%2Ffrance-italy-six-nations-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41310c39715eb2c12ec21d0d0116c0281acc2c9e%2F965_333_2239_1344%2F2239.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=France%20cling%20on%20to%20edge%20out%20Italy%20after%20Sergio%20Parisse%20blows%20drop%20goal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F06%2Ffrance-italy-six-nations-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=France%20cling%20on%20to%20edge%20out%20Italy%20after%20Sergio%20Parisse%20blows%20drop%20goal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F06%2Ffrance-italy-six-nations-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41310c39715eb2c12ec21d0d0116c0281acc2c9e%2F965_333_2239_1344%2F2239.jpg>
 Sergio Parisse makes his unsuccessful drop goal attempt, leaving Italy to lose 
by two points. Photograph: INPHO/REX/Shutterstock 
He stood out because his team-mates were largely muted elsewhere. They tried 
to play with width, but Italy read their intentions and piled in reinforcements 
even if the first tackles on Vakatawa and Danty were broken. The French 
forwards never really offered themselves as viable alternative as their runs 
were more abruptly halted.

Italy were much stronger up front. Things will improve no doubt for France, 
but Italy the losers will take more from this than the victors. They came into 
this game chased by whispers that if they did not shape up, the campaign to 
have Georgia or Romania replace them in theSix Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations> would gather pace.

Canna and the entire team looked completely at home in the championship. Rome 
will be no stroll for England nexton Sunday.

France Médard (Doussain 77); Bonneval, Fickou (Mermoz 55), Danty, Vakatawa; 
Plisson, Bézy (Machenaud 65); Ben Arous (Poirot 50), Guirado (capt), Slimai 
(Atonio 50), Jedrasiak (Flanquart 72), Maestri, Lauret, Chouly, Picamoles 
(Camara 16)Tries Vakatawa, Chouly, Bonneval Con Plisson Pens Plisson 2

Italy Odiete (McLean 55); Sarto, Campagnaro, Garcia (Haimona 68), Bellini; 
Canna (Palazzani 77), Gori; Lovotti (Zanusso 65), Gega (Giazzon 56), Cittadini 
(Castrogiovanni 65), Biagi (Bernabo 46), Fuser, Minto, Zanni, Parisse (capt)
Tries Parisse, Canna Con Canna Pens Canna, Haimona Drop goal Canna

Stade de France

Game rating 6/10 Referee JP Doyle (Eng)
 