
Germany’s acting FA president, Reinhard Rauball, has praised France’s players 
for an “outstanding gesture of camaraderie” after they refused to leave the 
Stade deFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> on Friday night in a 
show of solidarity with their opponents.

Both sets of players spent much of the night on mattresses in the stadium 
after Germany were advised not to return to their team hotel following the
terrorist attacks across Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2015/nov/14/paris-attacks-what-we-know-so-far>
. “The French said that they were staying as long as Germany had to stay,” said 
Rauball.

German football team spends night at Stade de France after Paris attacks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/14/german-football-team-spends-night-stade-de-france-paris-attacks>
A group of empty minibuses left the stadium in the early hours to collect the 
German squad’s bags from the hotel, where there had been abomb scare earlier in 
the day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/13/germany-evacuated-paris-hotel-bomb-threat>
. Players and staff then flew back to Frankfurt on Saturday morning.

“The players were very afraid,” said Germany’s general manager, Oliver 
Bierhoff. “We didn’t want to take any risks and we didn’t know either whether 
all routes would have been secure, so we stayed. Our thoughts are with the 
victims and their relatives. We are just happy to have landed safely.”

The Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/football/germany> players, who are 
due to play Holland in Hannover on Tuesday, later released a joint statement, 
saying: “We came to Paris to do what connects us all – to play football, 
together, against one another and in friendship. To have an enjoyable evening 
together with our fans, to show sporting ambition, but particularly we came for 
a fair and peaceful encounter. We all looked forward to playing in the Stade de 
France, to have a great night of football, which ended up turning into a 
nightmare.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Fexplosion-france-germany-football-paris-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F13%2F1447453212753%2FKP_596038_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Explosion%20heard%20during%20France%20v%20Germany%20football%20match%20in%20Paris%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Fexplosion-france-germany-football-paris-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Explosion%20heard%20during%20France%20v%20Germany%20football%20match%20in%20Paris%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Fexplosion-france-germany-football-paris-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F13%2F1447453212753%2FKP_596038_crop_640x360.jpg>
Explosion heard during France v Germany football match in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/nov/13/explosion-france-germany-football-paris-video>
“It was a dull bang which changed everything. It produced pictures that will 
remain in our heads for a long time. We spent the night doing a lot of 
thought-processing. We asked ourselves why something like this could happen? 
How is such inhumanity even possible? There were a lot of answers but none that 
could explain these cowardly attacks. We lost a game of football on Friday 
evening. But nothing is as irrelevant as that right now.”

Fans and journalists who were inside the stadium described the atmosphere as 
“surreal”. Loïc Tanzi,covering the game for Goal.com 
<http://www.goal.com/en/news/468/international-football/2015/11/14/17310432/a-terrible-drama-how-stade-de-france-tragedy-unfolded>
, said that while fans had cheered the first explosion, thinking it was a 
firework, the second detonation “plunged the stadium into silence … At 
half-time, a helicopter began to fly over the ground. Telephone calls and text 
messages left no one in any doubt. When the final whistle was blown the PA 
system announced: ‘There have been incidents outside the stadium, please leave 
by the west gates.’ Outside … chaos. There was a huge crowd surge and people 
were shouting: ‘He’s armed. He’s going to shoot us.’ And so we went back to the 
stands.”

Andreas Berten, a reporter for publishers Funke Mediengruppe, told the New 
York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/15/world/europe/stade-de-france-paris-soccer.html>
 he had been waiting for a lift down to the dressing room area when “suddenly 
hundreds of fans came running back through the gates toward the field. We 
thought perhaps there were attackers coming into the stadium with guns.”

A France <https://www.theguardian.com/football/france> supporter, Frédéric 
Lavergne, told the Associated Press: “We heard the explosions but we thought 
they were home-made fireworks. [At the end] we preferred to stay on the field, 
that’s where we felt safest.”

It was gone 11.30pm local time before the pitch cleared – with a group of fans 
filmed singing La Marseillaise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/nov/14/football-fans-sing-la-marseillaise-during-stadium-evacuation-video>
 defiantly as they walked out of the stadium.

Among those caught up in the confusion were 1,200 volunteers and emergency 
workers who had been given free tickets to the game to honour their role in 
responding to theAlps Germanwings plane crash in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/24/german-a320-airbus-plane-crashes-french-alps>
.

The Airbus executive Rainer Ohler told Reuters: “It was supposed to be an 
evening of French and German celebration and appreciation after that tragic 
event. At first nobody thought of terrorism. It was when President Hollande 
left and people started getting texts that we realised what was going on.”

Among other tributes, Noël Le Graët, head of the French FA, said in a 
statement: “The French Football Federation shares the emotion that shakes the 
nation. We share the grief of the bereaved families and relatives.”
 