
The iconoclastic French economy minister Emmanuel Macron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/19/hollande-bazooka-decree-socialist-french-president-economy>
 is poised to shake up the political landscape before next year’s presidential 
race by launching a political movement, sparking speculation about his own 
ambitions to run for power.


Macron, 38, a charismatic and straight talking former investment banker, has 
had a meteoric rise to become one of France’s most popular political figures 
despite being unknown two years ago, belonging to no political party and never 
having run for elected office.

Since François Hollande <https://www.theguardian.com/world/francois-hollande> 
catapulted him from presidential adviser to economy ministerin 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/26/new-cabinet-ministers-france-manuel-valls-socialist-rebels>
, Macron has sent a rocket through traditional French politics.

While serving in a Socialist government, he has systematically attacked the 
taboo subjects of the left – from the 35-hour week to Sunday working, and the 
vast public service – and decried what he calls the terrible limitations of a 
“sclerotic”France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, paralysed by 
economic immobilism and the dire discrimination against the country’s 
multi-ethnic youth on housing estates.

Hosting a “citizens’ rally” in his home town of Amiens, in northern France, on 
Wednesday, Macron announced he was founding his own political movement, called
En Marche! <https://www.en-marche.fr/parcours/#/>, or Forward!, which was 
neither “of the right nor the left”. Open to anyone from any political party, 
the movement is rounding up support from MPs and funding. Its aim is to come up 
with new ideas to solve the “blockages” holding France back.

“I’m in a leftwing government, unashamedly,” Macron said. “But I also want to 
work with people from the right, who commit to the same valuesThis ambition, 
it’s radical, it’s a bit crazy, but there is such an energy in this country.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Ffrances-emmanuel-macron-launches-political-movement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F332aadd8d17147805c695df707b4ecf9e708be79%2F0_80_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=France's%20economy%20minister%20Emmanuel%20Macron%20launches%20political%20movement&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Ffrances-emmanuel-macron-launches-political-movement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=France%27s%20economy%20minister%20Emmanuel%20Macron%20launches%20political%20movement&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Ffrances-emmanuel-macron-launches-political-movement%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F332aadd8d17147805c695df707b4ecf9e708be79%2F0_80_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
 François Hollande has not yet announced whether he will run for a second term. 
Photograph: Philippe Wojazer/Reuters 
Macron’s timing is significant. With just over a year to go until France’s 
2017 presidential race, there is a growing exasperation with old political 
party structures on the left and right.Marine Le Pen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/marine-le-pen>’s far-right Front National is 
a rising force 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/13/front-national-held-back-in-france-but-its-trajectory-is-on-the-up>
 seen as a very real threat. Le Pen is shown by polls as easily able to knock 
out a mainstream candidate and reach the presidential final round.

 Hollande is France’s least popular modern president, plagued by terrible poll 
ratings,mass unemployment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/26/french-taxi-drivers-block-paris-roads-in-uber-protest>
 and low growth. He still hopes to run for re-election but had promised he 
would not do so unless he stemmed the seemingly relentless rise in joblessness. 
He has not yet announced whether he will run for a second term and a sense of 
doubt and distrust is growing on the broader left.

The former president Nicolas Sarkozy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nicolas-sarkozy> meanwhile, is fighting a 
primary race to be candidate on the right. But the prospect of an election race 
between three old faces from the past – Hollande, Sarkozy and Le Pen, who all 
fought the last presidential race in 2012 – has exasperated much of the already 
pessimistic electorate.

Macron has many enemies on the traditional left of the Socialist party over 
his pro-business, liberalising economic reform agenda. But by styling himself 
as fresh blood with new ideas in a tired political landscape, media 
commentators have seized on his potential as a future leadership figure – a 
young outsider who could run as a surprise presidential candidate if Hollande’s 
ambitions collapse, or who could serve as a future prime minister in a centrist 
government.

At the rally in Amiens, Macron stressed that the 2017 presidential elections 
were not his priority, but did not rule out being a candidate. “This is not a 
movement for yet another candidate for the presidential election, that’s not my 
priority today,” he said.
 