
Providing free breakfast clubs for primary schools in disadvantaged areas 
boosted maths and literacy results even among those pupils who didn’t attend, 
according to new research.

The findings suggest that government funding of universal free lunches for 
children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/29/fall-in-proportion-of-pupils-getting-free-school-meals>
 in infant school in England may be more productive – and more cost-effective – 
if spent on breakfasts clubs instead.

Kevan Collins, chief executive of the Educational Endowment Foundation which 
supported the work, said: “The government has committed to spending £10m a year 
on healthy breakfast clubs, as part of their plan to tackle childhood obesity. 
They should consider using a free, universal and before-school model to benefit 
attainment as well.”

The work, evaluated by the Institute for Fiscal Studies, looked at free 
breakfasts provided at schools before the start of teaching, andfound strong 
improvements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/17/healthy-breakfasts-fuel-better-school-results-says-study>
 in writing, reading and maths for pupils in year two, aged six and seven.

The research also found similar, but less prominent improvements in writing 
for pupils in year six, aged 10 and 11.

Free school meals 'putting pressure on small schools' budgets'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/31/free-school-meals-putting-pressure-small-schools-budgets-uk>
The findings were based on the results from 106 primary schools in 
disadvantaged regions, which offered children a choice of cereals, porridge and 
bagels.

Sam Bailey, the head teacher of the Forest Academy in Barnsley, was an 
enthusiastic supporter of the scheme, saying it produced a “positive effect” 
within the entire school.

“Pupil behaviour has improved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/20/after-school-clubs-can-improve-poorer-childrens-education>
 dramatically and attitudes to learning are the best they have ever been,” 
Bailey said. “Academic standards have been raised too and we’ve seen 
significant improvements in every year group.”

Andy Jolley, a campaigner who has challenged the government’s universal infant 
free school meal (UIFSM) programme, said: “Breakfast clubs seem to offer 
similar or better outcomes than UIFSM but for a fraction of the price. It’s 
time the government looked into the benefits of UIFSM to seeif it really offers 
value for money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/31/free-school-meals-putting-pressure-small-schools-budgets-uk>
.”

The IFS researchers noted that the positive benefits extended to children who 
didn’t even go to the pre-school clubs, thanks to improved concentration and 
behaviour by those who did.

“This finding is interesting because it shows that breakfast clubs provide an 
opportunity to improve outcomes for children who do not actually attend 
breakfast club, through better classroom environments,” the IFS said.


Collins said: “That’s why the findings are so encouraging. Not only does a 
good breakfast provide all young people with a nutritious start to the day, but 
well-run breakfast clubs have the potential to boost attainment and behaviour 
too.”

Even among those who did attend, breakfast alone may not have been the main 
reason behind the improvements.

“The findings suggest that it is not just eating breakfast that delivers 
improvements, but attending a breakfast club. This could be due to the 
nutritional content of the breakfast itself, or the social or educational 
benefits of the breakfast club environment,” the IFS said.


Schools face disruption as a result of universal infant free school meals 
policy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jan/20/schools-disruption-universal-infant-free-school-meals-policy-funding-special-needs-food>
In schools that took part, year two children gained the equivalent of two 
months’ additional progress, which the IFS said was “roughly equal to the 
effect of providing universal free school meals in two pilot areas in 2011 
which led to the national roll-out of that programme for infants.”

For year six children, similar improvements were seen in writing, but there 
was no significant boost in reading and maths.
 