
British TV’s most celebrated hotel owner once performed a goosestep across his 
foyer with a finger held under his nose, in approximation of Hitler’s 
moustache. Basil Fawlty then asked his German guests why one of them was 
sobbing. “Will you stop talking about the war?” snapped one. “Me?” asked 
Fawlty. “You started it.” “We did not start it!” “Yes, you did – you invaded 
Poland.”

That may have been back in the 1970s, but Britons still can’t stop mentioning 
the war.On Radio 4’s News Quiz recently 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b06vn929>, Hugo Rifkind noted that the mayor 
of Cologne had recommended that – following a spate of sexual attacks, 
reportedly by Arab men – women should keep strangers at arm’s length. “I’m just 
not sure it’s the best advice,” said Rifkind, “to tell Germans confronted with 
a racial minority to stand in a public place with their arms out.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffreud-dads-army-and-the-nazis-what-our-anti-german-jokes-say-about-the-british%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34ce8c43db507623d70381a9cdf4fca908d14720%2F0_0_1801_1080%2F1801.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Freud%2C%20Dad's%20Army%20and%2070%20years%20of%20Nazi%20jokes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffreud-dads-army-and-the-nazis-what-our-anti-german-jokes-say-about-the-british%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Freud%2C%20Dad%27s%20Army%20and%2070%20years%20of%20Nazi%20jokes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffreud-dads-army-and-the-nazis-what-our-anti-german-jokes-say-about-the-british%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34ce8c43db507623d70381a9cdf4fca908d14720%2F0_0_1801_1080%2F1801.jpg>
 ‘You started it’ … John Cleese in the Fawlty Towers episode, The Germans. 
Photograph: BBC 
Why does so much British comedy still rely on memories of a conflict that 
ended 70 years ago? Because, as is always the case with humour, the joke says 
more about the teller than its target. Consider Harry Enfield’s early 1990s 
characterJürgen the German <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=doPR-6X9h7c>, a 
tourist in London struggling with his country’s historic shame. His 
catchphrase? “I feel I must apologise for ze conduct of my nation during zevar 
<http://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/UsefulNotes/WorldWarII>.” Each week, 
Jürgen would lose his sangfroid because of some failing in British life (trains 
not running on time, say).

It’s high time we stopped mentioning the war | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/feb/02/its-high-time-we-stopped-mentioning-the-war>
No doubt I’m reading too much into Enfield’s creation, but I suspect he was 
partly exploring British envy for Germans. As a nation, we have never felt 
moved to do what we should – namely, reflect on how utterly disgusting we were 
(and perhaps still are) as a nation and an empire.
 ‘I feel I must apologise’ … Harry Enfield as Jürgen the German 
In reality, Germans are not like Jürgen and more like Gottfried the exchange 
student in the BBC’s Outnumbered: sane, multilingual astute observers of the 
folly of modern Britain.In one episode 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2071137/plotsummary>, Gottfried asked if it was 
really true that this buffoon with the silly hair, this man whom Germans 
recognise as an obvious twerp, has been elected mayor of London? The joke 
traded on the rather convincing idea that it’s the British who are laughable, 
not the Germans.

That’s why the tagline for the new Dad’s Army film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/26/dads-army-review-film-who-dont-you-think-you-are-kidding>
 is so funny: “The British Empire strikes back.” We know it never will. All we 
have is humour to express and explore our repression, our economic 
inadequacies, our infantilism and our many, many failings. We’re unbeatable at 
that.

“Such smart uniforms,” Sergeant Wilson was fond of observing of the Nazis in 
the Dad’s Army series. “Blind obedience, Wilson,” Captain Mainwaring would 
retort, livid at his subordinate’s lack of patriotic sentiment. Dad’s Army was 
an exploration of many comically rich areas, one of them being Britain’s 
enduring incredulity that this shambles of a nation could have defeated such a 
militarily – and sartorially – superior foe. Some might say its abiding 
popularity shows how irredeemably hidebound the British are: we’re mired in 
anti-German feelings for aGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> 
that no longer exists, and wedded to a pride in a Britain that never was.

But that would be a misunderstanding of how comedy works – and of how Germans 
figure in postwar British culture. It may seem that the British hate the 
Germans but (and feel free to read this aloud in the comedy accent of a 
Viennese psychoanalyst) the truth is we are actually projecting our own 
inadequacies on to the symbolic other. In other words, we hate ourselves more.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffreud-dads-army-and-the-nazis-what-our-anti-german-jokes-say-about-the-british%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6e01a86ac264ee7bff2b0719160cd9e394ca269%2F57_106_2631_1579%2F2631.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Freud%2C%20Dad's%20Army%20and%2070%20years%20of%20Nazi%20jokes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffreud-dads-army-and-the-nazis-what-our-anti-german-jokes-say-about-the-british%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Freud%2C%20Dad%27s%20Army%20and%2070%20years%20of%20Nazi%20jokes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffreud-dads-army-and-the-nazis-what-our-anti-german-jokes-say-about-the-british%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6e01a86ac264ee7bff2b0719160cd9e394ca269%2F57_106_2631_1579%2F2631.jpg>
 Defending the realm … Arnold Ridley, Arthur Lowe and John Le Mesurier in the 
original Dad’s Army. Photograph: Allstar/BBC 
 As Freud put it in Jokes and Their Relation to the Unconscious, humour allows 
us to release ideas and emotions that have been repressed. The euphoria it 
triggers returns us to “the mood of our childhood when we were ignorant of the 
comic, when we were incapable of jokes, and we had no need of humour to make us 
feel happy in our life”.

Freud never lived to see ’Allo ’Allo!, which ran from 1982 to 1992, but he 
would have recognised its comically pervy Nazis – Herr Otto Flick and Private 
Helga Geerhart, both played by Brits – as a euphoric release of repressed 
sexual energies in socially acceptable sitcom form. In one episode, hotsy-totsy 
Helga reveals that her silk knickers have been stolen to repair a hot-air 
balloon. “Not,” wails Herr Flick, “ze vones viz ze little swastikas around ze 
edge?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffreud-dads-army-and-the-nazis-what-our-anti-german-jokes-say-about-the-british%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb5e7673518b087c17fdba2d25c32dabd2c22e63%2F440_169_796_1195%2F796.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Freud%2C%20Dad's%20Army%20and%2070%20years%20of%20Nazi%20jokes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffreud-dads-army-and-the-nazis-what-our-anti-german-jokes-say-about-the-british%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Freud%2C%20Dad%27s%20Army%20and%2070%20years%20of%20Nazi%20jokes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffreud-dads-army-and-the-nazis-what-our-anti-german-jokes-say-about-the-british%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb5e7673518b087c17fdba2d25c32dabd2c22e63%2F440_169_796_1195%2F796.jpg>
 A smouldering psychopath … Rufus Sewell in The Man in the High Castle. 
Photograph: Amazon Studios 
This projection of sado-masochistic British sexual fantasies on to German 
bodies is an abiding cultural theme. It’s arguably why, for instance, Ian Dury 
rhymed “Hit me with your rhythm stick” with “Das ist gut/Ich liebe dich” in 
1978 before adding: “Hit me, hit me, hit me!”

When are Britons going to get over these stereotypes and realise that Germany 
is not a land of risible Weimar temptresses and jackbooted Nazi thugs? Not for 
ages yet. Not because we hate Germans, but because we need them – to personify 
what we fear about ourselves but daren’t admit.

Germans, understandably, detest being cast in this role. Writing in Der 
Spiegel, Marco Evers examined this self-serving fairy story by taking a look at 
English football fans going to the 2006 World Cup in Germany. “No matter where 
they looked, they could see no goosestepping policemen in leather coats or 
German supermen. Instead, they encountered fantastic weather, peaceful fan 
zones and hedonistic partying Germans who bore no similarity to the ‘Krauts’ 
described in the British media.” Perhaps the only words more terrifying to 
British ears than “advancing Nazi stormtroopers” are “hedonistic partying 
Germans” enjoying “fantastic weather”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fdads-army-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F4%2F1454601361564%2FKP_1708359_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dad's%20Army%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fdads-army-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dad%27s%20Army%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fdads-army-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F4%2F1454601361564%2FKP_1708359_crop_640x480.jpg>
 Dad’s Army - video review 
I can’t believe I’ve got this far without detonating the H-bomb. Why do 
Britons like dressing up as Hitler? Freddie Starr is significant for adding 
short trousers to what is substantially Charlie Chaplin’s impersonation inThe 
Great Dictator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/18/chaplin-great-dictator-comedy>. 
Comedian Richard Herring’s 2009 appropriation of Hitler’s moustache is more 
interesting. Herring was obliged to defend himself from those who thought he 
was endorsing racism, in dressing up as Hitler to make some unpalatable remarks.
Nonsense, retorted Herring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/jul/31/richard-herring-standup-comedian-brian-logan>
: “It is an age-old comedic device to say the opposite of what you believe in 
order to demonstrate the ultimate stupidity of the stated position. Is it 
heresy to explore the arguments of the racist? Some liberals might think so.” 
So dressing up as Hitler offers a space for Britons to confront the 
intolerable, to imaginatively explore evil.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffreud-dads-army-and-the-nazis-what-our-anti-german-jokes-say-about-the-british%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06117073f8bd28c3beb507731588aac22bc1f2ba%2F0_0_2285_1370%2F2285.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Freud%2C%20Dad's%20Army%20and%2070%20years%20of%20Nazi%20jokes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffreud-dads-army-and-the-nazis-what-our-anti-german-jokes-say-about-the-british%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Freud%2C%20Dad%27s%20Army%20and%2070%20years%20of%20Nazi%20jokes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffreud-dads-army-and-the-nazis-what-our-anti-german-jokes-say-about-the-british%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06117073f8bd28c3beb507731588aac22bc1f2ba%2F0_0_2285_1370%2F2285.jpg>
 Sexual energy … Richard Gibson as Herr Otto Flick and Kim Hartman as Helga 
Geerhart in ’Allo ’Allo. Photograph: BBC 
When are Britons going to stop stereotyping Germans as Nazis? Probably never. 
Put it this way: where would British actors be without the Nazis? Unemployed, 
most likely. I’m not just talking about Herr Flick and his comedy henchpersons. 
Right now, I’m enjoying watching Rufus Sewell as a smouldering Nazi psychopath 
inThe Man in the High Castle 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2015/11/20/the-man-in-the-high-castle-rufus-sewell_n_8609166.html>
, Amazon’s TV adaptation of Philip K Dick’s what-if-the-Nazis-had-won novel.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffreud-dads-army-and-the-nazis-what-our-anti-german-jokes-say-about-the-british%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06e46a7e616e4e518686a634c8ef5e2a90d7cabf%2F292_524_2213_3318%2F2213.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Freud%2C%20Dad's%20Army%20and%2070%20years%20of%20Nazi%20jokes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffreud-dads-army-and-the-nazis-what-our-anti-german-jokes-say-about-the-british%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Freud%2C%20Dad%27s%20Army%20and%2070%20years%20of%20Nazi%20jokes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffreud-dads-army-and-the-nazis-what-our-anti-german-jokes-say-about-the-british%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06e46a7e616e4e518686a634c8ef5e2a90d7cabf%2F292_524_2213_3318%2F2213.jpg>
 Uncomfortable humour … Richard Herring with his Hitler moustache. Photograph: 
Jim Wileman 
Sewell is only the most recent of a long line of Britons who have excelled as 
either Nazis or Nazi-like Germans: I’m thinking of the lateAlan Rickman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gallery/2016/jan/14/alan-rickman-a-life-in-pictures>
 as Hans Gruber in Die Hard and, sticking with the same franchise, Jeremy Irons 
as Gruber’s no less evil brother in Die Hard With a Vengeance. If you’re 
casting a Nazi in Hollywood, the chances are you’ll call a Brit.

 * Dad’s Army is on general release on 5 February.  