
A new A-League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> season is upon 
us, but you’d barely know it. Football traditionally struggles to find space at 
this time of year, thanks to the finals series of the NRL and AFL, but the 
build up to season 11 has been even quieter than usual. No marquee signings, no 
milestones, no glitz and glamour.


PFA will not be rushed into signing new deal before A-League season opener
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/06/ffa-chief-urges-pfa-to-get-new-deal-signed-before-a-league-season-opener>
 Aside from the FFA Cup, which seems to have lost none of its novelty in its 
second season, football fans have had a bleak off-season. There has been 
ownership dramas at Newcastle Jets and an ongoing saga with the Indonesian 
owners of Brisbane Roar, who have left players, staff and creditors unpaid for 
months. The very public and very messy battle between FFA and the players 
association engulfed both the men’s and women’s games, while SBS has relegated 
the A-League from the main channel to SBS2. There are new revelations of the 
distrust between NSW Police and the Western Sydney Wanderers active supporter 
group, as well as rumblings about the FFA board elections in November.

Perhaps the best news in the run up to this season was the September release of
A-League: The Inside Story of the Tumultuous First Decade.Co-authored by 
Fairfax journalist John Stensholt and Leopold Method publisher Shaun Mooney, 
the book is a timely reflection on football’s incredible growth over the past 
10 years, but it is also instructive for the upcoming decade.

A-League shows that while the recent boom has given top-level football a much 
firmer footing in Australia, it has been built and paid for by an unsustainable 
confluence of generous government funding, the largesse of several wealthy 
individuals and the sale of A-League clubs to new owners. The government money 
included a start-up loan from the Howard Liberal Government, as well as the 
Gillard Labor Government’s pork-barreling in Western Sydney that led to the 
creation of the Wanderers in 2012. The losses of club owners alone have been 
staggering, in the vicinity of $150-200 million.

Perhaps this is why, rather than aggressively stimulate the league, the clubs 
appear to be opting for a period of consolidation.

Many believe the lack of true, high-profile marquee signings has hampered the 
league’s growth. In the biggest and most important markets, Sydney and 
Melbourne, there are relative unknowns in Filip Holosko (Sydney FC), Federico 
Piovaccari (Wanderers), Besart Berisha (Victory) and Robert Koren (City). 
Incredibly, the highest-profile player signed to an Australian club this season 
has been former Greece captain Kostas Katsouranis, who played for second-tier 
Heidelberg United in the FFA Cup quarter-final.

Brisbane Roar kick off new A-League season with win at Western Sydney
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/08/brisbane-roar-kick-off-new-a-league-season-with-win-at-western-sydney>
Those who advocate marquee players will point to Sydney FC’s investment in 
Alessandro Del Piero between 2012-2014. Del Piero, along with the introduction 
of the Wanderers, precipitated a huge growth in the club’s revenue and 
membership numbers, while boosting the rest of the competition. Overnight the 
A-League went from stale to sexy, and the TV executives loved it. There’s a 
reason there was a Fox Sports camera stationed solely on Del Piero, and there’s 
a reason there will never be a Holosko-Cam, no matter how many goals he scores 
this season. Holosko is a player whose wages cannot be squeezed into the salary 
cap, not a proper marquee.

Indeed the role of high-profile marquee players is inextricably linked to the 
next television rights deal. Marquee players bring commercial and mainstream 
interest in the A-League, in turn giving FFA greater leverage in their 
negotiations with TV networks.

As shown by Stensholt and Mooney in A-League, the last deal – worth $40 
million – received no interest from the commercial networks. Instead it was 
thrashed out with Fox Sports, SBS and the Federal Government, with the latter 
pair providing $8 million.

It’s unlikely there will be similar generosity next time around, but still FFA 
are aiming for an increase of at least 50% on the last deal. At the moment this 
appears blindly optimistic.

SBS’s coverage, which was supposed to provide the free-to-air oxygen that FFA 
craves, has been peripheral. When SBS switched the A-League from SBS2 to the 
main channel last season, FFA chief executive David Gallop said it was a “sign 
of SBS’s commitment to the game and underlines the booming popularity of the 
A-League”.

But SBS directors Michael Ebeid and Helen Kellie both expressed their 
disappointment with the A-League viewing numbers, and this season have returned 
the coverage to SBS2. That is a vote of no confidence, no matter which way you 
look at it. Even the public service-oriented, self-proclaimed “home of 
football” want out.

David Squires on … the new A-League season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/picture/2015/oct/08/david-squires-on-the-new-a-league-season>
Of course, there is a long way to go, and nothing will be officially finalised 
until 2017. But the success of this season will be important for Gallop to 
present an attractive product to the commercial networks. Much of the 
A-League’s next decade will hinge upon how lucrative this deal is – hot-topic 
issues such as the PFA-FFA dispute, the timing of expansion to 12 teams and the 
ongoing viability of several clubs all revolve around FFA’s lack of revenue.

There are some positive signs. Melbourne Victory continue to set the benchmark 
for A-League clubs, cracking 25,000 members this week, while Sydney FC have 
been solid, if not spectacular, since the Del Piero era. There is also an 
attractive new bunch of foreign players, not household names but promising 
signings nonetheless.

Nothing however, will change the fact that in 2014-15 half the clubs went 
backwards – Western Sydney Wanderers, Perth Glory, Central Coast Mariners, 
Brisbane Roar and Newcastle Jets all retrograded. Meanwhile Adelaide United 
have lost their popular, charismatic coach Josep Gombau, Melbourne City have 
delivered far less than expected since the takeover by the City Football Group 
and Wellington Phoenix offer very little to Australia in terms of growth.

The fundamental question is this: what has changed to make people interested 
in the A-League since last season? The rusted-on fans will be there, and that’s 
great, but it’s not enough. Why would the thousands of latent football fans who 
aren’t yet attending or tuning into A-League games suddenly do so this season?

In such a competitive sporting marketplace, there is a fine line between 
consolidation and stagnation. As theA-League book illustrated, at this stage of 
the competition’s growth, the sizzle can be more important than the steak. 
Right now there is no sizzle.

Friday Focus is a new weekly column from the Guardian’s pool of football 
writers that aims to highlight the current and pertinent issues affecting men’s 
and women’s football in Australia.
 