
What a difference a week makes. Last Sunday, the bottom of the table clash 
betweenPerth Glory <https://www.theguardian.com/football/perthglory> and 
Newcastle Jets ended in a 6-1 win to Glory. Although the gap between the top 
six and the rest remains significant, Glory CEO Peter Filopolous believes 
finals football is within reach. He’s also convinced the club will crack the 
10,000 crowd mark for the first time this season at nib Stadium on Saturday.


Perth Glory hit 10-man Newcastle Jets for six in A-League romp
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/24/perth-glory-hit-10-man-newcastle-jets-for-six-in-a-league-romp>
Filopolous says it has been a season for “consolidation”, but if history is 
your thing – and for most Glory fans it is – then the club appears to have gone 
backwards. This time last year Glory were top of theA-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> ladder, W-League premiers and 
second-placed in the National Youth League. This weekend, Glory host Melbourne 
Victory having won just four games all season. Crowds are at their lowest in 
the club’s 20 year history, the W-League team finished second last, and the NYL 
side won just two games to finish bottom of their conference.

 Certainly this season was never going to be easy. The exodus that coach Kenny 
Lowe feared in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/17/kenny-lowe-stem-tide-exits-embattled-perth-glory>
 came to fruition, with players such as Scott Jamieson, Danny Vukovic, Jamie 
Maclaren, Brandon O’Neill, Mitch Nichols, Riley Woodcock, Michael Thwaite, 
Antony Golec and Youssef Hersi all departing, while Andy Keogh has only 
recently returned after a stint in Thailand. The next four rounds don’t do them 
any favours: Glory face top five sides Melbourne Victory, Sydney FC, Brisbane 
Roar and Western Sydney Wanderers, while a long trip to Wellington awaits next 
weekend.

 Take a longer view, however, and the situation appears worse. Between 1996 
and 2004 in the old national league, Glory won the premiership three times, the 
championship twice, and most importantly, revolutionised the way football was 
organised in Australia. Glory were once the most powerful example of a 
privately-owned franchise that represented an entire city rather than a 
community.

 Twenty years ago, almost to the day, Fairfax journalist Michael Cockerill 
wrote of Glory: “This all-Australian success story has happened not by accident 
but by design. Which means the formula can be applied elsewhere to strengthen 
and develop the national league.”

 Filopolous remembers those days well. In 1996 he was CEO of South Melbourne. 
“I’ve always had a close affinity with the brand of Perth Glory, from the days 
it emerged so spectacularly back in 1996,” he says. Filopolous, who was 
appointed in June 2015 afterJason Brewer resigned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/16/perth-glory-ceo-jason-brewer-resigns>
 in the fallout from last season’s salary cap scandal, holds a positive outlook 
for Glory. In February, the club will release its four year plan, titled The 
Perth Glory Way.

Michael Thwaite joins Perth Glory exodus with move to China
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/26/michael-thwaite-joins-perth-glory-exodus-with-move-to-china>
 Just what is the Perth Glory way? Under the ownership of Tony Sage it has 
been tricky to pin down. There has been an enormous amount of passion, tears 
following the 2012 grand final loss, and plenty of off-field drama.

 While Sage is in charge Glory may never again reach the heady days of the 
late 1990s, when the club was the pride of Western Australia. Outside the 
circle of people directly employed by him, there is a level of dissatisfaction 
towards Sage in the west and fans have protested against his ownership. And, of 
course, it was under his reign that the club was found guilty of cheating the 
competition rules. FFA chief executive David Gallop labelled Sage’s lack of 
knowledge of the salary cap situation“obviously unacceptable” 
<http://www.watoday.com.au/sport/soccer/perth-glory/ffa-find-perth-glory-chairman-tony-sage-responsible-for-salary-cap-breaches-20150420-1mp7rz.html>
. Sage has denied any knowledge of the salary cap issues that saw the FFA expel 
the Glory from the A-League finals in 2015.

 Many believe this is why crowds are at an all-time low. Glory fans have never 
had it better since the upgrade of nib Stadium, yet the interest doesn’t seem 
to be there. This season, after eight home games, the average gate is just 
7,160.

 “We have moved forward [from the salary cap scandal],” says Filopolous. 
“We’ve drawn a line in the sand and moved forward as a club. There’s some fans 
that still feel aggrieved, and obviously a small element that we need to 
re-engage, but we’ve moved forward.”

 Part of moving forward was taking over the licence of the W-League side, 
which for several seasons was run and funded by Football West. Afterlast 
season’s success 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/nov/20/w-league-women-glory-back-perth-complete-revival>
, however, 2015-16 has been difficult. It took several weeks for the players to 
even get their kits for the new season; in one home match the club ran out of 
water during a game, with coaching staff having to run out with cups of tap 
water for the players. After every away game, the squad has had to shower, 
change and get to the airport for a red-eye flight back to Perth. When Glory 
played a double-header against Brisbane Roar in November, the W-League side 
flew home the same night. The A-League players, of course, flew home the next 
morning. Perhaps it is unsurprising that there were so many injuries this 
season. When asked about these issues, Filopolous offered no comment except to 
say there had been some “teething issues” in the transition.

 Times are tight over in the west, and the club is not making money. Sage, who 
is invested heavily in a faltering mining industry, has seenthe share price in 
his company Cape Lambert fall 
<https://www.google.com.au/webhp?sourceid=chrome-instant&ion=1&espv=2&es_th=1&ie=UTF-8#q=cape%20lambert%20resources%20share%20price&es_th=1>
. Word is that Perth Glory were put on the market in the off-season, but 
couldn’t attract a buyer. Glory’s founding owner Nick Tana isunderstood to be 
interested 
<http://theworldgame.sbs.com.au/article/2015/04/18/tana-prepared-bankroll-perth-glory-again-should-sage-quit>
.

 The recent promises emanating from the the club are encouraging, although 
familiar. Perhaps the record-breaking victory last weekend will entice a few 
fans back. After so much disappointment and betrayal, let’s hope its not too 
late. A strong national league requires a strong Perth Glory.
 