
As Selin Kuralay lay on the turf clutching her right knee, her screams and 
sobs could be heard right around the ground. Eighty minutes into the first-round
W-League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/w-league> match, the veteran 
Melbourne Victory midfielder immediately knew her fate. “When you’ve done it 
before, you never forget the feeling,” says Kuralay. “I kind of knew at the 
point where I put my foot down that I’d torn my ACL. For about two or three 
minutes it’s as if someone has literally got a knife and chopped your ligament 
out.”


Most W-League players will know a fellow player who has recently succumbed to 
an anterior cruciate ligament injury, or have gone through it themselves. 
Kuralay first tore her ACL in 2003, as she was preparing to represent Australia 
at the Olympics. Marijana Rajčić, the captain of Lady Reds, injured her ACL 
last weekend. Caitlin Munoz, the veteran Canberra United striker who was 
recently recalled to the Matildas, jokes that she has had “three-and-a-half 
knee reconstructions” since 1998.

In one game in 2012, Victory lost two players, Ash Brown and Louisa Bisby, to 
ACL injuries. Brown, who made her W-League debut at 16 and Matildas debut at 
17, has suffered an incredible three ACL injuries in four games, the most 
recent occurring in the Victorian state league earlier this year.

Seventy per cent of all ACL injuries happen in non-contact situations, and the 
fear of a strange landing or an unusual body twist haunts players, coaches and 
fans of women’s sport. As Kuralay says: “you just don’t hear about the guys 
doing their ACLs – you watch the A-League and you don’t see them blow out six 
or ten knees in a season, whereas you do in such a short season for the women.”

In round five, on 15 November, Matildas star Sam Kerr went down in a similar 
fashion as Kuralay did in round one. As she cried and struggled to leave the 
field, social media was instantly ablaze with speculation and well-wishers. So 
much so that Perth Glory put out a quick statement to quell fears of an ACL 
tear:
Perth Glory Women (@PerthGloryWomen) 
SAM KERR UPDATE: She is currently icing her ankle, not her knee #BRIvPER 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/BRIvPER?src=hash> #WestvsRest 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/WestvsRest?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/PerthGloryWomen/status/665738498675109890> November 15, 
2015 <https://twitter.com/PerthGloryWomen/status/665738498675109890> 
When ruptured, the ACL looks on an MRI scan like a thick band of white tissue 
that has come apart. You can’t touch it, as it’s within the knee joint, but it 
stops the tibia moving forward on the thigh bone. Essentially it provides 
stability to the knee.

There are many theories why women are more at risk of an ACL injury. 
Everything from landing mechanics and body shape to menstrual cycles, age and 
family history have been suggested as possible causes.

Kate Beerworth, the Matildas head physiotherapist, says the academic 
literature shows that women are “four to six times” more likely to injure their 
ACL then men. “There are three main reasons: anatomical variances, hormonal 
variances and neuromuscular differences between males and females,” she says.

Professor Julian Feller is an internationally recognised orthopaedic surgeon 
who works with elite athletes across many sports. He is currently recruiting 
participants to be part of a large study into ACL injuries, and hopes to be 
able to draw some comparisons between men and women from the results. “Women 
are clearly at an increased risk, and that deserves it’s own research 
attention,” he says.

The Football Federation of Australia are doing their own research in 
conjunction with the Australian Catholic University and with funding from the 
Australian Institute of Sport. In September, the FFA rolled out an ACL injury 
prevention protocol. Beerworth and Socceroos physiotherapist Les Gelis 
presented the protocol to the W-League and A-League clubs, and hope the 
strategy will seep right down to the grassroots. “We’re certainly putting the 
resources behind that,” says Beerworth. “It’s all about education and coach 
education, making sure the jumping and landing techniques are in practice 
across the board. That will be part of the next FFA coaching curriculum.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F27%2Ffriday-focus-w-league-stars-face-a-long-road-back-from-serious-knee-injuries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc42e3097807e9b7277d0bb47674823c3f370cd96%2F0_16_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Friday%20Focus%3A%20W-League%20stars%20face%20a%20long%20road%20back%20from%20serious%20knee%20injuries%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F27%2Ffriday-focus-w-league-stars-face-a-long-road-back-from-serious-knee-injuries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Friday%20Focus%3A%20W-League%20stars%20face%20a%20long%20road%20back%20from%20serious%20knee%20injuries%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F27%2Ffriday-focus-w-league-stars-face-a-long-road-back-from-serious-knee-injuries%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc42e3097807e9b7277d0bb47674823c3f370cd96%2F0_16_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Canberra United veteran Caitlin Munoz jokes that she has had “three-and-a-half 
knee reconstructions” since 1998. Photograph: Tony Feder/Getty Images 
Kuralay, 30, walked away from the game five years ago after a career that took 
her to the Australian national team and college football in the USA. She’s now 
a senior financial analyst at ANZ Bank in Melbourne. “I moved back to Australia 
at 25, graduated, and it kind of got to a point where there was a big financial 
burden on my family to support me while I continued to play football,” she 
says. “I wouldn’t change it for the world — I’ve set myself up financially. 
I’ve got my own apartment. I’m just fully independent.”

With a supportive boss, Kuralay decided to return this year, encouraged by the 
prospect of reuniting with fellow Matildas veterans Thea Slatyer, who she’s 
known for 15 years, and Melissa Barbieri, who she’s played alongside since she 
was 13. But in their first match, Slatyer limped off with an injury, and 
Kuralay’s comeback was cruelly cut short. The last woman standing, Barbieri
posted a heartfelt message to social media 
<https://www.facebook.com/auswomensgame/posts/1083453358362053> recognising the 
sacrifices Kuralay made to return to football.

“We were training four days a week from the first week of September onwards, 
but after that, we didn’t have any games,” explains Kuralay. “You can do a lot 
of preventative and core strength type of stuff, but I don’t really have a 
program in place. In hindsight I should have pushed for all these things, but 
you don’t really think about the possibility of it.”

This weekend Kuralay and Munoz, who have known one another since the 
Australian u-19s camp in 2002, will go through very different emotions. Munoz 
will be enjoying her football in Korea, representing the Matildas after a five 
year absence from the national team. Kuralay, who before her injury had dreams 
of returning to the Matildas, will struggle around on crutches and follow the 
Round 7 W-League match between Melbourne Victory and Perth Glory.

Four weeks since her operation and Kuralay has finally been able to move back 
into her own place. “I’ve been living at Mum and Dad’s, baby-sat by my mother,” 
she says. “I can’t look after myself, I can’t go to work.”

“I feel for anyone who goes down with an injury, but particularly ACLs,” says 
Munoz, who sent Kuralay a message of support soon after her injury. “Everyone’s 
still pretty close in the football world — you make lifelong friends.”

Kuralay’s recovery, which she describes as “intrusive on your body and your 
mind”, will be long and frustrating, and that’s before she makes a decision 
whether to play on or retire. At least there seem to be no gender disparities 
in recovery. “We can’t find differences between return-to-sport rates between 
males and females,” says Professor Feller. She might also find inspiration from 
her old friend Munoz, who at 32 says her knee is “stronger than ever”.

“I feel like I’ve got unfinished business, but just at the moment it’s so 
fresh,” says Kuralay. “I’ll try and do rehab if I want to give it another 
crack, but I guess it always plays in the back of your mind: I just can’t go 
through this again.”
 