
The Return is a good new Russian film about two sons and their father. It 
demands to be seen not because we are all interested in Russian cinema, but 
because we all have fathers. Andrei Zvyagintsev, the director, has understood 
what other Russian film-makers, attempting to survive in the wild post-Soviet 
forest, have not: that making Russian films great again depends least of all on 
them being Russian. They will be that anyway. Whatever lifted the films of
Andrei Tarkovsky <https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrei-tarkovsky> out of the 
ordinary, it was not that they were Russian, although most of them were. 
Rather, it was in the way Tarkovsky and his collaborators touched universal 
human experiences of memory, fear, alienation, hope and love.

Zvyagintsev has been compared to Tarkovsky, which says as much about the 
critics making the comparisons as it does about the director himself.The Return 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-return> resembles Tarkovsky only on a 
superficial level - in the use of silences and sounds, pages turning or rain 
falling, to set off dialogue, and the way the characters are inset into wide, 
lonely, elemental screenscapes, indoors and under the sky. Indeed, 
Zvyaginstev's care for each of the separate elements of film-making, the 
camerawork, light, sounds and the textures of objects, as well as the acting 
and Vladimir Moiseenko's fine script, is another superficial link to Tarkovsky. 
"This is not a Tarkovsky film," said Naum Kleiman, director of Moscow's Museum 
of Cinema. "Tarkovsky's films are Protestant. This is more in the tradition of 
Greek tragedy."

When critics compare a promising young Russian film-maker to Tarkovsky, they 
are sending out other, coded messages. If they are western critics, they are 
reminding us of the extent to which, for westerners, the last great 
achievements of postwar Soviet cinema were defined by Tarkovsky, even in exile.

or Russian audiences, the story of cinema before and after the collapse of the 
Soviet Union is different. The number of Russian film masterpieces which 
crossed over to find a world audience in the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s was perhaps 
not so great as we now imagine, and the post-Soviet 1990s were not, 
collectively, so barren. What grieved the Russians after the USSR went the way 
of all empires wasn't so much the paucity of cinematic works of genius as the 
disappearance of the steady flow of comedies, satires, melodramas, romances and 
thrillers - some wonderful, some workaday, most at least competent, which made 
their movie world so rich. In the new, free Russia, there were still a handful 
of exceptional films, but they were hard to find amid the spew of Hollywood and 
the sometimes freakish attempts by Russian directors to mount an imitative 
fightback.

"The whole system of film production and distribution collapsed," said 
Kleiman. "It ceased to be possible for the producer to get back the money he 
had spent. Then there was a kind of magnetic storm, depriving our moral, 
political and historical compass of orientation. What were we for? What were we 
against? The older generation had the ground taken away from under their feet, 
and the younger generation, post-Brezhnev, took as their form Hollywood films, 
which is always a strategic mistake. You can't do second-hand Hollywood."

Early attempts in the perestroika era to mimic exploitative western thrillers 
foundered on the misapprehension that the gut-stirring emotions Hollywood has 
become so expert in manipulating are cheap to provoke. Yuri Kara's 1988 
thriller Vory V Zakone (Thieves In Law), about feuding mafia families on 
Russia's Black Sea riviera had some good actors, including Valentin Gaft, a 
seductive location and a trashy story of unparalleled cynicism which I admit I 
find irrestistible. But the editing, the soundtrack, the acting, the dialogue, 
the music, the limited number of cameras used and the sheer slowness of the car 
chases all screamed that the participants were either out of their depth, or 
did not care about what they were doing, except as a means to be famous and 
make a fast rouble with the least possible effort. The film remains popular in 
Russia, in a culty kind of way, but doesn't even approach the pantheon where 
the well-crafted crime thrillers of the Soviet era are kept. Admittedly 
Stanislav Govorukhin's 1979 Mesto Vstrechi Izmenit Nelzya (The Meeting Must Be 
There), the best loved Soviet screen crime saga, was a TV series, but it was 
not until Alexei Balabanov made the gangster thriller Brat (Brother) in 1997, 
later followed by a sequel in 2000, that the Russian cinema of an era so 
defined by organised crime came up with anything to match Govorukhin in 
popularity, drama and sincerity.

As with thrillers, so with comedy. Comedy, particularly foreign comedy, does 
not play well at film festivals. Whether because western critics found 
something objectionable about the idea of Soviets having a good time laughing 
at themselves, or because the Soviet authorities didn't care to show their 
country's funny side, the three maestros of Russian film comedy in the 
Khrushchev to Gorbachev years - Eldar Ryazanov, Leonid Gaidai and Mark Zakharov 
- are almost unknown in the English-speaking world. Films like Brilliantovaya 
Ruka (Diamond Hand), Beregis Avtomobilya (Beware of the Car) and Gaidai and 
Zakharov's rival 1970s versions, six years apart, of 12 Stulyev (Twelve Chairs) 
are comedy gems by anyone's standards. You hardly notice, because you quickly 
take it for granted, how beautifully the films are edited and shot - although 
the cartoonishness of Gaidai's colours and vignettes is unmistakeable - but you 
certainly notice when post-Soviet comedies aren't.

Film makers were in the same position with comedy in the wake of the red flag 
coming down as they were with crime. Real life kept trumping the treatments. 
Why bother making a decent thriller when every night the news reported the 
latest clutch of people murdered on their doorstep? How could you make comedies 
when the same bulletins reported that workers were receiving their wages in 
toilet rolls, or showed your president too drunk to get off his plane to meet a 
foreign prime minister? Again, it was only in 1995, when Lenfilm released 
Alexander Rogozhkin's Osobennosti Natsionalnoi Okhoty (Peculiarities of the 
National Hunt), a foul-mouthed but ultimately generous story of a group of 
insanely drunk hunters rampaging through the northern forest, that Russian 
audiences believed the film world had reconverged with their new reality.

The curious biography of Nikita Mikhalkov, now chairman of the Russian Union 
of Cinematographers, says much about what has happen to Russian film-making 
over the past 50 years. Born into the Soviet elite - his father Sergei was a 
favourite of Stalin and wrote the words to the Soviet national anthem - he 
became a star in 1963 as a sweet, optimistic teenager singing the title song of 
the film Ya Shagayu Po Moskvye (Strolling Round Moscow). He directed his first 
film four years later, going on to make films in the 1970s which won 
international recognition and are still loved by Russians today, like 
Nyeokonchennaya Pyesa Dlya Mekhanicheskovo Pianino (Unfinished Piece for 
Mechanical Piano) and a film based on the iconic Russian wastrel, Oblomov.

An adroit politician, Mikhalkov was one of the few directors who managed to 
keep their eyes on the changing possibilities and practicalities of making 
films as the USSR changed to Russia - with the result that, in 1994, he was 
able to make Utomlenniye Solnstem (Burnt by the Sun), which took both the Grand 
Jury Prize at Cannes and the Oscar for best foreign film. It's a good film, but 
with hindsight, the vain, na√Øve, hearty strut and swagger of the all-Russian 
hero, played by Mikhalkov, was not entirely acting. In 1998, Mikhalkov managed 
to burn the unprecedented sum, for Russia, of $35m on a multilingual historical 
epic, Sibirsky Tsiryulnik (The Barber of Siberia), which sought to appeal to 
Russian patriotism and mass western audiences and alienated both. Booed at 
Cannes, it went straight to video.

Despite the difficulties, it would be unfair to exaggerate the lack of good 
films from Russia in the perestroika and post-Soviet period. There have been 
successes, some noted in the west, others lost in the distribution maze. See, 
if you can, Vladimir Bortko's superb 1988 black and white adaption of Mikhail 
Bulgakov's Heart of a Dog, a satire on Bolshevism; Kira Muratova's strange and 
wonderful Tri Istori (Three Stories) from 1997, about three women and murder; 
Dnevnik Yevo Zheny (His Wife's Diary), made by Alexei Uchitel in 2000, about 
the menage a trois in the last, exiled years of the Russian writer Ivan Bunin; 
and Alexander Sokurov's recent Russian Ark. It is too soon to say whether 
Zvyaginstev may come to resemble Tarkovsky - or Almodovar, or Fellini, or 
Hitchcock - in creating, over years of film making, a recognisably distinctive 
world. But for the time being he should be extended the favour that westerners 
don't always grant to Russian artists, that of not seeking a spurious political 
allegory in his film.

It's fair enough to wonder what a Russian director is nodding to when he puts 
a dead seagull in a shot, or mentions the village of Beketov, but essentially 
this is a film about men and generations, harsh, tender and tragic, not about 
Vladimir Putin's Russia. "In the time of perestroika, there was a cynicism 
towards characters; people were like insects," said Kleiman. "Now, in Russian 
films, a new quality has appeared: compassion."

The Return is released on Friday June 25.
 