
Last month, Mark Seymour instructed the anti-Muslim group Reclaim Australia to 
cease playing 
<http://www.theage.com.au/victoria/hunters--collectors-frontman-mark-seymour-condemns-use-of-holy-grail-at-reclaim-australia-antimuslim-rallies-20151122-gl5ad1.html>
the Hunters and Collectors song Holy Grail at its rallies.

“We stand together with refugees and asylum seekers the world over,” he wrote. 
‘We are opposed to bigotry, race hate and fascism.Reclaim Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/reclaim-australia> has no place in 
Australian Society.”

Seymour’s comments followed similar remarks from Jimmy Barnes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/22/jimmy-barnes-denounces-anti-islamic-protesters-who-used-his-songs>
, Midnight Oil, Shane Howard and John Farnham – interventions that left the 
Reclaimers, by necessity, musically reliant on their own supporters. Thus, at 
the Adelaide Reclaim Australia event, anti-Islam protesters were treated to a 
performance from a hip-hop artist calling himself Aussie Digger.

Jimmy Barnes denounces anti-Islamic protesters who used his songs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/22/jimmy-barnes-denounces-anti-islamic-protesters-who-used-his-songs>
It was quite something.

Aussie Digger threw down his rhymes on a stage 
<https://www.facebook.com/ReclaimAustraliaADL/posts/416061105269263> already 
occupied by a man wearing a pink onesie and another flag-waving fellow dressed 
as a giant jar of vegemite. “Our Aussie hangover cure is – wait for it,” rapped 
the Digger. “Egg and bacon sandwiches/I don’t think there’s any chance of 
changing it/ So believe it mate you can love it or leave it”.

“The low-fi recordings,” wrote New Matilda’s clearly shellshocked Max Chalmer 
<https://newmatilda.com/2015/11/23/comic-and-terrifying-in-equal-measure-what-we-learned-from-the-reclaim-australia-rallies/>
. “The old people in the crowd trying not to look too perplexed. The growing 
distance between the rapper and his beat.”

White conservative rap is, of course, a reliably woeful genre, both in its 
Australian and US manifestations.

Stylistically, Aussie Digger bears more than a passing resemblance to the 
artist known as Juk <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h4eTUwl8Rto>, whose track 
Time for Truth celebrates Ted Cruz, the Republican presidential hopeful who 
recently distinguished himself bypromising to nuke the Middle East 
<http://theweek.com/articles/592964/ted-cruz-wants-nuke-middle-east>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dh4eTUwl8Rto&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dh4eTUwl8Rto>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dh4eTUwl8Rto&media=>
The clip accompanying Juk’s Time for Truth features the rapper gyrating 
awkwardly next to two accomplices dressed, not as jars of Vegemite, but as 
Barack Obama and Hilary Clinton.

“Are you fed up with the excuses?” demands a smirking Juk. “Ted Cruz has got 
your back/Standing for America on marriage and Super Pacs.”

Likewise, in his song Patriotic People, the Tea Party rapper  Hi Caliber 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BY5z6DUfkKA>, boasts of being “the only MC to 
ever rock Capitol Hill”, a feat that seems less impressive when you realise 
this so-called “rocking” almost certainly happened during a rally of angry 
retirees, some of whom were probablywearing wigs and tricorn hats 
<http://hubpages.com/politics/teapartytricornhatfreedomlibertysmallgovernment>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBY5z6DUfkKA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBY5z6DUfkKA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBY5z6DUfkKA&media=>
While hip-hop is perfectly capable of conservatism, successful relationships 
between rappers and rightwing politics generally take a rather different form.

For example, in 2011, Donald Trump, the current Republican forerunner, was 
ostentatiously namechecked on a track byPittsburgh artist Mac Miller 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=74TFS8r_SMI>.

Miller cited Trump, not because of his attitude to Obamacare or sharia law, 
but because the real-estate mogul’s conspicuous consumption exemplified the 
“bitches and riches” lifestyle to which Mac himself aspires. As the song 
explained: “Take over the world when I’m on myDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> shit/Look at all this money, 
ain’t that some shit?”

Miller was, in fact, more about the shit than The Donald, which explains why 
he later developed second thoughts about their connection.


“When [Trump] started running for president,” Miller said in 2013, “I was 
like, ah, fuck, this is horrible: I have a fucking song with this dude’s name, 
and now he’s being such a fucking douchebag.”

In 2006, the influential American magazine National Review compiled a list of 
“the 50 greatest conservative rock songs” 
<https://www.google.com.au/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwiI8re-ud3JAhWEoJQKHWAqCJwQFggbMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.nationalreview.com%2Farticle%2F217737%2Frockin-right-john-j-miller&usg=AFQjCNEnv3dYaJL4fyXedhoihSjcxY1p-w&sig2=wrV8NmcLsYlevAUYsQ-9ag&bvm=bv.110151844,d.dGY>
 in an article that inadvertently highlighted the right’s broader problem with 
popular music.

“On first glance,” wrote John J Miller, “Rock’n’roll music isn’t very 
conservative. It doesn’t fare much better on second or third glance (or 
listen), either.”

The tracks he shoehorned into his rightwing mixtape (Janie’s Got a Gun by 
Aerosmith <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RqQn2ADZE1A> on the basis it 
explained “how the right to bear arms can protect women from sexual predators”;
Wouldn’t It Be Nice by the Beach Boys 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lD4sxxoJGkA> because of its “pro-abstinence 
and pro-marriage” message; and so on) illustrate the musical difficulties 
facing most Republican candidates, who ostentatiously embrace the family values 
for which pop is traditionally blamed for eroding.

Hence, during the administration of George W Bush, the attorney general, John 
Ashcroft, pioneered the genre that we might call “Tea Party schmaltz”.

Staff cry poetic injustice as singing Ashcroft introduces patriot games
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2002/mar/04/usa.julianborger> 
Ashcroft, a conservative Christian, wasn’t so much sworn into office as 
anointed <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2002/mar/04/usa.julianborger> (on 
his own insistence) with cooking oil. He once covered a bare-breasted statue of 
justice with a curtain; he supposedly believes that tabby cats are “signs of 
the devil”. And, when he wasn’t introducingdraconian assaults on civil liberties
 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Patriot_Act>, he liked to sing.

In this clip, for instance, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=woLQI8X2R6Y> he 
belts out a self-penned number called Let the Eagle Soar, a song that, like 
Justin Tranchita’s tune,This is America 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LUtwLCn1AGs>, consists entirely of platitudes 
and patriotic cliches.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwoLQI8X2R6Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwoLQI8X2R6Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwoLQI8X2R6Y&media=>
If Ashcroft earned a reputation for singing earnestly about nothing, Herman 
Cain, a Republican contender in the 2012 election, took the genre of 
impassioned meaninglessness to a whole new level.

During one preselection debate 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2011/12/03/cain-quotes-pok-mon-movie-in-final-speech.html>
, Cain adopted an uncharacteristically serious note, explaining to the 
audience: “A poet once said, ‘Life can be a challenge, life can seem 
impossible, but it’s never easy when there’s so much on the line.’”

Internet sleuths searching for this “poet” discovered that Cain was 
unwittingly quoting the theme song from the Pokémon movie.

That revelation left Cain, however, entirely unabashed. For the rest of his 
campaign, he continued to cite the tune, thereby proving that syrupy inanities 
were equally palatable for Tea Party radicals irrespective of whether they 
lauded the United States or praised the achievements of imaginary monsters.

What does all this mean for Reclaim Australia?

As the rock stars withdrew their support, the United Patriots Front posted a 
link to a grandly titledReclaim Australia Anthem 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dOCullmYut0>. The anthem is more competently 
performed than Aussie Diggers’s raps, though it distinguishes itself from a 
subsequent parodyThe Cronulla Tribute Song by the True Australian Patriots 
<https://www.facebook.com/video.php?v=462609057240861&video_source=pages_finch_trailer&theater>
 mostly because of the peculiar yodelling that accompanies its first few bars.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdOCullmYut0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdOCullmYut0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdOCullmYut0&media=>
If that doesn’t catch on, perhaps Reclaim can call upon the UPF’s former 
leader Shermon Burgess to step up to the mic. In his spare time, Burgess fronts 
a charming band called Eureka Brigade, where he warbles away on tracks such as
Shit On A Mosque (It’s What We Do) 
<https://soundcloud.com/eurekabrigade/shit-on-a-mosque-its-what-we>.

Mark Seymour he ain’t but at least you know what you’re getting.
 