
Do you know your debt from your deficit? Your benefit cap from your universal 
credit? And what has Mr Micawber got to do with it all?


We take the main buzzwords expected in this budget, as well as those of 
budgets past, and break them down in this glossary.


Air passenger duty

Air passenger duty (APD) is charged on departing flights from the UK and 
varies depending on the length of the journey. For premium tickets the duty is 
higher.

Alcohol and tobacco duties
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Fbudget-2015-buzzwords-glossary-of-key-terms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F18%2F1426644229190%2F68267c00-d99d-4d90-a1b1-58e214f02cf3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Google%20tax%20to%20the%20welfare%20cap%3A%20a%20budget%20glossary%20of%20the%20key%20terms&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Fbudget-2015-buzzwords-glossary-of-key-terms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Google%20tax%20to%20the%20welfare%20cap%3A%20a%20budget%20glossary%20of%20the%20key%20terms&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Fbudget-2015-buzzwords-glossary-of-key-terms%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F18%2F1426644229190%2F68267c00-d99d-4d90-a1b1-58e214f02cf3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The chancellor typically announces changes to alcohol duties in the budget. 
Photograph: Alamy 
Alcohol duty is charged on beer, wine and spirits, while tobacco duty applies 
to cigarettes, cigars, hand-rolling tobacco, pipe tobacco and chewing tobacco. 
In the past, the Treasury has used “escalators” that mean duties rise a certain 
percentage above inflation each year

, but in his 2014 budget, George Osborne scrapped the escalator for alcohol 
duties. He argued that new laws to prevent alcohol being sold below minimum tax 
rates were more effective at helping to stop supermarkets from undercutting 
pubs and also at helping to stop problem drinking.

Apprenticeships

Apprenticeships combine practical training in a job with study. They take 
between one and four years to complete depending on their level, which ranges 
from the equivalent of five GCSE passes to degree level. The Conservatives say 
they have championed apprenticeships and grown the numbers of those taking up 
this form of training from the age of 16. The government wants tocreate 3m 
apprenticeships by 2020 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/government-kick-starts-plans-to-reach-3-million-apprenticeships>
. But critics worry the government has focused on numbers to the detriment of 
the quality of apprenticeships.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Fbudget-2015-buzzwords-glossary-of-key-terms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F18%2F1426644348406%2Fd8a9c552-17e3-4654-9c31-5cb0359e348e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Google%20tax%20to%20the%20welfare%20cap%3A%20a%20budget%20glossary%20of%20the%20key%20terms&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Fbudget-2015-buzzwords-glossary-of-key-terms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Google%20tax%20to%20the%20welfare%20cap%3A%20a%20budget%20glossary%20of%20the%20key%20terms&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Fbudget-2015-buzzwords-glossary-of-key-terms%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F18%2F1426644348406%2Fd8a9c552-17e3-4654-9c31-5cb0359e348e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 George Osborne meets apprentices during a visit to a JCB factory. The 
government has sought to highlight growth in apprentice numbers. Photograph: 
Rui Vieira/PA 
Apprenticeship levy

A new levy on businesses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/08/chancellor-hands-businesses-66bn-in-tax-cuts-and-giveaways>
 from next year to help reach ambitious apprenticeship targets. The government 
haspitched it to business as a way to end years of under-investment in training 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/21/government-contract-bids-commitment-apprenticeships>
 and solve skills shortages. Companies will be charged 0.5% of their payroll 
from April 2017 towards the apprenticeship levy, which will raise roughly £3bn 
a year for the following four years. Businesses that spend less than £3m on 
wages a year will not pay any tax because each employer will receive a £15,000 
allowance that offsets the cost.

The chancellor pledged that those paying it will “get out more than they put 
in” but he has facedopposition from big business groups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/26/fury-over-osbornes-116bn-business-payroll-tax>
. They have warned that some employers might cut back on recruitment if they 
are worried about the cost of the levy. Another concern is thatemployers could 
rebadge existing jobs as apprenticeships 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/02/uk-apprenticeships-plan-attacked-employer-groups>
 to meet training targets and recoup the costs of the levy.

Budget

The chancellor updates plans for the economy twice a year, in a budget, 
usually in March, and in an autumn statement in November or December. TheOffice 
for Budget Responsibility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/office-for-budget-responsibility> (see 
below) publishes forecasts for the economy and for the public finances 
alongside the chancellor’s autumn statement and alongside the budget. In 2015, 
the autumn statement was presented alongside a spending review.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Fbudget-2015-buzzwords-glossary-of-key-terms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F18%2F1426644786807%2Ff6a66536-e070-4e86-bcbd-ad4ae229c8c7-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Google%20tax%20to%20the%20welfare%20cap%3A%20a%20budget%20glossary%20of%20the%20key%20terms&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Fbudget-2015-buzzwords-glossary-of-key-terms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Google%20tax%20to%20the%20welfare%20cap%3A%20a%20budget%20glossary%20of%20the%20key%20terms&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Fbudget-2015-buzzwords-glossary-of-key-terms%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F18%2F1426644786807%2Ff6a66536-e070-4e86-bcbd-ad4ae229c8c7-1020x612.jpeg>
 The autumn statement will include the latest forecasts for the state of 
Britain’s public finances. Photograph: Owen Humphreys/PA 
Bank levy

In his last budget before the election, Osborne hit the banking industry with 
another rise to the bank levy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/18/banks-hit-hardest-in-revenue-raising-budget>
, a tax announced in his emergency budget at the start of the last parliament 
in 2010.

But after sustained lobbying by the banking industry, the summer budget in 
July 2015 containedshock changes to the bank levy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/08/biggest-banks-welcome-budget-reduction-in-bank-levy>
. The chancellor scaled back the levy but at the same time announced a new 
eight percentage point surcharge on bank profits.

Benefit cap

Billed by the government as an “incentive to work”, this household benefit cap 
limits the amount of benefits out-of-work working-age families can receive.

Business rates

Business rates are paid to local authorities on most non-domestic properties, 
such as shops, offices, pubs and holiday rental homes. Some properties are 
eligible for discounts on theirbusiness rates 
<https://www.gov.uk/introduction-to-business-rates>, called “business rates 
relief”. Local authorities are responsible for collecting the tax.

The rates are hated by many small businesses on the high street, which face 
competition from online retailers.

Capital gains tax

This is a tax on the profit when something is sold off and that asset has 
increased in value since it was bought. It is the gain made that is taxed, not 
the amount of money received.


It is paid on “chargeable assets”, including most personal possessions worth 
£6,000 or more, apart from cars and property that is not someone’s main home. 
It is also due on shares that are not in an ISA and on business assets.

People only have to pay CGT on overall gains above a tax-free allowance 
(called theannual exempt amount 
<https://www.gov.uk/capital-gains-tax/allowances>).

Corporation tax

Levied on business profits from trading, from investments and from selling 
assets for more than they cost. The rate was 28% in 2010, it is currently 20% 
and is due to fall further.

Deficit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/video/2015/nov/25/economics-explained-the-deficit-and-the-debt-video>

Also referred to as “public sector net borrowing” or simply “borrowing”, the 
budget deficit should not be confused with the national debt.The deficit is the 
gap between how much the government spends in a year and how much money it 
receives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/video/2015/nov/25/economics-explained-the-deficit-and-the-debt-video>
. The UK runs one of the largest budget deficits in the industrial world.

Money is raised from taxes, especially income taxes, and other sources. Money 
is spent on things such as public services, state pensions and interest 
payments on debt.

The government’s independent forecasters assess how these outgoings and income 
are likely to evolve. They predict whether the deficit will grow wider or will 
narrow, or perhaps be wiped out altogether to leave a surplus.Budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/budget> surpluses have been achieved in only 12 
years since 1948.

The deficit can be expressed in billions of pounds or as a percentage of GDP.


Earnings growth


Official figures every month give average wage growth in annual terms. Between 
the financial crisis in 2008 and 2014, this wage growth was lower than 
inflation, meaning average wages were falling in real terms. In other words, 
even when wages were going up on paper, they were not keeping pace with price 
rises and so people were worse off. Wage growth has now recovered and at the 
same time inflation has fallen, meaning average real wages are rising again. 
But wage growth has been slower than most economists were expecting in recent 
months. Wage growth has important implications for the public finances because 
it affects income-related tax revenues.

Fiscal rules (and the Mr Micawber principle)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Fbudget-2015-buzzwords-glossary-of-key-terms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436283461725%2F388bac76-e836-4d40-a4a4-30293e7892e2-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Google%20tax%20to%20the%20welfare%20cap%3A%20a%20budget%20glossary%20of%20the%20key%20terms&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Fbudget-2015-buzzwords-glossary-of-key-terms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Google%20tax%20to%20the%20welfare%20cap%3A%20a%20budget%20glossary%20of%20the%20key%20terms&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Fbudget-2015-buzzwords-glossary-of-key-terms%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436283461725%2F388bac76-e836-4d40-a4a4-30293e7892e2-1020x612.jpeg>
 ‘It is Mr Micawber’s avowed belief that the surplus of income over expenditure 
is the source of all human felicity.’ Photograph: Hulton Getty 
Osborne’s main fiscal rule, or target, is to run permanent budget surpluses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/10/george-osborne-public-finances-victorian-values>
 in normal times starting by the end of the tax year 2019-20 in a bid to cut 
the national debt. This allows the government to borrow only in exceptional 
circumstances. It differs from the “fiscal mandate” under the previous 
coalition government, which sought to eliminate borrowing to cover day-to-day 
spending but allowed borrowing to pay for investment, such as building schools 
or roads while also adjusting for the state of the economy. Osborne’s plan has 
conjured images of Mr Micawber, a character in Charles Dickens’s David 
Copperfield. Governments were expected to at least balance the books in the 
19th century and in the first three decades of the 20th century, when the 
public finances were run on the Mr Micawber principle that income exceeding 
spending equalled happiness and spending exceeding income equalled misery.

There is a second fiscal rule, or target, that the government has set itself 
of ensuring debt is falling as a share of GDP every year up to 2019-20.

Fuel duty


The Labour government brought in a fuel duty escalator as a green tax during 
the 1990s. By raising fuel duty by 1p above inflation every year it ensured tax 
became a large proportion of petrol pump prices. The previous coalition 
government scrapped the fuel duty escalator in 2011 and froze duty at 57.95p a 
litre. But back in 2011 the government said that if the price of oil fell below 
$75 a barrel for a sustained period, the escalator would be reintroduced. Oil 
prices have tumbled since summer 2014 and Brent crude is currently below $45 a 
barrel.

GDP
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Fbudget-2015-buzzwords-glossary-of-key-terms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F18%2F1426644689635%2F2d25c89e-9af5-4bda-babf-77a4bc8fd9d4-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Google%20tax%20to%20the%20welfare%20cap%3A%20a%20budget%20glossary%20of%20the%20key%20terms&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Fbudget-2015-buzzwords-glossary-of-key-terms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Google%20tax%20to%20the%20welfare%20cap%3A%20a%20budget%20glossary%20of%20the%20key%20terms&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Fbudget-2015-buzzwords-glossary-of-key-terms%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F18%2F1426644689635%2F2d25c89e-9af5-4bda-babf-77a4bc8fd9d4-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Employees work on new Nissan automobiles as they travel along the production 
line at Nissan’s vehicle assembly plant in Sunderland. George Osborne has 
called for a ‘march of the makers’. Photograph: Bloomberg via Getty Images 
Gross domestic product is a measure of a country or region’s economic 
activity. It is the sum of all goods and services produced in the economy, 
including services, manufacturing, construction, energy, agriculture and 
government. At each budget and autumn statement, the Office for Budget 
Responsibility (OBR) forecasts GDP growth for the next five years. It also 
looks at what is likely to drive that growth and has previously flagged the 
UK’s continued reliance on consumer spending alongside a weak record on net 
trade.

Gilts

These are bonds issued by the UK government, so-called because at one time 
they were gold-edged and also because of their relative security as an 
investment choice – the British government has never failed to make payments 
due on gilts. A bond is simply an IOU. It is an agreement under which a sum is 
borrowed from an investor at a stipulated rate of interest and repaid after an 
agreed period of time. Before the end of each financial year the Treasury sets 
an annual financing remit that specifies the annual total of gilt sales planned 
for the financial year. This usually coincides with the budget each March.

Google tax

Officially known as the “diverted profits tax 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/diverted-profits-tax-guidance>”, 
this was announced at the autumn statement in December 2014 and came into force 
in April 2015. It is designed to counter the practice of large multinational 
companies diverting profits abroad through complicated business structures in 
order to avoid paying taxes. The new 25% rate tax applies to a company’s 
profits that have been diverted from the UK through complex arrangements and 
applies to both UK and foreign multinational companies.

Help to buy


The surprise of Osborne’s 2013 budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/mar/20/budget-2013-osborne-offers-homebuyers-help-to-buy>
, the help-to-buy scheme was designed to kickstart the housing market and help 
first-time buyers and movers who, following the credit crunch, were finding it 
hard to get home loans without a large deposit. The first element of the scheme 
was an interest-free loan on new-build properties and due to last until 2020.

The second part offers banks and building societies a government guarantee on 
mortgages of up to 95% loan to value (LTV) on existing properties. It is 
scheduled to end in 2016.

In his November 2015 autumn statement, Osborne announced a new help to buy 
equity loan scheme for London to let buyers in the capital borrow up to 40% of 
the purchase price of a new build home.

Help to buy Isas

Osborne announced in the March 2015 budget that the government will hand over 
£50 for every £200 a would-be buyer saves towards a deposit up to a £3,000 
limit. So the new help to buy Isa (individual savings account) means if a 
first-time buyer can save £12,000 in a tax-free account, the government will 
add £3,000 – which could reduce substantially the length of time they need to 
save to buy a home. Anyone who has never owned a home before can open an 
account, which means a couple buying together can claim up to £6,000 towards 
their first property.

However, critics have warned the new scheme will again fuel demand for homes 
without increasing supply.

Individual savings accounts (Isas)

Isas <https://www.theguardian.com/money/isas> let individuals save tax free. 

Infrastructure

This is repeatedly flagged by business groups as an area ripe for public and 
private investment in the UK. In simple terms it means things such as roads, 
rail, internet connections and access to electricity. For example, the 
government’s national infrastructure plan 2014 included plans to build and sell 
new homes, and to invest £2.3bn in flood defences and £15bn in road 
improvements.

Inheritance tax

This is paid if the value of an estate left behind when someone dies adds up 
to more than £325,000 – the so-called inheritance tax threshold. The rate of 
inheritance tax is 40% on anything above the threshold. An estate is exempt 
from inheritance tax if the deceased left everything to their husband, wife or 
civil partner, who lives permanently in the UK.

Lifetime allowance

This is the amount an individual can save into a pension in their lifetime.

National debt

Also referred to as “public sector net debt” this is the government’s stock of 
outstanding debt. Governments have to borrow to cover the difference in a year 
when there is a deficit – a gap between receipts and spending. Debt builds up 
because governments run deficits much more often than they run surpluses.

The national debt can be expressed in billions of pounds, or as a percentage 
of national income or in terms of thousands of pounds per household – it is 
estimated at £59,000 per household in this tax year.

Net debt was less than 40% of national income before the financial crisis. The 
latest estimates from the OBR put it at 82.5% this tax year.


The OBR forecasts how much will be added to – or paid off – the national debt 
each year. This matters for the public finances because of the money spent on 
interest payments every year. In other words, the higher the debt the higher 
the cost of servicing it. Net debt in the UK is higher than the average of 
other industrial countries.

National insurance contributions


Employers pay national insurance contributions (NICs), also known as a “jobs 
tax”, for each worker.

National living wage

Workers in the UK aged 16 or over are legally entitled to a national minimum 
hourly wage.The government announced in July’s summer budget that it will also 
introduce national living wage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/08/budget-2015-uk-gdp-other-rich-nations-george-osborne>
. From this April, people over the age of 25 will earn a minimum wage of £7.20 
an hour. The new national living wage will rise at a relatively modest rate, 
reaching £9 an hour by 2020.

In total, the Office for Budget Responsibility reckons that a total of 6 
million earners will have their pay boosted as a result of the policy 
<http://cdn.budgetresponsibility.independent.gov.uk/July-2015-EFO-234224.pdf>. 


It is important not to confuse the national living wage with the living wage, 
which is a higher, voluntary ratecalculated to provide a basic but decent 
standard of living <http://www.livingwage.org.uk/calculation>. 

Has George Osborne really introduced a living wage?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/reality-check/2015/jul/08/george-osborne-budget-national-living-wage>
Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Fbudget-2015-buzzwords-glossary-of-key-terms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F16%2F1426527648944%2F7a1f7bc4-4b72-4eca-8e02-d695b640a4ef-2060x1144.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Google%20tax%20to%20the%20welfare%20cap%3A%20a%20budget%20glossary%20of%20the%20key%20terms&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Fbudget-2015-buzzwords-glossary-of-key-terms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Google%20tax%20to%20the%20welfare%20cap%3A%20a%20budget%20glossary%20of%20the%20key%20terms&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Fbudget-2015-buzzwords-glossary-of-key-terms%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F16%2F1426527648944%2F7a1f7bc4-4b72-4eca-8e02-d695b640a4ef-2060x1144.jpeg>
 Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) chairman Robert Chote. Photograph: 
Lewis Whyld/PA 
The government’s independent fiscal watchdog was set up in 2010 to monitor the 
public sector’s finances. It produces forecasts by assessing the likely impact 
of policy decisions and expected developments in the economy. Typically this 
happens twice a year – alongside each budget and autumn statement. TheOBR 
<http://budgetresponsibility.org.uk/> uses its forecasts to assess the 
government’s performance against the targets that it has set itself. Back in 
2010, Osborne said the move to cede powers to a trio of experts at the OBR was 
designed to restore public faith in government forecasts and toremove the 
temptation for chancellors to “fiddle the figures” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/may/18/osborne-office-for-budget-responsibility>
 for political ends. The OBR has been chaired since October 2010 byRobert Chote 
<http://budgetresponsibility.org.uk/about-the-obr/who-we-are/robert-chote/>, 
who was previously director of the Institute for Fiscal Studies thinktank.

Output gap

This is an estimate of the difference between the current level of activity in 
the economy and the potential level it could sustain when at its most efficient 
while keeping inflation stable in the long term. The output gap is a judgment 
of the spare capacity in an economy. The OBR estimates an output gap in order 
to make its forecasts and to assess the government’s chances of meeting fiscal 
targets. An output gap is based on educated guess work, given the level of 
potential output is never actually observed but has to be estimated.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Fbudget-2015-buzzwords-glossary-of-key-terms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F18%2F1426643784552%2F4fe86a15-6e82-45f5-ad98-18ed796172c3-2060x1517.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Google%20tax%20to%20the%20welfare%20cap%3A%20a%20budget%20glossary%20of%20the%20key%20terms&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Fbudget-2015-buzzwords-glossary-of-key-terms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Google%20tax%20to%20the%20welfare%20cap%3A%20a%20budget%20glossary%20of%20the%20key%20terms&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Fbudget-2015-buzzwords-glossary-of-key-terms%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F18%2F1426643784552%2F4fe86a15-6e82-45f5-ad98-18ed796172c3-2060x1517.jpeg>
 The chancellor changed the starting point for income tax in his summer budget. 
Photograph: Nick Ansell/PA 
Personal allowance


This is the amount a person can earn before having to start paying income tax. 

Productivity


This is a measure of efficiency in an economy. Commonly, it is measured in 
terms of output per worker or output per hour worked.The UK has suffered from 
weak productivity growth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/06/budget-2015-george-osborne-britain-productivity-puzzle>
 and this has beenlinked to the squeeze on living standards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/24/oecd-warns-uk-must-fix-productivity-problem-to-raise-living-standards>
 in recent years. Osborne has made raising productivity – through measures such 
as spending on infrastructure and help for firms investing in research and 
development – a focus.

Protected budgets

These are areas where the government has promised not to cut. It has pledged 
to “protect spending on the NHS, schools and overseas aid”. But it is worth 
noting that broader areas of health and education are not protected in the same 
way. So there is a commitment to increase spending on the NHS but the budget 
for social work is not protected, for example.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Fbudget-2015-buzzwords-glossary-of-key-terms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F18%2F1426643879903%2Fe9019194-f783-4989-aea6-6473c336afb4-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Google%20tax%20to%20the%20welfare%20cap%3A%20a%20budget%20glossary%20of%20the%20key%20terms&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Fbudget-2015-buzzwords-glossary-of-key-terms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Google%20tax%20to%20the%20welfare%20cap%3A%20a%20budget%20glossary%20of%20the%20key%20terms&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Fbudget-2015-buzzwords-glossary-of-key-terms%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F18%2F1426643879903%2Fe9019194-f783-4989-aea6-6473c336afb4-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Budget and autumn statement speeches typically end with a rabbit being pulled 
out of the hat by the chancellor. Photograph: RubberBall / Alamy/Alamy 
Rabbits

Chancellors often end their budget speeches to parliament with a rabbit out of 
the hat. These are often crowd-pleasing measures and in previous years these 
have included the help-to-buy scheme, a pensions overhaul and stamp duty 
changes.

Rebalancing


Osborne vowed to rebalance the UK economy away from over-reliance on domestic, 
consumer spending and towards more support from manufacturing and exports. In 
the last parliament, he promised a “march of the makers”. But a global economic 
slowdown and a strong pound have knocked UK exports and the manufacturing 
sector contracted last year. The sector is still below the levels of production 
seen before the crisis.

Resource spending

The money spent by a government department can be split into resource spending 
and capital spending. Resource spending is on day-to-day activities, including 
any programmes a department runs, and administration. Capital spending is 
investment in things like public buildings and transport links. Funds earmarked 
for capital spending cannot be used for resource spending.

People sometimes talk about the money that keeps government departments 
running – the resource part of departmental expenditure limits (DEL) – as RDEL. 
Similarly they also talk about CDEL, the money within a department’s budget 
that is earmarked for investing. (See Total Managed Expenditure below for more 
details)



Stamp duty

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Fbudget-2015-buzzwords-glossary-of-key-terms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F18%2F1426644091616%2Ff4d898af-5839-401b-b814-b366e994aa4e-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Google%20tax%20to%20the%20welfare%20cap%3A%20a%20budget%20glossary%20of%20the%20key%20terms&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Fbudget-2015-buzzwords-glossary-of-key-terms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Google%20tax%20to%20the%20welfare%20cap%3A%20a%20budget%20glossary%20of%20the%20key%20terms&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Fbudget-2015-buzzwords-glossary-of-key-terms%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F18%2F1426644091616%2Ff4d898af-5839-401b-b814-b366e994aa4e-1020x612.jpeg>
 Photograph: Toby Melville/PA Archive/Press Association Images 
A levy on the sale of buildings or land. 

State pension

This can be claimed by most people when they reach state pension age. That 
pension age is changing, however. The state pension age for women is increasing 
from 60 to 65 to equalise it with that of men and the age for both men and 
women is due to rise beyond 65 in the future to reflect longer life 
expectancies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Fbudget-2015-buzzwords-glossary-of-key-terms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F18%2F1426643692676%2F17a329ef-7779-4dfb-aa0a-f4842438996e-2060x1363.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Google%20tax%20to%20the%20welfare%20cap%3A%20a%20budget%20glossary%20of%20the%20key%20terms&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Fbudget-2015-buzzwords-glossary-of-key-terms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Google%20tax%20to%20the%20welfare%20cap%3A%20a%20budget%20glossary%20of%20the%20key%20terms&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Fbudget-2015-buzzwords-glossary-of-key-terms%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F18%2F1426643692676%2F17a329ef-7779-4dfb-aa0a-f4842438996e-2060x1363.jpeg>
 Pensioners saw big changes announced to what they can do with their pension 
pots last year. Photograph: Alamy 
Structural budget deficit


The structural, or underlying, deficit is an estimate of how large the deficit 
would be if the economy was operating at a normal, sustainable level of 
employment and activity. This is the part of the deficit that is immune to ups 
and downs in the economy that affect tax receipts and welfare costs.

Tax credits

Tax credits <https://www.theguardian.com/money/taxcredits> are a mechanism to 
redistribute income to people on lower wages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/oct/20/tax-credits-what-are-they-and-who-benefits>
. They are a form of benefit that is means-tested and paid out to some parents 
and guardians, under the child tax credits scheme, and to some workers, as 
working tax credits. Some people qualify for both.

Eventually, both tax credits are due to be replaced by universal credit (see 
below).


Triple lock

The coalition introduced a so-called “triple lock” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/nov/22/triple-lock-deal-keeps-pension-incomes-rising-and-puts-pay-in-the-shade>
, which means the basic state pension rises by either inflation based on the 
September consumer price index (CPI) figure, growth in average weekly earnings 
or 2.5%, whichever is highest.

Universal credit

A single benefits payment that will eventually replace income-related 
jobseeker’s allowance, housing benefit, child tax credit, working tax credit, 
income support and income-related employment support allowance. The government 
says it will be structured so that people are always better off working than on 
benefits.

The scheme is already being rolled out but  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jun/25/labour-says-universal-credit-will-take-495-years-to-roll-out-as-costs-rise-3bn>
has been hit by a series ofdelays and cost overruns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jun/25/labour-says-universal-credit-will-take-495-years-to-roll-out-as-costs-rise-3bn>
.

VAT

Charged on much consumer spending. The standard rate is 20%. There is also a 
reduced rate of 5% for goods such as children’s car seats and home energy 
bills, and a zero rate for items including most foods, books, newspapers and 
children’s clothes.

Vehicle excise duty

A tax on vehicles, split into bands based on a car’s CO2 emissions.

Welfare cap

A limit on the amount that government can spend on certain social security 
benefits. Not to be confused with the benefit cap, which limits total household 
benefits.












 