
The young family, low income


Natalie Shipp, 28, and her fiance, Adam Long, 25, will pocket an extra £80 a 
year when the personal allowance increases by £400 to £11,000 on 6 April, and 
take home a further £100 tax-free when it increases to £11,500 next year,writes 
Donna Ferguson. They plan to invest as much as they can of this money into the 
new lifetime Isa for under-40s, which came as a welcome surprise.


“The extra money isn’t much to many people, but it is to us,” says Natalie. 
“At the moment, we don’t have any savings or pensions, and no spare money to 
save anyway. It’s a massive benefit to think we’ll get £1 from the government 
for every £4 we save, tax-free. That will definitely encourage us to save more.”

The couple rent their home in Wiltshire but would like to buy one day. Adam 
earns £13,000 a year as a forklift driver for Asda, while Natalie is a 
full-time mum to their three young children, Ebony, eight, Indie, three, and 
Thea, one. Rent takes up the majority of Adam’s earnings, and they rely on 
working and child tax credits to help pay for their groceries and bills.

Natalie is glad there were no further cuts to these credits (which will be 
frozen for the next four years) but would have liked to see more help with 
childcare costs in the budget, so she could afford to work instead of having to 
wait until her children were older. “The cost of childcare means that 
financially we’re better off with me not working, which frustrates me. I think 
the chancellor should have offered more support for people like me who want to 
work.”

She volunteers for 4children, a charity that runs her local children’s centre, 
and was disappointed that no extra funding was offered for such facilities, 
which means a third of the centres in her local area will have to close. “I’m 
also worried about these plans to make all schools academies – will it mean 
that schools in better areas will have a lot more to offer than schools in 
lower class areas?

“A sugar tax is a good idea, but my kids don’t drink sugary drinks anyway. 
This government is not putting enough focus on young children at the start of 
their lives. Children’s centres play such an important role in helping to 
stimulate children and support parents.”

She also wishes there had been more funding for the NHS. “One of my daughters 
is being assessed for autism and there’s no funding for her assessment on the 
NHS, so we’re having to rely on a charity to do it. I would have liked to see 
the chancellor prioritising the NHS more than businesses.”

The first-time buyers

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Ffirst-time-buyers-pensioners-budget-2016-george-osborne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F103003731bff4ef603c6426b0890063b13b18ba6%2F0_95_6144_3684%2F6144.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20first-time%20buyers%20to%20pensioners%20%E2%80%93%20who%20will%20benefit%20from%20the%202016%20budget%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Ffirst-time-buyers-pensioners-budget-2016-george-osborne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20first-time%20buyers%20to%20pensioners%20%E2%80%93%20who%20will%20benefit%20from%20the%202016%20budget%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Ffirst-time-buyers-pensioners-budget-2016-george-osborne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F103003731bff4ef603c6426b0890063b13b18ba6%2F0_95_6144_3684%2F6144.jpg>
 Alex Jeffers and his girlfriend, Carol Woodman, in their house in Cardiff. 
Photograph: Gareth Phillips for the Guardian 
Alex Jeffers, 26, and his girlfriend, Carol Woodman, are saving to buy their 
first home,writes Hilary Osborne. They have already taken advantage of George 
Osborne’s help-to-buy Isa, opening a Halifax account as soon as it launched in 
December. “I’ve been paying steadily into that for the last few months – I’ve 
been fortunate and I’ve been able to put the full £200 a month into the 
account,” says Alex.


Under the current rules, when they are ready to buy their savings will be 
topped up by a government payment of up to £3,000 each. But if they save into a 
lifetime Isa instead they could get even more.

Alex says the prospect of a bigger government payment sounds attractive, as 
does the fact that the bonus can be earned on longer-term savings. “It sounds a 
lot better than an account that you can only use to buy a house – it gives a 
bit more flexibility and if I don’t end up buying anywhere I’m not losing that 
25%.”

He doesn’t have a pension – the small tech company he works for in Cardiff 
won’t have to automatically enrol him into a scheme until August 2018, and he 
says he has “just not got round” to opening one himself. “Being able to 
continue paying into the same account could make it a lot simpler.”


Alex had already started saving before the account was launched, but still 
expects it to be a couple of years before the couple can start looking for 
somewhere to buy. They pay £650 a month between them to rent a flat, and expect 
to look at flats when they are ready to buy, which means spending between 
£120,000 and £150,000, he estimates.

Alex says that stamp duty changes that make it more expensive for people to 
buy second homes should help them. “The part of Cardiff I used to live in is 
full of ‘to let’ signs – you walk down the street and they’re everywhere,” he 
says. “A lot of first-time buyers have been at a disadvantage.”

The retired headteacher 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Ffirst-time-buyers-pensioners-budget-2016-george-osborne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb7836e4c0a15ff39a179e9c85826c49d99f93db%2F0_222_3872_2322%2F3872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20first-time%20buyers%20to%20pensioners%20%E2%80%93%20who%20will%20benefit%20from%20the%202016%20budget%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Ffirst-time-buyers-pensioners-budget-2016-george-osborne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20first-time%20buyers%20to%20pensioners%20%E2%80%93%20who%20will%20benefit%20from%20the%202016%20budget%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Ffirst-time-buyers-pensioners-budget-2016-george-osborne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb7836e4c0a15ff39a179e9c85826c49d99f93db%2F0_222_3872_2322%2F3872.jpg>
 Retired headteacher Jane Cowley at her home near Belford, Northumberland. 
Photograph: Mark Pinder for the Guardian 
There was precious little in the budget for older people, says retired 
headteacher Jane Cowley – one of several hundred thousand women born in the 
mid-1950s who argue they have been seriously short-changed by increases to the 
state pension age,writes Rupert Jones.

George Osborne’s first comment was that the UK was “set to grow faster than 
any other major advanced economy in the world”, but Cowley says that despite 
this, there seems to be “no money to support more vulnerable people in society 
such as pensioners and the disabled”.


For decades Cowley had been expecting to receive her state pension at 60, but 
measures included in thePensions <https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> 
Act 1995 increased her state pension age (SPA) to 64 years and two months. In 
2011, the coalition government pushed through a speeding-up of the timetable, 
and as a result her SPA was raised again, to 65 years and eight months.


Cowley, 61, was born in 1954, which means she is in the worst-affected age 
group: the biggest losers from this shakeup are said to be the estimated 
500,000 women born between 6 October 1953 and 5 April 1955. She is a retired 
primary school head who worked in Surrey and now lives in Northumberland with 
her husband, Clive. She has three sons, aged 33, 31 and 28, and backs the 
campaign being run by Women Against State Pension Inequality (Waspi), which has 
been calling for “fair transitional arrangements” to help those adversely 
affected by the SPA changes.


Cowley says she is “very disappointed [Osborne] did not take the opportunity 
to put right that obvious wrong. Ros Altmann, the pensions minister, said some 
time ago that women feel they simply don’t matter to policymakers, and 
certainly that came through strongly in this budget.”


She acknowledges that the lifetime Isa for under-40s, which young people can 
use to buy their first home or save for their retirement with a 25% cash bonus 
from the government, is something that will benefit people such as her sons. 
“I’m sure that for younger people, that is going to be a huge help. The choice 
is often stark, between saving for a pension and saving for a house.”


In the meantime, she will continue to back the Waspi calls for a better deal 
for the 1950s women. Cowley says her two SPA increases represent a financial 
loss of around £35,000, as they mean her having to wait almost six extra years 
to get her state pension cash.


“Both governments have been at fault,” she says. “I’ve got a small 
occupational pension that I can draw on at the moment [but] there are a lot of 
women who haven’t got one. There’s someone I’ve met who had no idea she wasn’t 
going to get her pension at 60 – she decided to give up work because her father 
was poorly. She had to sell her house and is now living off her savings while 
she cares for her father.”

The pensioner

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Ffirst-time-buyers-pensioners-budget-2016-george-osborne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22d1870e178242cbd506293580faed490ccc0845%2F0_403_6014_3613%2F6014.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20first-time%20buyers%20to%20pensioners%20%E2%80%93%20who%20will%20benefit%20from%20the%202016%20budget%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Ffirst-time-buyers-pensioners-budget-2016-george-osborne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20first-time%20buyers%20to%20pensioners%20%E2%80%93%20who%20will%20benefit%20from%20the%202016%20budget%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Ffirst-time-buyers-pensioners-budget-2016-george-osborne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22d1870e178242cbd506293580faed490ccc0845%2F0_403_6014_3613%2F6014.jpg>
 Pensioner and retired lecturer Paul Russell from Shipley, near Bradford. 
Photograph: Asadour Guzelian 
Retired English teacher Paul Russell, 76, from Shipley in West Yorkshire had 
his personal checklist of reforms ready as he sat down to watch the 
chancellor’s speech,writes Patrick Collinson. 


 An hour later, he had been able to tick off none of them and has been left 
fearful that with continued austerity, vital local care services used by the 
elderly will remain under severe threat.


“Social care for the elderly, provided by local authorities, is the elephant 
in the room. It is being constantly downgraded and underfunded. A lot of local 
daycare centres are going to close over the next few years.”

He tops up his state pension with a “reasonable” public sector pension but 
says it is far from lavish. After social care, his big concern is the new 
“single tier” state pension that is expected to be £155.60 a week, compared 
with the current state pension of £115.95, when it comes into force in April. 
“But to get that money you’ll need a full 35 years of NI contributions, and an 
awful lot of people, mainly women, won’t be in that situation. Everybody’s 
going to be individually assessed.”

Russell acknowledges that while the “triple lock” system – which was safe 
again in this budget – has ensured that state pensioners have gained annual 
increases, they have not been as attractive as some people think. “I am keen to 
keep the triple lock, but am not happy the way it is tied to the CPI rather 
than the RPI. And remember, the triple lock only applies to the basic state 
pension, not the earnings-related element. That means that one-third of my 
state pension has not been increasing. I’d like to see a basic state pension 
that really is a living pension. The idea of surviving on £156 a week is 
risible.”

A Yorkshire man, Paul is less than impressed by Osborne’s constant references 
to the Northern Powerhouse. “It’s mostly waffle,” he says. “Yes, he’s gave the 
go-ahead to HS3 between Leeds and Manchester. But it’s only 30 miles. We don’t 
need high speed, we just need a normal speed line with more carriages rather 
than the slow and outdated service we have now.”

Paul and his wife, Tina, have seven children and 17 grandchildren. “My 
experience is that the young are having a rotten time, but it’s not because 
people like me are doing particularly well,” Paul says. “The debate has gone 
too far in saying that it’s all the fault of older people. We have also had the 
pressure of austerity.”


Paul retired from teaching more than a decade ago, but worries that the 
generation behind him are going to have to “work longer for less”. Society will 
just have to accept that more of its resources are going to have to go towards 
older people, he says. “The government is going to have to wake up to the fact 
that it has to adjust the balance of its budget to reflect the population 
profile of the country. There are going to be more and more older people.”

The businesswoman

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Ffirst-time-buyers-pensioners-budget-2016-george-osborne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4706db1e628e54d38572c140c0b84b5c15db232b%2F0_103_1653_992%2F1653.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20first-time%20buyers%20to%20pensioners%20%E2%80%93%20who%20will%20benefit%20from%20the%202016%20budget%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Ffirst-time-buyers-pensioners-budget-2016-george-osborne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20first-time%20buyers%20to%20pensioners%20%E2%80%93%20who%20will%20benefit%20from%20the%202016%20budget%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Ffirst-time-buyers-pensioners-budget-2016-george-osborne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4706db1e628e54d38572c140c0b84b5c15db232b%2F0_103_1653_992%2F1653.jpg>
 Rosie Ginday and Zee Mwale. Zee has been working with Rosie since 2014 when he 
took part in her training course to help marginalised young people. Photograph: 
Rob Finney for the Guardian 
Macaroon maker Rosie Ginday is thrilled about the boost to the business rates 
relief announced in the budget, but bemused about the cut to corporation tax,
writes Katie Allen.


She set up the social enterprise Miss Macaroon five years ago and ploughs the 
profits back into training young people who are ex-offenders, care leavers and 
have been long-term unemployed. The Birmingham-based pastry chef is about to 
branch out into new retail outlets in stations, airports and shopping centres, 
so the prospect of paying less or no business rates is welcome.

“It will definitely help us and give us a bit more of a security blanket,” 
says Ginday, who is 32. “It might only make a difference of a couple of 
thousand pounds, but that could help put two more people on our training course 
and to potentially come off benefits and find employment.”

The business is growing quickly and turnover this year will be £200,000. From 
a kitchen on the outskirts of the city, a team of four pastry chefs pipe, bake 
and fill 7,000 macaroons a day. Bespoke versions are sold to corporate clients 
such as fashion house Karl Lagerfeld to use as gifts, and the company also 
caters for weddings and sells macaroons wholesale to restaurants, retailers and 
hotels. Ginday hopes the move into retail could create up to 100 jobs.

So far 19 people have been through her four-week course in macaroon making, 
personal development and other skills to help them get into work. Some have 
gone on to work with her, others she has helped find jobs and apprenticeships 
elsewhere.


Ginday wishes Osborne had provided more help for social enterprises like hers 
rather than cutting corporation tax again. Miss Macaroon paid £4,000 in 
corporation tax last year –the same amount as paid by Facebook in the UK in its 
latest full year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2015/oct/11/facebook-paid-4327-corporation-tax-despite-35-million-staff-bonuses>
.


“Businesses shouldn’t be getting tax breaks when the welfare state is being 
attacked to the extent it is,” she says. “I think corporation tax is not that 
much. For us it makes a big difference, that money could put people through our 
training course … We are paying 20% on our profits and huge corporations don’t 
seem to pay their fair share. There should be some kind of link to how much 
good work you are doing.”

The millennial

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Ffirst-time-buyers-pensioners-budget-2016-george-osborne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c832a4a314c4ffd87a6e965e7a0538d6ba11638%2F803_877_4766_2859%2F4766.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20first-time%20buyers%20to%20pensioners%20%E2%80%93%20who%20will%20benefit%20from%20the%202016%20budget%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Ffirst-time-buyers-pensioners-budget-2016-george-osborne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20first-time%20buyers%20to%20pensioners%20%E2%80%93%20who%20will%20benefit%20from%20the%202016%20budget%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Ffirst-time-buyers-pensioners-budget-2016-george-osborne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c832a4a314c4ffd87a6e965e7a0538d6ba11638%2F803_877_4766_2859%2F4766.jpg>
 Evie Calder earns less than the London living wage. Photograph: Graeme 
Robertson for the Guardian 
Evie Calder cannot imagine how she will take the first steps towards owning a 
home, and there was nothing in theBudget <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/budget>
 to help her do that,writes Rebecca Smithers.

 “It’s just not something I can get my head round,” says the 24-year-old UCL 
postgraduate, who lives and works in London as a paid intern for a climate 
change NGO. “I live hand to mouth and have no savings. Every single penny I 
earn goes on rent, food, travel and trying to pay off my overdraft. I’m lucky 
if I get to the end of the month without ending up overdrawn again.”


Ineligible for benefits, she has survived financially so far by sharing a flat 
with her boyfriend and two of his friends – an arrangement that will end soon 
when he goes abroad to work – and with occasional financial handouts from her 
parents. Now, she is hoping that the internship, which follows a previous 
unpaid one, will lead to a job and the security that will bring.

“I didn’t think that at my age things would be this difficult,” says Evie. “My 
sisters are four and six years older than me but they have managed to buy 
homes, are both married and close to starting families. They have not suffered 
in the way that I have. I cannot even begin to think about my student debt – I 
have just had to park it in a box.”

Since September 2015 Evie has been working as a paid intern, for which she 
receives £9.10 an hour – less than the London living wage of £9.40. But her 
earnings have not amounted to a “proper salary” and she had not expected the 
internship to last for more than six months, which would have kept her earnings 
below the current personal tax allowance of £10,600.

She is disappointed that a budget pitched shamelessly at the squeezed next 
generation only aims to help “those who are struggling to save enough for a 
house but fails to address those who are struggling to save anything at all, 
especially in London. More could have been done to help young people of my age 
trying to work and survive in the capital, which is in a bubble of its own. 
Even the London living wage is not enough to survive on, let alone to save, and 
I’m disappointed that this wasn’t addressed in the budget at all.”


With her climate change hat on, she is not impressed that the oil and gas 
industry will benefit from £1bn of tax cuts as the supplementary charge is cut 
from 20% to 10%.


Even a move to another flat share, in Mile End, for which she will pay an 
all-in mate’s rate of £750 a month – will be a struggle, she fears. “I try to 
stay optimistic but sometimes I get depressed about what is happening to my 
generation. I enjoy the work and this is what I want to do. I have not sold out 
in the way that some people have, although this would have made things much 
easier financially.


“I know I’m not going to be earning a lot of money, but I deserve to be able 
to plan for the future and to be able to start thinking about getting a foot on 
the property ladder.”
 