
There are historical dramas, and then there are historical dramas written by 
Steven Knight. The 57-year-old creator of cult gangster dramaPeaky Blinders has 
built a reputation as the man to go to for a risky period piece, and that is 
certainly the case with his latest show,Taboo, which starts on BBC1 on Saturday.

It’s the tale of James Keziah Delaney (Tom Hardy), a Georgian adventurer with 
a very dark past who returns from America on his father’s death and promptly 
finds himself up to his neck in intrigue, murder and revenge.Taboo might not 
featurePeaky Blinders’ beguiling mix of modern music and sharp fashion, but 
Knight’s muscular, colourful and occasionally shocking script ensures that it 
is very much hewn from the same rock, although the writer insists he is not 
simply aiming for outraged headlines.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsteven-knight-peaky-blinders-taboo-risky-period-drama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc76eec20837edca1d654082affc0875fd00d7b47%2F1810_92_2362_2953%2F2362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Peaky%20Blinders%20to%20Taboo%2C%20how%20TV%E2%80%99s%20history%20man%20is%20shaking%20up%20period%20drama&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsteven-knight-peaky-blinders-taboo-risky-period-drama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Peaky%20Blinders%20to%20Taboo%2C%20how%20TV%E2%80%99s%20history%20man%20is%20shaking%20up%20period%20drama&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsteven-knight-peaky-blinders-taboo-risky-period-drama%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc76eec20837edca1d654082affc0875fd00d7b47%2F1810_92_2362_2953%2F2362.jpg>
 Screenwriter Steven Knight. Photograph: Robert Viglasky/BBC 
“I hope it will have the sort of loyalty that Peaky does and I think people 
will be surprised by it,” he says. “It’s definitely a different way of doing 
English period drama. Not that there’s anything wrong with how it’s done at the 
moment, but I wanted to make something that felt more unfamiliar. I felt why 
not tell this story, not for any political reason but because it’s there and it 
hasn’t really been told.”

The story he is referring to is the beginnings of industrialisation and the 
start of what would eventually become the Victorian empire.Taboo is set during 
the regency of the future George IV, but Knight is clear that the seeds of 
change were already being sown.

“I see it as a story not about class but about commerce,” he says. “The 
history of Britain has always been written through the prism of class, and 
that’s fine, but the 19th century was driven by money and this story reflects 
that. This is a drama about the ships and money and warehouses and docks that 
formed the engine of the empire.”

However, he cautions against drawing too many parallels between the 
expansionist East India Company, whose often malign influence is felt 
throughout the series, and today’s corporations. “It is a modern story because 
it’s about big business and corporate enterprise but I’ve tried not to make it 
simply ‘the East India Company were evil’ because that’s so easy to do. They 
did things that we now know to be evil, but if you want to learn anything from 
it you have to understand that they were human beings like us. They were 
capable of both good and bad.”

This sense of the past as a shifting beast made up of many stories and 
personalities is key to Knight’s view of history. “We tend to believe that 
history goes in straight lines but it doesn’t,” he says. “We look back and 
believe that history tells the story of how we gradually became more permissive 
but the reality is that history goes in circles and if you look at the morality 
of 1814 [whenTaboo is set] it’s much more hedonistic and libertarian than the 
1960s. It was all going on.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsteven-knight-peaky-blinders-taboo-risky-period-drama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba562cd4c090c36bd1d1456ecf87f6c580300fee%2F0_192_4284_2570%2F4284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Peaky%20Blinders%20to%20Taboo%2C%20how%20TV%E2%80%99s%20history%20man%20is%20shaking%20up%20period%20drama&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsteven-knight-peaky-blinders-taboo-risky-period-drama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Peaky%20Blinders%20to%20Taboo%2C%20how%20TV%E2%80%99s%20history%20man%20is%20shaking%20up%20period%20drama&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsteven-knight-peaky-blinders-taboo-risky-period-drama%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba562cd4c090c36bd1d1456ecf87f6c580300fee%2F0_192_4284_2570%2F4284.jpg>
 Joe Cole as John Shelby, Cillian Murphy as Thomas Shelby and Paul Anderson as 
Arthur Shelby in Peaky Blinders. Photograph: Robert Viglasky/BBC 
Put like that, it is easy to see the appeal of a drama set in Georgian England 
– and why the subject looks set to be big news in 2017: in addition toTaboo, 
ITV will airHarlots, starring Samantha Morton and Lesley Manville as 
18th-century brothel owners, later this year, while Jake Arnott’s new book,The 
Fatal Tree, published next month, tells the story of Georgian pickpocket 
Edgworth Bess and her lover, the notorious thief, Jack Sheppard.

“Before the Victorian era, England was much more of a wild place,” Knight 
says. “And I think that when you take away the safe harbours that you normally 
expect in this kind of period drama – lady so-and-so meets with lady so-and-so 
– then you end up with something very different.”

How does he feel about the fact that the series has already been described as 
the anti-Poldark, with both dramas featuring brooding leading men who return 
home after long absences to claim what they believe to be theirs? Knight 
laughs. “I’ve honestly never watchedPoldark but I’m sure it’s brilliant. To 
make something commercially popular is actually very difficult and people love
Poldark so they’re obviously doing it right.”

And for all Taboo’s boundary-pushing (the show is definitely more Deadwood than
Downton Abbey), Knight is clear that he doesn’t dislike straightforward 
historical dramas; indeed, his script for 2007’sAmazing Grace, about William 
Wilberforce and the abolitionist movement, was a more conventional affair, 
while the recent second world war dramaAllied, starring Brad Pitt and Marion 
Cotillard, deliberately harks back to the romantic epics of the 1940s and 50s.

“There’s nothing wrong with the classic ways of adapting stuff,” he says. 
“It’s absolutely fine. But I don’t think that just because most people do it 
one way doesn’t mean that you shouldn’t try another.Taboo certainly isn’t a 
commentary on other types of period drama. It’s just a different way of 
tackling one.”

Yet it is also the case that Knight is beginning to build quite a reputation 
as a creator of alternative period dramas.Peaky Blinders had Nick Cave and PJ 
Harvey on the soundtrack and gave a bunch of small-time crooks from 1920s 
Birmingham a mythic outlaw sheen.Taboo is equally full-blooded, thrusting the 
audience straight into a grimy Georgian London where anything and anyone is for 
sale.

“I think audiences like to see characters that they can identify with 
presented with a different set of rules, which they certainly [have] withTaboo 
because of the period in which it’s set,” Knight explains. “It’s not familiar 
and there’s a simmering tension, yet there are some recognisable aspects. It’s 
like playing a computer game in a wild west setting – you play the game and 
it’s the same game you’ve always played but the setting is different so what 
does that mean for how you play?”

And for all their risk-taking, his dramas are meticulously researched. “I read 
lots of history before writing this, everything from books about that specific 
time to Henry Mayhew’sLondon Labour and the London Poor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/oct/16/rereading-henry-mayhew-london-poor>
 which covers a later period. I wanted the smell of London and how it was, and 
first-hand accounts are best for that. The key is in finding individuals who 
will give you a good sense of the history – for example, we have an American 
spy inTaboo in later episodes who’s based on a real person. He was a spy and 
also a surgeon at St Barts, plus his hobby was dyeing cotton to find the best 
dye. We used the whole thing because it was so weird. I’m sure viewers will say 
it’s almost too much but it was all drawn from real accounts.”

Having said that, he remains resigned to the fact that not everyone will be 
convinced. “I always get people saying aboutPeaky Blinders that there were no 
Peakys after 1908. Well, either my entire family were making it up or they 
existed after that time because they know that in the 1920s people were 
referred to as ‘Peaky Blinders’,” he says. “In history there’s what’s written 
down and there’s what actually happened. There are always people who are doing 
things that don’t fit the official accounts.”

So would it be fair to describe Knight’s television dramas as a form of 
alternative history, dealing with those stories that can’t be contained or 
easily explained away? He nods. “Yes, exactly. Historians like to find patterns 
because that’s their job, they want a pattern that can be referred back to, or 
to view an event as part of a bigger pattern, but for people living their lives 
during that time it’s not like that.”

Knight is currently writing the fifth episode of the fourth series of Peaky 
Blinders, which will return in October – “it’s going to be really good, the 
best yet, they’re having to step back and go back to their roots” – and has 
recently written screenplays forThe Girl in the Spider’s Web – based on 
David Lagercrantz’s sequel to theMillennium series of novels by Stieg Larsson 
that started withThe Girl With the Dragon Tattoo – and a western, Woman Walks 
Ahead, starring Jessica Chastain.

As for the future, there’s at least one other historical period he’d like to 
give the Knight touch. “I’d really love to do something early medieval,” he 
says, before pausing and adding with a laugh: “I basically want to do Lady 
Godiva but I don’t quite know yet how to stretch it out.”

Taboo is on BBC1 on Saturday 7 January at 9.15pm 
 