
Most years, when it comes to retrospectives, December belongs to the 
exceptional. But this hasn’t been most years. This has been a dog, with misery 
piled on top of disappointment piled on top of misery. So perhaps, given the 
abject state of 2016, it’s more fitting to concentrate on the worst TV shows of 
the year. Thankfully, we’ve got plenty to choose from. Here are the six worst 
offenders:

Crisis in Six Scenes (Amazon)
 My god, what a DOA series this was … Woody Allen and Miley Cyrus in Crisis in 
Six Scenes. Photograph: Amazon 
When it was announced that Woody Allen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/25/woody-allen-traumas-in-life-weaken-us-cafe-society-amazon>
 was making a six-part series for Amazon, the man himself announced: “I don’t 
know how I got into this. I have no ideas and I’m not sure where to begin.” At 
the time, it sounded somewhere between false modesty and sly self-deprecation. 
But then people actually got to see Crisis in Six Scenes, and now it doesn’t.My 
God, what a DOA series this was 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/28/crisis-in-six-scenes-woody-allen-miley-cyrus>
. It didn’t have a plot. It was sluggishly paced. The whole series felt like a 
threadbare film idea meaninglessly stretched to total breaking point. This has 
to count as the worst thing poor Woody has ever done.

Vinyl (Sky Atlantic/HBO)
 A soapy, overblown series … not even the most devoted Scorsese fan could get 
behind Vinyl. Photograph: Sky TV 
Theoretically, Vinyl couldn’t fail. Produced by Mick Jagger and Martin Scorsese
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/martinscorsese>, with a first-class 
soundtrack, it promised to tell the story of the 1970s music industry with more 
authenticity than ever before. But it didn’t because, unbeknownst to anybody, 
what Jagger and Scorsese had actually dreamed up was asoapy, overblown cartoon 
of a series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/10/vinyl-hbo-martin-scorsese-mick-jagger>
 not even the most devoted Scorsese fan could get behind. It was every bad 
musician biopic you’ve ever seen, assembled Voltron-style into a harrowing 
kaiju of cliche.Vinyl won’t be back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/apr/12/forget-the-music-hbos-vinyl-is-a-brave-and-bitterly-honest-depiction-of-addiction>
, and nobody will miss it.

Top Gear (BBC)
 Too flaccid and eager to please … Chris Evans and Matt LeBlanc in Top Gear. 
Photograph: BBC Worldwide  Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Chris Evans and Matt LeBlanc in trailer for revamped Top Gear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/video/2016/mar/31/chris-evans-and-matt-leblanc-in-trailer-for-revamped-top-gear-video>
Of all the repercussions to have come from Jeremy Clarkson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/jeremyclarkson> lamping his producer, the 
most upsetting was the hobbled Top Gear that sprang up in its wake. Although 
replacement hosts Chris Evans and Matt LeBlanc gave it their best shot,the 
format turned to ashes in their hands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/04/why-chris-evans-top-gear-was-doomed-from-the-start>
, becoming simultaneously too flaccid and eager to please. It was a hollow 
shell of a show, andEvans legged it as fast as he could 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/04/chris-evans-quits-bbc-top-gear-after-one-series>
. The rave reviews received by Clarkson’s new showThe Grand Tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/25/the-grand-tour-can-jeremy-clarkson-and-his-cronies-keep-up-the-pace>
 – which, even more than his old series, is just a load of doddery old men 
larking about near some cars – only compounded Top Gear’s failure.

The X-Files (Channel 5)
 Suffocated by ineptitude … David Duchovny and Gillian Anderson in The 
X-Files. Photograph: Ed Araquel/AP  Sorry, your browser is unable to play this 
video.
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
The X-Files reboot trailer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/video/2016/jan/22/the-x-files-reboot-trailer-video>
Chances are you probably forgot The X-Files 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/08/x-files-review-new-series-underwhelming-unnecessary>
 was even revived this year, thanks to the tepid reception it received. Not 
that it should have been a surprise, of course; the show didn’t even get to the 
end of its original series with all its wheels intact, and both spin-off 
feature films were dismal. Although the new series had one undoubted bright 
spot – the knowing, self-referential Mulder and Scully Meet the Were-Monster – 
it was suffocated by the ineptitude of its neighbours. In particular the finale,
My Struggle II 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/23/x-files-episode-six-recap-finale-full-of-the-good-the-bad-and-the-ugly>
 (in which humanity experiences an extinction-level event and the whole thing 
plays out like a Romanian am-dram version of House MD) might go down as the 
worst episode of the series ever produced. The X-Files didn’t deserve to end 
like this, but it sure as hell doesn’t deserve to come back again either.

BBC sitcom season 
 Like a CCTV feed from an unlicensed regional Are You Being Served? dinner 
performance. Photograph: Kieron McCarron/BBC/PA 
“We’re bringing back all the old sitcoms your parents liked!” said the BBC. 
“No, don’t do that, because it’ll taint those shows for fans of the originals, 
and alienate younger viewers,” replied literally everyone else. “LALALALALALA 
CAN’T HEAR YOU,” screamed the BBC – as it commissioned what to all intents and 
purposes looked like a CCTV feed from an unlicensed regionalAre You Being 
Served? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/feb/16/are-you-being-served-makeover-mrs-slocombe-mr-humphries>
 dinner performance. It’s genuinely difficult to find anything positive to say 
about any of the revived sitcoms – maybeGoodnight Sweetheart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/05/nicholas-lyndhurst-goodnight-sweetheart-bbc>
 didn’t quite make me want to pull out my fingernails as much as I thought it 
would – except that at least nobody at the BBC will make such a silly decision 
ever again.

The Fall (BBC)
 The whole thing was made up of scenes where nothing happened … The Fall. 
Photograph: Des Willie/BBC/The Fall 3 Ltd 
Listen, it is not fair that Gillian Anderson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gillian-anderson> has two shows on this 
list. Gillian Anderson is a brilliant actor, and it probably isn’t her fault 
she was dealt such a crummy hand this year. But Jesus, the final series ofThe 
Fall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/30/the-fall-paul-spector-psychological-thriller>
 was awful. The whole thing was made up of either scenes where nothing 
happened, scenes where too much happened, or scenes where things happened for 
no reason whatsoever. And then it ended, and nobody noticed because they had 
all died of boredom three weeks earlier. Worse still, this whole piece now 
looks like a weird vendetta against Gillian Anderson, who is wonderful. Thanks 
a lot, 2016.
 