
Oversized sleeves

Once an afterthought, sleeves are the red carpet tweak of 2017. Owing, 
perhaps, to their one-size-fits-all quality, they feel like a way to snazz up 
an affordable outfit without much fuss. However, on the red carpet, mimicking 
the catwalk, they will doubtless be the power move of this coming awards season.

Choose from fluted, cropped, bunched and oversized, and try anything from 
Marques’Almeida to Balmain. Sarah Jessica Parker, often a bellwether of future 
trends, chose cold-shoulder Vera Wang and a loose homage to the late Carrie 
Fisher (and indeed Hillary Clinton,an early adopter  
<http://hailee%20steinfeld%20also%20channelled%20princess%20leia%20in%20a%20loose-sleeved%20lilac%20dress%20with%20half-sleeves/>
of this trend). Hailee Steinfeld also went cold-shouldered in a loose-sleeved 
lilac dress with half-sleeves. Drew Barrymore, meanwhile, wore a Bianca 
Jagger-esque batwinged dress by Filipino designer Monique Lhuillier. Sleeves. 
Likely to reappear at the Oscars.

Frozen (the film and the weather)
 Claire Foy, Gina Rodriguez and Anna Kendrick. Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock/AP 
Inspired presumably by Frozen, or rather a sympathetic nod to those outside of 
LA being cold, icy shades of pink blue and silver dominated the Globes red 
carpet. The tones were feminine but provided sweet respite from the usual 
princess gowns that dominate awards season. There’s a lot to unpack with this 
theme, although metallics, shine and brassy tones were takeaways at the spring 
shows, chiefly Marques’Almeida, MM6 Maison Margiela, Christopher Kane and 
Versus. Here, given the mood of the US this month and the remonstrative tenor 
of the acceptance speeches – fromMeryl Streep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/08/meryl-streep-golden-globes-speech-donald-trump>
 to Tom Hiddleston – it suggests the guests were also in reflective mood. 
Claire Foy went for safety and modesty in Erdem, while Gina Rodriguez’s 
waterfalling plunge dress by Naeem Khan evoked Marilyn Monroe’s go-to Travilla 
dress.

The dissenter
 Actor Donald Glover in Gucci. Photograph: Robyn Beck/AFP/Getty Images 
There’s always one rebel, he’s generally a man and generally, he’s an award 
winner: Donald Glover (who won a Globe for his FX show, Atlanta) wore a brown 
velvet suit by Gucci. Black tie usually means satin peak lapels, so the risk 
was twofold here and ordinarily this shouldn’t have worked. But it did, not 
least because it was not the obviously branded bright/embroidered Gucci from 
designer Alessandro Michele – but also because it was velvet: this season’s 
fabric (Gucci and Balenciaga for men, Valentino and Victoria Beckham for women).

The meme hunter
 Miranda Kerr at the InStyle and Warner Bros Golden Globes After Party. 
Photograph: Cook/Variety/REX/Shutterstock 
Somehow not yet a meme, Miranda Kerr’s Angelina leg was a nice reminder that 
Hollywood glamour is as encouraging of flesh as it is of fabric and Tiffany. 
Kerr, of course, picked the wrong leg – Jolie has of course patented The Right 
Leg – butKendall Jenner <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/kendall-jenner> 
(who appeared later, in Paula Ke, at the NBCUniversal party) followed Jolie’s 
lead and showed her right thigh under her burnt orange dress. That all three 
women chose to do it in similar gowns suggests there is some sort of sartorial 
obligation if you’re wearing a strapless, long-line dress.

Black and white 
 Jonah Hill in Prada. Photograph: Valerie Macon/AFP/Getty Images  Actress 
Janelle Monáe in Armani Privé. Photograph: Robyn Beck/AFP/Getty Images 
A nostalgic colour scheme on one hand, on-trend on the other (Topshop Unique 
was all about zebra stripes, and monochrome was also a running theme in Jim 
Jarmusch’s Paterson), it suggests a polarised world or at least no grey area. 
Moreover, it’s versatile – see Jonah Hill zhoosh up his black tux with white 
trainers, orJanelle Monae <https://www.theguardian.com/music/janelle-monae> in 
Armani Privé. That and it photographs well.
 