
This year's Glastonbury lineup arrives amid a degree of controversy. Those who 
claim the festival has become too mainstream for its own good could point to 
the preponderance of what one critic dubbed "landfill indie" - Human Rights 
Watch has already lodged a complaint about the Pigeon Detectives playing twice. 
In the unlikely event that Sir Michael Parkinson chooses to attend this year's 
festival, he could arrange his weekend to take in James Blunt, Katie Melua, 
Will Young, Gilbert O'Sullivan and Newton Faulkner (twice).

But, like Noel Gallagher's recent "I'm-not-having-hip-hop-at-Glastonbury" 
outburst, that would rather miss the festival's point. In the even less likely 
event that Sir Michael Parkinson wanted not only to attend Glastonbury, but to 
hear nothing but bleeding-edge dance and electronica all weekend, that too 
could be arranged: he could take in a DJ set from someone called Roland the 
Bastard, and end with a nerve-jangling dubstep triple-bill on the G Stage: DJs 
Appleblim, Caspa and Rusko, and a live set by Benga and Skream.

It's hard not to feel that the most interesting stuff at this year's festival 
may be taking place on the smaller stages, where the Hoosiers fear to tread and 
rejuvenated soul diva Candi Staton rubs shoulders with gloriously crepuscular 
clog-dancing folkies Rachel Unthank and the Winterset, as well as Brazilian 
electro-funk outfit CSS. Friday night at the Dance Village's East Stage offers 
acclaimed disco revivalists Hercules and Love Affair, as well as a DJ set by 
Fatboy Slim. On the same day, anyone keen to check out this year's crop of 
hotly tipped alt-rockers is advised to try the John Peel Stage, which has US 
psychedelicists MGMT, Glasvegas and the Ting Tings.

That said, there are some intriguing artists on the main stage - not least 
Jay-Z on Saturday night. He is extravagantly talented, but his shtick largely 
revolves around discussing his life of impossible luxury and wealth - not 
necessarily what you want to hear about if you're up to your knees in mud and 
filth.

There is also Leonard Cohen on Sunday night. His set should be fascinating - 
not just because of his unimpeachable back catalogue, but because on his last 
album the old boy's voice sounded completely shot. Perhaps things have improved 
since then. He may be planning to perform his greatest hits using sign 
language. Either way, it's going to be an interesting show.

Â· The Guardian is an official sponsor of the Glastonbury festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/glastonbury>. This year's festival runs from 
June 27 to 29.
 