
‘The former royal chef Owen Hodgson reveals that our monarch likes a touch of 
Marmite with her mushrooms.” Not my words, readers, but the words of a Hello! 
magazine article from last year, which really takes you back to an era when 
Britain wasn’t living under the constant threat of post-Brexit commodity 
rationing.

With the great Marmite war, the reality of Brexit has started to bite | Polly 
Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/13/great-marmite-war-reality-brexit-bite>
Of course, the Queen is a trouper. If push comes to shove in the great Marmite 
war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/13/great-marmite-war-reality-brexit-bite>
, she will knuckle down with the rest of her subjects, just as her mother once 
did. One must be able to look the Yeast End in the face.

Still, at least Brexit isn’t all bad news for Her Maj – she always liked the 
royal yacht. On Thursday, Boris Johnsonexpressed regret 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/13/boris-johnson-waffling-foreign-affairs-select-committee-brexit>
 that refloating Britannia “is not a priority” for the government, apparently 
confused that it should have taken second place to things such as Liam Fox’s 
trade policy moodboard and an urgent mission for the markets-whisperer, Philip 
Hammond. But Boris revealed he is hoping a consortium of rich delusional 
weirdos (not his exact words) will club together and get this symbol of our 
glorious yesteryear touring the world again.

As for the view from said world, well, the traditionally dry and affectless 
USA Today put it this way: “Britons freak out over shortage of disgusting black 
spread 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/world/2016/10/13/britons-freak-out-over-shortage-disgusting-black-spread/91985110/>
”. And another story in the New York Times began: “Once upon a time, in the 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, there was a royal yacht … 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/14/world/europe/uk-britain-tories-hard-brexit.html?_r=0>
”

Davies is going to eat Vegemite just as stubbornly as he’s going to justify 
our journey down to dollar parity

Reading these two articles in fairly short order, I was suddenly reminded of 
that great Mitchell and Webb sketch 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hn1VxaMEjRU> in which one worried SS officer 
turns to the other in a moment of dawning realisation and asks: “Are we the 
baddies?” To peruse the aforementioned articles and the many other foreign 
newspaper reports of similar tone is to be struck by a similar question: “Are 
we the ‘And finally …’?”

In the world’s news bulletin, are we becoming the absurd story the anchor 
signs off with, the tenor of his quizzically raised eyebrow effectively being, 
“How about these stupid pricks, then?” Even in a country in which Donald Trump 
stands at one remove from the White House, are we the best go-to source for a 
running gag?

While we mull that, I am delighted to introduce a favourite new Brexit 
character. As the opening voiceover of The Big Lebowski drawls, “Sometimes 
there’s a man … Sometimes there’s a man, well, he’s the man for his time and 
place. He fits right in there.”

With this in mind, please give a welcome to Tory MP David Davies 
<https://www.david-davies.org.uk/>. Not that David Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/daviddavis> – slightly different 
spelling. But it turns out that being so good they almost named you twice is a 
joke the Conservative party regards as so good that they have in fact made it 
twice. So this particular David Davies isn’t the secretary of state for exiting 
the European Union. That guy’s The Big Davis, if you will.
David Davies MP (@DavidTCDavies) 
So Unilever using Marmite prices to punish us for Brexit. toast-spread fight 
back starts here. From now on It's Aussie made Vegemite for me.
pic.twitter.com/vHHxNeoloy <https://t.co/vHHxNeoloy>
 <https://twitter.com/DavidTCDavies/status/786492752959799296> October 13, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/DavidTCDavies/status/786492752959799296> 
Our guy across town – the other Davies – is the Tory MP for Monmouth, and on 
Thursday he announced himself as a key general in the current culture war. “So 
Unilever using Marmite prices to punish us for Brexit 
<https://twitter.com/DavidTCDavies/status/786492752959799296>,” he tweeted. 
“Toast-spread fight back starts here. From now on it’s Aussie made Vegemite for 
me.”

Sometimes there’s a man … Sometimes there’s a man. I can think of nothing in 
which the heroic self-harm of certain Brexiteers is more perfectly distilled 
than in Davies’s political decision to eat Vegemite over Marmite. I don’t think 
David likes Vegemite, I don’t think he likes it one bit, or he’d have been 
eating it for years. Like rugby or base speed, Vegemite isn’t something you 
take up in your mid-40s. You picked a lane a long time ago, and that lane was 
Marmite.

Last week, the British Election Study published fascinating post-referendum 
research 
<http://www.britishelectionstudy.com/bes-resources/brexit-britain-british-election-study-insights-from-the-post-eu-referendum-wave-of-the-bes-internet-panel/#.WADz1DYrKrM>
 indicating that people identify more strongly as remain or leave than they do 
as supporters of any political party. I’ve not done the deep-data study yet, 
but let’s be clear: it’s going to be even stronger, as far as Marmite or 
Vegemite goes.

Furthermore, I am scientifically positive that if you’d conducted a blind test 
and asked Davies which yeast extract he preferred, followed by – for example – 
which value of the pound he preferred, he’d not only have been eating Marmite 
soldiers for ever but he’d be assembling them in a little egg-side shrine to 
Brussels.

But the test isn’t blind, more’s the pity. Consequently, Davies is going to 
eat Vegemite just as stubbornly as he’s going to justify our journey down to 
dollar parity. He has proudly made eating Vegemite a political decision. Every 
mouthful is going to taste so good for just that reason – except it isn’t. It’s 
going to taste like Vegemite, which he must know is wrong, or certainly will do 
as time goes on. But after the fashion of the age, Davies is now post-fact, as 
far as yeast extracts are concerned.

He can’t be held responsible if this position allows for the rise of radical 
alternatives – the hideous spreading of Bovril, for instance, rather than the 
drinking of it. In fact, even down the line, when sustained experience of 
Vegemite becomes so inarguably unpleasant, Davies is not going to blame himself 
for the choice. You know who he’s going to blame? Marmite, for driving him to 
it. Like I said, sometimes there’s a man. Sometimes, there’s a man … He fits 
right in there.
 