
As the economy recovers on both sides of the Atlantic, next year will bring a 
different set of pressures for senior executives – and one bank governor. Some 
are just changing the nameplates on the executive suite door; others are trying 
to complete turnaround plans or maintain strong growth

Moya Greene 

Chief executive, Royal Mail <https://www.theguardian.com/business/royal-mail> 

Sector: Distribution

Royal Mail will continue to be the focus of public and political attention 
next year following its controversial flotation on the stock market.

The furore surrounding the company being sold off on the cheap – the shares 
were sold at 330p and soared by 38% on the first day and are now changing hands 
at 578.5p – has been centred on the business secretary, Vince Cable, whose 
department presided over the sell-off, and not Greene who had no role in the 
pricing decision.

Greene delivered a 147% increase in half-year pre-tax profits to £233m. 
Perhaps even more impressively she managed to smooth over industrial relations 
with the Communication Workers Union (CWU), which had threatened days of 
strikes before Christmas. Royal Mail's 140,000 workers were given a 9% pay rise 
over three years.

Now Greene will have to focus on securing the long-term future of Royal Mail. 
The company and the government said the service needed to be privatised to 
enable it to generate cash to invest in parcel delivery as letter use continues 
to decline. On average 58m letters are sent every day, compared with 63m in 
2011-12.

Battles are also expected over the universal service obligation that requires 
Royal Mail to deliver to every address in Britain six days a week for the same 
price. The USO is protected by law until 2021, but other countries, including 
Greene's native Canada, are ending door-to-door delivery.Rupert Neate

Jamie Dimon 

Chief executive, JP Morgan 

Sector: Wall Street

Poor Jamie Dimon. Nothing went right for him in 2013. After an annus 
horribilis of billion dollar fines and public admissions of wrongdoing even the 
JP Morgan boss's Christmas card backfired. The foldout card of his photogenic 
family playing tennis inside their opulent home soon became fodder for late 
night comedians.

Dimon steered his bank so ably through the financial crisis but has seemed 
impotent as his bank and his own reputation have been trashed. And there is 
more to come in 2014. US officials are investigating to what extent JP aided 
and abetted Bernard Madoff, the infamous swindler, and bought up the children 
of influential Chinese officials in order to further its own business.

It's hard to imagine another industry where the leader of a major company 
could survive such a catalogue of disaster

Dermot Nolan 

Chief executive, Ofgem

Sector: Energy

Dermot Nolan is moving into one of the hottest jobs in Britain as chief 
executive of the energy watchdog,Ofgem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ofgem>. It is his task to try to ensure 
that Britons do not freeze because the energy markets fail to work properly.

His predecessor, Alistair Buchanan, failed and departed by the back door with 
a leaving note that said there was a high possibility that the lights would go 
out if nothing changed.

Nolan is heading an organisation described by MPs as a toothless tiger which 
has become so discredited that the Labour party has promised to scrap it. But 
Nolan, who does not start until March, knows the terrain because he has spent 
three years working as chairman of Ireland's Commission for Energy Regulation.

Critics will say the Yale University-trained economist has not been a great 
success, pointing to the fact that electricity prices in Ireland are the fourth 
highest in the European Union.

Nolan will need to help customers tackle fuel poverty, stand up to the power 
of the big six energy companies and fend off desperate politicians trying to 
bolster their position before the 2015 general election.

He will need the luck of the Irish to prosper. Terry Macalister

Sir Martin Sorrell 

Chief executive, WPP

Sector: Media

In a few months Sir Martin Sorrell will be unseated as the most powerful man 
in advertising, as rivals Publicis and Omnicom complete a $35bn (£21.4bn) 
merger to create the world's largest marketing services group.

The prospect has become something of an obsession for the chief executive of 
WPP, which has held the top spot since 2008, with 2014 set to be a clash of the 
advertising titans. "The question strategically will be how he respond to the 
mega deal," says Alex DeGroote, media analyst at Panmure. "It could leave WPP 
looking a bit sub-scale in some markets."

The move deal-hungry bankers and investors would like to see is for WPP to buy 
IPG, the world's fifth-largest advertising group. That deal would allow WPP to 
hit back in the US, by some distance the world's largest advertising market, 
where Publicis Omnicom Group will have twice as much media buying muscle as 
Sorrell's business.Mark Sweney

Mark Carney 

Governor, Bank of England

Sector: Economy

Hand-picked by George Osborne to replace Mervyn King as governor of the Bank 
of England <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor>, Mark 
Carney holds the key to the performance of the economy in 2014. The Canadian 
had a dream start at Threadneedle Street: his arrival was marked by a surge in 
growth, a reshaping of monetary policy and a PR coup when he agreed to put Jane 
Austen's head on the next £10 notes.

Things get tougher next year. Carney's assumption when he announced the Bank's 
forward guidance in August was that it would take until early 2016 before 
unemployment reached the 7% threshhold that would automatically trigger a 
discussion about interest rates. But the rapid improvement in the labour market 
means joblessness could hit 7% by early 2014.

Carney believes the economy is still too fragile to cope with higher interest 
rates and the Bank is concerned about the impact of dearer borrowing on 
debt-laden households. Yet, with the economy currently growing at more than 3% 
a year and the housing market humming, fears of overheating will grow. Carney 
says the Bank now has the powers to cool the housing market without the need 
for a rate rise that would affect the whole economy. He may need to use them.
Larry Elliott

Ross McEwan

Chief executive, RBS 

Sector: Banking

Being boss of Royal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup> was never going 
to be a low-profile role and Ross McEwan, who took over from Stephen Hester 
three months ago, will be in the industry spotlight throughout 2014.

In January he will have to face the outcome of a review by Clifford Chance 
into allegations that the bailed-out bank has mistreated its small business 
customers. In February the New Zealander has promised to set out his strategy 
for the bank, which was rescued with £45bn of taxpayers' money in 2008 and has 
yet to offer the public a profit on its 81% share stake.

The City will want to see how much of a free hand McEwan has in devising his 
strategy. As it is, he is creating a new £38bn non-core division as a result of 
a report commissioned by George Osborne, who has made clear his view that the 
bank should be domestically focused. McEwan, who has warned that RBS will make 
a substantial loss because of the creation of the bad bank, is expected to 
focus on the high street business. He seems likely to embark on a major 
overhaul of the IT systems which have at times left customers unable to access 
their cash and bank accounts. He also has to build a new management team. A 
finance director must be appointed after Nathan Bostock quit for Santander and 
the chairman, Sir Philip Hampton, has indicated that he is eyeing the exit.Jill 
Treanor

Euan Sutherland 

Chief executive, Co-op Group

Sector: Mutuals

Euan Sutherland ended 2013 with the relief of knowing that a £1.5bn rescue 
package for Co-operative Bank had been pulled off. With the hole filled, the 
former boss of B&Q must turn his attention to his new plan for the whole of the 
Co-op Group – which owns supermarkets, pharmacies, funeral homes and farms.

Sutherland has pledged to set out a new vision for the UK's biggest mutual 
organisation by the time of the annual meeting in May. He will have to decide 
whether to sell any businesses to reduce the strain on the finances caused by 
the bank, which is only 30% owned by the mutual after its rescue. Cash to 
invest for growth in any of the business lines will be in short supply.

The way the group is run will also be overhauled. Former City minister Lord 
Myners has become its first non-executive director and is viewed as a candidate 
to chair the group. At the same time the bank is facing a number of 
investigations: one into events at the bank by former civil servant Sir 
Christopher Kelly, which was commissioned by Sutherland, and another 
investigation by regulators that has been demanded by the government.Jill 
Treanor

Angela Ahrendts 

Senior VP retail [designate], Apple

Sector: Technology

Burberry's chief executive, Angela Ahrendts, will hang up her trenchcoat and 
head back to America next year to look after a very different kind of Macintosh 
– as Apple's retail boss. News of her departure wiped half a billion pounds 
from Burberry's stock market value, underlining the extent to which investors 
credit her with the UK firm's transformation into a global luxury brand.

"We met for the first time last January, and I knew in that meeting that I 
wanted her to joinApple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple>," chief 
executive Tim Cook wrote in a letter announcing her arrival, in which he 
described Ahrendts as "wicked smart".

She was the FTSE 100's best paid boss in 2012, with a package worth almost 
£17m, and the US-born executive is expected to more than double her income with 
her first big job in technology. Ahrendts, who embraced technology and social 
media at Burberry, is the first executive to be trusted with overseeing both 
stores and the website at Apple, whose sales per square foot are already higher 
than any other retailer in the world.Juliette Garside

Philip Clarke 

Chief executive, Tesco

Sector: Retail

It's the UK's biggest supermarket, with some of retail's biggest problems. 
After a tough 2013, chief executive Phil Clarke has his work cut out to 
convince investors that he can revive Tesco's fortunes this year, with 
challenges at home and abroad.

In Britain, Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> has found 
itself caught between fast-growing discounters Aldi and Lidl and upmarket 
grocers such as Waitrose and M&S, which are cashing in on concerns about the 
quality and provenance of food following the horsemeat scandal.

Clarke desperately needs to carve out a firm identity for Tesco either by 
seriously taking on the discounters and Asda on price or by improving 
perceptions of the store's food quality and service in store.

So far he is opting for the latter strategy in a £1bn turnaround launched when 
Clarke took the reins in 2011. But progress seems slow. UK underlying sales, 
which strip out the impact of new stores, fell 1.5% in the three months to 23 
November.

With times still tough for shoppers whose disposable income is under pressure, 
Clarke is being pushed to do more on prices.

The former international director will need to get a grip on problems 
overseas. Underlying sales are falling in all Tesco's major markets. Trading in 
Ireland, Thailand and South Korea – previously strong international markets for 
Tesco – are particularly poor. Shareholders were shocked by a 70% fall in 
trading profit in central Europe.

There are a lot of fires to fight, and the pressure is on Clarke and his 
finance director, Laurie McIlwee, to show they have the answers this year.Sarah 
Butler

Mary Barra 

Chief executive designate, GM

Sector: Industry

A daughter of Motor City, Mary Barra takes the helm of Detroit and America's 
largest carmaker in January. Barra's appointment is significant enough as the 
first woman to run a major auto manufacturer, but it is also of importance to 
Britain and Europe, where GM is still trying to turn round its operations under 
the Vauxhall and Opel brands.

Britain's high-end car producers, led by Jaguar Land Rover and Mini, are 
performing well but the volume market served by Vauxhall's Ellesmere Port and 
Luton plants is struggling. Ellesmere Port has won the competition to produce 
the next Astra, but expect Barra to take a prominent role in restructuring the 
European car industry next year and beyond.Dan Milmo 
 