
On 16 November 2009, police found the distended body of a 60-year-old man in 
the Chicago river. It was Michael Scott, president of the Chicago Board of 
Education. A single, close-range gunshot to the left temple suggested foul play.

That is, until a month later, when the police department revealed that 
pioneering data analytics 
<http://www.polygon.com/features/2013/10/16/4817988/watch-dogs-invasion> had 
been used to sift through a haystack of video footage from the city’s CCTV 
cameras. The all-seeing eyes had tracked Scott’s blue Cadillac to its terminus 
on the river's east bank. He was alone: it was suicide.

This harrowing story unsettled Illinois five years ago, and became an 
inspiration for the video gameWatch Dogs, released last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jun/01/watch-dogs-review-ubisoft-shooter>
. Set in near-future Chicago, it follows hacker hero Aiden Pearce as he tries 
to stay alive in a city where a single mainframe – the Central Operating System 
(CtOS) – controls the urban electronic infrastructure. “We extrapolated a bit 
from what was happening in 2009,” says Watch Dogs creative director Jonathan 
Morin. “But there was a feeling that, because of the city’s history, Chicago 
was the kind of place where the authorities might actually install something 
like CtOS.”


Watch Dogs, which sold 4m copies 
<http://variety.com/2014/digital/news/watch-dogs-breaks-sales-records-for-ubisoft-provides-bright-future-for-original-games-1201210422/>
 in its first week, is just the latest game to thrust the player into a 
detailed, pulsating and populous artificial metropolis. Ubisoft's previous 
bestsellers, the Assassin's Creed series, modelled the cities of Renaissance 
Italy; Rockstar's Grand Theft Auto has given us pimped-out versions of New York 
(Liberty City), LA (Los Santos) and Miami (Vice City). But as these virtual 
cityscapes become ever more closely synced with their real counterparts, does 
the street run the other way, too? Can video games teach us about our cities, 
and how we might want them to play out?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fwatch-dogs-gtav-video-games-reshape-cities-sim-city-will-wright%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F9%2F1402334215941%2F21dc338b-8b6d-4437-a5b2-c6757d8174f8-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Watch%20Dogs%20to%20GTA%20V%2C%20why%20'video%20games%20are%20going%20to%20reshape%20our%20cities'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fwatch-dogs-gtav-video-games-reshape-cities-sim-city-will-wright%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Watch%20Dogs%20to%20GTA%20V%2C%20why%20%27video%20games%20are%20going%20to%20reshape%20our%20cities%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fwatch-dogs-gtav-video-games-reshape-cities-sim-city-will-wright%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F9%2F1402334215941%2F21dc338b-8b6d-4437-a5b2-c6757d8174f8-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Willis Tower, Chicago, pictured in Watch Dogs 
Bottling metropolis mojo in video games has become a painstaking artisanal 
labour, one that is conducted by the 21st-century equivalent of Renaissance 
fresco workshops. Ubisoft, for example, had more than 1,000 people working on 
Watch Dogs. Morin says they chose Chicago because of its reputation as a “city 
of crisis”: the rebuilding after theGreat Fire of 1871 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/picture/2013/oct/10/photography-chicago-fire>
; the overhaul of the police force afterAl Capone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/picture/2014/jan/25/photography-us-crime>
;the riots of 1919 and 1968 
<http://www.encyclopedia.chicagohistory.org/pages/1032.html> that caused the 
city to re-examine race relations. “They are proud to stand back up after big 
problems,” Morin says. “And they always seem to do it through innovation in 
terms of how the city is run. They always end up taking very ballsy moves, 
which is why we thought CtOS was plausible there.”

Chicago’s office of emergency management and communications 
<http://www.cityofchicago.org/city/en/depts/oem.html> has indeed pioneered an 
integrated operations centre, which unifies public and private security feeds 
into one of the world’s largest surveillance networks – an estimated 24,000 
cameras. (Ubisoft’s Montreal headquarters is just a few kilometres fromGenetec 
<http://www.genetec.com/>, whose software helps monitor the Chicago footage.) 
But Ubisoft didn’t get any access to that network. So how exactly do you go 
about modelling an urban ecosystem?


If there is one man who knows what an imposing task it is, it’s Will Wright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2007/oct/26/willwright>, creator of 
1989’s seminalSimCity <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SimCity>. “Cities are 
amazingly complex systems,” Wright told me from his home in Oakland, 
California. “Millions of autonomous agents – the people – making millions of 
decisions: where to live, where to work, where to eat lunch. Those millions of 
decisions are the city.”


The Watch Dogs team tried to get a handle on those millions of decisions by 
applying an old-fashioned technique: the field trip. They made repeated visits 
to take photos of different neighbourhoods and landmarks, such as the Willis 
tower; they recorded ambient audio and observed people’s behaviour. They wanted 
the unauthorised tour: beyond police escorts into sketchier areas, they didn’t 
enlist much official cooperation. Scouting out the city’s deprivedEnglewood 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Englewood,_Chicago> district, they fell victim to 
a case of mistaken identity. “We were in a big red van, so as soon as we got 
out, people starting yelling, ‘FBI! FBI!’ and running away,” says level-design 
director Sebastien Galarneau. The team have also brought the virtual and real 
together,with a site that shows how much data is available right now on real 
cities, such as London, Paris and Berlin <http://wearedata.watchdogs.com/>. 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fwatch-dogs-gtav-video-games-reshape-cities-sim-city-will-wright%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F9%2F1402315977613%2Fca287420-079d-4103-ba01-91214468470b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Watch%20Dogs%20to%20GTA%20V%2C%20why%20'video%20games%20are%20going%20to%20reshape%20our%20cities'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fwatch-dogs-gtav-video-games-reshape-cities-sim-city-will-wright%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Watch%20Dogs%20to%20GTA%20V%2C%20why%20%27video%20games%20are%20going%20to%20reshape%20our%20cities%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fwatch-dogs-gtav-video-games-reshape-cities-sim-city-will-wright%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F9%2F1402315977613%2Fca287420-079d-4103-ba01-91214468470b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 'People started yelling FBI! FBI!' ... Englewood, Chicago was one of the 
neighbourhoods the Watch Dogs team visited to model. Photograph: Getty 
Everyone who has developed an "open-city" game undertakes the same trawl for 
authenticity.Shenmue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/may/02/shenmue-sega-classic-14-years-too-late>
 was the genre's first modern 3D incarnation, modelling the streets of Hong 
Kong in 1999, while last year’sGrand Theft Auto V 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/grand-theft-auto> is generally agreed 
to be the high-water mark: Rockstar distilled 250,000 photographs andcountless 
hours of video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2012/nov/12/grand-theft-auto-v-preview-gta-5>
 into Los Santos, their version of Los Angeles and its hinterland. It isn't 
always easy, says Watch Dogs' Galarneau. "It was a stressful experience going 
into the back alleys taking pictures of abandoned homes, weird railings ... the 
dark places of the city."

But developers must also strike a balance between fidelity and fun. For 
instance, Ubisoft tampered with Chicago’s grid layout, to encourage a more 
stimulating (ie carnage-filled) driving experience.Sleeping Dogs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2012/aug/14/sleeping-dogs-review>
 (2012) crammed Kowloon and many of Hong Kong’s other districts on to the main 
island, which is considerably less populated in real-life. “Some of the alleys 
are very tight,” says lead designer Mike Skupa. “The organic nature of the city 
is just incredible – it keeps on getting built on top of itself.”

The Assassin’s Creed franchise, a Ubisoft titan that towers over the field 
alongside Grand Theft Auto, has mocked up 14 cities across four different time 
periods. ForAssassin's Creed: B 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2010/nov/16/assassins-creed-brotherhood-game-review>
rotherhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2010/nov/16/assassins-creed-brotherhood-game-review>
, set in 1499, Ubisoft figured players wouldn’t stand for a virtual Rome bereft 
of the dome of St Peter’s, on which work only began in 1506. So they finagled 
it in – the only significant deviation from scrupulous historical accuracy 
(with respect to the architecture, at least) that made an archaeologist out of 
lead designer Patrick Plourde. “We had to break the whole present-day city 
down. We had a historian who would say: that’s baroque – no good. That’s 
medieval – you can use it. Early Renaissance – good. Late Renaissance – no 
good.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fwatch-dogs-gtav-video-games-reshape-cities-sim-city-will-wright%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F9%2F1402315699265%2F3c26e082-1843-4742-af12-2ae46fbe6bf4-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Watch%20Dogs%20to%20GTA%20V%2C%20why%20'video%20games%20are%20going%20to%20reshape%20our%20cities'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fwatch-dogs-gtav-video-games-reshape-cities-sim-city-will-wright%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Watch%20Dogs%20to%20GTA%20V%2C%20why%20%27video%20games%20are%20going%20to%20reshape%20our%20cities%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fwatch-dogs-gtav-video-games-reshape-cities-sim-city-will-wright%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F9%2F1402315699265%2F3c26e082-1843-4742-af12-2ae46fbe6bf4-1020x612.jpeg>
 'The organic nature of the city is just incredible' ... Kowloon was merged 
with the main Hong Kong island for the 2012 game Sleeping Dogs. Photograph: 
Paul Hilton/EPA 
In this increasingly crowded field, each virtual city has its own style: 
Assassin’s Creed <http://assassinscreed.wikia.com/wiki/Assassin%27s_Creed_Wiki> 
uses a “social-stealth” system that relies on sophisticated crowd dynamics; 
Sleeping Dogs emphasises pedestrianism; Watch Dogs, surveillance. By 
encompassing all these different facets of city living, open-world game 
development is approaching a form of urban planning – albeit a fantasy version, 
in which the designer has near-godlike agency. They're not quite free of 
budgetary restrictions, perhaps, but they're unencumbered by local politics, 
and can cut and paste neighbourhoods, orchestrate traffic flows and command the 
weather.

SimCity, of course, handed this panoply of powers to the player. Will Wright, 
was inspired, among many things, by the work of JW Forrester – whose 1969 book
Urban Dynamics [PDF] 
<http://www.exponentialimprovement.com/cms/uploads/UrbanDynamicsFirstFiftyYears.pdf>
, a collaboration with a former Boston mayor, pioneered a computer model for a 
simulating city environments. By breaking down social and economic forces into 
118 equations, it encouraged people to stop thinking passively of urban 
problems as sculpted by external forces, like rural-to-urban migration, and 
start envisioning a more dynamic, adjustable ecosystem. With SimCity, planners 
got their first taste of play; and thousands of players later became planners.

Wright now thinks we may be on the verge of another breakthrough. “I’ve always 
like the metaphor of the city as a body – the roads are the circulatory system, 
the nervous system is communication," he says. "In some sense we are now 
overlaying a whole new nervous system on our cities, with new information flows 
and feedback. For the first time, through social networks, we have real metrics 
about the things that happen thanks to the millions of individual agents in the 
city.” With the digital and the physical finally speaking the same language, 
there's surely never been a better time for games to reshape our cities.


***


Wright lives in the hills of Oakland. He digs the ocean view, but says it’s 
one of the “most dysfunctional” Bay Area cities. He admires neighbouring 
Emeryville: “They’ve taken a totally different approach to zoning and 
governance, and they’ve been extremely successful. It’s a very small area, but 
that’s where a lot of the new development in shopping areas and office space 
has gone.”

Lined up side-by-side, the Bay Area cities are a perfect illustration of the 
unpredictability of actual cities. As he puts it: “When you throw humans in the 
mix, things become very, very counterintuitive.” But though cities have a way 
of outgrowing any model, video games are starting to provide tools to keep 
ahead.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fwatch-dogs-gtav-video-games-reshape-cities-sim-city-will-wright%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F9%2F1402315885093%2F433f2c96-e652-45f1-91c7-5bff201835d6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Watch%20Dogs%20to%20GTA%20V%2C%20why%20'video%20games%20are%20going%20to%20reshape%20our%20cities'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fwatch-dogs-gtav-video-games-reshape-cities-sim-city-will-wright%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Watch%20Dogs%20to%20GTA%20V%2C%20why%20%27video%20games%20are%20going%20to%20reshape%20our%20cities%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fwatch-dogs-gtav-video-games-reshape-cities-sim-city-will-wright%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F9%2F1402315885093%2F433f2c96-e652-45f1-91c7-5bff201835d6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 'When you throw humans in the mix, things become counter-intuitive' ... Will 
Wright, creator of the seminal SimCity. Photograph: Ryan Anson/Getty 
Second Life <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/secondlife> and Minecraft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/minecraft> have been used to visualise 
built environments, such as theBlockholm <http://www.blockholm.com/> project, a 
state-funded recreation of the Swedish capital using the Minecraft engine. 
Based on official land data, the simulation allowed players to propose future 
buildings; the best 10 were publicly exhibited and put up for planning 
consideration. MeanwhileBlock by Block 
<https://mojang.com/2012/09/mojang-and-un-presents-block-by-block/>, an 
initiative by the UN human settlement programme UN Habitat, used Minecraft to 
involve residents in shaping community spaces around the world, like 
redesigning football fields in Nairobi’s Kibera slum. For more finessed-looking 
3D world-building, there are commercial programs likeCityEngine 
<http://www.esri.com/software/cityengine>, which was used to remake a section 
of Marseille for a significant redevelopment project 
<http://www.eiffage.com/cms/developpement_durable/preparer_avenir/phosphore/projet-marseille.html>
 and to create a futuristic cityscape for aMinistry of Sound commercial 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=doaC2bql7Ho>. For civic organisations, 
however, such programs remain expensive (if not quite in the $265m league of 
Grand Theft Auto V).

Chris Haller, founder of Urban Interactive Studio 
<http://urbaninteractivestudio.com/>, also experienced his “big a-ha moment” 
playing SimCity. His company now applies game mechanics, such as interactive 
visual elements and a scoring system, to public-engagement projects like 
surveys. “We often see this vicious circle in the typical town hall meeting,” 
he says. “People yell and start demanding certain things. And the planners go 
into defensive mode, because they think the ideas are pie-in-the-sky. It 
becomes very unproductive.”

 'Big a-ha moment' ... SimCity inspired countless planners, and led Chris 
Haller to apply game mechanics to public projects like town hall meetings 
His "gamified methodology" seeks to open up the planning process for all 
parties, by drawing more people out and giving equal weight to all voices, not 
just the loudest. Bannock county, Idaho used the studio’s BrightPages app to 
liven upfour alternative scenarios for its transportation system 
<http://engagingcities.com/article/4-steps-highly-engaging-plan-documents>; the 
participants opted forone that adapted existing infrastructure 
<http://mtp2040.org/preferred-scenario>, to minimise additional public spending.

Eric Gordon, director of Emerson College's Engagement Lab 
<http://engagementgamelab.org/> in Boston, takes a more purist approach. He 
says gamification does a good job of getting people to talk about pre-defined 
goals, but true games have other advantages. “They’re not about making a 
process more efficient – a game is probably the least efficient method of doing 
anything. There are goals, but you have obstacles in your way that aren’t 
necessary. You agree to be part of that system, and you play towards your goals 
without taking the most efficient route. A game gives people a chance to 
imagine things in a different way, not just get there faster.”

In 2010, he devised Participatory Chinatown 
<http://www.participatorychinatown.org/>, a role-playing game in which 
Bostonians were invited to play one of 15 fictional residents, and complete 
missions like finding a job or a place to hang out. “People said they 
appreciated the perspective of this other person they got to play," he says. 
"They told the story of what was happening in a very different way – much more 
personalised.” But the method has its limitations: “They might play, say, an 
immigrant who couldn’t afford to buy a coffee at Starbucks every morning. But 
if they wanted a Starbucks on every corner in real life, that was still the 
case [after they finished the game]. Playing Grand Theft Auto doesn’t make me 
want to shoot people, so why would playing a pro-social video game make me more 
pro-social?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fwatch-dogs-gtav-video-games-reshape-cities-sim-city-will-wright%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F9%2F1402334009179%2F755cf42c-d81f-46fa-9289-f067a8b96b22-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Watch%20Dogs%20to%20GTA%20V%2C%20why%20'video%20games%20are%20going%20to%20reshape%20our%20cities'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fwatch-dogs-gtav-video-games-reshape-cities-sim-city-will-wright%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Watch%20Dogs%20to%20GTA%20V%2C%20why%20%27video%20games%20are%20going%20to%20reshape%20our%20cities%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fwatch-dogs-gtav-video-games-reshape-cities-sim-city-will-wright%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F9%2F1402334009179%2F755cf42c-d81f-46fa-9289-f067a8b96b22-2060x1236.jpeg>
 'People appreciated the perspective of this other person they got to play' ... 
Participatory Chinatown, in which Bostonians were invited to play one of 15 
fictional residents 
Gordon hopes for a more subtle effect – to exploit the play-centric space of 
video games to challenge people’s moral frameworks, to get them to give answers 
they didn’t know they would, to obtain more nuanced findings for the planning 
process. He calls it “augmented deliberation”. His ideas had their biggest 
trial in 2012 during a three-week series of games, involving over 1,000 
players, that fed recommendations about transport and zoning intoDetroit’s 
Future City study <http://detroitfuturecity.com/>, which maps out the next 50 
years for the embattled metropolis.

Social experiments like this could just be the start, Gordon thinks: “Games 
are inevitably going to reshape what cityscapes look like.” He compares their 
potential impact to the development of New York’s Times Square in parallel with
the early urban films of Thomas Edison 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BQr_V7ie5fI>: their primitive tracking shots 
fostered a new conception of the "moving" city that also found expression in 
the square’s illuminated advertising, known as “sky signs”. “People would stop 
and watch [the ads] for minutes at a time, and bask in the kinetic energy of 
that space,” says Gordon, “The idea of the ur-city, [ultimate city] became the 
city in movement. Times Square was considered the centre of New York, and New 
York the centre of world urbanism.”

He thinks that video games could now have a similar effect on how we think of 
cities, born out of countless Xbox rampages. Pursuits like parkour – physically 
moving through a city like an obstacle course – could be seen as analogues of 
untrammelled video game freedom, and better ones than clunky transpositions like
Pac-Manhattan <http://pacmanhattan.com/> (though location-based games, such as 
the popular geo-tagging "wargame"Ingress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jun/04/ingress-the-game-that-reveals-googles-secret-war-to-control-london>
, are undeniably getting more sophisticated). The whole idea of the "smart 
city", networked up to deliver all services conceivable, is a sublimation of 
the gamer’s bottomless inventory and notion of place as malleable to their 
every need. The global fantasy architecture of places like Dubai, Shanghai and 
even the new London skyline, elasticating the limits of spatial feasibility, 
seems to have been pulled direct from the digital realm.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fwatch-dogs-gtav-video-games-reshape-cities-sim-city-will-wright%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F10%2F1402393296333%2F84fbaf56-cbcb-4372-abcd-305c02c7c539-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Watch%20Dogs%20to%20GTA%20V%2C%20why%20'video%20games%20are%20going%20to%20reshape%20our%20cities'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fwatch-dogs-gtav-video-games-reshape-cities-sim-city-will-wright%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Watch%20Dogs%20to%20GTA%20V%2C%20why%20%27video%20games%20are%20going%20to%20reshape%20our%20cities%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fwatch-dogs-gtav-video-games-reshape-cities-sim-city-will-wright%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F10%2F1402393296333%2F84fbaf56-cbcb-4372-abcd-305c02c7c539-1020x612.jpeg>
 City as obstacle course ... a map of Chicago in Watch Dogs 
All very exciting for any Google Glass cyborgs keen to lord it over the Tron 
boulevards of the future. But the danger is that the human element gets 
sidelined. On one level that just means forgetting that cities are, in fact, 
the people who live there: for example, the University of Michigan 
Transportation Research Institute (UMTRI) and Xerox are building a32-acre 
simulated city 
<http://www.fastcoexist.com/3031302/this-real-life-sim-city-will-be-a-testing-ground-for-new-transportation-technologies>
, with buildings, benches, intersections, street lights, traffic signals, 
signs, construction barriers and, as Fastcompany puts it, "every other 
complication of city life that a driver might encounter ... except wayward 
pedestrians". On a deeper level, Watch Dogs aims to flag up the perils of data 
centralisation, such asRio de Janeiro’s 2016 Smart Cities pledge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/may/23/world-cup-inside-rio-bond-villain-mission-control>
, which feeds off citizen-sourced data and occupies a perilous zone between 
civic empowerment and Orwellian control. “Centralising information so you can 
better dispatch civic resources is an inevitable need in the evolution of our 
society, but we need to be cautious about the consequences,” says Watch Dogs' 
Morin. “We all love our phones, put a lot of information on them. But we 
sometimes fail to step back and look at the big picture. That’s why we give the 
power of hacking to the player – all the temptation and desire to exploit the 
weaknesses around them.”

Gordon and Haller are similarly concerned that citizens win out in the great 
tech march forwards. The former says he is aware that co-opting video games 
into public engagement could be “used to pacify people into a haze of fun”. In 
his eyes, it’s vital that game-driven urban planning delivers tangible results 
for citizens, and doesn’t slip into the kind of trendy "participative" 
marketing more likely to serve business interests. You could question other 
gamified projects: London’s Oystercard gameChromaroma 
<http://www.chromaroma.com/>, which awards points for different journeys, could 
be useful for amassing travel data, but might equally be rattling the can to 
get more money for TfL. Is Ingress a canny way of co-opting people into urban 
mapping or, just a giant Google advert? “I want to see responsible use of games 
that deploys what they’re good at – creating a context of play that allows 
people to experiment safely with possibilities in the civic realm and 
ultimately empower them,” says Gordon.

On the other side of the looking glass, games developers have their own 
version of the problem. Their clockwork cities are ever more immaculate, but 
Morin admits they fall short on the people front: the sense of a city as a 
wondrous, unconducted symphony of individual minds.Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games> are struggling to move beyond 
the looped dialogue and behaviour scripts of the past; Watch Dogs hints at the 
idea of citizens having inner lives, but mostly to deliver the game’s satirical 
slugs about privacy.

Plourde dwells similarly on the strengths and limitations of the first, 
Crusades-set Assassin’s Creed. “It was the best one in terms of low-level 
immersion: being able to walk around and watch what people were doing. But it 
was not well-realised in terms of making the crowd an active element in the 
gameplay.” He says that the sequels were a constant struggle to maintain the 
illusion of a spontaneous city – ensuring that a player never rounded a corner 
to find no one there, or aMatrix-like glitch in the system 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z_KmNZNT5xw>.

Wright believes open-world developers are taking the wrong approach entirely. 
“You look at GTA, and this amazing world Rockstar have created, and it’s all 
hand-built," he says. "An evolutionary process didn’t lead to Los Santos: it 
was 300 artists studying pictures, building models. They’re just painting a 
portrait of a neighbourhood. It only gets you so far.” That way of thinking, he 
says, hinders developers from bridging the gap between static (if beautifully 
rendered) city backdrops and true, dynamic simulations. Rather, he envisions 
games that work like evolution: an open-ended, unpredictable system. The 
challenge is how to make such a thing compatible with the personalised drama, 
all those sagas of rogue gangsters, cops and assassins so crucial to drawing in 
the player.

We’ll carry on inching our way towards the ultimate sim city. Playing it, 
detached from the real world, could be the ultimate exercise in cynicism. Or 
perhaps our playful instincts really can be meaningfully unleashed on our 
streets. Wright has made a brilliant career in the gap between sim and reality, 
between the model and the mortar, but even he stresses that the impulse to 
sculpt cities has natural limits. “Utopia is always finite. The agenda changes 
all the time. I don’t think there ever will be a utopian city.” Digital or 
otherwise.


• Which are the best video game cities? Share your favourites with 
GuardianWitness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jun/10/best-video-game-cities>

 