
We're watching more TV – around four hours a day 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/2013/mar/18/10-reasons-watching-more-tv>
 – than ever before, with Netflix's dark political drama House of Cards the 
latest American buzz show that has everyone talking. It makes sense, then, that 
we start taking style tips from our favourite characters. WithSex and the 
City's Carrie Bradshaw 
<http://www.instyle.com/instyle/package/general/photos/0,,20364084_20365543_20775661,00.html#20775661>
 andThe Killing's Sarah Lund 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/fashion/2012/sep/17/sarah-lund-jumper-final-killing?INTCMP=SRCH>
 now consigned to your DVD collection, here are six new style stars waiting on 
your digibox now.

Claire Underwood, House of Cards 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/2013/feb/01/review-house-of-cards-episode-one-netflix>
 Robin Wright as Claire Underwood in House of Cards – her sleek bob is sure to 
become 'the Claire'. Photograph: Melinda Sue Gordon/AP 
This is the kind of wardrobe that makes grown women sigh with envy. Nothing 
Robin Wright's Claire, the wife of Kevin Spacey's scheming Francis, wears is 
shouty or too flamboyant. Instead, it's ordered, tasteful, classic and grownup. 
Her sleek side-parted bob is sure to become "the Claire". Mrs Underwood has no 
time for anything frivolous, clothes are her armour and they come in shades of 
grey, black, blue and oatmeal. To replicate it, you will need a pencil skirt, 
LBD, a black trench and a camel coat. Ruthless streak and power-hungry husband 
are optional.

April Ludgate, Parks & Recreation 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/2013/mar/02/parks-and-recreation-sarah-dempster>
 Aubrey Plaza as April Ludgate in Parks & Recreation. Photograph: BBC/NBC 
Anyone trying to ape the style of disaffected youth should study Aubrey 
Plaza's character in the local-government comedy Parks & Recreation. As office 
intern April Ludgate, she masters a flicking-through-magazines, 
roll-of-the-eyes attitude. With glossy side-parted hair, bold floral prints, 
stripes andSesame Street colours <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B5gH6JCmrQg>, 
her geek-chic thrift-store wardrobe is a bright spot of hipster style in a 
world of cheap suits. She's also a little like a modern, deadpan version of
Winnie from The Wonder Years <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xpm0WIBaES0> – and 
that can never be a bad thing.

Kalinda Sharma, The Good Wife 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/2012/jan/24/next-box-set-good-wife>
 Archie Panjabi as Kalinda Sharma in The Good Wife. Photograph: Jeffrey 
Neira/CBS 
While Julianna Margulies as Alicia Florrick 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/the-good-wife/pictures/the-good-wife-cast/7a1ff5d9-a508-4227-8fe8-8b178bef7080>
 might be the obvious style reference for this lawyer-based show – nice skirt 
suits are her thing – the savvy choice is actually Kalinda Sharma. Played by 
Archie Panjabi, the investigator with a shadowy past wears a NSFW uniform of 
short skirts, over-the-knee boots and cropped biker jackets, accessorised with 
a gun and/or ex-husband. It's dominatrix goes to court and, with biker style 
still the fashion choice at brands ranging fromChristopher Kane to Chanel 
<http://www.style.com/fashionshows/complete/F2013RTW-CKANE>, it's bang on trend.

Selina Meyer, Veep 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/series/veep-episode-by-episode>
 Julia Louis-Dreyfus as Selina Meyer in Veep. 
As a vehicle for Julia Louis-Dreyfus – AKA Elaine from Seinfeld – Veep excels. 
It's also an unlikely resource for work-friendly fashion tips. A female 
vice-president's wardrobe – even a made-up one – has to be pretty top notch, 
after all. Meyer's approach is half "don't mess with me" power suits and half 
retro secretary – thinkLily Tomlin in 9 to 5 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LwDMFOLIHxU>. While that sounds like a terrible 
combination, it actually means lots of pussybow blouses, "done" hair and bright 
colours. Thetrailer for season two 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/mar/19/veep-season-two-selina-meyer>
 stars a leopard-print pussybow, so expect even more style along the corridors 
of power.

Carrie Mathison, Homeland 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/series/homeland-episode-by-episode>
 Claire Danes as Carrie Mathison in Homeland. Photograph: Showtime 
While Carrie's style – trousersuits, white shirts, a security pass worn as an 
accessory – divides opinion, her hair is universally regarded as a triumph. 
Baby blonde, razor-sharp and fine enough to blow in the softest of breezes, it 
has given midlength cuts a much higher profile. ModelKarlie Kloss even got a 
similar haircut 
<http://style.time.com/2013/01/18/karlie-kloss-chop-already-named-haircut-of-the-year/>
. Mathison's do is so perfect, in fact, that style-aware viewers have been 
known to be distracted from the show's latest plot twist. That has to be the 
sign of seriously good hair.

Jessa Johansson, Girls 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/series/lena-dunham-s-girls-episode-by-episode>
 Jemima Kirke as Jessa Johansson in Girls. Photograph: Publicity image 
If in any doubt that Jessa and her cousin Shoshanna couldn't be more 
different, look at their wardrobes. While Shoshanna isneat as a pin  
<http://style.time.com/2013/03/18/girls-costume-designer-jenn-rogien-picks-her-9-favorite-outfits-from-season-2/>
– see fascinators, polo shirts and alice bands – Jessa is what can only be 
described as a hot mess. A bit bohemian – dressing gown in the street, anyone? 
– her intrepid traveller look always involves a lot of stuff: jewellery, floaty 
florals and flea-market finds with stories behind them ("This old thing? I got 
it at the top of a mountain in Nepal.") The wild blonde tresses and spontaneous 
marriages only add to the free spirit vibe. Hippy style has a new heroine.
 