
Few people shop around for a funeral. In the highly charged emotional state 
following the death of a loved one, saving money seldom tops the list of 
priorities. But does this mean that partners and families are left with 
excessive bills? Just how much should we expect to pay for a funeral in 2016?

A basic funeral is currently around £3,700 – and that’s just for the funeral 
director costs. Add in the crematorium and cemetery fees, plus the price of a 
small reception or wake, and the total cost can easily exceed £5,000.

Guardian Money research has found that councils have been discreetly raising 
the cost of burial by far more than the rate of inflation or wage increases. 
What’s more, our price checking of large funeral directors such as Co-operative 
Funeralcare has found they charge as much as £1,500 more than independent local 
firms.

In the past year, the price of cremation has increased on average by 4.8%, 
while burial costs are up by 4.9%. More than 50 crematoriums across the UK 
raised their prices by more than 5%, and a handful by more than 20%. These 
figures have to be laboriously gathered from local councils and private 
companies as they are under no obligation to report price rises.

The major cost for most people is hiring a funeral director. These are the 
firms that arrange the funeral, store the body of the deceased, deal with 
paperwork and arrange the coffin and hearse.

One of the simplest things you can do to save money is to shop around. The two 
biggest chains are Co-operative Funeralcare and Dignity, which together make up 
30% of all funeral parlours in Britain.

In terms of price, the differences are marked. We obtained prices from 30 
funeral directors in Glasgow and south London in July, made up of five 
independent funeral homes, five Co-operative Funeralcare outlets and five 
Dignity branches in each city. Dignity was easily the most expensive (see table 
below), costing around £1,000-£1,500 more than independent firms. Prices in the 
table are for a standard funeral, including the cost of a coffin, hearse and 
professional service fees, but do not include disbursements such as the 
cemetery or crematorium costs, which will vary according to individual councils.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Ffuneral-cost-small-directors-bereaved-families-cremation-burial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0480e414892158bd16f405901ba210a85eefd3b4%2F3_0_1385_728%2F1385.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Funeral%20costs%20can%20see%20you%20digging%20deep%2C%20but%20small%20directors%20ease%20the%20pain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Ffuneral-cost-small-directors-bereaved-families-cremation-burial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Funeral%20costs%20can%20see%20you%20digging%20deep%2C%20but%20small%20directors%20ease%20the%20pain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Ffuneral-cost-small-directors-bereaved-families-cremation-burial%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0480e414892158bd16f405901ba210a85eefd3b4%2F3_0_1385_728%2F1385.jpg>
In response to the rising prices, a growing number of groups and businesses 
are fighting for fairer pricing of funerals. TheFuneral Poverty Pledge 
<http://fairfuneralscampaign.org.uk/content/funeral-poverty-pledge>, set up by 
anti-poverty charity Quaker Social Action, for example, encourages funeral 
directors to be more transparent over their pricing models and lists the 
businesses that have signed up to the pledge.

Funeral comparison sites are another recent innovation supporting industry 
transparency. One such site, Funeralbooker.com <https://funeralbooker.com/>, 
enables users to compare prices for some (though not all) local funeral 
directors. Sites such as these are a good starting point for arranging a 
funeral, but you should meet with the funeral director in person before making 
your final decision.

Similarly, you should not choose a funeral director on the basis of price 
alone. You need to be able to trust the company and work together to deliver 
the funeral that’s right for you and your family. If one funeral home isn’t 
quite right, don’t be afraid to walk away and find another.

In the past year, the price of cremation has increased on average by 4.8%, 
while burial costs are up by 4.9%

Sometimes hospitals will enlist the services of a funeral director to pick up 
the body, but you do not have to use that company. Again, if nothing has been 
signed, you are free to choose another provider.

Any reputable funeral director will have an itemised price list available when 
you visit, but it’s still worthwhile asking how the end cost is worked out. 
Some price lists are far from straightforward.

The greatest cost incurred is the professional service fee, which covers the 
funeral director liaising with third parties, picking up the body within 
working hours, refrigeration, preparation of body, cleaning, washing, dressing, 
driving from the funeral home via the home of the deceased to the crematorium 
or cemetery, and the hiring of pallbearers. The fee might or might not include 
the cost of a hearse. All this typically costs around £1,000.

In the past, funeral businesses were family-owned operations that would serve 
whole communities, and in some small towns this setup still exists. However, 
larger chains have been gradually buying out family businesses, often when 
members of the family retire.

These large chains tend to keep the name of the family that originally ran the 
funeral home. Every branch of Dignity is run under a family name and 30% of 
Co-operative funeral homes trade under a family’s name. When these businesses 
buy up independent funeral homes, they purchase the use of the family name and, 
consequently, their reputation. Many customers visit funeral homes with family 
names in the belief they are supporting a local independent business or because 
they would rather place their trust in a family-owned organisation.

Unfortunately, many of us are reluctant to discuss and plan for the 
practicalities of death, a subject steeped in taboo. We put off conversations 
until we find the “right time”, we ignore the inevitable, and outsource the 
practical arrangements to hospitals and funeral homes. Only 2% of people know 
what their loved ones’ last wishes are and no one is placing funeral 
arrangements at the top of their to-do list.

This attitude has sparked several attempts to open up the conversation about 
death.My Gift of Grace <http://mygiftofgrace.com/> is a card game for “living 
and dying well”, designed to prompt those difficult conversations, covering 
end-of-life care and last wishes. Another interesting development are so-called
death cafes <http://deathcafe.com/> where people can meet and discuss their own 
mortality over a coffee. Even so, little has been done to tackle the 
practicalities of arranging a funeral.

Thinking outside the box

When it comes to alternative send-offs, funeral directors have only a limited 
range of brochures and catalogues to flick through, writes Patrick Collinson. 
If you’re looking for a funeral a little out of the ordinary, the best place to 
start is online.

There are the wacky ideas – like having your ashes pressed into a vinyl 
record, made into a firework or launched into space. For the eco-minded, the 
best option is a woodland burial in a biodegradable coffin made from materials 
such as bamboo, rattan or willow.

Then there are the cost-effective ideas. Some go as far as to organise entire 
DIY funerals, roping in favours from family and friends without ever consulting 
a funeral director. Families can decorate the coffin and the location of the 
service with drawings and flowers, build their own coffin, use their own car 
for the hearse – the works.

Funeral directors aren’t essential to funerals, but they certainly remove much 
of the inevitable stress of doing it yourself. Some funeral directors will work 
with you to create a funeral that’s significantly cheaper and more personal 
while others will be against the idea on principle.
 