
Game of Thrones has just wrapped up its sixth season, with an explosive and 
heart-stopping end 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/27/game-of-thrones-recap-season-six-episode-10-the-winds-of-winter>
. It’s the first time the show’s makers have gone beyond the books of the 
saga’s creator George RR Martin – so how did it go?

We asked fans to review the latest Game of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones> offering – did it 
live up to the hype? Are you now eagerly anticipating what’s to come? Here’s 
what you told us.

Zoe Tongue, 20, Sheffield


Rating: 5 out of 5 – ‘The women made this the best season yet’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fgame-of-thrones-fans-review-season-six%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cac2e8ef1bbcf78e79a108f933f0eca06e6ac1e%2F0_0_960_960%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Game%20of%20Thrones%20fans%20review%20season%20six%3A%20'Misogyny%20has%20been%20replaced%20by%20breakneck%20storytelling'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fgame-of-thrones-fans-review-season-six%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Game%20of%20Thrones%20fans%20review%20season%20six%3A%20%27Misogyny%20has%20been%20replaced%20by%20breakneck%20storytelling%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fgame-of-thrones-fans-review-season-six%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cac2e8ef1bbcf78e79a108f933f0eca06e6ac1e%2F0_0_960_960%2F960.jpg>
This season of Game of Thrones has seen its women start to dominate, making it 
the best season yet. The show has previously been criticised for its portrayal 
of women, but nowthey are showing their strength 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/audio/2016/apr/26/game-of-thrones-season-6-premiere-the-citadel-podcast>
. The transformation of Sansa Stark from a naïve, weak girl into a strong 
survivor who is unafraid to fight for her house and family has been one of the 
highlights of this season. Another highlight was the story of Cersei Lannister 
who, despite suffering loss and humiliation, crawled her way back to the top in 
the season finale (the first 20 minutes showing her destroying her enemies as 
she sips wine were incredible). TheBattle of the Bastards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/20/game-of-thrones-battle-of-the-bastards-was-true-cosmic-comeuppance>
 was another of the season’s best scenes: bloody, intense, and as epic as most 
Lord of the Rings battles. It’s a shame that the season was let down by episode 
seven, The Broken Man, which seemed to be a filler episode and almost had me 
bored, but it was still a stunning season nevertheless.

Suzy Jackson, 35, Gateshead

Rating: 4.5 out of 5 – ‘An exhilarating season, but I needed a notebook to 
keep up’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fgame-of-thrones-fans-review-season-six%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F137e50c2f5e7171ee08573ac6b6adf4e6813dc8a%2F0_0_1813_1813%2F1813.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Game%20of%20Thrones%20fans%20review%20season%20six%3A%20'Misogyny%20has%20been%20replaced%20by%20breakneck%20storytelling'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fgame-of-thrones-fans-review-season-six%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Game%20of%20Thrones%20fans%20review%20season%20six%3A%20%27Misogyny%20has%20been%20replaced%20by%20breakneck%20storytelling%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fgame-of-thrones-fans-review-season-six%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F137e50c2f5e7171ee08573ac6b6adf4e6813dc8a%2F0_0_1813_1813%2F1813.jpg>
Season six has both exhausted and exhilarated me as a viewer. I watched avidly 
asJon Snow rose from the dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/23/game-of-thrones-every-way-jon-snow-could-come-back-from-the-dead>
, chuckled at Tyrion avoiding being chargrilled by dragons, and shrieked with 
joy at the Hound’s safe return(disclaimer: this is not a show you watch 
casually).

So many characters and so little time, though. Episodes flitting from story to 
story were vibrant, but I needed a notebook to keep up. The ultimate reward for 
viewers like me was when the hand-wringing returned with the battle of the 
bastards, and Sansa overseeingRamsay Bolton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/11/why-i-love-iwan-rheon-game-of-thrones-bim-adewunmi>
’s demise at the jaws of his own baying hounds. Yara Greyjoy and the 
superbly-portrayed young Lady Mormont added to a very girl power heavy season.

Ultimately, the season ended magnificently with a black queen, a white wolf 
king – of newly recognised lineage, and a Khaleesi and her substantial fleet 
heading to shore. Winter, it seems, is here.

Ed Prior, 31, Bristol

Rating: 4 out of 5 – ‘This season provided compelling TV, even without a 
roadmap from George RR Martin’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fgame-of-thrones-fans-review-season-six%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F833f317fa5811132c83f14b949ff2b0705bfe8aa%2F0_0_1000_1330%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Game%20of%20Thrones%20fans%20review%20season%20six%3A%20'Misogyny%20has%20been%20replaced%20by%20breakneck%20storytelling'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fgame-of-thrones-fans-review-season-six%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Game%20of%20Thrones%20fans%20review%20season%20six%3A%20%27Misogyny%20has%20been%20replaced%20by%20breakneck%20storytelling%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fgame-of-thrones-fans-review-season-six%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F833f317fa5811132c83f14b949ff2b0705bfe8aa%2F0_0_1000_1330%2F1000.jpg>
This season was a thrilling step into the unknown. Many popular fan theories 
were confirmed, as well as gasp-out-loud surprises. It was also satisfying, in 
a show sometimes borderline glacial in pace, to see things really get moving.

Much-hated characters got their comeuppances while long-suffering 
fan-favourites triumphed, giving more reason to smile than usual in a series 
known for frequent rug-pulling. Numerous key plot threads came together or were 
brutally cut off, offering the prospect of a leaner, more focused story for the 
show’s final two seasons.

The writing was sometimes less subtle that it’s been, the dialogue not quite 
as sharp. However, this was made up for with some truly spectacular action, 
especially in penultimate episode, and moments of heartbreaking emotional heft 
(I’m looking at you, Hold the Door). Overall, this season’s bold storytelling 
proved Game of Thrones can still provide compelling TV even without a complete 
roadmap fromGeorge RR Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/george-rr-martin> for guidance. All of the 
pieces are now in position for what promises to be a truly titanic conclusion 
to the series.

Jack Myers, 21, London

Rating: 4 out of 5 – ‘The season six finale has set us up for a 2017 of 
relentless intrigue and gore’

Season six has redeemed itself from last season’s doldrums. It’s been a long 
time coming, but with Olenna, Sansa, Yara and Danaerys having drubbed their wan 
competition, next season promises some compelling character trajectories 
(especially if Little Miss Mormont, the baby battleaxe of Bear Island, is 
anything to go by). Thank the many-faced god Daenerys’s faraway farragos have 
come to an end, and fingers crossed that this spells an end to the dragon ex 
machina also. This season’s halfway house, The Door, boasted a Danny Boyle 
flair for the rabid undead, although Hodor deserved much more than that twee 
backstory. The battling bastards on the other hand proved even more mesmerising 
than last season’s Hardhome.

With the whole of Westeros now hellbent on deposing Cersei at its decrepit 
core, the season six finale has set us up for a 2017 of relentless intrigue and 
gore.

Adam Dawson, 23, Newcastle

Rating: 3 out of 5 – ‘A season of incredible highs and disappointing lows’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fgame-of-thrones-fans-review-season-six%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55ef97131475133bf0e3898976f299213f51bb27%2F0_0_834_1112%2F834.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Game%20of%20Thrones%20fans%20review%20season%20six%3A%20'Misogyny%20has%20been%20replaced%20by%20breakneck%20storytelling'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fgame-of-thrones-fans-review-season-six%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Game%20of%20Thrones%20fans%20review%20season%20six%3A%20%27Misogyny%20has%20been%20replaced%20by%20breakneck%20storytelling%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fgame-of-thrones-fans-review-season-six%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55ef97131475133bf0e3898976f299213f51bb27%2F0_0_834_1112%2F834.jpg>
It’s been, as usual, a season of incredibly satisfying highs and terribly 
disappointing lows. Most of the good stuff came from the women of Westeros. 
Most rewarding, of course, was Sansa finally getting revenge on one of the 
several men who’ve abused and tried to tear her down. Her smirk at Ramsay 
Bolton as he’s eaten by dogs is such a release for a character who has suffered 
beyond suffering.

Sansa’s ferociously loyal guard, Brienne of Tarth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jul/21/game-of-thrones-brienne-gwendoline-christie-models-for-vivienne-westwood-stylewatch>
, isn’t as lucky. Once again, she’s let down by a dull storyline which has her 
traipsing the countryside looking for someone to chat with rather than whipping 
out her sword and slaying on the battlefield. If the show really wanted to tear 
down those gender roles, it’d show Brienne being the knight we know she is.

At least there’s hope for Daenerys. Finally, she’s getting herself across the 
ocean. Maybe now she’ll stop making grand speeches about how she’s going to do 
something and actually do it. Maybe it’ll take another seven seasons for her to 
actually set foot in Westeros. We’ll be here, waiting, watching.

Sarah Barrett, 28, Leicester

Rating: 4 out of 5 – ‘It’s not always well-written or feminist, but goddammit 
it’s addictive’

After the run of violence against women that was Season five – a series where 
therape of Sansa Stark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/may/20/game-of-thrones-rape-sansa-stark>
 was followed by the burning alive of an innocent girl – my hopes weren’t high 
for season six. But against my better judgment I ended up watching anyway, and 
ended up pleasantly surprised. The sex and violence is slightly less gratuitous 
this time around, Westeros’s villains are beginning to get their comeuppance, 
and the women wronged last season are beginning to avenge themselves. Sansa 
smirking as she walked away from a screaming Ramsay Bolton made for an 
immensely satisfying scene.


Now, my beloved Tyrells are burned away in Cersei’s wildfire (boo) and their 
murderer is on the Iron Throne (hiss.) God knows what Season seven will bring, 
but by this point I’m there until the bitter end. (And this isGame of Thrones, 
so the ending will be bitter.) It’s not always a brilliantly written show and, 
despite some ground gained this year, it’s not a particularly feminist show 
either. But goddammit, it’s addictive.

Lewis English, 29, Stevenage

Rating: 4 out of 5 – ‘The story-lines have sped up, although it has lost some 
heart’

By unshackling itself from George RR Martin’s books, the sixth season of Game 
of Thrones sped up many of its storylines while, at the same time, losing some 
of its heart. A perfect example of this is the storyline of Sansa Stark and 
Brienne of Tarth’s trip from Winterfell to Castle Black. In season three of the 
show this would have been a whole season’s arc (I exaggerate, but not by much.)
However, despite this loss of heart, Hodor excluded, I currently
believe this might be the best season of the show. Gone is the wanton 
misogyny, replaced by breakneck storytelling, a mass cull of unneeded 
characters and a convergence of alliances that make me genuinely interest for 
season seven.

 