
Once in a while I post about interesting events, art exhibitions and film 
festivals that have a passing relevance to games and/or the people who read 
about them on Gamesblog. So here are here are some genuinely fascinating new 
examples...

First up, from April 2 to May 16, the excellent Plymouth Arts Centre 
<http://www.plymouthartscentre.org/> is housing, 'Alejandro Jodorowsky's "Dune" 
An Exhibition of a Film of a Book That Never Was', a touring event originating 
at London'sDrawing Room <http://www.drawingroom.org.uk/>. In 1976 the cult 
Chilean director attempted to interest Hollywood in a surreal movie adaptation 
of Frank Herbert's bloated novel. Sadly, he garnered little interest and the 
project was shelved, but not before he'd commissioned a cabal of famed artists 
and designers to produce concept work for him - some of which will be shown at 
the centre.

Why is this relevant? Well, among his collaborators were the legendary French 
comic book artist Moebius, an oft-cited influence on videogame artists and 
designers, and HR Giger, who should need no introduction on this website, and 
has also been a formative presence in game art. Also on board was British 
sci-fi artistChris Foss <http://www.chrisfossart.com/>, famed for his beautiful 
book covers, which graced the works of Isaac Asimov, E.E. Doc Smith and other 
notaries of the genre. His intricately imagined and brightly-coloured 
spacecraft festooned with alien iconography, have no doubt inspired game 
developers all over the world.

And of course, Alejandro Jodorowsky himself has been referenced by Japanese 
game design maverick andGrasshopper Manufacture 
<http://www.grasshoppermanufacture.com/> founder, Suda51, not least in No More 
Heroes <http://www.risingstargames.com/games/no-more-heroes-wii.html> which 
bears a few similarities to Jodorowsky's feverish Westerm El Topo.
Elsewhere, from March 22-26, the Science Museum is running a series of nightly 
events at itsDana Centre <http://www.danacentre.org.uk/> venue, exploring 
digital technology, and its impact on our lives. The five one-hour tech fests 
have been curated by TV presenter and Gamesblog outcast Aleks Krotoski (hi 
Aleks! Oh sorry, Dr Aleks!), and while they all look interesting, there are two 
particular highlights for Gamesblog types.

On March 25 there's 'What Are Games Really Teaching Us?' a debate about the 
educational value of games (including, I believe, some playable examples), and 
on March 26 there's 'Technology You Can't Live Without' a series ofPecha Kucha 
<http://www.pecha-kucha.org/> presentations (basically lightening fast 
power-point talks using 20 slides in six minutes and 40 seconds) by various 
luminaries including a triple A games designer, a tech academic, a poet, a web 
developer and a community manager.

Places should be pre-booked by calling 020 7942 4040 or emailing 
tickets@danacentre.org.uk.


Finally, between April 1 - 16, the National Media Museum in Bradford will be 
celebrating the opening of its newGame Lounge 
<http://www.nationalmediamuseum.org.uk/gameslounge/> area (pictured above) with 
a range of special events and activities. On the 7th and 9th, there's Big 
Screen Gaming, which brings popular Xbox and PS3 games to the Museum's cinema 
screen - and visitors can play for free. There are also Lego Animation 
Workshops based on the Lego Star Wars and Lego Indiana Jones games, and two 
Pixel Art Stop Motion Animation Workshops, which will allow you to design your 
own retro 2D game characters.

There's also the cool-sounding Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games> Lounge itself, which features 
Tetris-shaped furniture and 15 retro computer, console and coin-op games to try 
out, including Donkey Kong, Pong, Super Mario Kart and Manic Miner.

Events <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/events> need to be booked via 
the National Media Museum box office on 0870 70 10 200.
 