
Endings are an everyday occurrence in Westeros: often abrupt, usually violent. 
Just ask the High Sparrow, vaporised in the lurid wildfire explosion that left 
a Sept-sized crater in King’s Landing at theend of season six 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/27/game-of-thrones-recap-season-six-episode-10-the-winds-of-winter>
. But if the notoriousRed Wedding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/jun/03/game-of-thrones-recap-season-three-episode-nine>
 blooded the franchise’s army of acolytes – training both readers and TV 
watchers to expect the worst, especially when it comes to honourable characters 
– at least we’ve been granted advance warning about the biggest ending of them 
all.HBO confirmed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/01/game-of-thrones-end-after-season-eight-hbo-spinoff>
 over the weekend that the eighth series of the fantasy megahit will definitely 
be its last, albeit at a Television Critics Association press conference rather 
than by dispatching white ravens. Fans can start physically and mentally 
preparing themselves for post-GoT life sometime in 2018.


This eighth and final season will nudge the TV show numerically ahead of 
George RR Martin’s projected seven-book series (currently stalled at volume 
five,A Dance With Dragons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2011/jul/12/a-dance-with-dragons-george-r-r-martin>
, published back in 2011). In truth, the screen adaptation – while necessarily 
streamlining characters, collapsing Westeros travel times and torpedoing whole 
plots – has already expanded far beyond its source material. The books were 
genre bestsellers, but the TV version is culturally omnipresent. Judging by 
column inches and online chatter alone, Game of Thrones can justifiably claim 
to be the biggest show in the world. So how do you satisfyingly wrap-up the 
most pored-over drama of all time?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fgame-of-thrones-finale-hbo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac0e932585eea889430a6a3769b9bc01f881e1a6%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Game%20of%20Thrones'%20days%20are%20numbered%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0so%20how%20will%20it%20end%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fgame-of-thrones-finale-hbo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Game%20of%20Thrones%27%20days%20are%20numbered%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0so%20how%20will%20it%20end%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fgame-of-thrones-finale-hbo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac0e932585eea889430a6a3769b9bc01f881e1a6%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Kit Harington as Jon Snow in Game of Thrones. Photograph: HBO 
Despite shepherding the saga to unprecedented popularity, showrunners David 
Benioff and DB Weiss have always been deferential when courting fans of the 
novels, emphasising that Martin shared his plans for wrapping up the story with 
them from the very beginning of development. Even the heartbreaking Hodor 
revelation in season six was one of three “WTF moments” that Martin outlined 
for Benioff and Weiss during those early meetings. But the King’s Landing 
cataclysm and its aftermath – literally purging Westeros of many existing power 
players – places them very firmly in the driving seat.

The sense is of a gridlocked part of a chessboard being swept clean, perhaps 
because the destruction of the Sept was the first real game-changing event to 
outpace the existing novels. The showrunners’ messaging has also been gradually 
transitioning from a tone of faithful adaptation to respectful autonomy. 
“People are talking about whether the books are going to be spoiled and it’s 
really not true,” Beniofftold Entertainment Weekly 
<http://www.ew.com/article/2016/05/24/george-rr-martin-3-twists-game-thrones> 
earlier this year. “So much of what we’re doing diverges from the books at this 
point.”

The capstone of season six was the rousing sight of fireproof queen-in-waiting 
Daenerys Targaryen finally escaping the political quicksand of Meereen, 
amassing a war fleet with the help of Houses Martell and Tyrell and plotting a 
course for King’s Landing with her faithful dragons in tow. With the seventh 
season confirmed as only being seven episodes, there’s a sense that this 
tightening of scattered storylines – no more sunburnt sojourns to Essos! – must 
also surely accelerate the overarching plot. Previous GoT seasons have usually 
featured one epic, balls-to-the-wall smasheroo episode, such asBlackwater 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/may/28/game-of-thrones-blackwater>
 orThe Watchers on the Wall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/jun/09/game-of-thrones-recap-season-four-episode-nine-watchers-on-the-wall>
 orThe Battle of the Bastards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/20/game-of-thrones-recap-season-six-episode-nine-the-battle-of-the-bastards>
. Reducing the episode count so substantially creates a certain expectation. 
Are fans looking for sevenHardhomes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jun/01/game-of-thrones-recap-season-five-episode-eight-hardhome>
 in a row?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fgame-of-thrones-finale-hbo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2dadd11c357d131be79acc6555443b8f7a7c0d88%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Game%20of%20Thrones'%20days%20are%20numbered%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0so%20how%20will%20it%20end%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fgame-of-thrones-finale-hbo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Game%20of%20Thrones%27%20days%20are%20numbered%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0so%20how%20will%20it%20end%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fgame-of-thrones-finale-hbo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2dadd11c357d131be79acc6555443b8f7a7c0d88%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 The Winds of Winter – the final episode of Game of Thrones’ sixth season. 
Photograph: Sky TV 
Or perhaps that is to misjudge what viewers get out of Game of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones>. Those standalone 
action episodes are spectacular, but GoT has created equally pulse-pounding 
drama in scenes that feature little more than two characters conspiring in a 
draughty-looking castle antechamber. Martin created a whole sprawling continent 
and mythology from scratch, compete with a long and perhaps unnecessarily 
detailed pre-history, but the real story of Westeros has always seemed 
internalised. These are, first and foremost, psychologically recognisable 
people constantly navigating the realpolitik required to survive in their 
unforgiving world. We may tingle at the thought of a physical reckoning between 
ravaged badasses the Hound and the Mountain. But there is an almost equally 
tangible appetite to see Cersei and Daenerys finally meet face-to-face, 
expertly throwing shade rather than punches.

The real problem is that even after that fiery Sept clearout, Game of Thrones 
retains a uniquely sprawling cast. And when the final episode of season eight 
comes around, they will all need to be counted back in like a humungous 
football squad. Perhaps the next two seasons are going to be an agonising 
whittling down of fan favourites, leaving broken helms and shattered corpses by 
the wayside until only a handful of key players remain. Personally, I’d like to 
see a counter-intuitively non-violent ending – after years of big blokes 
hogging the Iron Throne, there are now smart, capable women installed in 
practically all of the pivotal power positions across Westeros. Surely they can 
run the world better than the men? But that won’t make for the sensational 
drama we except from a series that made its name with dragons, flagons and 
shaggin’. Which raises the question: what do you think will happen?
 