
Genetically modified mosquitoes could be released in the Florida Keys as early 
as this spring, an official said, after voters in Monroe County, Florida, 
approved the experiment in areferendum on election day 
<http://enr.electionsfl.org/MON/Summary/1662/>. 

The British company Oxitec will still need to apply to the US Food and Drug 
Administration for approval, as the original location for the trial – Key Haven 
– voted against the trial. The experiment could be the first time a genetically 
modified animal is released into the wild in the United States.

“We decided we have so many other options in the county that we are going to 
pick another site in the county, and not worry about Key Haven for the trial,” 
said Phil Goodman, a commissioner with theFlorida 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/florida> Keys mosquito control district 
and longtime supporter of the trial.

Zika: Let's give women the contraception they so desperately want
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/20/zika-lets-give-women-the-contraception-they-so-desperately-want>
The male mosquitoes modified by Oxitec are designed to control Aedes aegypti 
mosquito populations by mating with wild females, and passing a gene to their 
offspring that stops them from reaching maturity. Only male mosquitoes are to 
be released (one out of every 1,000 could be female). Male mosquitoes do not 
bite.

The mosquitoes are meant to undermine the same mosquitoes that spread Zika, a 
virus that can cause birth defects in children born to infected mothers. The 
virus ravaged Brazil before arriving this spring in Puerto Rico, an American 
territory, and then parts of Miami.

Oxitec has billed the mosquitoes as a way to control populations without 
poisonous insecticides. However, opposition to the trial was widespread in Key 
Haven, asmall, upscale community near Key West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/14/florida-keys-zika-virus-genetically-modified-mosquitoes>
. Just 35% of Key Haven residents supported the measure, whereas 58% of voters 
supported it in Monroe County as a whole.

Though Oxitec plans to abandon the Key Haven location, countywide support 
means the company can look for a new location to run the trial in Monroe County.

“While we did not win over every community in the Keys, Oxitec appreciates the 
support received from the community,” Oxitec CEO Hadyn Parrysaid in a release 
<http://www.oxitec.com/monroe-county-support-trial-oxitecs-genetically-engineered-mosquitoes/>
. He said the company, “is prepared to take the next steps with the Florida 
Keys Mosquito Control Board to trial its environmentally-friendly and 
non-persisting mosquito control solution”.

Some opposition also came from the broader Florida Keys community. Mila de 
Mier, a real estate agent in Key West, said she planned on personally 
shepherding lawsuits against the trial should it go forward elsewhere in Monroe 
County.

“I wasn’t surprised, I wasn’t very surprised at all,” said de Mier about the 
referendum result. De Mier is one of the most fervent opponents of Oxitec. She 
and many others contend that the impacts of such a release are not well enough 
studied to justify the risk of releasing the animals.

Oxitec has long portrayed itself as a community-oriented company. Their 
spokesperson, Derric Nimmo,previously told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/14/florida-keys-zika-virus-genetically-modified-mosquitoes>
 he personally went door-to-door to try to convince Key Haven residents of the 
value of the experiment.

But during the election, the company took more drastic measures, funding a 
political committee calledFlorida Keys Safety Alliance 
<http://www.flkeysnews.com/news/local/article98875267.html> to promote its 
product, Florida Keys News reported.
 