
4.21pm GMT 

Afternoon summary

• Ed Miliband has joined David Cameron and Nick Clegg in condemning the 
proposal for MPs pay to go up to £74,000. This is what he said.

I want to be clear with the public, I don't think it's right that MPs should 
get this pay rise at a time when nurses, teachers, people in the private sector 
are going through a pay squeeze and facing incredibly difficult economic 
circumstances. I think it will just undermine trust in politics further. I'm 
determined that this pay rise does not go ahead if there's a Labour government. 

The independent body charged with this are just wrong. I have to account to 
the British people, they don't have to account to the British people and I know 
that this proposal does not command public confidence, will not command public 
confidence and I understand why it won't command public confidence. That's why 
I'm determined it doesn't happen.

Miliband also said he would be meeting Sir Ian Kenndy, the chair of the 
Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority, to ask him to think again.

• Northern Ireland's  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/dec/12/northern-ireland-immunity-troubles-democratic-unionist>
largest political party has said it would back limited immunity for those who 
admitted to crimes connected to the Troubles. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/dec/12/northern-ireland-immunity-troubles-democratic-unionist>
 As Henry McDonald reports, in a boost to talks aimed at securing agreement on 
contentious parades, flags and the past, theDemocratic Unionist party (DUP) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/dup> said there could be limited immunity 
with victims' agreement.

• The Home Office has admitted that personal details of nearly 1,600 illegal 
immigrants whose families were in the process of being returned home were 
accidentally published on its website. 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-25353311>

• The Electoral Commission has insisted the government is to blame for the 
record low turnout in 2012's police and crime commissioner (PCC) elections. 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-25350158>

• Parliamentarians and others have paid tribute to Nelson Mandela at an event 
in Westminster Hall. <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-25341459>

That's all from me for today.

Thanks for the comments.

4.15pm GMT 

Earlier Nick Clegg revealed that Bill Clinton had told me to read a book 
called The End of Power by Moisés Naím. Paula Cocozza has been looking at it, 
and she's written a post about the lessons it might have for Nick Clegg. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/shortcuts/2013/dec/12/bill-clinton-nick-clegg-end-of-power>
One is that small powers can be effective.

For Naím, micropowers are antithetical to megaplayers. If you can persuade 
yourself to see David Cameron as a megaplayer, then Clegg could make a 
convincing micropower. You might be squinting by now, but that is fine: a 
natural reaction to micro-anything. Powers of veto, delay, and watering-down 
fit into the micropower category, Naím says. He has a subchapter which Clegg 
could find useful, headed "Just Say No".

3.55pm GMT 

Here's a short afternoon reading list.

• Jon Lansman at Left Futures outlines the compromise proposal that Unite is 
offering Ed Miliband in the debate on reforming Labour's links with the unions. 
<http://www.leftfutures.org/2013/12/unite-offers-miliband-an-olive-branch-with-clear-red-lines/>

The executive council of Unite the Union yesterday offered Ed Miliband a 
compromise in his efforts to “mend the link” between Labour and the trade 
unions, but also set out the red lines which it is not prepared to cross.

In a unanimous decision, it welcomed “any measures which increase the 
involvement of individual trade unionists in the Labour Party” and, as had been 
advocated by Len McCluskey from the start, specifically agreed Miliband’s 
proposal that “individual political levy paying members of trade unions be 
encouraged to ‘opt in’ to associate membership of the Labour Party as part of 
the drive to build a Party of mass membership.” However, it also insisted that 
collective affiliation of the trade unions should continue alongside the 
opting-in of individual levy-payers and that there should be no diminution of 
trade union voting strength or representation within Labour party structures. 

• Jeremy Cliffe at the Economist names five Tory women who could stop Boris 
Johnson becoming the next leader. 
<http://www.economist.com/blogs/blighty/2013/12/conservative-party-leadership?utm_source=buffer&utm_campaign=Buffer&utm_content=buffer5b7ea&utm_medium=twitter>

The 2010 intake, though famously rebellious, includes dozens of talented 
politicians. If the party had won a majority, most would be ministers by this 
point. But it is in coalition, so must share the posts with Liberal Democrats. 
Many prospective stars languish, disappointed and resentful, on the backbenches.

Of those lucky ones who have been appointed to top jobs, five women MPs have 
been in the headlines recently. Each stands out for her relatively liberal 
views, her growing national prominence and—crucially—her growing following 
among fellow MPs. The five are Liz Truss, an education minister, Nicky Morgan, 
the economic secretary to the Treasury, Jane Ellison, a health minister, Margot 
James and Andrea Leadsom—the latter two both members of the Conservative policy 
board.

• Richard Godwin in the Standard praises Ed Balls for performing in a piano 
concert with him last weekend. 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/comment/richard-godwin-piano-should-be-the-forte-of-more-of-our-politicians-8997411.html>

One newspaper mocked Balls for playing children’s music, failing to 
distinguish music about children from music for children. Schumann is not 
Chopsticks. Another called it a publicity stunt — but, trust me, there are far 
less risky and time-consuming ways of making headlines. Roland Barthes said the 
only way to understand Schumann is to play him, even badly. In those hours of 
practice, you appreciate his brittle architecture. You realise it only takes a 
misplaced G# for the whole tender thing to fall apart. In front of 400 people.

3.34pm GMT 

Here's a short George Osborne/Treasury committee reading list.

• Paul Goodman (a former Conservative MP) explains at ConservativeHome why he 
admires George Osborne. 
<http://www.conservativehome.com/thetorydiary/2013/12/george-osborne-or-horatius-at-the-bridge.html>

A week on from his autumn statement, I can’t help admiring the way in which, 
almost alone (but for Michael Gove and, in his way, Eric Pickles), the 
Chancellor keeps taking the fight to the opposition – relishing the mix of 
Parliamentary chess and kung fu that puts Ed Miliband on the back foot; 
dreaming up deficit and welfare traps for Balls; seeking at every turn to find 
new means of ramming home Labour’s weaknesses on spending and welfare. Carla 
Millar portrays him above as Horatius at the bridge, holding his political 
opponents at bay. The tribute is deserved. I add a bitter-sweet footnote. 
According to some accounts, Horatius was badly wounded during the heroic 
episode, and unable afterwards to hold public office.

• George Eaton at the New Statesman imagines what the further welfare cuts 
envisaged by Osborne might be. 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/2013/12/osborne-promises-billions-more-welfare-cuts-where-will-his-axe-fall>

What cuts could he have in mind? It's worth looking back at the speech 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/welfare-speech>David Cameron made on 
the subject in June 2012 when he outlined a series of possible measures, 
including: 

 * The restriction of child-related benefits for families with more than two 
children. 
 * A lower rate of benefits for the under-21s. 
 * Preventing school leavers from claiming benefits. 
 * Paying benefits in kind (like free school meals), rather than in cash. 
 * Reducing benefit levels for the long-term unemployed. Cameron said: 
"Instead of US-style time-limits – which remove entitlements altogether – we 
could perhaps revise the levels of benefits people receive if they are out of 
work for literally years on end". 
 * A lower housing benefit cap. Cameron said that the current limit of £20,000 
was still too high. 
 * The abolition of the "non-dependent deduction". Those who have an adult 
child living with them would lose up to £74 a week in housing benefit. 
Osborne would also likely reduce the household benefit cap of £26,000 (he said 
today that "future governments could change the level" and Tory MPs have been 
pushing for one of £20,000) and maintain the 1% cap on benefit increases (a 
real-terms cut). 

• Michael Deacon sketches the hearing for the Telegraph. He imagines a fun 
game to play at Christmas - Treasury select committee. 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/10513719/Sketch-George-Osborne-games-master.htm>

3.07pm GMT 

Correction: Earlier I quoted George Osborne as saying universal credit would 
not have a 100% take-up. (See11.55am 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2013/dec/12/george-osborne-questioned-by-treasury-committee-on-autumn-statement-politics-live-blog#block-52a9a3b4e4b077f3c892926f>
 and1.17pm.)  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2013/dec/12/george-osborne-questioned-by-treasury-committee-on-autumn-statement-politics-live-blog#block-52a9a510e4b00188da8857b0>
I've been told that what he said was that it would not have a 100% taper. That 
means, as for every £1 they gain from the transferable tax allowance, they will 
not lose a full £1. 

2.31pm GMT 

Lunchtime summary

• George Osborne has said that welfare spending will have to be cut by 
billions of pounds after the next general election. (See 1.17pm.) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2013/dec/12/george-osborne-questioned-by-treasury-committee-on-autumn-statement-politics-live-blog#block-52a9a510e4b00188da8857b0>

• Sir Ian Kennedy, the chair of the Independent Parliamentary Standards 
Authority, has defended his plan for MPs to be paid £74,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/dec/12/mps-pay-go-up-74000-pay-body-recommends>
. In an interview on the World at One, he said critics should not just focus on 
pay.

Ipsa produced its report at 10am today and I have been going around and 
talking to a variety of people on television and radio, and saying this is a 
package and it isn’t just about pay. It’s about reducing expenses, resettlement 
allowances, pension entitlement and on the other hand, correcting a 
decades-long failure to wrestle with the artificially-low salary of MPs ...

What you’ve got to remember is three years ago when we introduced our reform 
of the expenses system we had the same howls of ‘how can you do that? That 
would be improper, we may have to do something about it’, votes of confidence 
were considered and so on. Three years on that expenses system works very well, 
is seen to be fair, it’s transparent, you can get the data, everybody else can 
get the data and people are coming from other countries to look at how we do 
it. 

But David Cameron and other senior politicians reiterated their belief that 
the proposed pay rise was unacceptable. You can read the Ipsa news release here 
<http://parliamentarystandards.org.uk/NewsAndMedia/Pages/LatestNews2.aspx?ListNews=739f9c00-b7d4-4282-bffd-9ae51fd8d92d&NewsId=60>
, and the full report here (pdf). 
<http://parliamentarystandards.org.uk/payandpensions/Documents/IPSA%20final%20report.pdf>
 And the Telegraph is runninga database recording what all MPs say about 
whether or not they would take the money. 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/david-cameron/10512987/Telegraph-database-find-out-if-your-MP-is-taking-Ipsas-11-per-cent-pay-hike.html>

• The Department for Education has released figures showing that more than 4% 
of England's nearly 17,000 primary schools failed to meet the government's 
tougher new standards in the basics of maths and English. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/dec/12/primary-schools-fail-maths-english-standards>

•  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/dec/12/judge-david-cameron-nigella-lawson?CMP=twt_gu>
Jurors in the trial of two former personal assistants accused of defrauding 
Nigella Lawson and Charles Saatchi have been warned to ignore comments made by 
David Cameron about the celebrity cook. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/dec/12/judge-david-cameron-nigella-lawson?CMP=twt_gu>
 As the Press Association reports, Judge Robin Johnson told jurors in the trial 
of Elisabetta and Francesca Grillo at Isleworth crown court that it was "of 
regret" when public figures commented about someone involved in a trial and 
urged them to only decide the case based on the evidence in court.

• The Office for National Statistics has released figures showing that the pay 
gap for full-time workers is getting wider. It went up to to 15.7% in 2013 from 
14.8% in 2012. The TUC general secretary Frances O'Grady criticised the 
government. 
<http://www.tuc.org.uk/equality-issues/gender-equality/equal-pay/shock-rise-gender-pay-gap-after-years-slow-steady-progress?utm_source=dlvr.it&utm_medium=twitter>

This year has seen a shock rise in the gender pay gap after years of slow, 
steady progress. Ministers should be ashamed of presiding over this latest 
dismal record on pay.

It is not right that in Britain today women still earn 15 per cent less per 
hour than men, a pay gap that costs full-time women over £5,000 a year.

The UK’s five million women part-time workers are faring even worse on pay, 
with two in five now earning less than the living wage.

The light touch, voluntary approach to tackling gender pay inequality is 
clearly failing. We need tougher action to force companies look at their pay 
gaps.

But, as Faisal Islam points out, for part-time workers the picture is 
different.
Faisal Islam (@faisalislam) 
In hourly terms, is equality in sight for part time workers? Gap down to 5%. 
Perhaps equality of low pay?pic.twitter.com/hsAgHnwLob <http://t.co/hsAgHnwLob>
 <https://twitter.com/faisalislam/statuses/411072857016250368> December 12, 
2013 <https://twitter.com/faisalislam/statuses/411072857016250368> 
• The Institute for Fiscal Studies has said that public sector pay is set to 
fall so sharply in comparison to private salaries over the next few years that 
employers are likely to find it difficult to recruit and retain high-quality 
staff. <http://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/7009>

• Michael Meacher, the Labour former minister, has criticised his party for 
not being able to win the argument on the economy. 
<http://www.michaelmeacher.info/weblog/2013/12/the-one-thing-holding-labour-back-is-the-lack-of-an-economic-policy-that-must-change-fast/>
Its stance was a "vacuum" and a "blackout", he said in a post on his blog.

It is staggering that after 3 years of brutal austerity the electorate, 
according to recent polls, believes even more than in 2010 that Osborne’s 
policy of incessantly cutting expenditure to balance the books is both 
necessary and right, when patently it is neither. It isn’t just the relentless 
Tory propaganda that Labour left behind a dreadful economic mess which could 
only be redressed by continuous austerity (both of which statements are wrong), 
it’s also the almost inexplicable failure of Labour to spell out the true facts 
which allows Tory marauding over the whole economic landscape, at fearful cost 
both to the country and the individual victims of austerity, to go completely 
unchallenged. This Labour economic vacuum cannot be allowed to persist. Labour 
is ahead on virtually every other point, but the economic issue is so crucial 
to people’s jobs, incomes, homes and security, which are what fundamentally 
matter to everyone, that a Labour blackout here could still swing the election. 

• Chris Grayling, the justice secretary, has said that security 
companies G4S and Serco are to hand over their contracts to electronically tag 
criminals following fraud allegations over the way they charged the government. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/dec/12/g4s-serco-tagging-contracts-fraud-allegations-monitoring-criminals?CMP=twt_gu>

• Lucy Powell, the shadow childcare minister, has called for a revolution in 
the way society treats working mothers. She made the comments in a speech. 
<http://press.labour.org.uk/post/69735910942/parents-face-prejudice-at-work-and-families-need-a>

Too often working parents are given a bad name at work: seen as not focused on 
the job or having to leave early or take time off. I want to bust this myth. I 
want to champion working parents, particularly working mums, and I want 
business and other organisations to join me.

Far from being scatty and clock-watching, working mums have done a day’s work 
before they leave the house - we don’t waste a minute of our day. We are highly 
productive at work because we have to be. We are loyal and creative employees.

We should be celebrating not berating the role parents play in the workforce 
and in society.

This is a job for all of us. It is shocking that there is only one mum in 
David Cameron's cabinet, and the depiction of working mums on the TV hasn’t 
moved on much from Wendy Craig's character Ria in Butterflies. That’s why we 
need more working mums in positions of power and culturally to reflect the 
positive contribution we make.

• Nick Clegg has defended David Cameron's controversial selfie with Barack 
Obama and Helle Thorning-Schmidt at Nelson Mandela's memorial service, saying 
the three world leaders were just "joking around". 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/12/nick-clegg-defends-david-cameron-mandela-selfie>

• Cameron has said he would like "a bit of peace and quiet" and some "squidgy 
tennis balls" for Christmas. As the Press Association reports, speaking to BBC 
Coventry and Warwickshire about what he wanted for Christmas he said: "A bit of 
peace and quiet would be quite a nice thing but you can never bank on that in 
this job." He added:

I want some squidgy tennis balls. I have started playing tennis with my son. I 
would like those ones which you can really whack and they don't go very far. If 
Santa's listening, you can get them down the chimney pretty easily and there 
will be a very happy recipient at the other end.

Updated at 2.38pm GMT

1.17pm GMT 

George Osborne's evidence to the Treasury committee on the autumn statement - 
Summary

Is there a better select committee in the House of Commons? Having listened to 
the work and pensions committee do a fairly poor job questioning Iain Duncan 
Smith earlier this week, it was striking just how much better this committee 
did with George Osborne; lots of intelligent, forensic questioning, very little 
repetition, and a chairman who uses follow-ups well to clarify what his witness 
is actually saying. And even the one member who specialises in partisan 
grandstanding - John Mann - at least does it with aplomb. You might not read 
about his questions in the FT, but he knows how to produce a Mirror splash.

Sometimes you can cover these hearings without getting anything. The reason 
I'm close to launching the Treasury select committee fan club (don't worry - 
I'm sure I'll soon get over it) is that this hearing was really productive. 

Here are the main points.

• Osborne said that welfare spending would have to be cut by billions of 
pounds after the next general election. He first made the prediction when 
Labour's Pat McFadden asked him if he accepted the prediction from the Office 
for Budget Responsibility last week that state spending on services would have 
to fall to the level it was in 1948. Osborne said he did not accept that - 
because a future government would choose to cut welfare spending (which is not 
included in the services metric used by the OBR) instead, allowing more money 
to be spend on services.

I think that assumption is based on what I think is an erroneous judgment 
about what the political system will do. They are perfectly right that on the 
current plans that's what it shows. But I think the next government will want 
to undertake further reductions in the welfare budget and further welfare 
savings. If you undertake further welfare savings then you don't reach that 
1948 number. 

Osborne was also asked about the Institute for Fiscal Studies's prediction 
that welfare would have to be cut by £12bn. As the Press Association reports, 
the IFS said that by the end of 2013-14, Whitehall departmental spending will 
have fallen by just over 8% and without further tax rises or welfare cuts that 
looks set to rise to 20% by 2018-19. It said that would mean a pick-up in the 
rate of cuts to public services to 3.7% a year and that just to avoid such an 
acceleration would require a further £12 billion a year in welfare cuts. 
Osborne said that he did not accept the £12bn figure, but he accepted the 
analysis behind it. 

My view is welfare expenditure cannot be excluded from difficult decisions 
that need to be made. If you want to maintain the same pace of reduction in 
government spending that we have had over this parliament, rather than 
accelerating it, then you are going to have to find billions of pounds of 
welfare savings. I think that is what this country needs to do. Personally I 
think if it comes to a choice we should be making our investment in schools and 
in science, because that's securing the long-term economic health of this 
country and we shouldn't be cutting those things because we are not prepared to 
deal with the welfare budget.

• Osborne hinted that he would like to see the value of the benefits cap cut 
further. When the Tory MP Brooks Newmark suggested that having the cap at 
£26,000 - equivalent to a pre-tax salary of £35,000 - was too high, Osborne 
said that it would be open to a future government to bring it down. This would 
be a subject of fierce debate, he said. 

• Osborne was unable to say how much it cost to fill up a Vauxhall Astra with 
petrol. When Labour's John Mann challenged him on this, Osborne said he did not 
know the figure and he refused even to guess. Mann later issued a press 
statement saying Osborne was "hopelessly out of touch". <http://t.co/v7jEq7mbnx>

• Osborne revealed that the 2014 budget will be on 19 March.

• He said he would provide the committee with a detailed analysis showing how 
different components, including regulation, contribute to the cost of energy 
bills. Andrew Tyrie, the committee chair, said it would be particularly useful 
for the public to have this information.

• Osborne said that he wanted to lead a "quiet revolution" that would make the 
Treasury more aware of the potentially advantages of cutting taxes. 
Traditionally, when assessing the economic impact of a tax cut, the Treasury 
uses a static scorecard that assesses the cut just in terms of the money lost 
to the Exchequer. Recently Osborne producedsome dynamic modelling showing the 
wider economic benefits of cutting corporation tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2013/dec/05/george-osbornes-autumn-statement-live#block-52a046b7e4b0299692d546fd>
. In response to a question from the Conservative David Ruffley, Osborne 
suggested that he would like to produce a similar exercise for fuel duty, or 
tax allowances.

I’m not expecting some overnight change in the way Parliament and the Treasury 
does public finances but I think it will start this quiet revolution where 
people come to realise that if you leave more money in people’s pockets they 
tend to be better at spending it and investing it than government.

Tories are strongly in favour of this kind of analysis because they believe it 
will reinforce the case for tax cuts. 

• Osborne confirmed that the Bank of England's Financial Policy Committee 
would have the power to block Help to Buy if the government wanted to extend it 
for more than three years. But he insisted that he was not intended to let it 
run for more than three years anyway. And if the FPC raised concerns about Help 
to Buy before then, he would listen to them, he aid.

• He rejected claims that Help to Buy was fuelling a housing bubble in London.

The early evidence from Help to Buy is that three quarters of those taken out 
are not living in London and the South East. The average house purchase that 
they have been looking for is £160,000 - that's below the national average. In 
other words, it is dealing with exactly the families we want it to help.

• He refused to say whether he expected interest rates to rise to 4 or 5%. 
Admitting that he was being "evasive", he said it was not the chancellor's job 
to forecast interest rate increases.

• He conceded that the sale of the student loan book would not fund his plan 
to expand student numbers. In his autumn statement he said the one would pay 
for the other. The IFS later said this was "economic nonsense". Under 
questioning from Pat McFadden (see11.10am),  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2013/dec/12/george-osborne-questioned-by-treasury-committee-on-autumn-statement-politics-live-blog#block-52a9989ee4b00188da8857a4>
Osborne conceded that the one-off benefit from the sale of the loan book would 
not cover the ongoing costs of more students going to university.

• Osborne accepted that poor couples on universal credit would not benefit 
much from the transferable tax allowance for marriage. Labour's Teresa Pearce 
asked Osborne to confirm thatmuch of the benefit they would gain from the 
transferable allowance would be lost through lower UC payments. 
<http://www.resolutionfoundation.org/blog/2013/oct/21/who-will-benefit-tax-break-married-couples/>
 Osborne did not contest this. Pearce said that Osborne claimed the poorest 
families would gain from the transferable allowance and that the UC effect 
showed that they would not. Osborne responded by saying that his claim was 
correct, because UC would not have a 100% take-up.

UPDATE AT 3pm: That last sentence is wrong. Osborne did not say that there 
would not be a 100% take-up of UC. He said there would not be a 100% taper 
(meaning people will not lose a full £1 in UC for every £1 they get from the 
transferable tax allowance.)

• He said that he would expect the free school meals policy announced in the 
autumn statement to continue into the next parliament. But money to fund it 
would have to be found in the 2015 spending review, he said.

Updated at 3.08pm GMT

11.59am GMT 

Andrew Tyrie steps in again.

Q: Are you saying the FPC can block Help to Buy if you try to extend it after 
three years?

Osborne says he set up Help to Buy for three years. He has given this 
commitment to parliament. So in practice the FPC has a veto. But it is not his 
intention to extend the scheme.

Q: So when the governor of the Bank of England said he did not have a veto, he 
was wrong.

Osborne says he has been very clear that the FPC could block the extension of 
the scheme after three year.

And, if it were to offer advice before then, he would listen to it. 

And that's it. Tyrie thanks Osborne for coming.

I'll post a snap summary as soon as I can.

11.55am GMT 

Q: You said some of the poorest families will be better off from the 
transferable tax allowance for marriage.

Osborne says that poor couples, where one partner is not working, will benefit.

Q: But if they are poor they will be on universal credit. And for every extra 
penny they earn, they will lose UC.

Osborne says there will not be a universal take-up of UC.

UPDATE AT 3pm: That last sentence is wrong. Osborne did not say that there 
would not be a 100% take-up of UC. He said there would not be a 100% taper 
(meaning people will not lose a full £1 in UC for every £1 they get from the 
transferable tax allowance.)

Updated at 3.09pm GMT

11.53am GMT 

Q: In July the Treasury issued a document called Managing Public Money. It 
said a department that wants to write off money has to clear it with the 
Treasury. When did the DWP tell you about the universal credit write-offs.

Osborne says the Treasury has been involved in constant negotiations on this. 
When universal credit is introduced, it will be the largest item of government 
spending.

Q: The document says parliament must be told about write-offs at the earliest 
opportunity. Has that happened?

Osborne says he thinks the proper processes have been followed.

11.50am GMT 

Labour's Teresa Pearce goes next.

Q: Are you worried universal credit is not providing value for money?

No, says Osborne. It is important to introduce this measure slowly.

Q: But some £303m is being wasted.

Osborne says he does not recognise that figure.

11.47am GMT 

Brooks Newmark goes next.

Q: Do you agree with the IFS that another £12bn of welfare savings are needed?

Osborne says he does not necessarily accept the number. But he accepts the 
analysis behind it.

Q: The benefit cap is set at a level equivalent to what a family on a pre-tax 
income of £35,000 receives. Shouldn't it be lower?

Osborne says it was set at a reasonable level. It would be open to a future 
government to change it.

Q: But shouldn't it be cut.

Osborne says it will continue to be a subject of fierce debate.

11.44am GMT 

Andrew Tyrie goes next.

Q: Would it be a good idea for the Treasury to publish a comprehensive 
assessment of what the component parts of energy bills are (including the 
impact of regulation)?

Osborne says he would be happy to provide that. When he came to office, there 
was no single place were this was available.

But he would be happy to share that with the committee.

11.43am GMT 

Q: Do you accept living standards are falling this year? And that they will 
have gone down from 2008 to 2015?

Osborne says a survey out today shows medium gross weekly earnings up 2.2%, 
the same level as inflation.

(Osborne is referring to this earnings survey from the Office for National 
Statistics.) 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/ashe/annual-survey-of-hours-and-earnings/2013-provisional-results/stb-ashe-statistical-bulletin-2013.html>

11.40am GMT 

Labour's Andy Love is asking the questions now.

Q: Do you accept there has been a real drop in household living standards over 
the last five years?

Yes, says Osborne. That's because the country got poorer.

Q: The OBR told this committee that it was inconceivable that real household 
incomes did not fall from 2008 to 20012.

Osborne says in 2008 there was the biggest recession and the biggest banking 
crisis in history. But you cannot improve living standards without improving 
the economy. His plan is improving the economy, he says. 

11.36am GMT 

Q: When I asked the OBR if they supported this model, they seemed "moderately 
lukewarm". They did not seem keen to use these assumptions.

Osborne says the OBR is meant to be cautious. He is not expecting an overnight 
change. But he wants to start a quiet revolution, so that people realise if you 
leave money in people's pockets, they will spend it.

Q: The TaxPayers' Alliance has suggested that every member of the Treasury 
select committee should be able to submit one idea to the Treasury for costing 
using this model a year. That would subject the Treasury to new ideas. Will you 
look at that?

Osborne says he takes all budget submissions seriously. And not just from 
Conservatives. This year he has adopted a proposal from Tristram Hunt, the 
Labour MP (relating to the ceramics industry in his constituency).

But he does not want to turn the Treasury into a version of the Congressional 
Budget Office, he says. 

11.32am GMT 

David Ruffley, a Conservative, goes next. 

Q: You asked HMRC to model the impact of the welcome cut in corporation tax. 
[There is more on this here.] 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2013/dec/05/george-osbornes-autumn-statement-live#block-52a046b7e4b0299692d546fd>
Why did you decide to do this now?

Osborne says he favoured this when he was in opposition. It reflects a debate 
over whether lower taxes can, in part, pay for themselves. Any chancellor will 
be cautious about cutting taxes. The Treasury has a static scorecard (ie, when 
it cuts taxes, it does not model the dynamic, and potentially positive effects 
on the economy). He wants to move the debate on. Now he can look at other 
areas. He will carry on using a static scorecard for this parliament. But he 
would like to move the debate on.

Q: What other taxes would you look at?

Osborne says he does not want to commit himself fully, but you could look at 
fuel duty, at the personal allowance. Fuel duty is an area where taxes can have 
a distortionary effect, he says.

There is not going to be a revolution overnight. He wants to be cautious.

There is a reverse to this. If you propose an increase in corporation tax, as 
some (ie, Labour) are proposing, that could cut investment.

11.26am GMT 

Q: In my county [Hertfordshire] spending per year per head on cancer is 
£5,000. In Birmingham it is £10,000. Is that fair?

Osborne says urban areas tend to have higher funding. They have greater social 
problems. There may be room for improvement. But as a country we have decided 
to spend more money in deprived areas.

11.22am GMT 

Jesse Norman, a Conservative goes next,

He asks about PFI.

Q: Is there a case for reviewing PFI waste?

Osborne says the Treasury has invited departments with PFI contracts to try to 
get them renegotiated. There were some "terrible" deals, he says.

Q: The Department of Health has been captured by these contracts. Will you 
look at this? I'm not convinced the DoH is on top of the problem.

Osborne says he will look at this.

11.20am GMT 

Osborne reveals, that as a former junior whip, he is entitled to wear the tie 
that former Labour and Tory whips both wear.

11.19am GMT 

Labour's John Mann has been tweeting about the hearing, and his exchanges with 
Osborne. 
John Mann MP (@JohnMannMP) 
Petrol prices under George a Osborne have arisen £5 every time you fill up due 
to his tax increases such as VAT ( more for bigger cars)
 <https://twitter.com/JohnMannMP/statuses/411081733883564032> December 12, 2013
 <https://twitter.com/JohnMannMP/statuses/411081733883564032> John Mann MP 
(@JohnMannMP) 
Here is my press release on clueless Osborne today at the Treasury Select 
Committee:http://t.co/v7jEq7mbnx <http://t.co/v7jEq7mbnx>
 <https://twitter.com/JohnMannMP/statuses/411088815814483968> December 12, 2013
 <https://twitter.com/JohnMannMP/statuses/411088815814483968> John Mann MP 
(@JohnMannMP) 
Osborne admits he has fiddled the figures about future lost income from 
student loans repayments. Not accounted for even in next Parliament
 <https://twitter.com/JohnMannMP/statuses/411090417481187328> December 12, 2013
 <https://twitter.com/JohnMannMP/statuses/411090417481187328> 
11.16am GMT 

Labour's George Mudie goes next.

Q: Your growth is not sustainable, the deficit has stalled for the last three 
years and debt is heading towards £1.5tr. How can you say your plan is working?

Osborne says he has made substantial progress in cutting the level of 
borrowing. And the structural deficit has fallen more quickly than in any other 
G8 country.

Q: You did well cutting the deficit in the first year. But for the last two 
and a half years it has stalled. Debt is rising at the rate of £3,000 a second.

Osborne say he would welcome Mudie's support in getting the deficit down. But 
his support has not been forthcoming.

Q: Your deficit reduction plan is like Alistair Darling's. I supported that. 
The recovery is partly fuelled by people using their savings. That is not 
sustainable. Business investment has been falling. I'm disappointed at the 
failure to deliver sustainable growth.

Osborne says Labour used to criticise him for going too far, too fast on the 
deficit. Now Mudie is saying he is not going fast enough. 

He needs to provide a backdrop of economic certainty.

11.10am GMT 

Q: The funding for free school meals is only set out to 2016. What will happen 
to it after that?

Osborne says his assumption is that that will continue. How to fund it would 
have to be decided in the 2015 spending review.

Q: You are selling the student loan book. That just generates a one-off fee. 
Do your calculations take into account the long-term effects of losing this 
income?

No, they don't says Osborne. The Treasury figures just look at the immediate 
costs. The OBR looks at the long-term consequences.

The student loan sale will help the government through the "early years" of 
the new policy.

Q: But you said in your statement that the cost of lifting the cap on student 
numbers would be paid by the sale of the student loan books. Can you really say 
it is fully funded?

Osborne says there are two costs: grants, and borrowing money to lend to 
students.

This is a cash flow issue.

Q: What happens when you money from the sale of the loan book runs out?

Osborne says the new students going to university will start to repay their 
loans.

11.05am GMT 

Osborne says welfare spending cannot be excluded from the difficult decisions 
that have to be made.

He suggests he wants to see "billions" cut from the welfare budget.

Q: The IFS say you will need welfare savings of £12bn a year.

Osborne says that is their figure. He is not going to put a figure on what he 
wants. But there will have to be savings worth "billions of pounds" if the 
state can continue to afford measures like education.

11.03am GMT 

Labour's Pat McFadden goes next.

Q: The OBR says the public spending could fall to its lowest level since 1948. 
Is that desirable?

Osborne says the OBR figures are based on an erroneous understanding of what 
the next government will do.

It is assuming no further welfare savings. But he thinks there will be further 
welfare savings.

Not all the savings need to come from departments.

Q: Is it a good thing to have the government's share of consumption at the 
level of 1948?

Osborne says he does not accept that assumption. He prefers to look at public 
spending as a share of GDP. That was 47% when he came into office. That is 
unsustainable. It is heading down towards 40%. But it won't get as low as 36%, 
the figure it was in Labour's early years in office.

11.00am GMT 

Q: What effect would continuing low productivity have on living standards?

Osborne says the OBR says a proper recovery needs better productivity.

10.59am GMT 

John Thurso, the Lib Dem MP, goes next.

Q: Why has productivity been so weak?

Osborne says the impairment of the banking system is the main problem. He does 
not accept the argument being made in the US, and heard here too, that there is 
some great stagnation affecting the West. Mark Carney rejected this idea too.

Q: But don't we need to understand this better?

Osborne says the flip side of lower productivity has been higher employment.

He never favoured an unemployment shock, on the grounds that this might 
improve productivity. Some people argued for this. But they tended to be in the 
press. People in parliament represent voters who worry about unemployment.

Q: If low interest rates are permitting a mis-allocation of capital, there 
could also be a mis-allocation of labour. That could lead to an upward blip in 
unemployment.

Osborne says he does not accept that. The OBR is forecasting a fall in 
unemployment.

10.54am GMT 

Q: Do you think Mark Carney has signed up to moral hazard in the banking 
sector?

Osborne says Leadsom is not being fair to Carney. His speech to the FT 
recently was very interesting. He said the UK could be home to a large 
financial services industry, provided the instruments are there to regulate the 
bank.

Tyrie steps in.

Q: You have not answered Leadsom's point. Parliament said Bank of England 
governors should be appointed for eight years so that they are around to see 
the outcome of their decisions. Yet he is only serving five years.

Osborne says this was a small price to pay for getting an excellent candidate.

10.48am GMT 

Andrea Leadsom, a Conservative, goes next.

Q: What is your view of what needs to happen in the eurozone?

Osborne says this remains a risk to the UK. Very low growth rates in these 
countries are a tragedy for them. But the "tailrisk" posed by the prospect of 
the euro breaking up has lifted.

Structural economic reform is important. But Spain has already introduced 
labour market reform. That is having an effect.

They are constructing a banking union. He spent a "happy" day in Brussels 
discussing this. But it's a slow process.

10.44am GMT 

Q: How are you going to bring this scheme to an end? People will be very 
aggrieved when you try to cancel it.

Osborne says the Treasury has cancelled schemes like this before.

And the scheme is stimulate the emergence of higher loan-to-value products.

Q: But how will you get out? Will there be a taper? A cliff edge could have a 
sharp, negative effect.

Osborne says Help to Buy will end after three years. He will consider how to 
end it.

10.43am GMT 

Andrew Tyrie goes next.

Q: On Help to Buy, what do you say to people who think you are adding vodka to 
the punchbowl?

Osborne says the Bank of England has the power to take the vodka away.

Help to Buy is designed to help people who can afford mortgages, but who 
cannot afford the deposit the banks are asking for.

Q: But what do you say to those who say it will fuel a housing boom?

Osborne says three quarters of those being helped are outside London. And the 
average price being bought is worth £160,000 - less than the national average.

He wants to increase the supply of homes. Planning laws have been relaxed. 
Labour opposed that.

A large social housing programme is underway.

Q: Ministers have gone too far when they say the Bank of England's Financial 
Policy Committee can cancel the scheme.

Osborne says he has not said that.

Q: Your colleagues have.

Osborne says the FPC can stop the scheme being extended. And he has asked it 
to look at the scheme next September.

Q: But the FPC can look at it any time it likes. So what does that mean?

Osborne says it means it can look at it. He set the FPC up. We need to be 
vigilant, he says. "But there is not that issue today."

The OBR says that even by 2018 house prices will be lower in real terms than 
they were in 2007.

Q: So you will stop ministers saying the FPC can stop this scheme. Those 
statements are misleading.

Osborne says the Bank has a powerful advisory role. And it has instruments it 
can use. If the FPC were to provide the Treasury with advice, the Treasury 
would be well advised to follow it.

10.36am GMT 

Brooks Newmark, a Conservative goes next. He asks about youth unemployment.

Osborne says it is too high. There are two parts to this. Part of this is 
cyclical - related to the recession. But there has been a longer-term problem 
too. 

One of the big announcements in the autumn statement was the one lifting the 
cap on university places.That got rid of the "Gosplan" system that operates in 
higher education.

Q: Why did you abolish employers' national insurance for every employee under 
21?

Osborne says he wanted a simple system. He visited a Morrisons this week, 
where they employ lots of young people. They welcomed this move.

10.32am GMT 

Stewart Hosie, the SNP MP, is asking the questions now.

Q: Have businesses and households become complacent about interest rates?

Osborne says he thinks there is quite a good understanding about how the Bank 
of England's guidance works. Survey evidence has shown this. It applies 
particularly in business.

Q: If we could get back to trend growth of 2.5%, someone from the MPC implied 
that would lead to an interest rate of 4 or 5%. Do you agree?

Osborne says it is not for him to say what interest rates should be.

Hopefully Scotland will vote to stay in the UK, he tells Hosie. He hopes 
Scotland will be part of this process.

Q: Is it your expectation that it will rise to 4 or 5%?

Osborne says he is going to give a simple but evasive answer - he does not 
think chancellors should comment on interest rates.
 George Osborne Photograph: /Democracy Live 
10.26am GMT 

My computer crashed a few minutes ago. But I've back now.

Q: You are finance minister of the sixth biggest economy on the planet? How 
much control do you have over global commodity prices?

No control, says Osborne. 

10.13am GMT 

Labour's John Mann goes next.

Q: Why is it fair that a German worker will be able to retire aged 63, but in 
this country a similar worker would have to wait until the age of 69?

Osborne says every country has to make its own decisions. In this country 
Adair Turner's review created a consensus. Labour legislated to put the pension 
age up. 

Q: But how can a German worker, under their coalition agreement, retire at 63?

Osborne says that's a matter for Germany. The government is tying the pension 
age to life expectancy. As far as he knows, that has all-party support. 

10.11am GMT 

Q: Isn't ring-fencing good politics but bad economics?

Osborne says he does not accept that. It's the public's money. They have made 
it clear that things like the NHS are a priority. And economists would say 
education is a good investment.

10.09am GMT 

Tyrie asks about ring-fencing. In the autumn statement, Osborne protected 
local government, HM Revenue and Customs and security and intelligence spending 
from the cuts being imposed on other departments.

Q: Does this mean they are ring-fenced for good?

No, says Osborne. That was just a decision for the autumn statement.

10.06am GMT 

Andrew Tyrie, the committee chairman, opens the hearing.

He thanks the government for the way it worked on the banking bill.

Q: When will the budget be?

On the 19 March next year, Osborne says.

• Osborne announces budget day - 19 March 2014.

10.04am GMT 

George Osborne is giving evidence alongside James Bowler, director for 
strategy, planning and budget at the Treasury.

10.03am GMT 

Here's some fighting talk from John Mann, a Labour member of the Treasury 
committee.
John Mann MP (@JohnMannMP) 
I've got some tough questions for George Osborne at the Treasury Select 
Committee. Watch it here from 10.00:http://t.co/Kzccjw4i8y 
<http://t.co/Kzccjw4i8y>
 <https://twitter.com/JohnMannMP/statuses/411067436922724352> December 12, 2013
 <https://twitter.com/JohnMannMP/statuses/411067436922724352> 
9.59am GMT 

George Osborne questioned by the Treasury committee about the autumn statement

The Commons Treasury is about to start taking evidence from George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne>.

You can watch it here, on Democracy Live. 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/democracylive/21006886>

9.57am GMT 

Chris Grayling, the justice secretary, has stripped G4S and Serco of 
responsibility for electronically tagging criminals.Both companies have 
admitted overcharging the Ministry of Justice. 
<http://news.sky.com/story/1171416/tagging-overcharges-g4s-and-serco-apologise>

Grayling made the announcement in a Commons written statement (pdf). 
<http://www.parliament.uk/documents/commons-vote-office/December%202013/12%20December/17-Justice-OffenderMonitoring.pdf>
 Here's an extract.

The House will recall that I made a statement on 11 July 2013 about 
significant anomalies in the billing practices under the current contracts with 
G4S and Serco. Members will be aware that these matters are now the subject of 
a criminal investigation by the Serious Fraud Office.

My department’s current contractual arrangements with G4S and Serco for the 
delivery of electronic monitoring services are due to expire on 31 March 2014. 
To ensure continuity of service from that point until the new contracts come 
into effect later in 2014, we have signed a contract with Capita to take over 
the management of the existing electronic monitoring services on an interim 
basis. This will mean that management of these services, which are now operated 
by G4S and Serco, will transition to Capita by the end of the current financial 
year. Under these arrangements, Capita will be using the systems and equipment 
of G4S and Serco, but the two companies will no longer have a direct role in 
delivering the service on the ground. 

9.51am GMT 

The primary school league tables for England are out.

Here's the Guardian's story about them. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/dec/12/primary-schools-fail-maths-english-standards>
 And here's how it starts.

More than 4% of England's nearly 17,000 primary schools 
<https://www.google.com/fusiontables/DataSource?docid=1ejUF0JxQ5HE3o4BZGfwDeC0RTNb5JgoWAcAd1Mk>
 failed to meet the government's tougher new standards in the basics of maths 
and English, according to new school league tables published on Thursday

Some 767 schools <https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> failed to 
achieve the government's mandated floor of at least 60% of pupils achieving 
"secondary-ready" levels in reading, writing and maths, and were below progress 
measures in all three subjects.

The tests taken by pupils at the end of the 2012-13 academic year were more 
challenging after the government raised the floor level. Using the new measure, 
834 primaries would have failed to meet the tougher standards in their 2011-12 
results.

A spokesman for the Department of Education (DfE) said: "This government 
brought in higher primary school floor targets with one aim in mind – to drive 
up standards with immediate effect to end years of entrenched failure.

"Schools respond to this challenge. The floor standards we introduced were 
tougher and performance is improving. Heads, teachers and pupils deserve credit 
for meeting the challenge head-on."

The slight improvement was expected after the 2013 results of the key stage 
two (KS2) tests of 11-year-olds – on which the primary tables are based – 
showed a better performance nationally.

Overall, the proportion of pupils achieving a level four result in reading, 
writing and maths at KS2 rose to 76% this year from 75% in 2012.

And here is the page on the Department for Education's website with all the 
data. 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-curriculum-assessments-at-key-stage-2-2012-to-2013>

9.44am GMT 

Here's the key quote from Nick Clegg on MPs' pay.

Myself, David Cameron, Ed Miliband, we are all, unusually in politics, as one 
on this one. We think it is incomprehensible and wholly inappropriate for MPs, 
who are at the end of the day public servants paid for by taxpayers, to have an 
increase in their pay which is completely out of line with the pay restraint 
that exists for millions of other people in the public sector.

9.35am GMT 

Q: Why are Ofsted blaming schools for pupils' bad behaviour? Aren't parents to 
blame?

Clegg says you cannot teach children if the are disrupted by bad behaviour.

But parents have a role to play too. Clegg says he knows of schools employing 
people to visit families and help them get their children to school. This can 
have a dramatic effect.

Parents cannot wash their hands of responsibility for their child when they 
leave them at the school gate.

And that's it. Call Clegg is over.

9.32am GMT 

Q: What do you think about Uruguay legalising marijuana?

Clegg says he supports what Norman Baker is doing about legal highs. 

He does not think it is a simple matter of legalising or not.

He thinks drug addiction should be treated as a health problem, not just a 
crime problem.

The Home Office is reviewing what other countries are doing. We should not 
close our mind to what other countries are doing.

But Clegg says he has never seen legalisation as a "magic wand" solution to 
the drug problem.

9.29am GMT 

Q: Have you ever smacked your children?

No, says Clegg.

Q: And were you smacked as child?

No, says Clegg. But his parents were quite strict.

Q: Should parents be allowed to smack their children?

Clegg says politicians should not provide parenting lessons to people. 
Parenting can be very frustrating. He chooses not to make his children.

Q: What about the occasional smack with a wooden spoon, as Mary Berry [the 
Great British Bake-Off judge] did 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2013/12/10/great-british-bake-off-mary-berry-smacking-children_n_4417390.html>
?

Clegg says he is reluctant to comment. He does not know what happened.

He does not want to get judgmental about what parents do. But of course they 
should not inflict violence on their children, or break the law.

Q: Would you intervene if you saw someone smacking a child in a supermarket?

Clegg says he has pulled his children away from something. Of course parents 
use force like this. But he won't adjudicate on something hypothetical.

9.24am GMT 

Clegg says all party leaders are agreed on MPs' pay.

Public consent matters to MPs more than in almost any other job.

At a time when the government is capping public sector pay at 1%, it would be 
hard, "to put it mildly", to justify paying MPs more.

A pay rise along the lines proposed today would be "incomprehensible".

But this is not set in stone. The proposal needs to be reviewed in 2015.

9.20am GMT 

And while we're on the subject of the Cameron/Obama/Thorning-Schmidt, the 
photographer who took the picture has written an interesting blog about it. 
<http://blogs.afp.com/correspondent/?post/Selfie>

He says Michelle Obama wasn't in a grump. 

Suddenly this woman pulled out her mobile phone and took a photo of herself 
smiling with Cameron and the US president. I captured the scene reflexively. 
All around me in the stadium, South Africans were dancing, singing and laughing 
to honour their departed leader. It was more like a carnival atmosphere, not at 
all morbid. The ceremony had already gone on for two hours and would last 
another two. The atmosphere was totally relaxed – I didn’t see anything 
shocking in my viewfinder, president of the US or not. We are in Africa. 

I later read on social media that Michelle Obama seemed to be rather peeved on 
seeing the Danish prime minister take the picture. But photos can lie. In 
reality, just a few seconds earlier the first lady was herself joking with 
those around her, Cameron and Schmidt included. Her stern look was captured by 
chance.

I took these photos totally spontaneously, without thinking about what impact 
they might have. At the time, I thought the world leaders were simply acting 
like human beings, like me and you. I doubt anyone could have remained totally 
stony faced for the duration of the ceremony, while tens of thousands of people 
were celebrating in the stadium. For me, the behaviour of these leaders in 
snapping a selfie seems perfectly natural.
 That selfie. Photograph: ROBERTO SCHMIDT/AFP/Getty Images 
9.15am GMT 

Clegg says even in death Mandela was acting as a catalyst, enabling people to 
overcome their differences.

Q: Would he have found the fake signer funny?

Clegg says he suspects he would.

9.12am GMT 

Q: There is a picture of you talking to Bill Clinton. And Ed Miliband is 
watching you, and "looking daggers".

Clegg says he knows Clinton a bit. They have met several times. They met in 
London recently, with his wife Miriam, and Clinton recommended a book called 
The End of Power. 
<http://www.amazon.com/The-End-Power-Boardrooms-Battlefields/dp/0465031560> 
Clegg was telling Clinton that his wife had read it.

Nick Ferrari asks Clegg if he should be worried about Clinton recommending a 
book to him called The End of Power. Clegg laughs. No, he says. He is very 
confident of staying in power.

9.08am GMT 

Q: What do you make of Cameron's Mandela selfie?

Clegg says some people are unhappy about it. But it was "friendly, 
lighthearted joking around by the three of them". He would not get too 
censorious, he says. The mood at the event was very celebratory.

Clegg asks the caller what he thinks. The caller says he did not mind it.

Q: Did you feel jealous you were left out?

No, says Clegg. He was sitting in a different section, and did not know what 
was going on.

9.04am GMT 

The first question is about Nelson Mandela's death.

Q: The BBC's coverage was over-powering. On Thursday night it cleared its 
schedules to cover Mandela. Yet there was a horrendous storm going on. 
Shouldn't the BBC have covered that more?

Clegg says he does not think politicians should tell the BBC or other outlets 
how they should run their news. 

But Mandela was extraordinarily unique. It is not surprising the editors 
wanted to devote so much time to him.

9.00am GMT 

Nick Clegg hosts his LBC phone-in

Nick Clegg is about to start his LBC phone-in.

You can listen here. <http://www.lbc.co.uk/>

8.55am GMT 

Sir Ian Kennedy, chair of the Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority, 
has usedan article in the Times (paywall) 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/opinion/columnists/article3946465.ece> to warn 
that it will be a disaster if MPs reject the proposals to increase their pay 
being published by Ipsa this morning.

Here's the Guardian's story about this. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/dec/12/mps-pay-ipsa-disaster-watchdog-warns>

And here's an extract from the article.

Parliament was clear in the wake of the expenses scandal that it was wrong for 
MPs to set their own expenses, salary, pensions and benefits. That remains a 
position hard to argue with. We all know that MPs made a mess of these things 
for decades; the result was a disaster.

We were given the job of tackling this issue independently for a reason. You 
are not independent if all you do is bend to the will of the government or the 
Commons ...

We are in no doubt — MPs’ pay needs a one-off uplift. Whatever measure you 
choose — including international comparisons and historic trends — they all 
lead to the same conclusion: MPs’ pay has fallen behind. It needs to catch up.

We will announce a one-off pay rise. Thereafter MPs’ pay will move with the 
pay of the rest of us. That’s a sensible way forward, which we will implement 
after a further review of conditions in 2015. 
 Sir Ian Kennedy. Photograph: Sarah Lee 
8.45am GMT 

George Osborne delivered his autumn statement a week ago today. Normally the 
media spends at last 48 hours scrutinising it in detail. But that did not 
really happen this year because the announcement of Nelson Mandela's death on 
Thursday night effectively knocked the autumn statement completely off the news 
agenda by Friday morning.

Never mind. Today the Commons Treasury committee will spend the morning 
quizzing Osborne on the small print.

For background, here are a couple of things worth reading.

• The 10-page Commons library note summarising the contents of the autumn 
statement (pdf). <http://www.parliament.uk/briefing-papers/SN06772.pdf>

• An analysis of the autumn statement from Paul Johnson, director of the 
Institute for Fiscal Studies (pdf). 
<http://www.ifs.org.uk/budgets/as2013/openingremarks_AS13.pdf>

I will be covering the hearing in detail.

Here's the agenda for the day.

8.45am: Elizabeth Truss, the education minister, and Boris Johnson, the mayor 
of London, make an announcement on childcare in London.

9am: Nick Clegg hosts his Call Clegg LBC phone-in.

9.30am: The Care Quality Commission publishes details of a national maternity 
survey.

9.30am: Primary school league tables for England are published.

10am: George Osborne gives evidence to the Commons Treasury committee about 
the autumn statement.

10am: The Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority publishes its plans to 
increase MPs' pay. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/dec/11/pay-rise-mp-cameron-unacceptable-ipsa>

2pm: John Bercow, the Commons Speaker, leads tributes to Nelson Mandela at an 
event in Westminter Hall.

2pm: Jeremy Hunt, the health secretary, speaks at a General Medical Council 
conference.

As usual, I’ll also be covering all the breaking political news as well as 
looking at the papers and bringing you the best politics from the web. I’ll 
post a summary at about 1pm and another in the afternoon.

If you want to follow me on Twitter, I’m on @AndrewSparrow. 
<https://twitter.com/AndrewSparrow>
 