
The chancellor’s promise of more cash for the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/25/public-service-winners-and-losers-in-spending-review>
 masks substantial cuts outside the core funding, while the increase fails to 
keep pace with rising demand. The spending review might mitigate some of the 
worst extremes of the immediate crisis, but it will not secure long-term 
sustainability or changes to the way care is delivered.

As Anita Charlesworth, chief economist at the Health Foundation, pointed out, 
substantial areas of critical spending have been stripped out of the definition 
of the NHS and the wider health systemwill suffer a real-terms cut of more than 
20% by 2020-21 
<http://www.health.org.uk/news/health-foundation-responds-government%E2%80%99s-spending-review>
. This includes junior doctor training, health visiting, health education, 
sexual health and vaccinations.

On top of this public health is being hit hard, with a 4% cut every year in 
real terms. The government is also going to consult on whether public health 
spending should be fully funded by business rates.

Views from local government on George Osborne's spending review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/nov/25/views-from-local-government-on-george-osbornes-spending-review>
Government grant to councils will be more than halved by 2020, although the 
Treasury claims this will be covered by increased revenue from council tax and 
business rates. Allowing councils that provide social care to impose a 2% levy 
on council tax to help pay for it will provide some relief, but it is far from 
a solution. As so often, it will be the areas with the highest levels of 
deprivation, and therefore the lowest tax base, that will benefit least from 
this, while they will feel the sharpest pain from the cuts in government grant.

The cumulative effect of all these changes will mean that more people will go 
into hospital, and discharging patients into social care as soon as they are 
ready to leave will continue to be a serious problem.

Capital spending is being cut in real terms, while the imposition of a 0.5% 
payroll tax – a levy on the staff costs of major employers to fund 
apprenticeships – is a new and significant charge.

The core NHS budget will rise by £4.5bn in real terms over the next five 
years. This is less than 1% a year above inflation and means, as theHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Foundation points out, that in 
real terms, health spending per person will be almost unchanged by 2020 
compared with the beginning of the decade, despite the substantial increase in 
need from an ageing population.

What's it like to work in the NHS? Share your experiences
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/nov/24/what-its-like-to-work-in-the-nhs-share-your-experiences>
The front-loading of the increase is welcome and will ameliorate some of the 
worst effects of the current financial crisis in the acute sector. But it takes 
heroic optimism to believe that this will give the NHS the wriggle room to 
reform the way care is delivered to make the current range of NHS services 
sustainable for the long term, notably by moving much more care out of 
hospital. Barely anyone believes the £22bn of efficiency savings assumed in the
Five Year Forward View 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2014/oct/23/nhs-five-year-forward-view-challenge-funding>
 can be delivered, and it is even harder to see how the financial settlement 
will fund aproper seven-day service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/may/18/health-unions-threaten-to-strike-if-seven-day-nhs-means-pay-cuts>
, as the government has again promised.

Perhaps the most striking perspective on health funding comes from looking at 
the GDP figures. The share of our national wealth that we devote to publicly 
funded health will fall from 7.3% this year to an astonishingly low 6.7% by the 
end of the decade. That is the true measure of the value we put on our 
healthcare and puts us well behind many other developed countries.

Overall this is a tough settlement for the NHS. It will not allow the health 
service to deliver the range and quality of care that the public expect and 
deserve. It will provide some short-term relief, but there is a high risk that 
the degradation of the financial position will largely continue. The chancellor 
has given theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> some remission, but 
he is a long way from providing a cure.

Join our network <https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/> 
to read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 