
George Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> will 
continue his argument for devolution to Manchester and the surrounding area as 
he takes up a new job as chair of the Northern Powerhouse Partnership.

The new body, whose creation has been backed by the government, will bring 
together business and local politicians to commission research, share ideas, 
and lobby Whitehall to press ahead with devolution.

'Northern powerhouse' is smoke and mirrors, claim Lib Dems
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/04/northern-powerhouse-is-smoke-and-mirrors-claim-lib-dems>
Osborne would have expected to spend the coming weeks closeted in the 
Treasury, drawing up his autumn statement, but he wassacked by Theresa May when 
she became prime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/14/theresa-mays-decisive-reshuffle-draws-line-under-cameron-era>
 in the wake of the Brexit vote. He could instead find himself lobbying his old 
department on behalf of Manchester.

He said the new role would be a key focus for him in the years ahead. “There’s 
a real excitement now in the north about what we can achieve if we work 
together. I don’t want us to lose that. That’s why I’m so pleased major 
businesses, civic leaders and others have worked with me to create this new 
northern powerhouse partnership. I’m also glad that the government has given 
its support.

“Chairing this new partnership will now be a major focus of my political 
energies. The northern powerhouse is here to stay.”

With his salary cut from a minister’s £134,500 a year to an MP’s £74,962 
overnight, Osborne had already signed up as an after-dinner speaker with a US 
agency.

It had been suggested that May was lukewarm about the northern powerhouse – 
one of a series of devolution deals to city regions involving powerful new 
metropolitan mayors who have been signed by the government in the past two 
years under a plan first mooted by Osborne in 2014.


But she used the phrase in an article in the Yorkshire Post 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/18/theresa-may-northern-powerhouse-yorkshire-cycling-world-championships>
 last month, saying it was central to her plans for a new industrial strategy 
for Britain.

Jeremy Corbyn, Boris Johnson and George Osborne among MPs hit by boundary 
shakeup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/13/corbyn-johnson-and-osborne-among-mps-hit-by-electoral-shakeup>
Writing in the Sun, Osborne said: “It is great that Theresa May has recently 
recommitted her government to the vision we set out. But if we’re going to make 
it happen we can’t just expect Whitehall to do it all. It has to be a team 
effort.”

He said that the new northern powerhouse partnership would “keep asking 
questions about what more we can do to help the North succeed and take a 
greater role in deciding its own future”.

Osborne has decided not to follow his close friend, David Cameron, who 
announced earlier this week thathe would step down from the House of Commons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/12/david-cameron-to-stand-down-as-mp-for-witney>
, after resigning the premiership. Osborne will remain a backbench MP 
supporting causes he believes in – though his Tatton seat is due to disappear 
as part of proposed boundary changes to be implemented by 2020.

Sajid Javid, the communities secretary and a political ally of Osborne, said: 
“This government realises the huge untapped potential of our great northern 
towns and cities. That is why I warmly welcome the launch of the northern 
powerhouse partnership.

“I hope it will become an important part of the debate and help us to do all 
we can to further boost jobs, growth and opportunities in the north of England.”
 