
George Osborne’s drive to boost homeownership has come under fire from a 
former member of the Bank of England’s monetary policy committee.

 The chancellor made helping buyers on to the housing ladder a central theme 
of last week’s autumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/25/george-osborne-unveils-his-bold-plan-to-tackle-housing-crisis>
, announcing what he called a “bold plan to back families who aspire to buy 
their own home”, including an expansion of the help-to-buy subsidised mortgage 
scheme.

But Dame Kate Barker, a housing market expert, told the House of Lords 
economic affairs committee on Tuesday: “I do feel uncomfortable about a set of 
policies that are designed to be supportive of people who are just on the cusp 
of being able to buy, and need nudging over the edge.

“In the US when they did that, it didn’t end well,” she said, alluding to the 
deliberate policies to boost homeownership that contributed to the sub-prime 
mortgage crisis.

George Osborne unveils his 'bold plan' to tackle housing crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/25/george-osborne-unveils-his-bold-plan-to-tackle-housing-crisis>
On help to buy, she said she was supportive when it was first launched, amid 
the credit crisis. But Barker added: “I’m less positive about it as a 
continuing policy – there are many better ways to use the money.”

“We have made the support for people who fall into difficulties with their 
mortgages less good, which seems to me to be worrying.”

Barker carried out a government-commissioned review of housing supply 
<http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/+/http:/www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/barker_review_of_housing_supply_recommendations.htm>
 for Gordon Brown in 2004, which has come to be regarded as the authoritative 
study of the subject, but few of her recommendations were acted on.


In the autumn statement, Osborne promised to back the construction of 400,000 
homes over the next five years, on top of the existing supply, but Barker told 
the Lords committee that a total of up to 300,000 a year might be needed to 
stabilise prices.

New housing supply has already increased, but the 34,250 homes started in the 
three months to September are still 30% below the pre-crisis peak,according to 
the latest official figures 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/477823/House_Building_Release_Sep_Qtr_2015.pdf>
.

Barker’s fellow witness, Martin Wolf, the economist and Financial Times 
commentator, agreed that subsidising homeownership, rather than supporting the 
rental sector, was questionable, saying: “I cannot see any good reason for 
this.”

He said ultimately, the government is likely to have to provide more support 
for low-paid tenants. “To shift support away from rent for this part of society 
is likely to prove in the long run an unsustainable policy.”

Both Barker and Wolf were highly critical of the government’s policy, 
announced before the general election, ofextending right to buy to tenants of 
housing association properties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/17/right-to-buy-deal-backed-by-only-55-of-housing-associations>
.


Osborne slipped social housing's obituary into the autumn statement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2015/nov/27/george-osborne-social-housing-obituary-autumn-statement>
“I think it’s an outrageous policy; I think it’s expropriation,” said Wolf.

He also suggested that planning policy might eventually have to be relaxed, 
and the green belt abolished, to allow housebuilding to expand. “If we’d had a 
green belt policy in 1850 we wouldn’t have had London, and I find London 
infinitely more interesting and enjoyable ... Most of the country is fields, 
most of them not particularly beautiful,” he said.

However, the committee’s third witness, Chris Walker, the head of housing and 
planning at the Policy Exchange thinktank, was more supportive of the 
chancellor’s aim to turn “generation rent into generation buy”.

“It is government saying ‘we will no longer support sub-market rental; we 
believe homeownership should be available to a much wider pool of people’,” he 
said.
 