
George Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> and Nick 
Clegg have been spotted having lunch near Westminster, fuelling speculation 
they may be coordinating efforts to avoid a hard Brexit.

The former chancellor and former deputy prime minister had an often difficult 
relationship in the Conservative-led coalition government, particularly towards 
the end, with Clegg describing Osborne asa very dangerous man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/apr/06/nick-clegg-george-osborne-is-a-very-dangerous-man>
 whose behaviour was “very unattractive, very cynical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/02/nick-clegg-george-osborne-cut-welfare-poorest-boost-tory-popularity>
”.

But the pair appeared to put aside their differences to meet at the Cambridge 
Street Kitchen in Victoria on Tuesday, where they were photographed having a 
glass of wine. A picture and short footage of their meeting was later published 
by LBC.
LBC (@LBC) 
Remain campaigners George Osborne and Nick Clegg spotted meeting in Victoria 
restauranthttps://t.co/Lim5Fsvfty <https://t.co/Lim5Fsvfty> 
pic.twitter.com/5qhbhU00PU <https://t.co/5qhbhU00PU>
 <https://twitter.com/LBC/status/811212101712805888> December 20, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/LBC/status/811212101712805888> 
The restaurant, whose slogan is “Why hello, Pimlico”, is a casual 
gastropub-style venue slightly off Westminster’s beaten track, where a 
beefburger costs £14.50 and dishes such as a soft-shell crab burger and an open 
salt-beef sandwich also feature.

A Lib Dem spokesman would not comment on the subject of the lunch other than 
to say it was private.

Both politicians supported staying in the EU and have decided to remain in 
public life despitelosing their government jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/13/george-osborne-the-unlucky-chancellor-too-wedded-to-austerity>
.

Osborne has not formally taken part in meetings of the Tory MPs pushing May to 
keep the UK close to the single market but is known to be influential behind 
the scenes.

He has repeatedly warned about the potential economic dangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/23/george-osborne-brexit-won-majority-hard-brexit-did-not>
 of a hard Brexit, saying: “What the future tells you at the moment, and what 
financial markets tell you today, is that every time they think Britain is 
going to have a less close relationship with our trading partners in Europe – 
every time there’s a hint from the government or a government minister says 
something like that – then the pound falls and in effect, the world is betting 
against Britain.

“Every time you have thoughtful contributions from members of the government 
saying: ‘Well actually we needsome kind of transition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2016/nov/21/what-is-a-transitional-brexit-deal-and-what-would-it-involve-theresa-may>
, we do need to have something more than the World Trade Organisation rules’ – 
every time you hear something like that – the world bets on Britain.”

Meanwhile, Clegg has taken on the role of Brexit spokesman for the Lib Dems 
and has released a series ofdetailed papers 
<http://www.libdems.org.uk/brexit-challenge> examining issues such as the 
likely impact on food prices and the potential effects of leaving the 
jurisdiction of the European court of justice.
 