
George RR Martin <https://www.theguardian.com/books/george-rr-martin> has 
hailed “an amazing next step in the world of books” as he announced publication 
of a new digital edition of A Game of Thrones, featuring “a world of additional 
content” and an extract from the forthcoming sixth novel in his bestselling 
Song of Ice and Fire series, The Winds of Winter.

A Game of Thrones: Enhanced Edition was released on Thursday on Apple’s iBooks 
<http://apple.co/gameofthrones> to mark the 20th anniversary of the epic 
fantasy novel’s first publication. It offers “a world of additional content”, 
said its publisher HarperCollins, ranging from interactive character maps to 
detailed annotations, character journeys and timelines, family trees and and 
audio clips.

Game of Thrones: an epic publishing story
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/05/game-of-thrones-an-epic-publishing-story-george-rr-martin>
It includes an extract from The Winds of Winter. HarperCollins said the 
excerpt had been briefly published on Martin’s website, but was now available 
only in the new enhanced editions.

“We’re now entering a new period in the history of publishing,” said Martin, 
announcing the new edition. “The digital book gives readers the ability to 
experience all this rich secondary material that had not been possible before. 
These enhanced editions, available only on iBooks, include sigils and family 
trees and glossaries. Anything that confuses you, anything you want to know 
more about, it’s right there at your fingertips. It’s an amazing next step in 
the world of books.”

The enhanced digital edition of the second novel in the series, A Clash of 
Kings, is scheduled for 27 October, while book three, A Storm of Swords is due 
on 15 December. The fourth and fifth books, A Feast for Crows and A Dance of 
Dragons will follow in February and March 2017.

A HarperCollins spokesperson remained tight-lipped about a publication date 
for The Winds of Winter, saying only: “As yet nothing has been finalised 
regarding the publication … but when the book is ready, it will be announced 
throughGeorge’s website <http://grrm.livejournal.com/>.”

Game of Thrones: how will Winds of Winter regain the suspense stolen by the 
show?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/jun/28/game-of-thrones-winds-of-winter-regain-the-suspense-stolen-by-the-show>
In January, Martin revealed that he had not yet finished the novel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/04/george-rr-martin-support-deadline-game-of-thrones-winds-of-winter-a-song-of-ice-and-fire>
, and that it would not be released before HBO aired the sixth season of its 
hit adaptation of his narrative. “Yes, there’s a lot written. Hundreds of 
pages. Dozens of chapters … But there’s also a lot still left to write. I am 
months away still … and that’s if the writing goes well,” Martin said at the 
time.

 