
Osborne & Little, the luxury wallpaper chain owned by the family of former 
chancellorGeorge Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne>, 
says it expects to benefit from the fall in the value of the pound triggered by 
the Brexit vote.

The company said there would be “limited impact” in the short term from 
Britain’s decision to leave the European Union, but if sterling remained weak, 
it would bring a “material benefit” to the business next year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fgeorge-osborne-little-family-business-wallpaper-benefit-brexit-vote-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F875a362d21a7896f971e63dad5e272f1eaddbfc6%2F1513_340_1331_1664%2F1331.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=George%20Osborne's%20family%20firm%20to%20benefit%20from%20Brexit%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fgeorge-osborne-little-family-business-wallpaper-benefit-brexit-vote-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=George%20Osborne%27s%20family%20firm%20to%20benefit%20from%20Brexit%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fgeorge-osborne-little-family-business-wallpaper-benefit-brexit-vote-eu-referendum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F875a362d21a7896f971e63dad5e272f1eaddbfc6%2F1513_340_1331_1664%2F1331.jpg>
 George Osborne said the UK would be permanently poorer after Brexit. 
Photograph: AFP/Getty 
The comments, made in the company’s latest accounts 
<https://beta.companieshouse.gov.uk/company/05794611/filing-history/MzE1ODY1NDQ5OGFkaXF6a2N4/document?format=pdf&download=0>
, will make uncomfortable reading for Osborne, who delivered a series of dark 
predictions about the likely impact of Brexit on UK companies before the 
referendum in June.


He said departure from the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/17/brexit-uk-treasury-leave-eu-referendum>
 would be a “most extraordinary self-inflicted wound”, would leave Britain 
“permanently poorer”, and plunge the country into immediate recession, 
requiring emergency budget measures.


The Osborne & Little board said: “In the short term there will be limited 
impact resulting from the UK leaving the EU, but if exchange rates stay as they 
are, in particular, the exchange rate between sterling and the US dollar, then 
there will be a material benefit in the year ending 31 March 2018.”

This will be a welcome boost for the company, which reported sales of £32.8m, 
down 4% for the year to March 2016. North America is the company’s largest 
market, accounting for £15.8m of sales.

The company said sales in the US were down 9% in local currency during the 
year, but only 2% lower when converted into pound sterling. The further sharp 
weakening in the pound, which tumbled toa 31-year low against the dollar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/oct/04/pound-dollar-low-construction-imf-brexit-business-live>
 on Tuesday, is expected to provide a major boost.

“The majority of the US … turnover is sourced by exports from the UK parent 
company,” the accounts stated. They added that Osborne & Little took measures 
to reduce exposure to currency fluctuations but this was only in the near term.

The company is controlled by Sir Peter Osborne, the former chancellor’s 
father. It reported a pre-tax loss of £377,000.
 