
The German Green party has called on the government of Angela Merkel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/angela-merkel> to fast-track the 
applications of Britons wishing to become German citizens in the light of the 
UK’s vote to leave the EU.


Hard Brexit will cost City of London its hub status, warns Bundesbank boss
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/18/hard-brexit-will-cost-city-of-london-its-hub-status-warns-bundesbank-boss>
Volker Beck, a leading member of the party, told the Bundestag that Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> should “send a signal that Britons 
belong to Europe and to Germany” by allowing the “swift and straightforward 
naturalisation” of British citizens.

The opposition Greens tabled the resolution having already written to the 
government over the summer requesting a reform of the citizenship law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/01/give-britons-fast-track-citizenship-says-germanys-green-party>
 because it said that young Britons in particular who were living and working 
in Germany “need a clear perspective that they can stay” in the event of 
Britain leaving the EU.

A heated debate in the German parliament on Friday revealed the extent to 
which the Brexit vote and the uncertainty surrounding Britain’s future 
relationship with theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> 
continues to vex and anger German politicians across the spectrum.

Beck said that 5,000 Britons had received German citizenship last year and 
there were many others who wished to apply among the more than 100,000 other UK 
citizens living in the country. But many were not eligible, he said, because 
they had not lived in the country for the eight years the current law 
recommended or were not earning the level of income required to prove they 
could support themselves.

Beck called on the German government to “change its spots” and create a 
“modern citizenship law” that would allow people to hold more than one 
citizenship. Currently, this is only possible in exceptional cases.

Once Britain leaves the EU, Britons would be unable to become German citizens 
without first renouncing their British citizenship, hence the Greens’ attempts 
to speed up the process that would allow Britons to become German and remain 
British.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fgermany-green-party-fast-track-british-citizenship-applications%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9babdd6f0eb4c29fd1e018c85d30c3c5e6974096%2F9_0_3483_2090%2F3483.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=German%20MPs%20in%20heated%20debate%20over%20fast-track%20citizenship%20for%20Britons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fgermany-green-party-fast-track-british-citizenship-applications%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=German%20MPs%20in%20heated%20debate%20over%20fast-track%20citizenship%20for%20Britons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fgermany-green-party-fast-track-british-citizenship-applications%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9babdd6f0eb4c29fd1e018c85d30c3c5e6974096%2F9_0_3483_2090%2F3483.jpg>
 Angela Merkel’s conservatives argued against the proposal to fast-track 
British applications for German citizenship. Photograph: Fabrizio Bensch/Reuters
But the proposal was met with stiff resistance by politicians from chancellor 
Angela Merkel’s conservatives.

Stephan Mayer of the Christian Social Union called Beck’s proposal 
“treasonous” and accused him of “pushing a policy of the forced Germanisation 
of Britons in Germany”.

He said that any discussion concerning Brexit was “premature and pointless, as 
long as the negotiations [regarding the conditions of exiting the EU] are still 
ongoing”.

“For the time being we need to view the issue with typical British 
dispassion,” he told parliament.

He said British citizens already “get all the rights they need here, apart 
from being able to vote”.

But Rüdiger Veit of the Social Democrats (SPD) hit back. “It’s not about a 
forced Germanisation of Britons; it’s to do with the fact they’re very welcome 
here and it would be a happy situation if as many of them who want to beome 
German citizens did,” he said.

Tim Ostermann, who is MP for Herford in North Rhine Westphalia, a base for the 
British forces in Germany until last year, said he had not received any 
complaints from British citizens who had chosen to stay in the area that they 
had had any difficulties in acquiring citizenship.

“I never heard from any ex-British soldiers that they had any problems,” he 
said, calling the Greens’ proposal “an overreaction”.

Germany would have “far bigger problems” to deal with than Britons’ 
citizenshiponce the Brexit negotiations began, Detlef Müller of the SPD said, 
adding that Germany and the EU “face extremely complicated negotiations” with 
Britain “even if the blonde and blue-eyed Boris Johnson would like to see it 
differently”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fgermany-green-party-fast-track-british-citizenship-applications%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d3c0891e6520545ea96a7ce925e90e64632bb71%2F0_61_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=German%20MPs%20in%20heated%20debate%20over%20fast-track%20citizenship%20for%20Britons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fgermany-green-party-fast-track-british-citizenship-applications%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=German%20MPs%20in%20heated%20debate%20over%20fast-track%20citizenship%20for%20Britons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fgermany-green-party-fast-track-british-citizenship-applications%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d3c0891e6520545ea96a7ce925e90e64632bb71%2F0_61_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 The German, British and European Union flags fly in Berlin. Photograph: Adam 
Berry/Getty Images 
Marian Wendt of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) said there was a danger 
that British citizens would receive preferential treatment which would put 
other EU members at a disadvantage. “I think a ‘Lex Britannica’ is a very bad 
idea,” he said, adding that he feared Britons would apply for a German passport 
only in order to avoid being a “nicht-Schengen Schlangen Steher” (“having to 
stand in the non-Schengen passport queue”) rather than out of a sense of 
loyalty or true conviction that they wanted to be German.

For well over an hour the MPs debated the issue in often fractious exchanges, 
which also touched on the issues of integrating refugees and easing citizenship 
rules for other nationalities who had been long-term resident in Germany, such 
as Turks.

In a closing address, Barbara Woltmann of the CDU warned that giving special 
treatment to Britons would send out the wrong signal by rewarding the “abuse of 
direct democracy”, in reference to the EU referendum. “After all, charlatans 
persuaded people to make a bad decision based on false information,” she said.


Further reflecting the extent to which the issues surrounding Brexit concern 
the German public, the tabloid Bild marked the three months since the 
referendum byfeaturing a “Brexit Balance” on page two of its Friday edition 
<http://www.bild.de/politik/ausland/brexit/bilanz-nach-3-monaten-47955220,jsPageReloaded=true.bild.html#remId=1537944413782828691>
. It concluded with the warning from leading economist Marcel Fratzscher that 
“the long-term costs of Brexit will probably be much higher than originally 
feared because what is becoming increasingly clear is that there will hardly be 
any compromise on continuing to give the British good access to the single 
market”.

Katrin Göring-Eckardt, chair of the Greens, told the Guardian on the sidelines 
of the debate: “It’s inconceivable that the 107,000 well-integrated Britons in 
Germany would be sent back to Britain ... because of the Brexit tragedy, which 
is why the Greens have tabled this motion.”
 