
While the rest of the world recovers from the great recession of 2008-2009, 
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> is stagnating. Eurozone 
growth is expected to be 1.7% next year. What can be done about it?

One solution is a weaker euro. Earlier this month, the chief executive of 
Airbus called for drastic action to reduce the value of the euro against the 
dollar by about 10%, from a "crazy" $1.35 to between $1.20 and $1.25. The 
European Central Bank (ECB) cut its deposit rates from 0 to -0.1%, effectively 
charging banks to keep money there, but these measures hadlittle effect on 
foreign exchange markets. 
<https://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/exchange/eurofxref/html/eurofxref-graph-usd.en.html>

That is mainly because nothing is being done to boost aggregate demand. The 
UK, US and Japan all increased their money supply to revive their economies, 
with currency devaluation becoming an essential part of the recovery mechanism. 
The ECB's president, Mario Draghi, often hints at QE – last month, he repeated 
that "if required, we will act swiftly with further monetary policy easing" – 
but his perpetual lack of commitment resembles that of Mark Carney, the Bank of 
England governor, whomone former UK government minister recently likened to an 
"unreliable boyfriend" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/24/bank-of-england-unreliable-boyfriend-interest-rates>
.

The ECB's inaction is not, however, wholly responsible for the appreciation of 
the euro's exchange rate. The pattern ofcurrent account imbalances 
<http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/tgm/table.do?tab=table&language=en&pcode=tec00043>
 across the eurozone also plays a large role.

Germany's current-account surplus, the largest in the eurozone, is not a new 
phenomenon. It has existed since the 1980s, falling only during reunification, 
when intensive construction investment in the former eastGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> more than absorbed the country's 
savings. The external surplus has grown especially rapidly since the early 
2000s, and today it remains close to its pre-crisis 2007 level, at 7.4% of GDP.

Now, however, countries previously stricken with deficits are moving into 
surplus, which means the eurozone's current account is increasingly positive. 
Indeed, the eurozone-wide surplus is now expected to be 2.25% of GDP this year 
and next. The eurozone is saving more than it is investing, or, equivalently, 
exporting more than it is importing. This is strengthening its currency.

Back in October 2013, the US Treasury pointed the finger at Germany's 
structural surplus as the source of Europe's woes. Its argument was that if one 
country runs a surplus, another must run a deficit, because the excess savings/ 
exports of the surplus country must be absorbed by another country as 
investment, consumption, or imports.

If the surplus country takes no steps to reduce its surplus – for example, by 
increasing its domestic investment and consumption – the only way the deficit 
country can reduce its deficit is by cutting its own investment and 
consumption. But this would produce a "bad" equilibrium, achieved by stagnation.

Something like this seems to have happened in the eurozone. Germany has 
retained its "good" surplus, whereas the Mediterranean countries slashed their 
deficits by cutting investment, consumption, and imports. Greece's unemployment 
rate soared to nearly 27%, Spain's is almost as high, and Portugal faces a 
banking crisis.

In November 2013 Paul Krugman wrote that, "Germany's failure to adjust 
magnified the cost of austerity" 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/04/opinion/krugman-those-depressing-germans.html?_r=1&>
. Though it "was inevitable that Spain would face lean years as it learned to 
live within its means", Krugman argued, "Germany's immovability was an 
important contributor to Spain's pain".

But Germany rejected this logic. Its current-account surplus was its just 
reward for hard work. Indeed, according to the German finance ministry, the 
surplus is "no cause for concern, neither for Germany, nor for the eurozone, or 
the global economy". Because no "correction" was needed, it was up to the 
deficit countries to adjust by tightening their belts.

John Maynard Keynes pointed out the deflationary consequence of this attitude 
in 1941. Deficit countries with a fixed exchange rate (as is the case in the 
eurozone) are forced to cut their spending, while surplus countries are under 
no equivalent pressure to increase theirs.Keynes's proposed solution 
<http://www.elibrary.imf.org/staticfiles/IMF_History/IMF_45-65_vol1.pdf#page=37>
 to this problem was an international payments system that would force 
symmetric adjustment on both surplus and deficit countries. Persistent 
surpluses and deficits would be taxed at an escalating rate. His plan was 
rejected.

Of course, a creditor country can always help a debtor by investing its 
surplus there. Germany is willing to do this in principle, but insists that 
austerity must come first. The problem is that stagnation ruins investment 
prospects.

China has shown that voluntary adjustment by a surplus country is possible. 
Until recently, the global imbalances problem was centred on China's bilateral 
surplus with the US. China used its excess savings to buy US Treasury bonds, 
which drove down world interest rates and enabled cheap borrowing, permitting 
America to run a vast current-account deficit. The main impact of low interest 
rates, however, was to fuel the housing bubble that burst in 2007, leading 
directly to the 2008 financial crisis.

Since then, China has made great efforts to reduce its external surplus 
<http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/BN.CAB.XOKA.GD.ZS/countries/1W-CN?display=graph>
. At its peak of 10.1% of GDP in 2007, the surplus was larger than Germany's; 
by the end of 2013, it had plummeted to 2% of GDP.

Why was China willing to adjust while Germany is not? Perhaps a key difference 
lies in the fact that Germany has significant political clout over the deficit 
countries with which it trades. Germany was effectively able to force austerity 
upon its neighbours.

That raises an important issue regarding the legitimacy of austerity. Its main 
proponents are creditors, who have much to gain from it (relative to the 
alternative of raising domestic wages and forgiving debts). Creditor-debtor 
conflicts have always been the stuff of monetary politics, and the persistence 
of austerity has set the stage for a new debtors' revolt.

So we will have to rely on Draghi and quantitative easing to save the euro 
from Germany. Money will have to fall from the proverbial helicopter before 
Germany shows any willingness to reduce its surplus.

• Robert Skidelsky, a member of the House of Lords, is professor emeritus of 
political economy at Warwick University
 