
Our commitment to Scott Trust Limited 
<http://www.gmgplc.co.uk/the-scott-trust/> is to ensure the Guardian exists in 
perpetuity.

Given our current challenging financial circumstances, if we are to thrive 
into the future we need to ensure that we grow our digital revenues.

We are already ahead of most the pack in terms of traditional media companies 
transitioning to a digital future, but more needs to be done.

Alongside this imperative, Guardian News & Media also has the desire to be a 
force for good in society, and, as part of that, the commercial departments are 
looking to find innovative, efficient and profitable ways to champion social 
and environmental justice.

At the heart of the commercial strategy is changing the way we think about, 
relate to, and engage with our audience, with the objectives to retain existing 
readers, deepen these relationships as well as encourage new readers and users.

We believe the key to success is the development of our open philosophy. Open 
represents an exchange of ideas, information and opinions, which we believe has 
the power to change the world for the better. Open is at the heart of 
everything we do and drives our editorial vision, digital-first strategy and 
our commercial future.

From a commercial perspective, open is about bringing us closer to our global 
audience because advertisers are also looking to form deeper and more targeted 
relationships with their consumers.

This means moving beyond simple advertising to creating more dynamic and 
engaging sponsored content and events.

In order to protect the Guardian's all-important reputation for independent 
journalism, strict guidelines have been put in place to ensure our readers know 
where we have entered into a commercial relationship. These were recently 
updated to provide even more clarity.

In a complex environment, we don't always get it right. For example, we 
published a promotional supplement paid for by Sri Lankain the same edition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/jun/10/clash-editorial-commercial-sri-lanka>
 as a story detailing claims of torture by the country's security personnel.

Rather than seek to be all things to all people, Guardian News & Media is 
concentrating on attracting and retaining "progressives". Progressives are 
people who embrace new experiences, technology and new ways of thinking.

We aim to build commercial partnerships that engage our audience, support our 
business model and actively do good. That is why we are finding ways to 
monetise the Guardian's unique space to facilitate debate and an exchange of 
ideas.

One example is the development of the Guardian Sustainable Business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/sustainable-business> (GSB) website, which aims 
to support the engagement of business in seeking solutions to the multiple 
challenges of climate change, resource depletion, ecosystem degradation and 
social inequality.

GSB was specifically created for the dual purpose of making money and 
providing high-quality editorial content to sustainability professionals and 
others who are interested in the role of business in society.

Another innovation from GNM is the Select advertising model, which works by 
bringing together the best independent publishers and blogs from across the web 
and helping them monetise their sites by running premium advertising campaigns 
across them. The benefit to GNM is access to excellent content sites and 
extended reach to a quality audience above and beyond theguardian.com users.

The Guardian carries out an annual survey of paper readers and web users as 
part of the Living our Values audit. This includes questions on whether they 
think we should refuse to accept advertising from certain types of companies.

The 2012 result shows a smaller proportion of print readers than in past 
years, Guardian 12% and Observer 12%, who would not object to any specific 
forms of advertising. For theguardian.com visitors, this was 20%, down from 
28%, in 2011.

The type of advertising that most Guardian and Observer readers and users 
would like to see omitted from the paper is for financial institutions involved 
in unethical investment, tax avoidance and mis-selling. Nearly three-quarters 
of readers from both titles objected. Online users also objected most to this 
type of advertising, although at 63% it was slightly lower than their print 
reading counterparts.

High levels of concern were also directed at companies who maintain highly 
damaging environmental practices and fashion brands with unethical labour 
practices. In many cases, the opposition to this type of advertising was in the 
seventy percentile and higher.

These concerns do appear to align with the sense of injustice that many in 
society are feeling currently and the very public anger at the banks.

At the same time, there is a realisation that advertising is essential to the 
financial sustainability of the Guardian, with only 13% of Guardian readers 
saying they were willing to pay more for an advertising-free experience.

However, 41% said that they would be prepared to register and log-in to 
Guardian digital services if a proportion of advertising revenues went to 
charity or community partnership projects.

The Guardian's commercial departments follow advertising industry guidelines 
and also on occasion refuse to carry advertisements or agree to sponsorship 
deals that are felt to strongly contravene our editorial values.

In general terms, however, there is a recognition that the Guardian's job is 
not to act as censor and that it also needs to attract advertising revenues to 
ensure its financial sustainability.

This is made clear in theÂ sustainability vision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainability/sustainability-vision>, which 
states: "We recognise that tensions can arise between our need for advertising 
revenues to sustain our business and being a medium for promoting consumption. 
Our role is neither to hector our readers nor to censor on their behalf. Our 
editorial coverage informs and influences our audience in their choices."

Even though GNM is facing a tough economic climate, the Guardian increased 
overall environmental and ethical revenue for the financial year ending March 
2011.

In fact, revenues from these areas on a like-for-like basis increased by 13%, 
compared with 3% total growth for ads and sponsorship revenues.

GNM's environmental and ethical income has grown to a 5.9% share of total 
revenues. It is worth noting here that we miscalculated the percentage last 
year, stating it at 6.6% rather than the actual 5.4%.

The main reason for this growth has been the expansion of business and 
professional sustainability services.
 