
Our return to Stars Hollow is nearly here. On Friday, Gilmore Girls: A Year in 
the Life will arrive on Netflix, finally (hopefully) satisfying all the 
questions we’ve had about the characters in the show ended in 2007. With all of 
the original cast (exceptEdward Hermann, who died in December 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/dec/31/edward-herrmann-dies-gilmore-girls>
) – plus some new faces – set to appear in the new episodes, we have a lot of 
hope for what’s to come. When Gilmore Girls drew to a close nearly a decade 
ago, Rory was single and on her way to a new job and Lorelei and Luke had 
reunited. But what now? Here are six questions that need to be answered.

I watched Gilmore Girls for the first time – what's all the fuss about?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/22/watching-gilmore-girls-year-in-the-life-as-a-newcomer>
Can Lorelei and Emily get on with each other this time?

Much of the original series was marked by fighting and tension between Lorelei 
Gilmore, played by Lauren Graham, and Emily Gilmore, played by Kelly Bishop. 
The mother-daughterpair never quite got along and it was stressful to watch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/10/gilmore-girls-reboot-idealizes-flawed-lorelai-rory-relationship>
. Sure, they had their differences but now, after all they’ve been through, 
can’t they just hug and make up? Luckily Graham recently revealed toTV Line 
<http://tvline.com/2016/11/14/lauren-graham-gilmore-girls-a-year-in-the-life-interview-lorelai-emily/>
 that some “healing” will happen between the two, especially in light Richard 
Gilmore’s death before the series opens. “The healing that happens between 
Lorelei and Emily is such a long time coming,” Graham said. “And because 
Richard’s absence is such a big part of our story, it really meant a lot to me 
to grow their relationship a little bit.”

Will Kirk get the screen time he deserves?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fgilmore-girls-year-in-the-life-plot-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9ad6aae03e79c6e2dee3813ff6bcf5886792a19%2F0_103_2752_1652%2F2752.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gilmore%20Girls%3A%20A%20Year%20in%20the%20Life%20%E2%80%93%20six%20questions%20that%20need%20to%20be%20answered&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fgilmore-girls-year-in-the-life-plot-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gilmore%20Girls%3A%20A%20Year%20in%20the%20Life%20%E2%80%93%20six%20questions%20that%20need%20to%20be%20answered&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fgilmore-girls-year-in-the-life-plot-questions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9ad6aae03e79c6e2dee3813ff6bcf5886792a19%2F0_103_2752_1652%2F2752.jpg>
 Comic relief … Sean Gunn (right). Photograph: Br/Everett/Rex/Shutterstock 
Let’s be real: Kirk (Sean Gunn) was the best part of the original Gilmore 
Girls. His ridiculous antics offered a continual sense of comic relief, even 
when the drama between the other characters was high. His dance from season six 
remains ingrained in every viewer’s mind, as well as his incredible short film 
from season two. There’s such an authentic, unabashed sense of life in the 
character, as silly as he can be, and we want to see him in every episode of 
the new chapters. And maybe he has a follow-up dance to his original.

How much coffee can one town drink?

The show will surely take viewers back to Luke’s infamous diner throughout the 
four mini-movie episodes and he will likely have some quips about the ladies’ 
obsession with caffeine. Maybe he’ll have some informed opinions about the “
java gene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/29/drink-coffee-drinking-habits>
” or the claim thatthree to five cups a day can prevent heart attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/mar/03/coffee-drinking-may-prevent-heart-attacks-study>
? If you’re planning to binge the series, I recommend grabbing a mug (or pot) 
and settling in.

Will Rory get a love story?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fgilmore-girls-year-in-the-life-plot-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef302ee6d60be40213e3b89e5a280c3ea1d017db%2F0_0_2867_1721%2F2867.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gilmore%20Girls%3A%20A%20Year%20in%20the%20Life%20%E2%80%93%20six%20questions%20that%20need%20to%20be%20answered&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fgilmore-girls-year-in-the-life-plot-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gilmore%20Girls%3A%20A%20Year%20in%20the%20Life%20%E2%80%93%20six%20questions%20that%20need%20to%20be%20answered&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fgilmore-girls-year-in-the-life-plot-questions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef302ee6d60be40213e3b89e5a280c3ea1d017db%2F0_0_2867_1721%2F2867.jpg>
 The Bledel test … does Rory need a love interest? Photograph: Saeed Adyani/AP 
Rory, played by Alexis Bledel, doesn’t need a man. She’s proven that as a 
character over the course of the original series, but that doesn’t mean that we 
don’t want to see her happy.Netflix <https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> 
has confirmed that all of Rory’s love interests – Dean, Jess, Logan – will be 
returning to the new episodes. Whether she’ll actually end up with one of them 
(please not Dean) is another question. Or maybe there’s a new guy in Rory’s 
future. Jess has always been a fan favorite, probably because he respected 
Rory’s intelligence in a way her other suitors didn’t, but does he have his 
life together in a way where he can really be there for her? So let’s hope for 
the best for Rory (not Dean) and cross our collective fingers that she gets 
success both at home and in her career.

Will the writers’ room retain the witty banter?

Gilmore Girls is famous for the speed of its dialogue and its esoteric wit 
(remember “Oy, with the poodles already”?). The trailer for the new season 
makes it clear that there is a lot of rapid-fire chat between the characters, 
which could be ideal for the age of Twitter where zingers can become internet 
memes quicker than you can say “crying Michael Jordan”. So please, Amy 
Sherman-Palladino, give us some new quotable lines. Twitter is ready.


Can we get a happy ending?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fgilmore-girls-year-in-the-life-plot-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa61976afd8349c8dec3be43660ba0c9765c558c3%2F0_103_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gilmore%20Girls%3A%20A%20Year%20in%20the%20Life%20%E2%80%93%20six%20questions%20that%20need%20to%20be%20answered&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fgilmore-girls-year-in-the-life-plot-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gilmore%20Girls%3A%20A%20Year%20in%20the%20Life%20%E2%80%93%20six%20questions%20that%20need%20to%20be%20answered&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fgilmore-girls-year-in-the-life-plot-questions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa61976afd8349c8dec3be43660ba0c9765c558c3%2F0_103_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
 Wouldn’t it be great if you just got along? … Gilmore Girls: A Year in the 
Life. Photograph: Saeed Adyani/AP 
The world of Gilmore Girls is one of lightheartedness and positivity, even 
when there’s drama or fighting. It’s the sort of show you watch when the real 
world gets dark and you need a respite. Stars Hollow is a town we’d all love to 
inhabit and through these episodes we’ve been able to. So as the story of Rory 
and Lorelei and Emily continues, we want to see them happy. Gilmore Girls is 
not The Sopranos, so there’s no reason for an ambiguous fade to black. In 
seeing these women happy, we’re happy, and that’s important in today’s world. 
Different TV shows fill different boxes for the viewers and Gilmore Girls tells 
us: “It’s going to be OK.” What that happy ending is could be a lot of things, 
but we want to see everyone stroll off into the sunset – at least until Netflix 
green-lights more episodes.
 