
Is the craft beer “revolution” over yet? For the past four or five years I’ve 
been plaintively asking this question in the same tone as a toddler in the back 
seat. Now it seems that every time I head to the pub I’m confronted by a row of 
hand-whittled taps. My pleas are becoming more desperate.

Craft beer is easy to hate. Most of it tastes bad. Beer snobs are phenomenally 
irritating, often even worse than the narky farmers’ market set or the paleo 
herd. Hops connoisseurs are so annoying that there are published guides on how 
not to be one, but theguides themselves 
<http://adequateman.deadspin.com/how-to-be-a-beer-enthusiast-without-being-a-beer-asshol-1679752627>
 contain bits like this:

What craft beer can teach the brewery big boys
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/feb/20/craft-beer-movement-big-breweries>
Also, lager has had its good name besmirched by a long association with shitty 
American macrobrews, all of which have to be lagers, and all of which would be 
just as gross if they were ales.

Such is the power of snobbery that in the course of explaining how not to be a 
“beer asshole,” the writer refers to beers he doesn’t like as shitty and gross. 
Co-organiser of last year’s Sip & Savour beer tasting, Michael Ward,described 
the event as 
<http://www.altmedia.net.au/sip-savour-craft-beer-is-a-conversation/98885> “a 
chance to really learn about beer – about craft beer that is, not the 
mass-produced drain water that goes by the same name.” Case closed, beer nerds.

But the worst part is that craft beer is un-Australian. We have a fairly 
specific kind of beer drinking culture, and it’s ill at ease with the kind of 
mouth-puckering, overly flavoursome beers favoured by the crafty set.

When I go to the pub I want to talk to my friends about their lives, our jobs, 
politics, funny things we saw on public transport that day. Ward says that 
“craft beer is a conversation”, which really gets to the heart of the matter: I 
don’t want to have a conversation with my beer, I want to have a conversation 
with my mates.

Combined with our loose culture of buying rounds, this “beer-as-backdrop” 
phenomenon is why it’s important for tap beers to be sessionable and relatively 
inexpensive. Beer blogger Martyn Cornell’sexploration of sessionability 
<https://zythophile.wordpress.com/2009/10/27/the-mystery-of-sessionability/> 
pinpoints the crucial difference between a “craft beer” kind of beer and what 
I, from an Australian perspective, would call a “normal beer”:

What makes a good session beer is a combination of restraint, satisfaction and 
‘moreishness’. Like the ideal companions around a pub table, a great session 
beer will not dominate the occasion and demand attention; at the same time its 
contribution, while never obtrusive, will be welcome, satisfying and 
pleasurable ...

Some craft beers fit this bill, but many are demanding in flavour and overly 
hoppy 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/life/drink/2013/05/hoppy_beer_is_awful_or_at_least_its_bitterness_is_ruining_craft_beer_s_reputation.html>
. Their chunderous aftertaste leaves you with room-clearing beer breath and no 
desire to go back for a second drink. I’m not alone in this opinion. David 
Chang, founder of the Momofuku restaurant group and cheap beer enthusiast,gets 
it <http://www.gq.com/life/food/201410/david-chang-cheap-beer>:


I don’t want to have a conversation with my beer, I want to have a 
conversation with my mates.

See, when a waiter asks me what I want to drink, I respond, ‘What is your 
lightest, crappiest beer?’ I’m very direct about my preference. [...] I am not 
being falsely contrarian or ironic in a hipsterish way. This is something that 
I genuinely feel: I do not want a tasty beer.

They’re also expensive, which means the price of finding one that doesn’t 
taste like licking a compost heap is too damn high (unless someone is giving 
them to you for free, which should be the only legal form of beer evangelism). 
This point can be lost on craft beer nerds, who are either higher income 
earners or so obsessed with their beer hobby that they can’t imagine why anyone 
would pay less exacting attention to the fizzy brown stuff they drink to give 
themselves a buzz.

Order a VB or a Reschs around one of these people (or worse, buy them one) and 
expect them to drink it, and you’re at a high risk of having the entire 
discussion become a beer education session. Since it’s become more socially 
acceptable to drink craft beer, the incidence of these hostile conversational 
takeovers has increased exponentially. If beer snobbery were perceived as a bit 
weird, like cheese enthusiasm or wine appreciation, we wouldn’t have this 
problem. Everyone drinking $4 schooners of freezing cold classless bitter would 
be free to talk about other things, all of them far more interesting.

Craft beer culture must die, or at least stop taking over all the pubs where I 
like to go. If it were contained to its own small bars where I never drink, 
it’d just be another niche subculture, where it belongs. Instead, it’s being 
relentlesslyhand-pumped 
<http://www.au.timeout.com/melbourne/bars/features/2610/hand-pumped-ales> down 
our throats. Give me cheap beer, or give me sobriety.
 