
Oh, but I had such high hopes for The Young Pope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/03/the-young-pope-review-jude-laws-sleek-pontiff-shines-in-sorrentinos-twin-peaks>
, the new drama series that starts next week on Sky Atlantic. The early signs 
were so promising. News leaked out in bits, each more deliciously risible than 
the last:Jude Law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/video/2016/sep/03/jude-law-the-young-pope-extended-trailer-video>
 to play a young pope! Called Lenny Belardo before the white smoketurns him 
into Pius XIII 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/15/the-young-pope-jude-law-as-the-first-american-pope>
! Who drinks Diet Coke Cherry for breakfast and was raised by a nun – played by 
Diane Keaton! The stage was set for a masterpiece of fibrillating absurdity. 
“Catholic Dynasty!” I thought, and hugged myself as rumours of a £3m budget per 
episode started to swirl. “Vatican Gossip Girl!”

The Young Pope review: Jude Law's sleek pontiff shines in Sorrentino's Twin 
Peaks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/03/the-young-pope-review-jude-laws-sleek-pontiff-shines-in-sorrentinos-twin-peaks>
In these troubled times our need for perfect trash TV is greater than ever, 
but in vain do I scroll through the terrestrial and cable menus, Netflix, 
Amazon Prime and the rest. Hope rises and is quickly dashed. Last year’sThe 
Royals <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-royals>, for example, was 
swollen with possibilities. A modern royal family headed by QueenElizabeth 
Hurley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/mar/26/liz-hurley-queen-helena-the-royals-posh-people-on-tv>
 and KingVincent Regan <http://the-royals.wikia.com/wiki/Vincent_Regan>? BRING 
IT. Alas, la Hurley, as ever, doomed the venture by being so bad she was bad, 
and Regan’s eyes flashed so unmistakably with the message “Call my agent! For 
the love of God, call my agent!” that it was hard to lose yourself in the 
fiction. Even Joan Collins’ arrival in a purple satin dress as Hurley’s mother,
the grand duchess of Oxford 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/tvandradio/11469644/12-things-we-know-about-The-Royals.html>
 (yes!), opining that: “You have failed as a wife, as a mother, as a daughter 
and – most devastatingly of all – as a queen”, couldn’t save things.

More recently, there’s Designated Survivor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/21/designated-survivor-review-kiefer-sutherland>
. Itshigh-concept 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/sep/30/designated-survivor-kiefer-sutherland-jack-bauer>
 – US government wiped out by bomb, mild-mannered lowest member on the cabinet 
totem pole Tom Kirkman (played by Kiefer Sutherland not playingJack Bauer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/13/24-legacy-fans-rejoice-jack-bauers-gone-but-the-new-show-has-thrown-us-a-brilliant-bone>
) is suddenly president – looked like a winner. But it hasn’t run with any of 
the glorious possibilities offered by the set-up. Instead, Kirkman keeps doing 
things like asking his bellicose generals to be a bit surer of their facts 
before sending in troops, and making sure he gets back to his family in time 
for supper every night. Not the kind of gorgeous nonsense I’m looking for.

And nor, it turns out, is The Young Pope. The first episodes were screened at 
theVenice film festival <https://www.theguardian.com/film/venicefilmfestival> 
and got rave reviews. It turns out thatPaolo Sorrentino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/paolo-sorrentino>, maker of shiny-bladed 
satire on Italian politics Il Divo and the clever, ravishingThe Great Beauty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-great-beauty>, has signally failed to 
give in to any of his baser instincts. His young pope is an illiberal ideologue 
who wants to funk absolutely nothing up but restore the power, mystique and 
murky glory of the church by dragging it back to the doctrinal purity of the 
past.

Great. Another quality drama choking up our watchlists. Oh, God of crap TV, 
why hast thou forsaken us?

Jean’s soap skill
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fgive-us-trash-tv-young-pope-jude-law%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F240b3bf0c1651732e32d266f03f8b85588f583cb%2F505_179_2711_1627%2F2711.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Give%20us%20this%20day%20some%20trash%20TV.%20This%20Young%20Pope%20is%20way%20too%20pious%20%7C%20Lucy%20Mangan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fgive-us-trash-tv-young-pope-jude-law%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Give%20us%20this%20day%20some%20trash%20TV.%20This%20Young%20Pope%20is%20way%20too%20pious%20%7C%20Lucy%20Mangan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fgive-us-trash-tv-young-pope-jude-law%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F240b3bf0c1651732e32d266f03f8b85588f583cb%2F505_179_2711_1627%2F2711.jpg>
 ‘We didn’t realise back then how good soap actors were.’ Photograph: 
ITV/Rex/Shutterstock 
Staying with the world of television for a moment, let us pay our respects to 
actor Jean Alexander, who hasdied at the age of 90 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/14/jean-alexander-who-played-coronation-streets-hilda-ogden-dies>
. She played of course (from 1964 to 1987) the Rovers Return charlady Hilda 
Ogden, an inveterate gossip in curlers and headscarf, and although not quite a 
battleaxe (despite making husband Stan’s life traditionally miserable), always 
ready to do screeching battle with anyone or anything that crossed her.

You believed in her so absolutely that it was always a shock to see Alexander 
“in real life”, without curlers or pugnacious expression, and hear her normal 
voice. We didn’t realise back then how good soap actors were, because in the 
days before reality shows and papped photos of anyone lower than Princess Di, 
we never saw the joins. Perhaps sometimes letting daylight in on magic lets you 
appreciate it more. Not often – but sometimes.

Book ends

We are moving house and – unless science in the next three weeks comes up with 
a way of storing them on the ceiling – I have to get rid of literally half my 
books. It is tearing at my soul and I cannot speak rationally about it. Please 
just send help, ideally in the form of a Tardis lined with Billy bookcases.
 