
Global markets have ended a difficult month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/24/stock-markets-world-financial-crisis-oil-china>
 on a stronger note after the Bank of Japan stepped in to boost its economy with
negative interest rates <https://www.theguardian.com/business/interest-rates>.

However, weak economic growth figures in the US underscored the scale of a 
global slowdown that has rattled investors.

Policymakers at Japan’s central bank stunned markets with a narrow vote to 
impose a 0.1% fee on deposits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/29/bank-of-japan-shocks-markets-by-adopting-negative-interest-rates>
 left with the Bank of Japan (BoJ) – in effect a negative interest rate. The 
central bank was spurred into action as volatile markets, flagging global 
growth and a downturn in China threatened major economies around the world.

In the US, news that the economy barely grew in the final three months of 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/29/us-economic-growth-slows-consumer-spending>
 prompted speculation that its central bank would rein in plans to raise 
interest rates this year, having tightened borrowing costs for the first time 
in almost a decade in December. GDP rose at an anaemic annual rate of 0.7% as 
consumers and businesses cut back on spending, while US exports were hurt by 
weaker overseas markets.

Rob Carnell, economist at ING Financial Markets, said: “All in all, these GDP 
data support the sense given by recent monthly numbers that theUS economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/useconomy> lost momentum into the end of 
2015. We are struggling to see how this story is reversed in the coming 
quarters.”

Stock market investors were cheered by the prospect of US interest rates 
rising at a slower pace and by the Japanese move, which followed the similarly 
aggressive precedent set by theEuropean Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/05/negative-interest-rates-european-central-bank>
 (ECB) in June 2014. The negative rate is designed to encourage commercial 
banks to use excess reserves – which they normally keep with the central bank – 
to lend to businesses instead.


The radical intervention provided an immediate boost to stock markets around 
the world after a dramatic start to the year that saw trillions of dollars 
wiped off their value in a matter of days. On Friday, the FTSE 100 in London 
closed up 2.6% at 6,084, to be back within a whisker of its starting level for 
2016 of 6,242. That rise was mirrored around European bourses and followed a 
rally in Asian stock markets, where Japan’s Nikkei jumped 2.8% to a two-week 
high. At the time of the London close, Wall Street was also higher, with the 
Dow Jones industrial average up 1.7%.

Chinese shares also rallied following the Japanese rate move but still 
suffered their biggest monthly fall for seven years. The Shanghai Composite 
Index has lost 22.6% since the start of the year.


The surprise negative rates decision came just days after the BoJ’s governor, 
Haruhiko Kuroda, suggested he had dismissed any drastic easing measures to 
boost business confidence.


On Friday, the bank said it had not ruled out a further cut. “The BoJ will cut 
the interest rate further into negative territory if judged as necessary,” it 
said in a statement.

It said the move was intended to lessen the risk to Japanese business 
confidence from turbulence in the global economy, a week after data showed the 
Chinese economy hadgrown at its slowest pace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/19/china-economy-grows-at-slowest-pace-in-25-years-latest-gdp-figures-show>
 for a quarter of a century in 2015.

The ECB held back from injecting more electronic cash into markets at its 
meeting this month but it too fired up share prices with a promise to consider 
more action in March.

The prospect of central banks pumping more stimulus into a struggling global 
economy has also helped stabilise oil prices. Brent crude, which earlier in 
January hit a 13-year low below $28 a barrel, stood at about $33.86 on Friday. 
It is still down 30% from a year ago.

Highlighting global unease about the global outlook following China’s 
slowdown, gold prices have gained almost 5% in January.

Friday’s estimate of US GDP from the Commerce Department was less than half 
the 2% annual growth rate in the third quarter and was the weakest showing 
since a severe winter reduced growth to a 0.6% annual rate in the first quarter 
of 2015.

Economists cautioned that this early estimate could yet be revised but said it 
still pointed to global headwinds buffeting the world’s biggest economy and 
suggested the USFederal Reserve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/federal-reserve> would not go ahead with 
all four interest rate rises slated for this year. Some said the latest signs 
of a US slowdown left the US central bank looking unwise after December’s rate 
rise.

“The GDP growth slowdown sheds a rather critical light on the Fed’s decision 
to raise interest rates in December,” said Nina Skero, economist at the Centre 
forEconomics <https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics> and Business 
Research.

“For the sake of credibility, it is unlikely that the Fed will reverse its 
December decision, but rates are likely to stay at their current level until 
2017.”

 