
There’s no denying that, according to the traditional arbiters of taste and 
decency, some pop culture is more equal than others. Mark Rylance mooching 
about in culottes in Wolf Hall: thumbs up. Sid Owen interpretive dancing “not 
waving but drowning” on Strictly: thumbs down. You can understand the fears. To 
admit that this sort of delicious tripe is a legit contributor to culture would 
be to admit some dark truths about ourselves. To some, the ascent of reality 
TV, more specifically the speed with which a vajazzle entered the public 
consciousness, was proof that all of society’s mistakes had come home to roost. 
It was decisive evidence that we’re a nation of deranged babies, spewing empty 
aspirations all over the place, and are all really, really thick to boot. 
Whether or not it’s true (it is), I would like to suggest that pure delicious 
tripe like Towie makes every bit as valid a contribution to the culture as Adam 
Curtis banging on about something poetic over some old videotapes.

Gogglebox is one of the rare shows that people of all brows can happily 
consume. By now, two years and six series into the show, we’re familiar with 
the format. A cast of a dozen or so families, partners and friends are filmed 
watching television over a week while, hunched over a laptop in the spare 
bedroom, a production team collect their candid, funny and telling reactions 
for us to enjoy. It’s a kind of televisual Mo Mowlam, holding the hand of every 
cultural tribe, consoling us all with the presence of two important things: the 
first, a concept so dumbed-down it borders on sinister; the second, the 
stripped back, “humanity at its truest” air of an anthropological study – 
something the OG, Big Brother, lost years ago.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fgogglebox-everyones-favourite-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441205057523%2F859c20cf-1480-4842-8b46-14d3f5dcc2c3-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gogglebox%3A%20why%20watching%20people%20watching%20TV%20never%20gets%20old&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fgogglebox-everyones-favourite-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gogglebox%3A%20why%20watching%20people%20watching%20TV%20never%20gets%20old&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fgogglebox-everyones-favourite-show%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441205057523%2F859c20cf-1480-4842-8b46-14d3f5dcc2c3-1020x612.jpeg>
 Jenny and Lee. Photograph: Jude Edginton 
As a show becomes well-loved, casting becomes ever more important. New 
families feel like big awkward cuckoos in the nest at the best of times, but 
introduce a duff one and they’re resented by the nation for ever. So far, 
production company Studio Lambert has barely put a foot wrong. I love the 
new-ish Malones, comprised of Ma and Pa, a hot man-bunned son and several 
large, soppy Rottweilers who lumber around the family like sleek, 14st sloths. 
June and Leon, the seventysomething couple from Liverpool, are essentially the 
adoptive grandparents to the nation, thanks in part to Leon’s skill at 
summarising the character of pundits and politicians (“Well, he’s a dickhead”). 
Personally speaking, my greatest interest lies in seeing Amy Tapper grow up, 
become PM and install huge screens showing round-the-clock ITVBe, making it 
mandatory viewing for her subjects. The 14-year-old north Londoner, one of the 
show’s best characters, is usually to be found horizontal in a onesie on the 
family’s three-piece suite. But the best thing Amy does is to remind us – 
HAC-tually – that it’s nice to snuggle up to your mum while gawping at 
something untaxing. This can be taken in a literal sense, but also in a kind of 
mind-blowing Jungian universal truth way that I think you’ll agree quite suits 
the show’s metascape.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fgogglebox-everyones-favourite-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441205188834%2Ff50c5311-470c-489b-b89e-a6c7e6cabc03-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gogglebox%3A%20why%20watching%20people%20watching%20TV%20never%20gets%20old&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fgogglebox-everyones-favourite-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gogglebox%3A%20why%20watching%20people%20watching%20TV%20never%20gets%20old&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fgogglebox-everyones-favourite-show%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441205188834%2Ff50c5311-470c-489b-b89e-a6c7e6cabc03-1020x612.jpeg>
 Bill and Josef. Photograph: Jude Edginton 
This is stellar stuff, something that hasn’t passed Bafta by (they gave it a 
gong for best reality and constructed factual programme last year). What 
Gogglebox proves is that, given a chance, human nature isn’t all that bad. Its 
stars aren’t the kind you’d find on proper reality TV. While Made In Chelsea 
may force you to watch Spencer bleating about having no control over which 
beautiful waifish toff he ruts with, we watch the Gogglebox cast discussing 
getting their pets neutered. Instead of showing us as shallow and 
individualistic, Gogglebox tells us that what’s important is watching stupid TV 
with your best friend(s) and a large Pepperoni Passion. Cue comedic and 
deserved retching sounds, green-gilled emojis etc at this flagrant employment 
of earnestness. There we go –Gogglebox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/gogglebox> will do that to you.

Friday 11 September, 9pm, Channel 4
 