
Like many of my best and most bizarre adventures, it wasn't even my idea in 
the first place. It began with a phone call from Bernie Corbett at the Writers' 
Guild.

"The government's setting up this new outfit called Ofcom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom> and they're looking for volunteers 
from the audience to advise on programme content. We think there should be a 
writer on it and..." I finished the sentence, as I often do with Bernie, 
"...I've got the right blend of world-weary wisdom, regional roots and cute 
jokes."

"You don't have to do it, but if you do, there's an ad in today's Guardian." 

We emailed for details. The information, when it arrived, was from a company 
called Saxton Bampfylde Hever of Guildford, part of the Amrop Hever Group. The 
forms weren't too onerous but they did contain a couple of short, sharp shocks 
plus one ghastly word: generalists. That's what they were looking for: 
generalists who, apparently, would be paid 12 grand a year to attend monthly 
meetings with a bit of homework thrown in.

The two shocks were that I had to submit a detailed CV and nominate a couple 
of referees to confirm that I was totally splendid, clean-limbed and devout. 
When I was at school the man next door used to do this for me.

As for the CV, I'd never written one in my life, because I haven't had a 
proper job in 43 years. Would they want to know about my six O-levels, three 
A-levels and my university career in Newcastle - Bachelor of Architecture 
(Failed)? We decided to fudge the early years and focus on the adult 
achievements: beat them over the head with The Barchester Chronicles, 
Beiderbecke, A Very British Coup and Baftas.

We threw in a couple of honorary degrees and a visiting professorship to add a 
little gravitas to the package, and sent the bundle off to Guildford. My 
referees - and I have to say they were both amused by the request - were Sir 
Jeremy Isaacs and Anthony Minghella. For God's sake, if you can't trust a 
knight of the realm and an Oscar-winning commoner, who can you trust?

The Dear John arrived on April 8. It explained that my details had been 
carefully studied but... "we will not be able to take forward your application. 
May I assure you that this is not a reflection on your ability to carry out 
this role but on the existence of a small number of individuals whose mix of 
skills and experience fits our client's requirements even more closely than 
yours."

On the face of it, it seemed a decent, properly concerned letter from Imelda 
Trafford of Saxton Bampfylde Hever of Guildford until I studied the text more 
carefully. It had been signed on her behalf by Belinda Beck, also, presumably, 
of SBH of G.

"I didn't even get to the interview stage and I'd got this great joke lined up 
about Gerald Kaufman. Is it because I is old?" I asked my wife.

"More than likely, dear," she said. "Or it may be your trade union background. 
Or the fact you resigned from the Labour party over Iraq. Or it might just be 
possible that there are people in the world whose skills and experience fit 
their client's requirements even more closely than yours. Try not to worry 
about it."

The following day I wrote in reply: 

"Dear Imelda Trafford, 

"Thank you for your letter of April 7, telling me that my skills and 
experience don't quite fit your client's requirements in relation to Ofcom's 
Shadow Content Board.

"Rejection is a professional reality for any freelance writer. In my time I've 
been shown the door, metaphorically, by some of the most famous names in the 
drama business, either side of the Atlantic. I've also been embraced by quite a 
few, as you'll see from my CV. So why did your letter rankle so?

"It's very simple. It wasn't a letter. It was a mailshot. My bet is that 
everybody who didn't make the shortlist was sent the same letter, and the no 
doubt patient and long-suffering Belinda Beck signed them all on your behalf.

"My problem is that in the past I've always known who was doing the rejection. 
This time I don't and am left to wonder, for example, who are Saxton, Bampfylde 
and Hever? How do you pronounce Bampfylde? Who is or are the Amrop Hever Group? 
Is Amrop a person or an acronym? What qualifications do any of them have to be 
adjudicating on matters relating to the future of broadcasting in this country? 
I even wonder, mischievously, how much they are being paid for this work? 
Though why this should be mischief I'm not quite sure, since it should be a 
matter of public record and, fair's fair, I did tell you how much I earn in an 
average year.

"Hand on heart, I'm not being a bad loser. But the people who asked me to put 
my name forward will want to know these answers and I'm sure we are all 
dedicated followers of the fashion for transparency in matters of public 
interest.

"With best wishes to you and, of course, to Belinda." 

Subsequently the names of the chosen generalists were released, headed by 
Jonathan Edwards. Obviously if you're looking for a Christian triple-jumper, 
he's your man and he seems a lovely fellow with a commendable passion for 
Tyneside.

His committee, at a cursory glance, appears to combine the elements that make 
for a balanced focus group in Chairman Tony's New Model Britain.

But what rankles is that after a month I still haven't heard from Imelda or 
Belinda, with answers to my highly impertinent, and therefore pertinent, 
questions. I've even thought of new and crucial questions: if SBH of Guildford 
are head-hunters, who hunted for them? And who hunts the hunters of the 
head-hunters?

"I'm inclined to shop them to the Guardian," I said to my wife over breakfast. 

"Why not? Have a second cup of coffee first." 

Mind you, it's probably my fault for not including the O-levels and A-levels. 

Â© Alan Plater <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alanplater> 2003
 