
When this year’s Strictly Come Dancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/strictly-come-dancing> lineup was 
announced in September, no one could have predicted that former shadow 
chancellor Ed “Glitter” Balls would become the star of this year’s dancefloor. 
He was Strictly filler, there to pad out the lineup and throw those who looked 
and danced the part into sharp relief. He would be another Ann Widdecombe or 
John Sergeant, plodding through the motions with grim determination, eyes 
beseeching the public to end this weekly misery.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fed-balls-strictly-come-dancing-best-bits%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad22a60dbc6bf1b60bf6972d2c8dc8fd8d0044ba%2F0_0_3500_2334%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Goodbye%2C%20Ed%20Glitterballs%20%E2%80%93%20here%20are%20your%20Strictly%20best%20bits&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fed-balls-strictly-come-dancing-best-bits%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Goodbye%2C%20Ed%20Glitterballs%20%E2%80%93%20here%20are%20your%20Strictly%20best%20bits&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fed-balls-strictly-come-dancing-best-bits%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad22a60dbc6bf1b60bf6972d2c8dc8fd8d0044ba%2F0_0_3500_2334%2F3500.jpg>
 If there’s one thing Strictly fans love, it’s a trier … Ed Balls and Katya 
Jones. Photograph: Guy Levy/BBC/PA 
But instead, he has been something of a revelation. Week after week we’ve 
watched his footwork, timing and performance level improve, as he and his 
professional partnerKatya Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/18/katya-jones-ambition-behind-team-glitterballs-ed-balls-strictly>
 have pulled off some of the most entertaining Strictly dances in years. Each 
one has been delivered with bags of personality and a truckload of effort. Ed 
wasn’t the best dancer by any stretch, but if there’s one thing the Strictly 
audience loves it’s a trier.

Ed Balls voted off Strictly Come Dancing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/27/ed-balls-voted-off-strictly-come-dancing>
Of course all good things must come to an end, and tonight was his turn to 
shimmy into the Strictly sunset. All that remains is for us to celebrate his 
best bits, his funniest bits, and that time he nearly dropped Katya on her head.

Week two – the air banjo incident

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBqPaaf1dB4U&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBqPaaf1dB4U>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBqPaaf1dB4U&media=>
After a ploddy waltz in week one, week two’s banjo-tastic charleston was the 
first indication that Ed could not only move all his limbs in time to music, 
but could also deliver a dance with real character. Craig gave it a score of 
three, possibly for the bit where Ed plays air banjo on Katya’s thigh.


Week four – Balls the dragon slayer
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFENx5YSzExM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFENx5YSzExM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFENx5YSzExM&media=>
Week four’s Spamalot paso doble was a hot mess from start to finish, but Ed 
prancing about in silver socks and a cape was welcome light relief in a 
lacklustre week. Katya was holding out for a hero, Len was holding out for a 
paso, but Britain was too busy laughing to care.


Week five – the only way to Amarillo

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVnTckkiHEIw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVnTckkiHEIw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVnTckkiHEIw&media=>
And then it was week five’s American smooth, and for as long as I live I will 
never get bored of watching Ed nearly drop Katya in that lift. Only her rock 
solid core saved her from a swan dive on to the Strictly dancefloor. Somehow Ed 
still wasn’t in the bottom two, but at least Katya didn’t have to go through it 
again in the danceoff.


Week six – the self-pleasuring scientist 

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHExzK_CgRqU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHExzK_CgRqU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHExzK_CgRqU&media=>
The week that spawned a thousand memes was Halloween week, when mad scientist 
Ed danced the cha-cha to Love Potion No 9. Overenthusiastic thrusting aside, 
this marked a turning point in the quality of Ed’s dancing: it was actually a 
pretty decent cha-cha, and I’m still smiling weeks later. If you only watch 10 
seconds of TV this year, make it this glorious moment when Ed Balls indulged in 
a little Strictly Self-Pleasuring.


Week eight – Gangnam Balls
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCzqtjk_iGFU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCzqtjk_iGFU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCzqtjk_iGFU&media=>
Just when you thought it couldn’t get any better, Balls climbed aboard Katya’s 
Gangnam pony and gave us a salsa to remember. In the week where Donald Trump 
won his own POTUS gameshow, Ed cantering around the Strictly studio was just 
what we needed.


But his Strictly journey came to an end this evening, when his Rolling Stones 
tango couldn’t give enough Satisfaction to keep him in the competition. He 
might not have been the UK’s most popular politician, nor Strictly’s best 
dancer, but he brought plenty of smiles this autumn, and lord knows 2016 has 
been light on those. Thanks, Glitterballs – you’ve been unforgettable.
 