
Eric Schmidt <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/eric-schmidt>, the 
executive chairman of Google, has described China as "the most egregious" 
example of a nation attempting to control the internet, as he hinted at 
expanding the company's multimillion-pound transition fund towards British 
publishers to boost revenues from digital.

In an interview with the Guardian editor-in-chief Alan Rusbridger at the Big 
Tent Activate Summit in New Delhi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2013/mar/20/big-tent-activate-summit-live>
, India, on Thursday, Schmidt spoke of his concern about reports from the New 
York Times last month that its computers had been invaded by Chinese hackers.

"As the internet has emerged in many of these different countries, there's 
quite a few countries that have no laws that pertain to the internet at all and 
those internets tend to be free and open with almost anything goes," he said.

"There are other governments that try very dramatically to censor or control 
the internet, withChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> being the 
most egregious example."

Asked about his views on the privacy of citizens online, Schmidt gave the 
example of Chinese dissidents who may wish to speak in confidence to a 
newspaper to reveal sensitive information.

"If I was giving you important information about something that was very very 
sensitive and if it were revealed that I were leaking this to you I would lose 
my job, my family would be killed or I would be exiled. This does occur – I was 
just in North Korea, for heavens sakes," he said.

"You take notes as a journalists and you write those down – but where do those 
notes go? You don't have to answer for the Guardian, but how would you feel if 
the Chinese had just hacked into the New York Times and gone into all of the 
servers of theNew York Times <https://www.theguardian.com/media/new-york-times> 
… how would you feel if you were a Chinese dissident? You'd be worried, if you 
had indeed done that," he told the summit.

"These are some of the problems that happen when everyone's connected ... My 
point here is that this [ability to intrude on privacy] is going to happen 
because the value of the internet is so profound and positive, but we've got to 
recognise the issues and get ahead of it by discussion."

Schmidt's remarks are likely to inflame already tense relations between 
Washington and Beijing over allegations of cyber-warfare.

On Wednesday, South Korea said it had traced a co-ordinated cyber-attack 
targeting banks and media firms to China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/mar/21/south-korea-cyber-attack-chinese?CMP=twt_gu>
, whose new premier, Li Keqiang,earlier this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/mar/17/china-premier-li-keqiang-bureaucracy>
 said that states should "not make groundless accusations against each other".

The interview comes a month after it was revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/feb/01/google-eric-schmidt-china-hacker-book>
 that Schmidt makes his sharpest criticism of China yet in his new book, The 
New Digital Age, which is due to be released in April. The Google chairman 
describes China as "the world's most active and enthusiastic filterer of 
information" and "the most sophisticated and prolific" hacker of foreign 
companies.

In the wide-ranging interview before India's internet pioneers, Schmidt did 
not rule out the prospect of Google launching a "digital transition fund" for 
British publishers,similar to the €60m money pot recently agreed in France 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/02/01/us-france-google-idUSBRE91011Z20130201>
.

"I'm sure we can talk about it," he said. "The reason I like this model is I 
don't like the idea of randomly writing cheques to publishers in the old model. 
I think it's a very good idea forGoogle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> to assist in the transition of 
their business model from old to new, so it's a very good positioning."

Speaking in India on Thursday, Schmidt flatly denied speculation that he is 
attempting to position himself for a job in the US government. Asked by 
Rusbridger whether he would take such a role, Schmidt replied: "No, never. 
Government people have a very hard job. I much prefer this job, it's much 
easier."

Speculation about a White House move has increased in recent months following 
Schmidt's trips to North Korea and Burma as an advocate for the open internet, 
coupled with his decision toshed 42% of his Google stock 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/02/09/us-google-schmidt-idUSBRE91712W20130209>
. He was replaced as chief executive of the internet giant in April 2011, as 
co-founder Larry Page sought to refocus the business on key areas, such as its 
Android smartphone software, Chrome web browser and search.

On the future funding models for newspapers, Schmidt singled out Politico, a 
Washington website that runs a hybrid of free and subscription-only sites for 
policy junkies, as a potential model for newspapers.

Last week Politico announced it had 1,000 subscribers paying upwards of $8,000 
(£5,200) a year and was launching a quarterly print publication. Referring to 
newspapers, he also said it was "a reasonable prediction that incumbent 
businesses who already have subscribers will transition them into online 
subscribers".

Schmidt also touched on his thoughts on soon-to-be-killed Google Reader ("I do 
love Google Reader, but we had priorities") and Apple's iPad Mini ("Too small").

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 