
Alphabet <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/alphabet>, Google’s parent 
company, pipped Apple to become the world’s most valuable company on Tuesday, 
ending the iPhone company’s four-year reign.

Alphabet’s shares rose by 4.7% by noon on Tuesday following the release of 
better than expected results. After the rise Alphabet was valued at $548bn to 
Apple’s $534bn.

Apple’s share price bounced back by the end of the day to put it in the lead 
again. But while the race between the two tech titans is close at present, 
analysts are predicting Alphabet will soon take the lead again. Deutsche Bank 
raised its 12-month share price target for Alphabet to $1,080, 40% above 
Alphabet’s closing price on Monday.

“We think the current re-rating in GOOGL shares is 2/3rds of the way complete 
and is likely to grind to $1000+,” said Deutsche Bank analyst Ross Sandler in a 
note to clients.

The news comes at an awkward moment for Alphabet, which is embroiled in a 
transatlantic battle with European regulators over tax breaks and calls tobreak 
up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/nov/27/european-parliament-votes-yes-google-breakup-motion>
the tech behemoth.

European commission unfairly targeting US companies over taxes, official says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/29/european-commission-unfairly-targeting-us-companies-starbucks-mcdonalds-amazon-apple-taxes-treasury>
The European commission is investigating  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/28/eu-could-force-google-to-pay-more-uk-tax>
complaints that “sweetheart” deals with the UK allowed the company to pay a 
pittance in taxes. US Treasury official Robert Stack accused his EU 
counterparts ofunfairly targeting  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/29/european-commission-unfairly-targeting-us-companies-starbucks-mcdonalds-amazon-apple-taxes-treasury>
US companies in its tax investigations.

The rise in Alphabet’s share price came after its decision to give investors a 
clearer picture of its businesses. Googlerenamed itself Alphabet  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/11/alphabet-google-rebranding-what-happens-next>
last August to better reflect the array of businesses it controls. Most famous 
for its core search engine, YouTube and Android mobile operating system, 
Alphabet also invests in a series of “moon shot” enterprises, betting on new 
technologies including robot cars, biotechnology, health and high-speed 
internet fibre networks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fgoogle-alphabet-share-price-overtakes-apple-as-most-valuable-company%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7794c7f6c5641f4f025bd6f24add289dd351b1f4%2F0_145_2200_1320%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Google's%20Alphabet%20overtakes%20Apple%20as%20world's%20most%20valuable%20company&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fgoogle-alphabet-share-price-overtakes-apple-as-most-valuable-company%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Google%27s%20Alphabet%20overtakes%20Apple%20as%20world%27s%20most%20valuable%20company&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fgoogle-alphabet-share-price-overtakes-apple-as-most-valuable-company%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7794c7f6c5641f4f025bd6f24add289dd351b1f4%2F0_145_2200_1320%2F2200.jpg>
 Google develops smart contact lens to measure glucose levels in tears. 
Photograph: Google/Rex 
On Monday evening the company gave investors the clearest picture yet of how 
much is being spent on its long-term bets and how much is made by its core 
business. The coreGoogle <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> 
businesses had revenues of $74.5bn in 2015 and it made a profit of $23.4bn – 
more than $66.5m a day. The “other bets” category had revenues of $448m and 
lost $3.6bn.

How Alphabet became the biggest company in the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/01/how-alphabet-made-google-biggest-company-in-the-world>
Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> overtook Exxon Mobil to 
become the most valuable company in the US in 2012, another milestone for the 
company that was resurrected from near collapse after the return of co-founder 
Steve Jobs in 1997.

Apple remains hugely successful. It posted the biggest quarterly profit in 
history – $18bn – for the last three months of 2015. But itsshare price has 
sagged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/26/apple-iphone-sales-slowdown-2007-drop-holiday>
as demand for the iPhone has softened. At its high point in 2015 Apple was 
valued at $760bn, but its share price has fallen close to 20% over the last 
year amid concerns that the tech giant has yet to come up with another 
blockbuster product.
Alphabet share price 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/02/alphabet_share/giv-27167JZc2dVbEEpCD>
Apple share price 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/02/apple_share/giv-27167L2u44vhD20OM/> 