
Alphabet <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/alphabet>, parent company of 
Google, looks set to take the crown from Apple and become the world’s most 
valuable company.

The tech company announced better than expected results on Monday and gave 
investors their first proper look under the hood at the engine that drives its 
business. Operating income from its core businesses rose 23% in 2015. Investors 
liked what they saw and shares spiked 8% in after-hours trading.

Alphabet closed the trading day valued at $518bn, behind Apple’s $538bn. But 
if it holds on to that gain once trading begins again Tuesday, it would be 
worth close to $560bn – the company first broke the half-trillion marker in 
October.

Wall Street has fretted for years about how much the core Google business was 
being used to fund founders Larry Page and Sergey Brin’s ambitions to grow new 
businesses in robots,self-driving cars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/15/google-testing-purpose-built-self-driving-cars-public-roads>
 and spaceships.

For the first time the company’s core business was broken out from its 
big-swing “moonshot” projects, allowing investors to see inside the tech giant 
with a little more clarity, and they like it a lot.

What's in a name? How Alphabet made Google the biggest company in the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/01/how-alphabet-made-google-biggest-company-in-the-world>
Google segment revenues for 2015 were $74.5bn and it made a profit of $23.4bn. 
For 2014Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> segment revenues 
were $65.67bn and profits were just over $19bn. In contrast the “other bets” 
had revenues of $448m for the 12 months ending 31 December 2015 and lost 
$3.5bn. In 2014 the moonshots brought in $327m and lost $1.9bn.


Google’s ad revenue – its primary source of income – for the last quarter was 
$19.08bn, up 17% year-over-year, in the company’s first earnings report as 
Alphabet.


Market analyst Scott Kessler of S&P Capital IQ said: “It’s nice to see that 
expenses are being more carefully overseen.” But Kessler still has the stock as 
a “hold.”

“The company is in the crosshairs of regulators around the world,” Kessler 
said, pointing to ongoing copyright litigation with Oracle and the company’s 
investigation by the European Commission over antitrust concerns and rows over 
tax breaks.

Tories lobbying to protect Google’s £30bn island tax haven
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/30/google-tory-battle-protect-30bn-tax-haven-bermuda>
Kessler said the earnings might have resulted in “enthusiasm, even euphoria,” 
but there were miles to go for Alphabet yet. “There are a lot of legal and 
regulatory issues that may come to a head this year,” he said.

It is the first time that Alphabet has provided specific numbers for its core 
business (Google’s search engine, YouTube, Android, Google Play and other units 
that form the heart of its business) and for the rest of the companies 
businesses (Google X, its research arm, Calico, its biotech company, Google 
Fiber, high speed internet, Nest, smart home devices and other bets on future 
technologies).


Ruth Porat, the company’s chief financial officer, said Alphabet was keeping a 
close eye on spending. “We remain on a journey, and it is still early days,” 
she told analysts on a conference call.

Outside of Google, Alphabet’s subsidiaries will each have their own chief 
executive, reporting to Page. The structure is reportedly modelled after 
billionaire investor Warren Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway, which owns a complex 
portfolio of businesses including clothes manufacturer Fruit of the Loom, 
insurer Geico and this week boughtPrecision Castparts,  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/10/warren-buffett-biggest-buy-yet-precision-castparts>
maker of aerospace and other industrial parts.


“Our very strong revenue growth in Q4 reflects the vibrancy of our business, 
driven by mobile search as well as YouTube and programmatic advertising, all 
areas in which we’ve been investing for many years. We’re excited about the 
opportunities we have across Google and Other Bets to use technology to improve 
the lives of billions of people,” Porat said.

 