
Each week, the 1960s children’s television puppet show Camberwick Green began 
with the narratorBrian Cant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/feb/20/how-we-made-trumpton>’s 
announcement: “Here is a box, a musical box, wound up and ready to play. But 
this box can hide a secret inside. Can you guess what is in it today? 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ecsmBFUtMyc>” As it rotated and ticked before 
its pint-sized audience, triangular segments on the top would slide apart and 
the puppet character destined to be the focus of the episode’s adventures would 
rise up on some hidden clockwork mechanism.

That captivating musical box and those entrancing eight-inch-tall puppets, 
with heads made from ping-pong balls and clothes from foam latex, were the 
creation of Gordon Murray, who has died aged 95. And the adventures of those 
characters – including the milkman Thomas Tripp, postmistress Mrs Dingle, 
scrumpy-quaffing rustic Windy Miller, and PC McGarry (No 452) – were also his 
work.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fgordon-murray-obituary-creator-of-trumpton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8fd7ddc2b129e26535d9948d127359d6ea15ad3%2F0_732_1876_1125%2F1876.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gordon%20Murray%20obituary%3A%20creator%20of%20Trumpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fgordon-murray-obituary-creator-of-trumpton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gordon%20Murray%20obituary%3A%20creator%20of%20Trumpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fgordon-murray-obituary-creator-of-trumpton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8fd7ddc2b129e26535d9948d127359d6ea15ad3%2F0_732_1876_1125%2F1876.jpg>
 Gordon Murray in his workshop 
For some, an idealised England is most memorably captured in Trollope’s 
Barsetshire, for others in the Archers’ Borsetshire. But for those who (like 
me) were children in the 60s, it was most poignantly realised in Murray’s 
Trumptonshire trilogy for theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>. First 
came Camberwick Green (1966), depicting an English village where everyone was 
gainfully employed in a trade and any threats to civil order would be snuffed 
out by the toy soldier troop from Pippin Fort in their army truck.

Then came Trumpton (1967), with its weekly excitement over the deployment of 
Captain Flack’s fire brigade. “Pugh, Pugh, Barney McGrew, Cuthbert, Dibble, 
Grubb,” went the moustachioed captain’s roll call before his men set off in 
their engine to attend some emergency – one that would be speedily resolved so 
that each episode could conclude with Flack’s men playing at a bandstand 
concert, still wearing their smart tunics and impressive helmets, before an 
appreciative, waltzing citizenry.

There's no crime in Trumptonshire. It's a happy world
Gordon Murray 
Finally, in 1969, Murray created Chigley, featuring the weekly adventures of 
Lord Belborough and his little train. The Trumptonshire trilogy, each 
consisting of 13 15-minute episodes, was aired on the BBC for nearly 20 years 
and and later broadcast on Channel 4 and Nickelodeon Junior. It was not 
immediately clear when these dramas were set, but the hint of a bustle Murray 
had inserted into the Camberwick Green gossip Mrs Honeyman’s skirt and the fact 
that Dr Mopp drove around the village in a bone-shaker car wearing a top hat 
indicated that it was probably before the first world war.

Like films of the era such as Mary Poppins (1964), Chitty Chitty Bang Bang 
(1968) or The Railway Children (1970), Murray’s creations took us back to an 
ostensibly gentler, perhaps Edwardian, England, before the 60s had swung and 
students revolted. For small children, Murray’s Trumptonshire suggested that 
Britain ran like clockwork and that adult life was an orderly, measured affair. 
It was a puppet fiction later satirised by Half Man Half Biscuit in their song
The Trumpton Riots 
<http://halfmanhalfbiscuit.uk/back-in-the-dhss/the-trumpton-riots/>.

“There’s no crime in Trumptonshire,” Murray told an interviewer in 1995. “It’s 
a happy world and a lot of people say ‘Well you shouldn’t encourage children to 
think that the world’s like that.’ Some people throw their children into the 
deep end of the swimming bath at an early age and say ‘Swim’. You know, that’s 
the way to learn, life’s hard. I don’t believe in that.” He believed, rather, 
in the innocence of childhood. “I am very upset, because I’m an old man now, at 
the short length of childhood that children have. They don’t have childhood for 
long and I think that’s a wicked shame, because childhood is the most 
marvellous thing you’ve got to remember for the rest of your life.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fgordon-murray-obituary-creator-of-trumpton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F915862f839bfcba18813f43fc64545658c2379c8%2F0_0_1876_2768%2F1876.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gordon%20Murray%20obituary%3A%20creator%20of%20Trumpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fgordon-murray-obituary-creator-of-trumpton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gordon%20Murray%20obituary%3A%20creator%20of%20Trumpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fgordon-murray-obituary-creator-of-trumpton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F915862f839bfcba18813f43fc64545658c2379c8%2F0_0_1876_2768%2F1876.jpg>
 Dr Mopp in his bone-shaker car in Camberwick Green, created by Gordon Murray 
Murray was born in Wandsworth Common, south-west London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, the youngest of four children. “I have 
been interested in puppets ever since I was a child,” he said in 1999. “My 
enthusiasm was greatly stimulated, I remember, by a visit to the Victoria 
Palace when I was about eight to see Delvain’s Marionettes on the variety 
bill.” After leaving school, he worked as a journalist for Home Gardening and 
the Smallholder and joined the Territorial Army. He served during the second 
world war and took part in the Normandy landings as a platoon commander.

After the war he worked as an actor in repertory theatre, where he met the 
ballet dancer Enid Martin, who had appeared in Michael Powell and Emeric 
Pressburger’s 1948 film The Red Shoes; she became his wife in 1955. He also 
established his own puppet company, Murray’s Marionettes, touring theatres in 
the UK. The BBC producer Freda Lingstrom was invited to one performance and, 
reportedly, was so impressed she offered him work operating Spotty Dog for the 
BBC children’s show The Woodentops (1955-57).

Murray subsequently became a producer in the formative years of the BBC 
children’s department, producing shows such as Sketch Club (1958-61) and 
Captain Pugwash (1957-66). Among successful puppet shows he created during this 
time were the 33 episodes of A Rubovian Legend (1958-63), narrated by actors 
includingDerek Nimmo 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/obituary-derek-nimmo-1073206.html>
 and using the skills of puppeteers Bob Bura andJohn Hardwick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2004/nov/26/broadcasting.guardianobituaries>
, and set in some fictional Ruritania-like European realm.

In 1964, he left the BBC to set up an independent production company, Gordon 
Murray Puppets Productions, based in a converted church in north London. It was 
from there that Murray sparked a revolution in British TV children’s puppetry. 
He realised that string-operated puppets looked old fashioned and so started 
using stop-motion animation, the technique of physically manipulating objects 
so that they appear to move on their own. Murray created the puppets and the 
sets but Hardwick and Bura animated them.

“Animation takes a very long time, doing one little move then click for the 
camera,” he said. “I remember the BBC saying they couldn’t afford it, but they 
did it.”Nick Park <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/jul/21/television> 
credited Trumptonshire for pioneering the stop-frame filming technique used in 
his Oscar-winning Wallace and Gromit animations. The Trumptonshire trilogy was 
also revolutionary as the first British children’s programmes made in colour.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDWNR-08Ff0w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDWNR-08Ff0w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDWNR-08Ff0w&media=>
 Opening scenes from Camberwick Green, 1966, created by Gordon Murray. 
In 1975, Murray made a stop-motion animation of A Rubovian Legend called 
Rubovia, and in 1978 another calledSkip and Fuffy 
<http://www.toonhound.com/skipfuffy.htm> that appeared in the Noel 
Edmonds-fronted Saturday morning children’s show Multi-Coloured Swap Shop 
between 1976 and 1982. His final series, The Gublins, 13 folktales told in 
verse and starring curious chimpanzee-troll-like creatures, aired in 1979. 
After retiring from animation, Murray produced and marketed limited-edition 
miniature books under the imprint Silver Thimble Books.

He was once asked what he did with the Trumptonshire puppets? “I burned them 
in a bonfire in my garden. I’d had them for some time after the transmissions 
had stopped. And various people had said ‘Oh they’re old fashioned’, and they 
always were old fashioned actually. They were old fashioned from the word go. 
They had been used an awful lot you know so I burned them, together with the 
scenery.” Even Captain Flack’s finest couldn’t save them.

But that wasn’t the end of Trumptonshire. In 2011 Murray had a clear-out of 
his attic in Northamptonshire with his son-in-law, William Mollett, and found 
boxes of the original film. The pair approached the BBC to see if any more of 
the original reels could be tracked down, and eventually footage was traced to 
a vault in west London. The reels were taken to BBC studios and post-production 
where the footage, frame by frame, was meticulously cleaned, scanned, then
digitally restored 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/jan/13/camberwick-green-trumpton-cleaned-up>
 and re-released in 2012.

Murray said at the time: “I’d love to see the people who first watched it back 
in the 60s enjoying it again, in pristine digital quality, with their 
grandchildren. I’m so delighted it’s been so lovingly brought back to life. I 
was really worried it had been lost forever and I can’t imagine a world without 
Trumptonshire.”

His wife died in 2001. He is survived by two daughters, Emma and Rose, and 
four grandchildren.

• Gordon Murray, puppeteer, TV producer and writer, born 3 May 1921; died 30 
June 2016
 