
A work by the artist Antony Gormley has been shown for the first time in the 
Guardianas the newspaper published an extract on Friday from Naomi Klein’s book 
on climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/06/dont-look-away-now-the-climate-crisis-needs-you>
.

The piece, called Connection, shows a disturbing silhouette of a giant body 
against a deep glow which could be manmade or natural. Both the body and the 
landscape appear to be equally toxic, raising questions of how humanity is 
impacting the planet through climate change.

“It’s very important that the image is not a didactic one,” said Gormley of 
the work, made with aniline dye on paper.

“Hopefully it gives you an opportunity to put yourself in the place offered by 
this silhouette and to think about your connection to and dependence on the 
context in which we find ourselves... the most important being the elemental 
world that we have managed for the first time ever, for any species, to have 
destabilised.”

The image will wrap around Saturday’s printed copy of the Guardian and be 
handed out ata climate change protest march through central London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/feb/26/met-backs-down-on-refusal-to-police-climate-and-womens-marches>
.

Gormley was minded to share the image because of the concerns he shares with 
the marchers about the irreparable damage we are doing to the planet. “We are 
sleepwalking into a massive human disaster.”


He said he despaired of politicians who thought no further forward than the 
next five years – “they are just not capable of long-term thinking.” Gormley 
has also shared an art work with the Guardian not seen in public before, called 
Evening IV, made with carbon, casein and Indian ink on paper. It accompanies 
the extract from Klein’s book,This Changes Everything – Capitalism vs Climate 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/281655/>.
 Evening IV by Antony Gormley. Photograph: Antony Gormley 
The Canadian author’s book argues that capitalism is ill-suited to handle the 
challenge that global warming presents – and that tackling climate change can 
also address inequality in society.

Gormley agrees. “If the division between rich and poor is already chronic and 
very consciously in people’s minds now, then the division between those who are 
banished from their homes because of rising sea levels and temperatures will be 
a hell of a lot more painful.

“As Naomi Klein has ceaselessly pointed out, we have to make politicians take 
notice.

“Short termism is the way capitalism works and the way politicians work and 
capitalism is not going to solve this. We have to find another form of defining 
value that is not market value.


“Nobody wants to face the truth that actually air, water, sunlight are 
resources that are certainly not free.”


Gormley has made previous work which explores questions around climate change, 
not leastAnother Place 
<http://www.visitliverpool.com/things-to-do/another-place-by-antony-gormley-p160981>
 which consists of 100 cast iron sculptures of Gormley’s own body on Crosby 
beach, looking out at the water from the mouth of the Mersey to the River Alt.

The figures ask questions around humanity’s relationship with nature, whether 
we are a toxic body and whether we can live sustainably.

Don't look away now, the climate crisis needs you
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/06/dont-look-away-now-the-climate-crisis-needs-you>
Gormley believes the human population will level out at 7-8bn despite UN 
projections suggesting it will hit 9bn in 2050, prompting huge questions. “Can 
we feed ourselves? Can we achieve, as a result of the challenge of climate 
change, social justice? It seems to me this is our biggest challenge but also 
our biggest potential disaster.


“Can we change what looks like Armageddon into a real go to find global 
governance that will allow human beings to work with the forces of nature in a 
sustainable way?”
 