
The government should demand a “zero-tolerance approach” to sexual harassment 
and violence in schools, and give extra resources to teach pupils about sex and 
personal relationships, according to England’s leading teaching unions. The 
calls from the teaching unions came in the wake of anew report by parliament’s 
women and equalities committee 
<https://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/women-and-equalities-committee/news-parliament-2015/sexual-harassment-and-violence-in-schools-report-published-16-17/>
 in which the MPs said sexual abuse of girls had become “accepted as part of 
everyday life” in England’s schools.

The MPs’ report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/13/sex-education-in-schools-is-inadequate-say-mps>
 called for personal, social, health and economic education (PSHE) to be made a 
mandatory part of the school curriculum, but the government’s response made it 
clear it would not make it compulsory, and declined to include specific topics 
on combating sexual harassment and sexual violence in training for new teachers.

“Yet again the government’s response is to do nothing.” said Russell Hobby, 
general secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers, whose members 
have long campaigned forPSHE lessons to be included in the national curriculum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/mar/24/personal-social-health-education-compulsory-schools-estelle-morris>
.

Government 'not doing enough' to combat sexual harassment in schools
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/29/government-not-doing-enough-to-combat-sexual-harassment-in-schools>
“PSHE is crucial to provide time in the curriculum to discuss important and 
sensitive issues, and to protect teachers when grappling with these subjects. 
To tackle sexual harassment and sexual violence, education has to be the key, 
with good quality age-appropriate sex and relationship education, and PSHE for 
all pupils.”

Chris Keates, general secretary of the NASUWT teachers’ union, said that 
schools had been forced to cut back on teaching about personal relationships 
because of budget cuts and pressures on timetables. “Schools should be places 
of safety, yet research undertaken by the NASUWT shows that all too often 
pupils, and also teachers, are being exposed to sexualised comments, threats 
and abuse,” Keates said.

“The government needs to set out how schools can secure a zero-tolerance 
approach to sexual harassment and bullying by providing clear guidance on how 
to deal with these issues and to ensure that all schools record, report and 
take effective action whenever incidents of sexual violence and harassment 
involving pupils occur.

“Schools must also be supported in tackling the problem. It must be recognised 
that sexual harassment and violence is a societal problem which cannot be left 
to schools to tackle alone.”

Why is personal, social and health education not compulsory in schools?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/mar/24/personal-social-health-education-compulsory-schools-estelle-morris>
The report said 29% of 16-18-year-old girls had experienced unwanted sexual 
touching at school, while more than two-thirds of both boys and girls reported 
hearing words like “slut” or “slag” aimed at girls in school on a regular 
basis. In total, 59% of girls and young women aged between 13 and 21 said they 
had faced some form ofsexual harassment at school 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/29/government-not-doing-enough-to-combat-sexual-harassment-in-schools>
 or college within the past year.

In its response to the MPs, the government suggested a “holistic” school-based 
approach, with individual schools developing their own codes of practice. It 
also promised to establish a new advisory group to the Department for Education.

But the National Union of Teachers said the government needed to make 
appropriate PSHE compulsory to ensure that schools made time for it. “Parents 
understand that growing up is complicated and can be challenging. They expect 
schools to help teach students about relationships, safety and equality, but 
the exam factory culture – which is fuelled by government policy – limits the 
scope for these important parts of learning,” said Rosamund McNeil, the NUT’s 
head of education and equal opportunities.
 