
The Greek government is to surrender powers over vast areas of economic and 
social policymaking to its eurozone creditors under draconian terms agreed for a
new three-year bailout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/12/greek-pm-seeks-bailout-ratification-as-doubts-remain-over-german-support>
.

The 29 pages of conditions concede ultimate authority over much of Greek 
policymaking to the eurozone and establish a system of quarterly reviews of the 
reforms by the troika of institutions – the European commission, the European 
Central Bank (ECB) and theInternational Monetary Fund (IMF) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/imf> – representing the creditors.

The document says: “The [Greek] government commits to consult and agree with 
the European commission, theEuropean Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank> and the 
International Monetary Fund on all actions relevant for the achievement of the 
objectives of the memorandum of understanding before these are finalised and 
legally adopted.”

The terms for the bailout – worth €85bn (£61bn) according to a senior EU 
source – foresee a radical overhaul of the Greek economy, stipulating major 
reforms of health, welfare, pensions and taxation systems, alongside more 
ambitious privatisation schemes. It also awards the troika decisive influence 
over reforms of thestruggling banking sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/29/greek-debt-crisis-key-points-athens-bank-controls>
.

Memorandum of understanding: What exactly has Greece signed up for?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/12/memorandum-understanding-what-exactly-has-greece-signed-up-for>
As the Greek parliament prepared to debate the package in an emergency session 
on Thursday – with a vote likely in the early hours of Friday – prime minister
Alexis Tsipras <https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexis-tsipras> said that 
despite “obstacles some are trying to put into our path” he remained optimistic 
a final agreement would be sealed on the country’s third financial rescue in 
five years.

The government wants parliament to ratify the draft text of the new bailout 
law so it can be approved by eurozone finance ministers at a meeting 
tentatively planned for Friday. This would allow the first tranche of aid to be 
disbursed in time for a debt payment of more than €3bn that Athens is due to 
make to the European Central Bank on 20 August.

Tsipras did not say who he thought was trying to derail the deal, but in a 
remark widely interpreted as a dig at Germany, Greece’s harshest critic and its 
most influential creditor, accused “certain EU states” of having a “hidden plan 
to reshape the eurozone usingGreece <https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> 
as the excuse”.

Germany said on Wednesday it needed more time to study the agreement laying 
out the raft of fiscal and other policy measures Greece must implement in 
exchange for the aid. Chancellor Angela Merkel’s spokesman, Steffen Seibert, 
said Berlin wanted to examine the deal with “the necessary thoroughness”.

The finance ministry said Germany would “have a position by the end of the 
week”, adding it was still conceivable that the German parliament – which must 
also ratify the deal – would vote not to approve the bailout but instead 
sanction a bridging loan that would allow Athens to make its ECB payment. “Both 
options are still open,” the spokesman reportedly said.

The Greek reform package will entail 57 separate measures, included in 40 
pieces of legislation to be voted on by Greek parliamentarians.

The Guardian view on the Greek bailout: a deal that addresses nothing | 
Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/11/guardian-view-on-greek-bailout-deal-that-addresses-nothing>
Thursday’s legislative blitz in Athens will be followed by further changes. By 
October, when the troika will review progress before agreeing to release more 
funds, Tsipras has to deliver next year’s budget, a supplementary budget for 
this year and a three-year fiscal strategy.

The bailout agreement says: “The conditionality will be updated on a quarterly 
basis, taking into account the progress in reforms achieved over the previous 
quarter. In each review, the specific policy measures and other instruments to 
achieve these broad objectives outlined here will be fully specified in detail 
and timeline.”

Meeting the bailout terms will require more austerity for Greece. The 
three-year programme entails a “fiscal adjustment” of up to 5% of Greek GDP, 
while the economy is expected to slump by 2.3% this year and 1.3% next year, 
according to senior sources.

Tsipras has also agreed to reverse some of the policy decisions he has enacted 
since being elected in January. The document states that privatisation in 
Greece “has come to a standstill” since he took power but the prime minister 
“has now committed to proceed with an ambitious privatisation programme”.

With Greece suffocating under capital controls and the banks fighting for 
survival under a mountain of bad debt, a main focus of the bailout programme is 
saving and reviving the banking sector through the recapitalisation of ailing 
financial institutions. Under the terms of the bailout, the troika will have 
strong influence over a bank sector rescue.

The document states: “No unilateral fiscal or other policy actions will be 
taken by the [Greek] authorities. All measures, legislative or otherwise, taken 
during the programme period, which may have an impact on banks’ operations, 
solvency, liquidity or asset quality should be taken in close consultation 
[with the troika].”

According to the document, external consultants are to be sent in to advise 
Greece’s national bank on bad debts and asset management, while the board of 
the Greek authority dealing with banking revival is to be co-appointed by the 
troika to counter suspected cronyism and “political interference”.

It says: “A new procedure for the selection and appointment of members in the 
executive board and general council will be designed by the end of September 
2015, which will imply a greater role for the [troika] institutions than in the 
past.”

No wonder the Greek finance minister looks resigned over possible bailout deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/11/no-wonder-the-greek-finance-minister-looks-resigned-over-possible-bailout-deal>
The European commission <https://www.theguardian.com/world/european-commission>
, which negotiated the new deal over the past fortnight in Athens alongside the 
ECB, IMF and the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) – the EU bailout fund – is 
keen to combat German-led scepticism over the package and see it implemented 
swiftly for fear of a political backlash in Greece.

Senior EU officials said: “The political momentum must now be seized. Waiting 
or prolonging discussion will not provide the opportunity for a better deal, 
but risk instead undermining the progress we have seen.”

But internal German government documents obtained by The Guardian contained a 
scathing critique of the bailout agreement, signalling major clashes over the 
next week. The government’s analysis said: “Implementation of many measures is 
foreseen not before October/November and some very important reforms will not 
be implemented yet and are not yet specified.”

It questioned whether the IMF supported the new deal, objected that the new 
rescue plan failed to address Greece’s debt sustainability and attacked a 
proposed delay in setting up anew privatisation trust fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/24/greek-debt-crisis-great-greece-fire-sale>
 that is supposed to hold Greek assets worth €50bn.

Senior officials in Brussels familiar with the negotiations insist the 
agreement is comprehensive. Alluding to the German objections, one senior 
source said: “We have not cut corners. We have not gone for a quick fix.”
 