
Greece clinched a three-year bailout worth €86bn (£60bn) after 
parliamentarians inAthens backed the deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/14/greek-parliament-still-thrashing-out-rescue-deal-vote>
, and Germany backed down on its opposition to the third rescue of the bankrupt 
country in five years.

A meeting of eurozone finance ministers in Brussels representing the country’s 
main creditors agreed to launch the new bailout with €26bn being disbursed next 
week following six months of bitter recrimination that almost saw the country, 
under the leftwing government ofAlexis Tsipras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexis-tsipras>, becoming the first to exit 
the single currency.

The meeting was upbeat about finalising the bailout terms after Tsipras 
secured approval from MPs for a huge package of legislation on Friday morning. 
The vote committed the indebted country toradical economic and fiscal reforms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/12/memorandum-understanding-what-exactly-has-greece-signed-up-for>
 needed to secure the rescue money.

Alexis Tsipras hit by Syriza rebellion as Greece approves bailout deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/14/greek-parliament-still-thrashing-out-rescue-deal-vote>
Wolfgang Schäuble, the German finance minister and critic of the proposed new 
deal, toned down his reservations at a meeting of his eurozone peers in 
Brussels several hours after the Athens vote.

German MPs will vote on the agreement on Wednesday and are expected to approve 
it, although Angela Merkel could face an even bigger rebellion than the 65 
politicians from her coalition who last month refused to back talks on a third 
bailout.

Over the past week, Berlin has consistently argued against being rushed into a 
new bailout, preferring to award Greece a new bridging loan to pay off a debt 
payment of €3.2bn due to theEuropean Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank> next week. But the 
temporary loans scenario was barely mentioned by finance ministers.


“The past six months have been difficult. We have looked into the abyss,” said 
Jean-Claude Juncker, the president of the European commission. “But today the 
message of today’s Eurogroup is loud and clear: on this basis,Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> is and will irreversibly remain a 
member of the Euro area.”

In an abrupt change of tone, the leaders paid tribute to Tsipras, who could 
only win the vote on the new bailout with the support of the opposition and by 
splitting his leftwing Syriza movement. It is now likely that Tsipras will call 
early elections and trigger a realignment of Greek politics.

Instead of questioning the merits of the draft deal struck earlier this week 
between Greece and its troika of creditors – the European commission, European 
Central Bank and the International Monetary Fund – the main problems raised on 
Friday concerned the issue of debt relief for Greece and whether or not the IMF 
would take part in the rescue. The IMF is refusing to participate in a new 
bailout until there is an “explicit and concrete agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/30/imf-will-refuse-join-greek-bailout-until-debt-relief-demands-met>
” on debt relief from Greece’s eurozone creditors.

Christine Legarde, the IMF managing director, told the meeting that it hoped 
to take part in the bailout and that a decision would be made in October, but 
she could not commit.


Schäuble said IMF participation was “indispensable”.

Greece needs to pay €3.7bn to its creditors next Thursday. The first €26bn 
will be released on Thursday morning, eurozone leaders said, although Greece 
would only see half of that immediately, since €10bn would be reserved in 
Luxembourg for Greek bank recapitalisation while a further €3bn would be 
disbursed over the next two months subject to Athens delivering on its pledges.

Alexis Tsipras is down but far from out
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/14/alexis-tsipras-greece-bailout-vote-new-election>
The first of the troika’s quarterly reviews of Greek progress in observing the 
strict terms of the deal is to take place in October. Depending on the results, 
the eurozone will then discuss rescheduling Greek debt amid a new consensus 
among the IMF, the ECB and the commission that the level of debt is 
unsustainable.

 But Jeroen Dijsselbloem, the Dutch finance minister, said Greece’s debt 
burden – and the problems of servicing it – would not become a major problem 
for almost 30 years.


There is unlikely to be any direct writedown of nominal debt levels, but moves 
to reduce the debt could involve extending repayment schedules and lowering 
interest rates.

Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> is the biggest and most 
formidable opponent of debt relief, but is also the loudest supporter of 
keeping the IMF on board.

IMF involvement in the new bailout was a “precondition” for Berlin, said 
Schäuble. “We have to see that we can get a clear, possibly binding, commitment 
from the IMF ... We’ve always said that has to be feasible. The IMF has its own 
rules, but we will have to find a way.”

An IMF statement supporting the new deal said it would reserve judgment on 
participation until October. “The IMF will make an assessment of its 
participation in providing any additional financing to Greece once the steps on 
the authorities’ programme and debt relief have been taken,” it said.

On Thursday the IMF’s call for debt relief was bolstered further when the 
European commission, the European Stability Mechanism – the eurozone’s bailout 
fund – and the ECBraised concerns about the scale of the debt burden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/13/greece-surprises-with-economic-growth-in-second-quarter>
. However, the three European institutions opposed the idea of a so-called 
“haircut”, or reducing the size of the debt. The IMF has said a haircut might 
be necessary.

Tsipras could become the leader Greece needs – if he can survive politically | 
David Patrikarakos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/14/alexis-tsipras-true-leader-greece-pragmatism>
Alexander Stubb, the Finnish finance minister, admitted that the debt relief 
issue was a problem that needed to be resolved.

 “We should be honest and open that there is a bit of a catch-22 to solve 
here,” he said. “The IMF will be involved only with debt relief, and we want 
the IMF to be involved but we don’t want debt relief. So some kind of solution 
will have to be found.”

Speaking ahead of the parliamentary vote in Athens, the Greek prime minister 
urged MPs to accept the tough bailout terms. Tsipras said the rescue package 
was a necessary choice for the nation, saying it faced a battle to avert the 
threat of a bridge loan – which he called a return to “crisis without end” – 
that Greece may be offered instead of a full-blown bailout.

The terms for the bailout detail a radical overhaul of the Greek economy, 
stipulating major reforms of health, welfare, pensions and taxation systems, 
alongside more ambitious privatisation schemes. It also gives the troika 
decisive influence over reforms of the country’sstruggling banking sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/29/greek-debt-crisis-key-points-athens-bank-controls>
.

 * This standfirst of this article was amended on 15 August 2015 to reflect 
eurozone ministers’ approval of Greece’s third bailout
 