
The Hilton hotel in Athens makes the perfect backdrop for high-intensity 
talks. Its ambience is subdued, its corridors hushed, its meeting rooms an 
oasis of tranquility.

When Greece <https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece>, in one of its many 
stand-offs with the international creditors keeping it afloat, finally won the 
right to conduct negotiations outside the confines of government offices, it 
seemed only natural that they should be held at the hotel.

However, in recent weeks the talks have assumed an increasingly nervous edge. 
An economic review that should have been completed months ago has been beset by 
wrangling as Alexis Tsipras’s leftist-led government has argued with lenders 
over the terms of a bailout agreed last summer.

The €86bn (£67.8bn) rescue programme agreed in July 2015 – the debt-stricken 
country’s third in six years – followed months of high-octane drama that saw 
Athens being pushed to the brink of bankruptcy and euro exit. Now, less than a 
year later – and with a crucial meeting of eurozone finance ministers lined up 
for Friday – a sense of crisis has returned to Greece.

With politicians indulging in the angry rhetoric that put Athens on a 
collision course with lenders last year, investors have begun to worry. Yields 
on government bonds have risen, protesters have taken to the streets, and 
“Grexit” – the catch-all word that so conjured up Greece’s battle with economic 
meltdown – is being murmured again.

Against a backdrop of maturing debt – the country must repay €5bn to the 
European Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank> and International 
Monetary Fund in June and July – commentators have begun to talk in terms of 
fatal miscalculation. “History is made of accidents which were not the result 
of some secret plan, but a string of errors, human weaknesses and obsessions,” 
wrote Alexis Papahelas in the conservative daily Kathimerini. “Lets hope we 
will avoid that.”

On the street, the uncertainty has not only had a deadening effect on an 
economy already battered by years of withering austerity; it has also created 
mounting anxiety among a populace that has seen per capita GDP levels drop by 
28%, unemployment nudge 30%, more than one in four businesses close and poverty 
afflict one in three. After defying the doomsayers, there are fears Europe’s 
most indebted country could now be heading towards a disorderly default.

“There is no one I know who isn’t worried,” says Yannis Tsandris, a private 
sector retiree whose pension has been cut by almost a third. “If there is a 
haircut on bank deposits it will be the end and, so far, that is the only 
measure they haven’t taken. If Greece defaults it will be impossible to find 
oil, impossible to find medicines. And this time round everything seems 
possible.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fgreek-talks-with-lenders-fraught-as-fears-grow-of-default%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88ddc04eadb0a09fbb9ea62286a4ed7715aeacc8%2F0_159_4835_2900%2F4835.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Greek%20talks%20with%20lenders%20fraught%20as%20fears%20grow%20of%20default&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fgreek-talks-with-lenders-fraught-as-fears-grow-of-default%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Greek%20talks%20with%20lenders%20fraught%20as%20fears%20grow%20of%20default&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fgreek-talks-with-lenders-fraught-as-fears-grow-of-default%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88ddc04eadb0a09fbb9ea62286a4ed7715aeacc8%2F0_159_4835_2900%2F4835.jpg>
 Migrants gather for a meeting at an unofficial camp run by volunteers near the 
port of Mytilene on the island of Lesbos. Photograph: Louisa 
Gouliamaki/AFP/Getty Images 
While Europe has been preoccupied with terror attacks, the crisis in Greece 
has not only rumbled on, but morphed into a two-pronged drama that has seen the 
country’s financial woes being intensified by thearrival of thousands of 
refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/23/number-of-refugee-arrivals-in-greece-passes-100000-in-less-than-two-months>
. On the frontline of that emergency, Greece has been forced to mete out funds 
from depleted coffers.

Prime minister Tsipras’s government – originally voted into office on a 
platform to eradicate austerity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/12/alexis-tsipras-pledged-to-end-austerity-now-he-is-asked-to-sign-up-for-more>
 – has used the migrant crisis to play for time. But after months of wrangling 
over pension reform, tax increases and non-performing loans, lenders stepped up 
their demands at the weekend, with the IMF saying Athens would have to agree to 
contingency measures worth €3bn on top of the package of €5bn in tax increases 
and spending cuts it is already negotiating with creditors.

The demand reflected the wildly divergent views of the IMF and the eurozone 
lenders on whether Athens can achieve agreed fiscal targets – including a 
primary surplus on public finances of 3.5% by 2018 – under the current reform 
programme.

The Washington-based body, which has also called for debt relief, considers EU 
figures too optimistic. “What we have seen to a great degree is a game of 
chicken, with the government avoiding any decision that might lead to crisis 
inside the [two ruling] parties or the government itself,” said Aristides 
Hatzis, associate professor of law and economics at Athens University. “But the 
demand for extra measures could also lead to a backlash, destabilise the entire 
political system and democracy itself. No government could sell such fiscal 
measures, not even one led by Alexis Tsipras.”

On Thursday, following Eurostat figures that showed Greece had attained a 
better-than-anticipated primary budget surplus last year, the leftist leader 
dug in his heels. What the country required was debt relief, not new austerity 
measures, he insisted. “Greece, which has a primary surplus of 0.7%, does not 
need extra measures. What Greece needs is an essential debt relief,” Tsipras 
told Euronews. “We must move forward and finally overcome this crisis.”

The government wants to conclude the review so that talks on debt forgiveness 
can begin and Athens can unlock badly needed bailout loans to honour this 
summer’s maturing debts.

All agree that Athens is now in a race against the clock. With little 
indication of the deadlock being broken at Friday’s eurozone meeting, analysts 
say it is vital the review is wrapped up in May beforeEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> gears up for the UK referendum 
on EU membership. The risk of ongoing talks spilling into a crisis in the 
banking system will grow if that is not achieved.

“The risk that an accident might happen is far from negligible,” said Athens 
University’s economics professor, George Pagoulatos. “Talks will have to freeze 
in view of the UK referendum. There is a window and it ends in May.”



 