
Greece <https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> has come a step closer to 
unlocking more international support for its debt-ravaged economy after talks 
with its eurozone neighbours.

A meeting of finance ministers from the single currency bloc ended with a 
proposal for Athens to agree to money-saving contingency measures. These could 
be enacted if the reforms already agreed prove to be insufficient for Greece to 
meet agreed budget surplus targets.

Greece clinched an €86bn (£67bn) bailout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/14/greece-edges-third-bailout-positive-signals-germany>
 last summer – its third such package of emergency loans – in return for 
promising to reduce its deficit with measures such as higher VAT rates and 
pension cuts. It now urgently needs more funds to be disbursed from that 
bailout as big repayment deadlines approach on some of its bonds.

But eurozone policymakers and the International Monetary Fund have been at 
odds over whether Greece can achieve agreed fiscal targets – including a 
primary surplus on public finances of 3.5% by 2018. The IMF is sceptical that 
the goal can be reached without extra reforms. The Fund alsowants the European 
Union to provide significant debt relief for Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/21/imf-demands-debt-relief-from-europe-for-greece-before-new-bailout>
 before getting behind thecountry’s third bailout package 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2015/aug/14/greek-bailout-vote-and-eurozone-gdp-growth-figures-live-updates>
.

There were signs of breakthrough at talks in Amsterdam on Friday where lenders 
called on Greece to pass extra measures into law as an insurance policy – only 
to be enacted if budget goals appear off target. Those contingency plans, 
equivalent to 2% of GDP, should allow Greece and its lenders to discuss debt 
relief while also unlocking further chunks of bailout money yet to be disbursed.


Jeroen Dijsselbloem, the Dutch finance minister and leader of the Eurogroup of 
eurozone finance ministers, said that after talks in Amsterdam,Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> would go away and work both on a 
possible upfront package of measures, as well as a package of contingent 
measures.

The Eurogroup would then probably meet again on Thursday next week, to discuss 
the proposed measures and there would also be a “serious conversation” about a 
debt relief package for Greece, he said.

He was upbeat on progress being made between now and Thursday. “We will all 
have to bridge our differences. For some of course, the contingency measures 
are difficult, and for some debt is a big issue, politically difficult,” 
Dijsselbloem said.

“But on all sides it was very constructive today and there was an open 
attitude to cross that bridge.”

The Dutch minister said that “in order for the contingency measures to be 
credible, they need to be legislated” and the IMF also said it wanted to see 
them passed into law. But Greece itself raised doubts about meeting those 
demands.

The Greek finance minister, Euclid Tsakalotos, told journalists it would not 
be possible to legislate for contingency measures, because Greek law would not 
allow it. He said Greece and its lenders would instead have to find “a 
commitment mechanism”.

Figures from the European statistics body Eurostat this week showed that 
Greece had achieved a better-than-expected primary budget surplus last year. 
That prompted the country’s leftwing government under its prime minister,Alexis 
Tsipras <https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexis-tsipras>, to argue again for 
debt relief over new austerity measures.

Diego Iscaro, senior economist at the consultancy IHS Global Insight, said 
those budget figures had emboldened Athens in its claims that it could be 
trusted on getting the deficit down.

But Iscaro expected the current negotiations between Greece and its official 
creditors to remain difficult. Last year’s outcome would not change things 
dramatically “as the IMF’s main concern is the long-term sustainability of 
Greece’s debt levels”, he said.
 