
Greece’s leftist-led coalition will turn to the lightning rod issue of debt 
relief on Monday at a crucial meeting of eurozone finance ministers following 
the late-night approval in Athens of laws overhauling the country’s tax and 
pension system.

Amid violence on the streets and a three-day general strike that had brought 
much of the country to a halt, the embattled government pushed the legislation 
through parliament with the backing of its 153 MPS. Addressing the 300-seat 
House, prime minister Alexis Tsipras said: “We are determined to makeGreece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> stand on its two feet at any cost.”

Europe's liberal illusions shatter as Greek tragedy plays on
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/01/europe-illusions-shatter-as-greek-tragedy-plays-on-austerity>
Rioters pelted police with stones while black-clad anarchists lobbed flaming 
Molotov cocktails, after Athens’s finance minister warned Greece could become a 
“failed state” if it was pushed too far.

The controversial bills, worth €5.4bn (£4.27bn) in budget savings, were seen 
as the toughest reforms the thrice bailed-out nation has been forced to enact 
since its debt crisis began 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/01/europe-illusions-shatter-as-greek-tragedy-plays-on-austerity>
. The once firebrand Tsipras called the vote in advance of tortuous bailout 
negotiations being concluded in a bid to placate eurozone finance ministers 
ahead of Monday’s meeting.

In an unprecedented step, lenders are expected to focus on the nation’s 
staggering debt load – at over 180% of GDP the largest inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> – with Athens keen to secure a 
pledge that a write-down is in the offing.

But creditors are also demanding a new set of contingency measures to ensure 
the country achieves agreed stringent fiscal targets by 2018.

Public anger against Greece’s lenders is palpable. “Every day they destroy our 
country a little more,” said Vassilis Papadopoulos, a young waiter, of the 
international creditors keeping the debt-stricken nation afloat.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Frioters-take-to-the-streets-ahead-of-greek-austerity-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbcce3e777b564adabe808d38705b791e0a6f7359%2F0_58_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Greek%20MPs%20approve%20toughest%20austerity%20measures%20yet%20amid%20rioting&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Frioters-take-to-the-streets-ahead-of-greek-austerity-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Greek%20MPs%20approve%20toughest%20austerity%20measures%20yet%20amid%20rioting&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Frioters-take-to-the-streets-ahead-of-greek-austerity-vote%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbcce3e777b564adabe808d38705b791e0a6f7359%2F0_58_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
 Riot police disperse protesters during clashes that broke during a protest 
against reforms to the tax and pension systems. Photograph: Orestis 
Panagiotou/EPA 
“OK, I accept we have to change but, like this, that’s not fair. How can 
anyone survive on a national monthly pension of €384? How can a state function 
when over 25% of its population is unemployed?”

Ahead of Monday’s eurogroup meeting meeting, finance minister Euclid Tskalotos 
warned darkly of the perils involved in demanding yet more cuts of a nation 
whose economy has shrunk by more than 25% in the six years since successive 
governments began slashing budgets in return for bailout aid.


“Nobody should believe that another Greek crisis, leading perhaps to another 
failed state in the region, could be beneficial to anyone,” he wrote in an 
unusually dramatic letter to his eurozone counterparts. “There is no way that 
such a package can be passed by the current government, or by any democratic 
government that I can imagine.”


For a time, it seemed, Greece’s economic woes had gone away. Eclipsed by 
Europe’s refugee crisis, terrorist attacks and the fears engendered by 
Britain’s forthcoming EU referendum, Athens’s debt drama appeared to disappear.

But policymakers are discovering that may have been wishful thinking. The 
nation that last year came close to exiting the euro – triggering the 
continent’s biggest existential crisis in decades – is once again close to the 
brink.

Economists, politicians and investors all speak of uncertainty – an 
uncertainty reinforced by the wildly divergent views of creditors over how best 
to put the country back on its feet.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Frioters-take-to-the-streets-ahead-of-greek-austerity-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03a1c3b43f8af5e9223f692be38fc8604def31b7%2F0_535_5265_3159%2F5265.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Greek%20MPs%20approve%20toughest%20austerity%20measures%20yet%20amid%20rioting&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Frioters-take-to-the-streets-ahead-of-greek-austerity-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Greek%20MPs%20approve%20toughest%20austerity%20measures%20yet%20amid%20rioting&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Frioters-take-to-the-streets-ahead-of-greek-austerity-vote%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03a1c3b43f8af5e9223f692be38fc8604def31b7%2F0_535_5265_3159%2F5265.jpg>
 Demonstrator wearing a gas mask during the protests. Photograph: Angelos 
Tzortzinis/AFP/Getty Images 
 Central to that argument is Greece’s ability to achieve a primary surplus of 
3.5% by 2018. The International Monetary Fund, which believes the surplus 
should be no higher than 1.5%, says substantial debt relief is the only way the 
country can recover economically. On Friday the fund’s managing director, 
Christine Lagarde,threatened to pull out of Greece’s rescue programme altogether
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/06/imf-threatens-greece-eurozone-christine-lagarde>
 if Brussels failed to yield. Athens has received more than €250bn in bailout 
funds in what has amounted to the biggest financial rescue programme in global 
history.

Germany’s hardline finance minister, Wolfgang Schäuble, fearing hefty losses 
on the loans Berlin and other eurozone members have made, has steadfastly ruled 
out debt forgiveness.

But Tsipras won unexpected support at the weekend from Germany’s 
vice-chancellor, Sigmar Gabriel. In a statement to Reuters, Sigmar, who is also 
the economy minister, insisted debt relief was now the only way of plucking 
Greece out of its seemingly endless economic death spiral. “The eurogroup 
meeting on Monday must find a way to break the vicious circle,” he wrote. 
“Everyone knows that this debt relief will have to come at some point. It makes 
no sense to shirk from that time and time again.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Frioters-take-to-the-streets-ahead-of-greek-austerity-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F825bd1e066b640d0d966cb2533ba6b05da3957e9%2F61_3_2372_1423%2F2372.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Greek%20MPs%20approve%20toughest%20austerity%20measures%20yet%20amid%20rioting&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Frioters-take-to-the-streets-ahead-of-greek-austerity-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Greek%20MPs%20approve%20toughest%20austerity%20measures%20yet%20amid%20rioting&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Frioters-take-to-the-streets-ahead-of-greek-austerity-vote%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F825bd1e066b640d0d966cb2533ba6b05da3957e9%2F61_3_2372_1423%2F2372.jpg>
 Protesters throw flares at riot police during the demonstration. Photograph: 
Angelos Tzortzinis/AFP/Getty Images 
The overhaul of the pension system – along with unpopular tax measures and an 
increase in VAT – form the central plank of a €5.4bn package of budget cuts and 
reforms that Tsipras has agreed to enact in exchange for rescue funds from a 
third, €86bn bailout the country signed up to last summer.

After nine months of wrangling over the latest austerity measures, Tsipras had 
hoped Sunday’s vote would unlock further funds.

In July Greece faces €3.5bn in debt repayments. Without bailout aid, once 
again it confronts the spectre of default and likely ejection from the single 
currency.

“We are, with a little less drama, back where we were last year,” noted 
Christos Memis, a veteran political commentator now in charge of news portal 
Protagon.gr.

“The prime minister and his aides are a little more mature, a little wiser. 
They like power and I think are determined to come to an agreement with 
Europeans but there are hurdles not least in Syriza,” he said of Tsipras’ 
radical left coalition party.

With the UK’s looming EU referendum, eurozone partners have made clear that 
bailout negotiations have to be wrapped up by the end of May or be put on hold 
until July when markets will once again be rattled by the prospect of a Greek 
default.

Speaking to the Guardian ahead of the vote, the culture minister Aristides 
Baltas, said the unpopular reforms would be enforced even if no one believed in 
them.

“Nobody in the government agrees with this agreement but we have signed it and 
have made a historical pledge to implement it,” said the French-trained 
philosopher who played a pivotal role in drawing up the ruling Syriza’s party’s 
founding programme. “We know it will be hard for Greeks.”
 