
Greece <https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> must implement economic 
reforms if it is to keep its place in the eurozone, Germany’s finance minister 
has insisted, ruling out debt relief for the country ahead of a crucial euro 
group meeting on Monday.

As the finance ministers of member states using the single currency prepared 
to discuss fiscal plans for the coming year, Wolfgang Schäuble in effect 
presented Greece with an ultimatum: either it must enforce unpopular structural 
reforms or exit the bloc.

“Athens must finally implement the needed reforms,” he told the newspaper Bild 
am Sonntag in an interview 
<http://www.bild.de/geld/aktuelles/wirtschaft/schaeuble-athen-muss-noetige-reformen-machen-49064258.bild.html>
 published on Sunday.

“If Greece wants to stay in the euro, there is no way around it – in fact 
completely regardless of the debt level.”

Asked if German voters should be prepared for the inevitability of debt relief 
in the run-up to national elections next year, Schäuble quipped: “That would 
not help Greece.”

Schäuble, who also asserted the Greek budget was not burdened by debt 
servicing because interest rates were now so low, made the comments as 
speculation mounted over how best to put the thrice-bailed-out nation back on 
the road to economic recovery. On Friday the German finance ministry announced 
that short-term measures to lighten Greece’s debt load would be among the 
proposals up for discussion at the euro group meeting.

Athens’s leftist-led government has long argued that the country’s staggering 
€330bn debt load 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/barack-obama-calls-for-meaningful-debt-relief-for-greece>
 is the single biggest impediment to sustainable growth. It is an argument that 
has wonbacking from the International Monetary Fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/23/imf-warns-eu-bailout-greece-debt-relief>
.

Time is of the essence. The economic crisis enveloping Greece is far from over 
despite more than €300bn of emergency loans since 2010 when, after its first 
brush with bankruptcy, it received its first EU-IMF sponsored bailout.

Related: 'Everyone’s outraged': angry Greeks foresee Grexit and drachma's 
revival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/10/greece-austerity-grexit-drachma> 

Amid relentless tax rises and budget cuts – the price of the aid – support for 
the euro is falling fast with graffitiextolling the virtues of the drachma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/10/greece-austerity-grexit-drachma> 
appearing across the capital. Euclid Tsakalatos, the Greek finance minister, 
has said the situation “is as critical as it was in the summer of 2015” when, 
under threat of euro ejection, Athens received itsthird €86bn rescue package 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/14/greece-edges-third-bailout-positive-signals-germany>
.

With his own popularity plummeting in the face of fury over creditor-mandated 
cutbacks, the prime minister,Alexis Tsipras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/06/greek-prime-minister-tsipras-reshuffles-cabinet-to-boost-bailout-reforms>
, had hoped to wrap up a second review of policy measures in time for Monday’s 
meeting as part of a broader strategy to secure short-term debt relief and 
participation of Greek bonds in the European Central Bank’s quantitative easing 
programme. The latter, he argues, is vital to Greece returning to international 
capital markets when itscurrent bailout expires in mid-2018 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/may/24/eurozone-greek-bailout-debt-relief-business-live?page=with:block-5744f176e4b04536c2a43cb8>
.

Instead, the review has been bogged down by disputes over contentious labour 
reforms including the abolition of collective bargaining and guards against 
companies laying off workers – red lines for leftists in the ruling Syriza 
party. Recently the IMF has added to the pressure, saying Athens will have to 
apply €4.2bn worth of extra measures to meet fiscal targets after 2018, a 
demand widely seen as the tipping point for austerity-whipped Greeks.

But Tsipras is also acutely aware that forthcoming European elections and the 
possible loss of sympathetic friends – starting withItaly’s Matteo Renzi in 
Sunday’s referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/italy-referendum-matteo-renzi> – 
could spell further trouble for the eurozone’s weakest link by quashing any 
chance of debt relief. Tellingly, leading Syriza cadres and MEPs have in recent 
weeks underlined the need for a “plan B” and not ruled out euro exit.

Highlighting the significance of Monday’s euro group meeting, the EU economic 
affairs commissioner, Pierre Moscovici, said discussion of fiscal plans would 
take place against a backdrop of the commission calling “for a positive fiscal 
stance for the eurozone as a whole”.
 