
‘Los Angeles is so massive, confusing, beautiful, harsh and strange that it 
almost defies you to make work about it,” says the photographerGregory Halpern 
<http://gregoryhalpern.com/>. “It is an impossible project in a way.” In his 
intriguingly titled new book,ZZYZX <http://www.gregoryhalpern.com/zzyzx.html> – 
named after a village on the edge of the Mojave desert in Saint Bernardino 
County – Halpern has created a California of the mind, a place both real and 
metaphorical, familiar yet alien. The photographs hold all kinds of resonances 
from the dark, surreal films ofDavid Lynch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/davidlynch> to the anxious urban 
neighbourhoods evoked in the early essays ofJoan Didion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/aug/20/biography.features>.

Even the light in Los Angeles seems compromised: there’s a beautiful haziness 
to it caused by the pollution in the air
Gregory Halpern 
“My work begins with the notion of documentary, but I want it to be more than 
that,” says Halpern, who grew up in Buffalo, New York, and now lives further 
upstate in Rochester. “It is grounded in reality, but it occupies an inbetween 
space between documentary and a certain sense of mystery. I want to always 
leave room in the pictures for the viewer’s thoughts and projections.”

Born in 1977, Halpern studied history and literature at Harvard, before 
completing a postgraduate degree in fine art at the California College of Arts. 
His previous books have includedOmaha Sketchbook 
<http://www.gregoryhalpern.com/omaha.html>, another less heightened journey 
into the American landscape, andEast of the Sun, West of the Moon 
<http://www.gregoryhalpern.com/eswm.html>, a collaboration with the photographer
Ahndraya Parlato <http://www.ahndrayaparlato.com/>, comprising of images taken 
on the solstice or equinox.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fgregory-halpern-zzyzx-photography-book-california-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f1541e06b0626cbfc640c3fa2c91b60fe410c24%2F0_0_1962_2400%2F1962.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gregory%20Halpern%E2%80%99s%20ZZYZX%20%E2%80%93%20California%20dreamin%E2%80%99%20in%20the%2021st%20century&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fgregory-halpern-zzyzx-photography-book-california-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gregory%20Halpern%E2%80%99s%20ZZYZX%20%E2%80%93%20California%20dreamin%E2%80%99%20in%20the%2021st%20century&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fgregory-halpern-zzyzx-photography-book-california-los-angeles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f1541e06b0626cbfc640c3fa2c91b60fe410c24%2F0_0_1962_2400%2F1962.jpg>
 ‘I just came upon this couple and it turned out they were moving into a 
friend’s house ... the image of them walking and pulling their possessions 
seemed mysterious and timeless. Plus, nobody walks in Los Angeles.’ Photograph: 
Gregory Halpern / Webber Gallery Space 
Halpern spent five years on ZZYZX, often travelling to locations in California 
he picked at random from Google maps. It took him another year to edit the 
results, trawling though an estimated thousand rolls of film, about half of 
which were shot in the final year after a Guggenheim grant enabled him to live 
in California for a time. “I was struck constantly by the beauty and the 
harshness of the environment, by the sunshine and the smog, the vast space of 
the desert and the choking traffic of the cities,” says Halpern. “Even the 
light inLos Angeles <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/los-angeles> seems 
compromised: there’s a beautiful haziness to it caused by the pollution in the 
air.”

That unreal light is one of the defining aspects of Halpern’s Californian 
photographs, falling on landscapes and faces, heightening the sense of 
unreality outsiders often detect in LA. The British documentary photographer
Chris Killip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/21/in-flagrante-two-review-chris-killip-thatcher-sea-coal-north-east-england-northumberland-industrial->
, who taught Halpern at Harvard, says he has broken away from “the sanctified 
cliched reverence” of traditional American landscape photography and “seems 
able to connect with this massive subject in ways that others cannot”. In one 
striking image, Halpern frames a black-stemmed Joshua tree, scorched by a 
forest fire, against earth and sky, its spiky golden leaves insisting on life 
even amid this deathly environment. In another, a raised hand, its open palm 
tattooed with seven stars, shades an unseen face from the unforgiving glare of 
the Californian sun. The stars, Halpern adds, could refer to a biblical 
quotation from Revelation 1:16.

Earlier working titles for the book included Babylon and Kingdom, but 
Halpern’s publisher, Michael Mack, advised against them, thinking rightly that 
they were too symbolic. Many of Halpern’s images, though, would be apocalyptic 
if they weren’t so formally beautiful. That beauty is troubling in a different 
way, when it is applied to the portraits of the homeless and the struggling 
that punctuate the book.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fgregory-halpern-zzyzx-photography-book-california-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb298f05ae39d3879a05106986b81244c0367c84b%2F0_0_1946_2400%2F1946.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gregory%20Halpern%E2%80%99s%20ZZYZX%20%E2%80%93%20California%20dreamin%E2%80%99%20in%20the%2021st%20century&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fgregory-halpern-zzyzx-photography-book-california-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gregory%20Halpern%E2%80%99s%20ZZYZX%20%E2%80%93%20California%20dreamin%E2%80%99%20in%20the%2021st%20century&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fgregory-halpern-zzyzx-photography-book-california-los-angeles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb298f05ae39d3879a05106986b81244c0367c84b%2F0_0_1946_2400%2F1946.jpg>
 ‘The guy reached up like this and I instinctively photographed it. There’s a 
reference to the American flag there, I guess.’ Photograph: Gregory Halpern / 
Webber Gallery Space 
There's still a notion of manifest destiny in California but also that it’s 
the end of the dream… you can go no further

“Most of the portraits are of people I encountered on the streets as I was 
photographing,” says Halpern. “I am not trying to make a statement about their 
situation in the way that a concerned documentary photographer might do. Again, 
it is about the reality and the mystery of the images, and, to a degree, about 
the questions they raise. There’s a picture of a homeless guy lying on the 
grass laughing, but is it a happy image or a sad one? Then, there’s the 
viewer’s reaction to it – is it mean? Is it exploitative?”

Halpern, one senses, is still grappling with the meaning of his work. ZZYZX is 
certainly a departure from the quieter observational style of his earlier work. 
“I seeZZYZX as part of a continuum but edging a little closer towards fiction,” 
he says. “I’m not saying it is fiction, but it has that element of being more 
somehow than the real – more beautiful, more ugly, more complicated and 
contradictory. Like LA itself, in fact.”

In a recent talk given at his London gallery, Webber, where images from ZZYZX 
arecurrently on show <http://www.webberrepresents.com/gallery/>, Halpern 
discussed his often obsessive working methods. Once he was on a flight from 
Buffalo to Los Angeles, he recalled, when the pilot announced they were flying 
over a forest fire that was visible below. From his middle-aisle seat, Halpern 
couldn’t see it, but when he landed in Los Angeles, he immediately hired a car 
and drove 90 miles back to where it was raging in order to photograph it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fgregory-halpern-zzyzx-photography-book-california-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8dc4db565a08f7adc89efdcb6f4535f2ae4b9bd1%2F0_0_1920_2400%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gregory%20Halpern%E2%80%99s%20ZZYZX%20%E2%80%93%20California%20dreamin%E2%80%99%20in%20the%2021st%20century&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fgregory-halpern-zzyzx-photography-book-california-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gregory%20Halpern%E2%80%99s%20ZZYZX%20%E2%80%93%20California%20dreamin%E2%80%99%20in%20the%2021st%20century&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fgregory-halpern-zzyzx-photography-book-california-los-angeles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8dc4db565a08f7adc89efdcb6f4535f2ae4b9bd1%2F0_0_1920_2400%2F1920.jpg>
 ‘In California, there is an element of dread that makes you feel the whole 
place could be on the edge of extinction. That’s there in the city but in the 
natural world, too. The constant threat of fire and the attendant lack of water 
is another example of the strange extremity of the place.’ Photograph: Gregory 
Halpern / Webber Gallery Space 
Images of fires and their aftermath are scattered throughout the book, another 
metaphor for the dread that haunts the Californian dream. The book’s title, 
though, comes from a village built on the promise of California’s scarcest 
commodity – water. The village Zzyzx, pronounced zye-zix, was formerly called 
Soda Springs after a natural spring there, but was rechristened by a mineral 
water pioneer, Curtis Howe Springer, in 1944. The eccentric Springer named it 
after what he claimed to be the last word that could be spelt in the English 
language.

“The word has a dystopian, futuristic aspect,” says Halpern, “even though it 
came out of a utopian dream that Springer had while squatting the land for 
three years. He somehow willed the word and the place into being. That notion 
of manifest destiny is there still inCalifornia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california>, but also the sense that it’s 
the end of the dream. You get there and you can go no further. You are faced 
with yourself and your life, but just in a more beautiful setting.”

ZZYZX is published by Mack (£35) 
<http://www.mackbooks.co.uk/books/1142-ZZYZX.html>. The work is on show at 
Webber Gallery Space <http://www.webberrepresents.com/gallery/>, London W1, 
until 29 Oct.
 