
European finance ministers will once again deliberate over how to treat 
Greece’s ongoing debt crisis this week despite the country desperately 
grappling with refugees pouring across its borders.

A meeting on Monday of finance ministers from the eurozone will determine 
whether creditors are to be given the green light to complete a long-delayed 
review of Greek economic recovery plans.

The review has been held up by disagreement among lenders over how much more 
Athens needs to cut from public spending. It is seen as key to reviving 
Greece’s banking sector and restoring business and consumer confidence.

“I think the situation right now is more dangerous than it was last summer,” 
the former finance minister Gikas Hardouvelis told the Guardian.


“Then it was a question of the political will of a few people,” he said, 
referring to the tumultuous negotiations that paved the way to Athensreceiving 
a third bailout in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/14/greece-edges-third-bailout-positive-signals-germany>
. “Now it’s a question of implementing reforms and working hard and if a 
government doesn’t believe in them and implements them begrudgingly, progress 
becomes very difficult.”

Monday’s meeting comes at an especially sensitive time. Greek unemployment 
remains the highest in Europe atalmost 25% 
<http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Unemployment_statistics#Unemployment_trends>
 – and just under 50% among the young. Many companies are relocating to 
Bulgaria, Albania, Romania and Cyprus as a result of over-taxation.


Meanwhile, the once booming tourism trade has taken a hit as bookings to 
Aegean isles have collapsed because of refugee arrivals. Last week, it was 
announced by Greece’s official statistics agency,Elstat 
<http://www.statistics.gr/en/home/>, that the debt-stricken nation had dipped 
back into recession 
<http://www.ekathimerini.com/206664/article/ekathimerini/business/economy-returned-to-contraction-in-2015-shrinking-02-pct>
.

After three emergency bailouts and the biggest debt restructuring in history, 
talk once again has turned to the country dropping out of the single currency.


Businessmen and bankers in private concede that as the economy disintegrates 
the possibility of a parallel currency is now openly being discussed. “The 
probability of Grexit is still there,” added Hardouvelis. “It has not gone 
away. Just look at the yield investors are required to pay on Greek bonds.”

Everyone agrees that time is of the essence. Further delays make potentially 
explosive reforms – starting with the overhaul of the pension system – harder 
to sell for a leftist-led government that in recent months has faced protest on 
the streets.


“We have no time,” finance minister Euclid Tsakalotos told the European 
parliament’s economics committee last week. “We hope the IMF will become more 
reasonable.”

The Oxford–educated economics professor has repeatedly said that postponement 
makes any plan “to escape the vicious circle of measures-recession-new 
measures” almost impossible.

But the IMF, under pressure from its own member states, insists that Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> will have to implement additional 
measures worth €9bn (£6.96bn), or 4.5% of GDP, if it is to meet an agreed 
budget surplus of 3.5% in the years ahead.


Without debt relief or deeper cuts to the pension system, the Washington-based 
body does not expect Greece to be able to meet that target.

While Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> wants the IMF to 
remain involved in the bailout programme, debt relief – even in the form of 
extending maturities on bonds – remains politically an anathema to eurozone 
lenders. Meanwhile, cuts to pensions, which have been slashed numerous times 
since the onset of the crisis in late 2009, are unthinkable for the government.

With disbursement of aid also held up, debt due for repayment this summer has 
hastened the need for a solution. “As far as Greece’s bailout is concerned, the 
bigger problem remains the ongoing disagreement between the Europeans and the 
IMF over the size of the fiscal adjustment necessary,” said Mujtaba Rahman, 
head of European analysis at the London-based Eurasia risk consultancy.

Any hopes that Greece’s frontline role in the refugee crisis could see 
creditors soften their stance were quashed ahead of the meeting on Sunday when 
Germany ruled out giving Athens more time to achieve budget goals. “The refugee 
issue and the aid program for Greece should not be mixed,” a spokesman for 
Berlin’s hardline finance minister Wolfgang Schäubletold Reuters,  
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-eurozone-greece-germany-idUSKCN0W80LK>
setting the scene for the standoff to intensify in Brussels.
 