
Many children will have received cash over Christmas, and most will spend it 
pretty quickly. But if the sums are quite generous – or if you want to get your 
children into the savings habit early – this is one area where there are still 
some decent returns to be had.

Instant-access accounts can be found paying 3% interest, while one regular 
savings account for children pays a very welcome 6% … more than almost anything 
out there on the market.

Regular-savings accounts

By far the highest return on any children’s account right now, at 6% gross, is 
theHalifax Kids Regular Saver <http://www.halifax.co.uk/savings/accounts/kids/>
. As the name suggests, however, this is not really designed for a one-off, 
lump-sum deposit but is definitely tempting if you can afford to separately 
stash a bit of cash. It requires you to commit to saving a regular amount of 
between £10 and £100 a month for 12 months. This branch-based account pays 
interest at the end of the 12-month term, during which no withdrawals are 
allowed.

Easy/Instant-access accounts

Many parents will be looking for a staightforward easy-access account which 
will allow them to make withdrawals whenever they like without any notice and 
add future birthday and Christmas money.

Best-buy tables from independent financial product comparison websites like 
Moneyfacts.co.uk <http://moneyfacts.co.uk>reveal that many of the easy-access 
accounts actually pay higher rates than notice accounts, so your child will not 
be losing out by having quick access to their savings.

But be careful when checking out the chart-toppers because some come with 
restrictions and are not as simple as they seem at first glance.

Take Nationwide’s Smart Limited Access 
<http://www.nationwide.co.uk/products/savings/smart-limited-access/features-and-benefits>
account, for example. This legitimately tops the charts for the instant-access 
accounts, paying 3% gross on deposits from £1 to a maximum of £50,000 and is 
available to children from birth. However, ​this only allows one withdrawal a 
year while continuing to pay the 3%. Once you make a second withdrawal, the 
rate drops to 0.75% for the remainder of the year.

HSBC’s MySavings <http://www.hsbc.co.uk/1/2/savings-accounts/mysavings>, which 
also pays 3% gross, but is relegated to second place in the Moneyfacts best-buy 
table by Nationwide’s offering, might actually appeal more to many parents.

It is open to seven to 17-year-olds, requires a minimum £10 deposit and pays 
3% on the first £3,000 – any balance in excess of £3,000 earns just 0.5%.

But there are no restrictions on the number of penalty-free withdrawals you 
can make so, if your child’s savings are never likely to top £3,000 and you 
want genuine easy access, this is arguably the one to go for.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fbest-childrens-savings-account-interest-rates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F847c1d0bfcb9cc545f189a6799f865ced1d8c5f1%2F0_509_5231_3140%2F5231.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Grow%20their%20interest%3A%20the%20best%20children%E2%80%99s%20savings%20accounts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fbest-childrens-savings-account-interest-rates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Grow%20their%20interest%3A%20the%20best%20children%E2%80%99s%20savings%20accounts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fbest-childrens-savings-account-interest-rates%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F847c1d0bfcb9cc545f189a6799f865ced1d8c5f1%2F0_509_5231_3140%2F5231.jpg>
 If a child earns more than £100 interest in a tax year, the parent is liable 
to pay tax. Photograph: Alamy 
Next best buy, paying 2.5% gross on balances of £1 to £25,000, is the 
Mansfield building society’s Young Saver 
<http://mansfieldbs.co.uk/children-s-accounts> open to children aged 0-17. It 
allows six free withdrawals each calendar year with additional withdrawals 
subject to the loss of 30 days interest on the amount withdrawn.

Also worth considering is Skipton building society’s Leap Account 
<http://www.skipton.co.uk/savings/childrens/leap-account>, a true easy-access 
account with no restrictions on withdrawals, paying 2.25% gross on £1-£50,000 
and open to account holders aged 0-17. Note that two rival accounts paying 
2.25% gross –Lloyds Bank Young Saver 
<http://www.lloydsbank.com/savings/young-saver.asp> and the Halifax, both drop 
their rate to 0.5% on savings above £2,000.

Parents choosing one of these need to be comfortable with their child having 
access to their savings, perhaps viewing it as a way of learning to manage 
their money.

Virtually all of these allow children to manage their own accounts from age 
seven with a passbook and some, such as the HSBC MySavings, offers holders a 
Visa debit card from age 11 so they can spend their money in shops, online or 
take it out at cash machines.

Fixed-rate children’s bonds

The easy-access accounts mentioned above all pay “variable” interest, which 
means the rate may be raised or lowered over time, so parents will need to keep 
an eye on any changes to see that the account remains competitive.

If you particularly want your child to have a fixed-interest account, where 
the rate will remain the same until maturity, the highest-paying option is the
Jumbo Junior Fixed Deposit from the State Bank of India 
<http://www.sbiuk.com/personal-banking/personal/young-savers/jumbo-junior-fixed-deposit-account>
, a five-year bond paying 2.9% on a minimum lump sum deposit of £1,000 (maximum 
£100,000).

Savings <https://www.theguardian.com/money/savings> bonds like this are 
suitable only for a one-off, lump sum deposit that parents want their child to 
leave untouched for the specified term. You cannot invest more after the 
initial deposit and you cannot withdraw any of the money until the bond matures 
and the interest is paid in five years.

Fixed-rate, five-year renewable Children’s Bonds, paying 2.5% tax free in 
fixed yearly instalments, are available for lump-sum investments of between £25 
and £3,000 per issue in £25 units, per child, from government-backedNational 
Savings and Investments <http://www.nsandi.com> (NS&I). Only parents, guardians 
and (great) grandparents can buy them for anyone under 16.

Junior Cash Isas

If you want a home for longer-term savings that your child will not be able to 
access until they are 18, consider a tax-efficient Junior ISA (JISA)​.

JISAs ​always pay interest free of tax – in case your child does exceed their 
personal allowance in their teens – and the £100 rule for interest earned from 
money given by parents or step-parents does not apply. You can save up to 
£4,080 in the 2015-16 tax year in a JISA and anyone can pay into it once 
opened. ​The child can take charge of the account at 16 but cannot access the 
money until 18 when it becomes an adult ISA.

The Coventry 
<http://www.coventrybuildingsociety.co.uk/savings-accounts/junior-cash-isa.aspx>
andNationwide 
<http://www.nationwide.co.uk/products/savings/junior-isa/features-and-benefits> 
are both offering the best rate cash JISAs, paying a variable tax-free rate of 
3.25%. Both accept full balance transfers from poorer-paying JISAs and from 
CTFs.

Halifax’s Junior Cash ISA 
<http://www.halifax.co.uk/isas/cash-isas/junior-cash-isa/> variable rate is 3%, 
but it is paying a chart-beating 4% if the parent holds a Halifax adult cash 
ISA or if the child is 16 or over.

The countdown is on: move your child’s savings into an Isa | Melanie Wright
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/feb/23/countdown-move-childs-savings-into-isa>
Tax on child accounts

In most cases children do not have to pay tax on interest because they do not 
receive enough income to exceed their personal income tax allowance (£10,600 in 
the 2015-16 tax year).

When you open a savings account for your child, you can fill out a form R85 at 
the relevant bank or building society which will tell them to pay gross 
interest on the account without deducting 20% tax, as is normally done 
automatically. If you later want to reclaim tax for your child, you can 
complete form R40, available online atgov.uk <https://www.gov.uk>.

But parents, particularly those who can afford to save a lot of money in their 
children’s name, should be aware that if a child earns more than £100 interest 
in a tax year from money given to them by one parent or step-parent, the parent 
is liable to pay tax on that interest at the same rate they pay on their own 
savings interest.

This applies whether or not the child has exceeded their own personal 
allowance. This special £100 interest limit does not apply to money given by 
grandparents, relatives or friends, however, though there may be inheritance 
tax to pay if the person making the gift dies within seven years of making it.
 