
When Andrew Witty became CEO of one of the biggest pharmaceutical firms in the 
world,GlaxoSmithKline <https://www.theguardian.com/business/glaxosmithkline>, 
his industry was so unpopular that campaigners threw red paint at company 
stands during conferences to represent the blood of those who died because they 
could not afford medicines.

Ten years on, as Witty, now Sir Andrew, prepares to retire from GSK, Big 
Pharma is increasingly being seen as part of the solution to global health 
issues and not the problem. Few would deny that a great deal of the credit goes 
to Witty.

Two years into his tenure, with Big Pharma’s reputation in the mire over the 
unaffordable cost of Aids drugs for people dying in Africa, Witty announced a 
major change of strategy. GSK would slash its prices in the poorest countries 
to no more than 25% of the UK price. It would also put any patents it owned 
over putative drugs that may have some effect on neglected tropical diseases 
into a “pool”, which would allow anybody to investigate them.

There was, he recalls, “a sharp intake of breath” from his competitors on the 
day the patent pools were announced, “but within a couple of years, we had 15 
or 16 companies that had signed up to the patent pool and we’ve made huge 
progress.”

Later, he helped instigate a meeting of all the big company CEOs in London 
with Bill Gates to pledge to help end the neglected tropical diseases that 
affect millions in poor countries yet are unheard of in the west, such as 
leishmaniasis and trachoma. They donate drugs, pay for their distribution and 
continue to meet every year.

“You think about the number of times you hear these meetings where everybody 
announces something and nothing happens,” Witty says. “And in this situation 
we’re talking about billions of doses of medicine being delivered to tens and 
hundreds of millions of people. It’s huge and as an industry we should be 
super, super proud of that.

“So if we played a small role in catalysing that, if that’s the only thing I 
did in my life, that’s not a terrible thing. And I’m very proud if we made that 
contribution, and what we’ve tried to do is continue to look for ways, keep on 
looking in different spaces, to say: is there something we can do here which 
can help further?”

He cites as an example the “flexible IP” announcement in March, which was a 
pledge not to seek patents in the least developed countries and to grant 
licences to generic drug manufacturers to make cheap copies of their branded 
medicines in middle-income countries. GSK also said it intended to put new 
cancer drugs in a patent pool, as a response to the growing numbers dying of 
cancer in developing countries.


“We will wait and see whether companies follow or not, but I think it raises 
the question for companies that may not have considered it and they have to 
address it,” he says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fglaxosmithkline-andrew-witty-companies-arent-doing-as-much-as-people-would-like%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd24684af6b1f7fef9dd9cb025a2e51e2d1d810d9%2F0_0_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=GSK's%20Andrew%20Witty%3A%20the%20man%20who%20sold%20the%20world%20cheaper%20medicines&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fglaxosmithkline-andrew-witty-companies-arent-doing-as-much-as-people-would-like%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=GSK%27s%20Andrew%20Witty%3A%20the%20man%20who%20sold%20the%20world%20cheaper%20medicines&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fglaxosmithkline-andrew-witty-companies-arent-doing-as-much-as-people-would-like%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd24684af6b1f7fef9dd9cb025a2e51e2d1d810d9%2F0_0_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 GlaxoSmithKline HQ in west London. Photograph: Ben Stansall/AFP/Getty Images 
Last week, for the fifth year running, GSK topped a league table compiled by 
the Access to Medicines Foundation, which scores the companies on a range of 
measures, from pricing and donation to research and development.

Witty says ranking top in the index is important, but what matters more is 
that companies now care about it. “One day we won’t be number one and I think 
that’s fine because hopefully what we’ve done in the period … is encourage 
other companies to compete and strive in a space which 10 years ago people 
probably weren’t competing and striving in.”

GSK long ago took the view “that drug companies don’t need to be just about 
innovation and return to shareholder”. He talks of the “twin poles” of their 
business model, which are innovation – finding new drugs – and access.

He denies there has been much resistance from shareholders, among whom there 
are those interested mainly in the returns and others who are, like many in the 
general public, concerned about societal issues. Other big businesses may want 
to take note.

“Where is some of the discontent, whether it’s of government or of big 
companies, where is some of that coming from?” he asks of the general mood of 
revolt against the establishment that has bubbled up this year.

“Some of that I think is coming from the perspective that actually these 
companies aren’t necessarily doing as much as ‘the people’ would like to see 
done on broader societal issues, whether that’s environmental, whether it’s 
access to medicine – there are a number of these themes,” he says.

He readily acknowledges that offering lower prices and waiving patents in 
Africa will help build the business there.

“In the long run, these things do have a fairly concrete benefit to 
shareholders in the sense that you are building capacity, economic 
stabilisation, all of those things,” he says. “You’re also building trust, I 
think, between the company and the country and the people of the country.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fglaxosmithkline-andrew-witty-companies-arent-doing-as-much-as-people-would-like%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b9e44bcf207d4ff85d28faccbfa8120d0fa8592%2F0_21_1715_1029%2F1715.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=GSK's%20Andrew%20Witty%3A%20the%20man%20who%20sold%20the%20world%20cheaper%20medicines&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fglaxosmithkline-andrew-witty-companies-arent-doing-as-much-as-people-would-like%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=GSK%27s%20Andrew%20Witty%3A%20the%20man%20who%20sold%20the%20world%20cheaper%20medicines&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fglaxosmithkline-andrew-witty-companies-arent-doing-as-much-as-people-would-like%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b9e44bcf207d4ff85d28faccbfa8120d0fa8592%2F0_21_1715_1029%2F1715.jpg>
 Emma Walmsley, Witty’s successor. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
The access to medicine index, which has been going since 2008 and is funded by 
the Gates Foundation and the UK and Dutch governments, was not entirely 
complimentary about GSK. The company lost points fora corruption scandal in 
China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/03/china-uk-private-investigator-gsk-closed-trial-peter-humphrey-yu-yingzeng>
, which Witty calls “a disappointment”.

And Médecins Sans Frontières criticised the index for highlighting some good 
practice among pharma companies that served to hide their failings. GSK and 
Pfizer had just dropped the price of their pneumococcal vaccine for use in 
emergencies but continued to charge high prices to middle-income countries, it 
said.

Witty’s answer is that the vaccine, against the leading killer of babies in 
Africa, is incredibly complex because it is 10 vaccines in one. “It’s a very, 
very difficult vaccine to make and honestly it’s unrealistic – when people say 
you can have three for a dollar, you can’t. I’d love to say yes, but you can’t. 
It’s never going to happen.”

The bottom line is that they cannot make a loss. “I think we are doing 
everything we can to have the volumes available and we are already leading the 
way to bringing down the prices as far as we can,” he says. “But at some point 
there is an irreducible minimum. Ultimately if you make no income on anything, 
you don’t exist.”

This big question is whether Witty’s initiatives will all be undone after he 
vacates his desk next March. He says not. His successor, Emma Walmsley, also 
believes in the access agenda, he says. “I don’t think there’s any great risk 
about her not being interested. She will be engaged and interested.”

The clashes with campaigners who want drug companies to do more will continue 
beyond Witty’s retirement. But those who think he has not gone far enough will 
also hope he has taken the pharmaceutical industry in a direction from which 
there will be no turning back.
 