
Select <https://www.theguardian.com/select> (premium advertising network)

The desire to help small and emerging sustainable businesses led to the 
creation in 2008 of the Green Ad Network.

This concept, now known as Guardian Select <https://www.theguardian.com/select>
, has expanded to nine verticals or networks and includes off-Guardian 
advertising environments, such as the Facebook app and our YouTube channel.

The vertical networks now include Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/select/select-green>, Diversity, Culture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/select/select-culture>, Travel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/select/select-travel>, Technology & Media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/select/select-technology-and-media>, Life & Style, 
Student & Graduate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/select/select-student-and-graduate> and Automotive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/select/publisher-directory-automotive>. The 
combined reach is 4.8 million unique users globally every month, which has 
grown 1 million year-on-year. Revenues across 2011-12 grew 110% year-on-year.

The model works by bringing together the best independent publishers and blogs 
from across the web and helps them monetise their sites by running premium 
advertising campaigns across them. The benefit to GNM is access to excellent 
content sites and extended reach to a quality audience above and beyond 
theguardian.com users.

Guardian editorial has also embraced the approach, with the travel desk 
launching a version of the blog network by incorporating some Select blog 
content.

More than 600 clients have advertised across Guardian Select, including 
Eurostar, Mini, HSBC, Christian Aid, Wildlife Trust, Greenpeace, Toyota Prius 
and the NSPCC.

Building brand partnerships for good

Over the past few years, the Guardian has built a strategic partnership with 
Ecotricity to grow its customer base, by facilitating a debate and sharing 
knowledge around sustainable energy.

Ecotricity is a green energy company specialising in selling and generating 
wind power. It is built on the principle of heavily reinvesting its profit in 
building more of its own wind farms.

We continue to expand their presence via our multiple platforms, networks and 
relationship with other publishers and partners (for example, through Guardian 
Select).

It also played host to a viral video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/ecotricity-offer/collapsing-cooling-towers-video> 
that promoted the move from fossil fuels to renewable energy. Also a microsite 
that sits within our domain indefinitely and we continue to develop content to 
build awareness, educate and gain new customers.

Supplements that support a sustainable life

The sponsored Outdoors season this year showed Guardian Creative's continued 
commitment to editorial content with a sustainable theme. The four supplements 
– urban wildlife, Britain's best walks, wild flowers, and Britain's best bike 
rides – all reflect our readers' interest in the themes, with the projects 
cementing new and established partnerships with sustainability champions such 
as Sustrans and the National Trust.

Dealing with readers' complaints

We rarely receive complaints from readers about advertising on the grounds of 
taste and decency. This is because, although advertisers may want to provoke, 
entertain, inform or amuse readers, they never want to annoy them, and this is 
reflected in the copy they provide.

If we judge that an advert is unsuitable, then we won't publish it. And, if 
one that we do publish provokes a material number of complaints, then we 
carefully consider and do, on occasion, pull it.

Despite the fact that some of our readers don't like us carrying advertising 
for, for example, low-cost airlines (although many more use them), we almost 
never refuse to carry advertising from specific industry sectors. This is 
because we do not see it as our role to censor advertising, instead preferring 
to let our users or readers make up their own minds.
 