
After the 24-year-old television reporter Alison Parker and her 27-year-old 
cameraman Adam Wardwere killed while on camera from a lake outside of Roanoke, 
Virginia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2015/aug/26/virginia-reporter-cameraman-shot-dead>
 on Wednesday morning, the frontrunner for the Democratic nomination, Hillary 
Clinton, somewhat predictablytweeted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2015/aug/26/virginia-reporter-cameraman-shot-dead>
 that “[w]e must act to stop gun violence, and we cannot wait any longer” and 
Virginia governor Terry McAuliffe called for new gun control measures in the 
form of background checks .

The conservative response to Democrats’ anodyne reactions is even more 
predictable 
<http://www.redstate.com/2015/08/26/reminder-democrats-care-grabbing-guns-victims-violence/>
: it’s wrong, they say, to “politicize” individual acts of firearm violence. 
But gun violence in the United States has everything to do with politics – and 
we should be talking more, not less, about the impact of America’s failed gun 
policies on victims and their families and communities.

Virginia TV journalists shot dead on air in attack staged by former colleague
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/26/virginia-gunman-kills-reporter-cameraman>
It is true – as apologists for the status quo will be sure to point out – that 
it is impossible to know whether today’s murder specifically could have been 
prevented by a more stringent gun control regime, let alone by one 
characterized exclusively by background checks. But on a more systematic level, 
the result of our lack of substantive, internationally comparable gun control 
is entirely clear: the USis not only an international outlier in its lack of 
gun control <http://www.vox.com/2015/8/24/9183525/gun-violence-statistics>, it 
is also a massive outlier in terms of firearm violence. The ease of access to 
firearms clearly causes large numbers of unnecessary deaths by homicide, 
suicide, and accident.

Thus, the staggering human toll of gun violence in the US is not just a random 
coincidence; it is the result of political choices.

Which policies could reduce the huge number of mass killings in the US are not 
a mystery: after 35 people were killed in Tasmania in 1996, Australia’s 
conservative government enacted sweeping gun control measures.The result 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/crime/2012/12/16/gun_control_after_connecticut_shooting_could_australia_s_laws_provide_a.html>
 was that both homicides and suicides by gun were immediately and sharply 
reduced, and there have been no mass killings in the country since. Conversely,
there have been 885 mass killings in the United States since December 2012 
<http://www.vox.com/a/mass-shootings-sandy-hook>, when a gunman killed 20 
elementary school students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/dec/15/newtown-shooting-victims-names-released>
 at the Newtown Elementary School in Sandy Hook, Connecticut.

Identifying the policy changes that could reduce American firearm slaughter is 
easy, of course – and figuring out a politically viable way of getting these 
policies enacted is another matter. Even if the 2008 Supreme Court decision in
District of Columbia v Heller 
<https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/554/570/> declaring an individual 
right to bear arms in the 2nd Amendment were to be overruled by the same court, 
thepolitical obstacles in the path of meaningful gun control are formidable 
<http://prospect.org/article/real-barrier-better-gun-control-policy>. Isolated 
state and local measures aren’t meaningless, but there are distinct limits to 
how much they can accomplish. Tough federal gun control measures could make a 
big difference, but passing any such measure through both the House and a 
Senate that massively over-represents small, rural states with a 
disproportionate number of gun-owners 
<http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2014/07/15/the-demographics-and-politics-of-gun-owning-households/>
 would be impossible for the foreseeable future.

The lack of congressional reaction to the Sandy Hook massacre in 2012 is 
instructive on that point. Even very modest, overwhelmingly popular gun control 
measures, involving background checks and controls on assault weapons and 
high-capacity magazines, failed to pass a Democratic Senate and, even if they 
had, they would have had no chance of passing the House of Representatives. 
Australian-style gun control is not coming to the US anytime soon, especially 
withsupport for gun rights only growing 
<http://www.people-press.org/2014/12/10/growing-public-support-for-gun-rights/>.

White House renews call for gun control after Virginia TV shooting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/26/virginia-tv-shooting-white-house-gun-control>
But gun control isn’t the only way to address gun violence, and Parker and 
Ward are not even its typical victims. Even had Parker and Ward’s killer not 
turned his gun on himself, there would have been an intensive investigation 
into their deaths, and the sure-to-have-been apprehended killer would have 
faced some measure of justice.

Consider, though, the situation 280 miles northeast of Roanoke in Baltimore, 
Maryland. The horrifying death of Freddie Gray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/apr/19/baltimore-man-injured-during-arrest-dies-week-later>
 in police custody has highlighted the violence committed by police against 
Baltimore’s African-American citizens, but what the police have failed to do 
for the community is also important to understanding how gun violence typically 
plays out in America. So far in 2015,more people have been killed in Baltimore 
(population 620,000) than in New York City (population 8.4 million) 
<http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/crime/blog/bal-baltimore-has-surpassed-new-york-city-in-homicides-20150820-story.html>
. The more than 200 murder victims in Baltimore receive much less attention 
from either the investigating authorities or the media, and the vast majority 
of those victims are poor and African-American. Indeed, the horrifying spike in 
homicides has been met with a weak response by the police:the clearance rate 
for murders is less than 40% 
<http://www.abc2news.com/news/crime-checker/baltimore-city-crime/homicides-spike-in-baltimore-but-police-clearance-rate-falls>
.

A lack of federal gun control is certainly a large part of the problem of the 
toll of gun violence. But other policies and social conditions – most obviously 
high levels of economic and racial inequality – also play a major role, and 
both are also the result of political choices.

As the journalist Jill Leovy explains in her new book Ghettoside 
<http://www.amazon.com/Ghettoside-True-Story-Murder-America-ebook/dp/B0062OCN4E>
, poor African-American communities in many American urban areas are 
simultaneously over- and under-policed: they are on the one hand subject to 
routine harassment, detention, and imprisonment for minor offenses but, when it 
comes to serious violent offenses committed against poor African-Americans, the 
reaction by the state and the media is too often apathetic or ineffectual. Most 
victims of gun violence will never make international news, and their deaths 
will almost never result in calls for more gun control – let alone the kind of 
gun control that would reduce the number of guns in the hands of Americans, 
which is the only tried-and-true method for reducing gun violence.

The American epidemic of gun violence has not been “politicized” by those who 
seek to alleviate it. It is and always has been an inherently a political 
question, as is what we’re going to do about it. The answer, at least for now, 
seems to be “nothing”. But it doesn’t always have to be.
 