
Tot trumps: kids' TV shows that are secretly brilliant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/01/kids-tv-shows-hey-duggee-sarah-and-duck-peppa-pig-teletubbies>
Phillip Schofield’s giant swinging conkers. Chris Tarrant’s big wet buckets. 
Emma Forbes’s sticky-fingered baking. “We don’t do duvets.” Andi Peters’s 
nu-rave jumpers. Gunge, phone-ins, custard pies and the Phantom Flan Flinger. A 
small furry sidekick called Gordon with a hand up his arse. Sometimes, 
describing Saturday morning children’s television feels more like pushing open 
the door to a particularly niche sex club than a world of family-friendly 
entertainment.

And yet, during its heyday – from the birth of Tiswas in 1974 to the dying 
embers of CD:UK in 2006 – more than two million children (not to mention 
thousands of hungover adults, red-eyed students and gently mewling parents) 
would sit down to stare happily at the chaos of a three-hour live broadcast 
every weekend. The catchphrases echoed around every school dinner hall; the 
phone-ins decorated every household’s telephone bill. Saturday morning kids’ TV 
taught us to question adults, to mock authority, to see through marketing hype, 
to laugh at the surreal and the ridiculous, and to appreciate a well-delivered 
punchline.

However, turn on the television at the weekend now and you are more likely to 
see a member of the Olympic rowing team cooking up a perfect soufflé against 
the white marble and herb baskets of Saturday Kitchen than anything resembling 
classic children’s telly. As the Manic Street Preachers’ Nicky Wire put it to 
journalist Sylvia Patterson: “Saturday morning kids’ TV has been ruined by 
pious, pontificating, revolting chefs”, putting the topic up there with 
unregulated banking and zero-hours contracts as things that are wrong with 
modern Britain.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Ftiswas-going-live-smtv-saturday-kids-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19d481c7193b49aca64a8394155d7ca37f6bd8d5%2F0_15_2126_1276%2F2126.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gunge%2C%20gophers%20and%20Kylie%20in%20a%20box%3A%20what%20happened%20to%20Saturday%20morning%20kids'%20TV%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Ftiswas-going-live-smtv-saturday-kids-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gunge%2C%20gophers%20and%20Kylie%20in%20a%20box%3A%20what%20happened%20to%20Saturday%20morning%20kids%27%20TV%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Ftiswas-going-live-smtv-saturday-kids-tv%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19d481c7193b49aca64a8394155d7ca37f6bd8d5%2F0_15_2126_1276%2F2126.jpg>
 Chris Tarrant on the set of Tiswas. Photograph: ITV 
What happened to the programmes that could unite the playground? Is it just 
because the kids have moved to YouTube? What are we all doing with our 
hangovers? Event television, fromGame Of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones> to The Great British 
Bake Off <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-great-british-bake-off>, 
continues to set the cultural agenda, so why have we let this chunk of 
scheduling slip through our fingers?

Partly, of course, it was the looming spectre of regulation; “focus groups and 
health and safety”, as Jamie East, broadcaster and son of Tiswas co-presenter 
Trevor East, puts it. “Chris Tarrant used to pick kids up by their ears,” 
laughs Jamie down the phone from the studio at Virgin Radio. “You’d never ever 
be allowed to do that now – rightly or wrongly. But back then you’d have 
hundreds of kids, queuing up in their best clothes, just to have buckets of 
water thrown over them and be locked in a cage.”

East was himself a star of children’s television before he was out of short 
trousers. “They used to get me on Tiswas all the time when I was a baby,” he 
recalls. “They called me Porky Pig; I was really fat, had no hair and would be 
in nothing but a pair of dungarees. At Easter time once, they all started 
throwing hot cross buns at me. But I was only 18 months old and nobody was 
holding me up, so when one hit me full in the face I fell right off the desk, 
on live telly.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Ftiswas-going-live-smtv-saturday-kids-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17dd0c5eaada0b222a65fc6c35d7398b95c511f1%2F0_22_2324_1394%2F2324.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gunge%2C%20gophers%20and%20Kylie%20in%20a%20box%3A%20what%20happened%20to%20Saturday%20morning%20kids'%20TV%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Ftiswas-going-live-smtv-saturday-kids-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gunge%2C%20gophers%20and%20Kylie%20in%20a%20box%3A%20what%20happened%20to%20Saturday%20morning%20kids%27%20TV%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Ftiswas-going-live-smtv-saturday-kids-tv%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17dd0c5eaada0b222a65fc6c35d7398b95c511f1%2F0_22_2324_1394%2F2324.jpg>
 Noel Edmonds and Keith Chegwin presenting Multi Coloured Swap Shop. 
Photograph: BBC 
Hearing East describe the benevolent mayhem of Tiswas – where men on the 
studio floor had the sole job of whipping up entire bathtubs full of custard 
and presenters frequently went off-script – it’s almost inconceivable that 
there were so few serious incidents. Instead, shows were allowed to develop 
their own anarchic, identities.

“Because they were two or three hours long, the programmes had room to 
breathe, which meant you could do a whole range of things and establish a whole 
range of characters,” explains Lorraine Heggessey, who ran Children’sBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> from 1997 to 1999. “Whether we’re 
talking about [Multi-Coloured] Swap Shop or Live & Kicking, that time did 
enable the production team and presenters to create whole new worlds.”

In the beginning, these shows grew organically out of the need to fill 
continuity time between cartoons. Unable to rely on swish, computer-generated 
idents, a child-centric format all of its own emerged, whose styles and 
presenters changed according to contemporary trends. The high-energy, 
primary-colour chaos of Tiswas and Multi-Coloured Swap Shop in the 1970s gave 
way to the surreal comedy and celebrity bafflement of Going Live! and Live & 
Kicking in the 80s and 90s, to be replaced at the turn of the millennium by 
high-shine, hangover-oriented music and entertainment shows like SM:TV Live, 
CD:UK and T4. By the early 00s, Saturday morning television was talking as much 
to knowing students as to excitable children.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Ftiswas-going-live-smtv-saturday-kids-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8bb142a9fea4bdfff75b115a3341c16c0d63ab55%2F0_95_1365_819%2F1365.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gunge%2C%20gophers%20and%20Kylie%20in%20a%20box%3A%20what%20happened%20to%20Saturday%20morning%20kids'%20TV%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Ftiswas-going-live-smtv-saturday-kids-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gunge%2C%20gophers%20and%20Kylie%20in%20a%20box%3A%20what%20happened%20to%20Saturday%20morning%20kids%27%20TV%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Ftiswas-going-live-smtv-saturday-kids-tv%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8bb142a9fea4bdfff75b115a3341c16c0d63ab55%2F0_95_1365_819%2F1365.jpg>
 Trevor Neal and Simon Hickson, AKA Trevor and Simon. Photograph: 
Photoshot/Getty Images 
Jamie Theakston and Zoë Ball: how we made Live & Kicking
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/may/11/how-we-made-live-and-kicking-jamie-theakston-zoe-ball>
Two of the best-loved characters to rise up from Going Live! and Live & 
Kicking were sketch duo Trevor and Simon, who now produce the podcast 
Strangeness In Space. Despite often taking advantage of the live TV format to 
introduce some spontaneous mayhem of their own, this Gilbert and George of 
children’s TV only remember getting seriously reprimanded once. “We were asked 
to do a promotion for a Blue Peter appeal, raising money for incubators in 
hospitals, which was a worthy thing,” says Simon Hickson. “But halfway through 
we went off-script and Trev just looked down the camera and said: ‘Shouldn’t 
the government be doing this?’ We got really told off for that.”

Luckily they got away with it, and went on to inject the fast-paced, surreal 
nature of 1980s alternative comedy into mainstream TV culture. “We studied 
drama at Manchester University just afterRik Mayall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/rik-mayall> and Ben Elton. The punk 
rock of comedy had begun and we seemed to have a direct line to it,” says 
Trevor Neal. Many of its big names made it on to Saturday kids’ TV, too. “Vic 
Reeves was our ‘Lone Yodeller’,” says Neal of one stint on L&K, “and he brought 
with him a hat made of a coathanger with shoes dangling off it.”

Trevor and Simon’s segments brought with them a frisson of live comedy’s 
danger. “We’d often talk the sketches through with the guests in the coffee bar 
backstage but it was still semi-improvised,” says Neal. “The Stock Aitken and 
Waterman people knew they were on to promote themselves and so would very 
happily do pretty much anything. When Kylie first came on, we put her in a 
cardboard box, packed straw round her, closed the lid and said she’d been 
hibernating over the summer.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Ftiswas-going-live-smtv-saturday-kids-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F336c43eb6f666f8483ee23095654e924aadbd0e7%2F0_10_3008_1805%2F3008.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gunge%2C%20gophers%20and%20Kylie%20in%20a%20box%3A%20what%20happened%20to%20Saturday%20morning%20kids'%20TV%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Ftiswas-going-live-smtv-saturday-kids-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gunge%2C%20gophers%20and%20Kylie%20in%20a%20box%3A%20what%20happened%20to%20Saturday%20morning%20kids%27%20TV%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Ftiswas-going-live-smtv-saturday-kids-tv%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F336c43eb6f666f8483ee23095654e924aadbd0e7%2F0_10_3008_1805%2F3008.jpg>
 Peter Andre gets gunked on CITV’s Ministry Of Mayhem, 2004. Photograph: 
REX/Shutterstock 
Sadly, as both the stars and the show got more famous, guests became more 
cautious. “A few years later, when she came on again, Kylie wouldn’t put a 
kettle on her head in case it ruined her hairstyle,” adds Neal. “And Jason 
Donovan wouldn’t put a dog costume on over his head, so sang Hound Dog just 
wearing it up to his shoulders.”

The decreasing number of pop stars willing to make fools of themselves on 
national television was perhaps another factor in the decline of the 
traditional Saturday morning kids’ show. The rise of the internet and tablets, 
YouTube-only children’s programmes, more tightly regulated advertising to kids 
and the big-budget appearance of shows such asStrictly Come Dancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/strictly-come-dancing> or Doctor Who, 
aimed at the whole family rather than just children, must also have had an 
effect. But the major cause, according to Heggessey, was simply the explosion 
of multi-channel television. “The first successful channels directly marketed 
at a particular demographic were children’s channels,” she explains. “Suddenly, 
children’s programmes existed on their own channels, which were on all the 
time, so children’s blocks on the main channels started to feel a bit 
redundant.”

“Last time I checked, there were 26 designated children’s channels, including 
Cartoon Network, Nickelodeon and the Disney Channel, and they all have 
licensing agreements with the makers of cartoons,” says Jamie Rickers, the 
one-time presenter and producer behind CITV show Toonattik. “Because of that, 
you have a smaller chunk of the market share, and therefore can’t demand the 
same amount of advertising revenue. That means you have less money for 
production, so can’t afford the studio time.” As a result, he says, producers 
have to rely on cutting deals with shows like Pokémon, who then use their 
television time to sell toys and merchandise.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Ftiswas-going-live-smtv-saturday-kids-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3555723a14f6db11d229143120d01eae50c77a24%2F0_205_6104_3663%2F6104.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gunge%2C%20gophers%20and%20Kylie%20in%20a%20box%3A%20what%20happened%20to%20Saturday%20morning%20kids'%20TV%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Ftiswas-going-live-smtv-saturday-kids-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gunge%2C%20gophers%20and%20Kylie%20in%20a%20box%3A%20what%20happened%20to%20Saturday%20morning%20kids%27%20TV%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Ftiswas-going-live-smtv-saturday-kids-tv%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3555723a14f6db11d229143120d01eae50c77a24%2F0_205_6104_3663%2F6104.jpg>
 The presenters of Scrambled. Photograph: ITV 
The heritage of gunge and games may have lived on into the millennium via 
shows such as the BBC’s Dick & Dom In Da Bungalow, and its lineage may still be 
just about visible in CITV’s current kids’ offeringScrambled 
<http://www.itv.com/citv/scrambled>. But the joyful, egalitarian mayhem that 
grew out of the continuity announcements between children’s shows has largely 
slipped off our screens like custard off an eyelash – and Saturday TV is all 
the worse for it. Never again will we see freckle-nosed pop stars review a new 
CD while sitting in a fibreglass tree, beside two grown men dressed as gnomes, 
as Vic Reeves in a pair of false teeth pretends to water the astroturf before 
them. Once it was formative as well as fun; giving us our sense of humour, 
encouraging us to take the piss out of grown-ups and treating pop stars with a 
great levelling irreverence and hinting at a moral code of fairness. In the 
current social media landscape of strict celeb branding, it’s hard to imagine 
getting that back.

In the end, the kids’ TV we knew and loved became too cautious, too slick, too 
obviously commercial. We swapped silly for commercial tie-ins, we switched 
gunge for garnish, mayhem for marinades, bacchanalia for baking, and something 
valuable has been lost; the mid-point between a live kindergarten broadcast and 
a surreal kind of comedy.

“Saturday mornings use to be a three-hour rollercoaster,” says Hickson, 
recalling the good times.

“You could do what you liked, really,” concludes East, “because there were no 
rules.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Ftiswas-going-live-smtv-saturday-kids-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5dc36e22aeaa7e94e519f640771ded23967134e%2F0_62_3872_2323%2F3872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gunge%2C%20gophers%20and%20Kylie%20in%20a%20box%3A%20what%20happened%20to%20Saturday%20morning%20kids'%20TV%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Ftiswas-going-live-smtv-saturday-kids-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gunge%2C%20gophers%20and%20Kylie%20in%20a%20box%3A%20what%20happened%20to%20Saturday%20morning%20kids%27%20TV%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Ftiswas-going-live-smtv-saturday-kids-tv%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5dc36e22aeaa7e94e519f640771ded23967134e%2F0_62_3872_2323%2F3872.jpg>
 The Phantom Flan Flinger from Tiswas. Photograph: ITV/REX/Shutterstock 
Flantastic! Four of the best Saturday morning telly regulars




The Phantom Flan Flinger (Tiswas)

The sinister figure, dressed in a black cape and hood (pictured), who would 
stalk the Tiswas set pushing custard pies into the faces of presenters and 
guests alike, was unmasked in 2011 as Birmingham taxi driver Benjamin “Benny” 
Mills.

Singing Corner (Going Live!)


Like the very worst tofu-eating, guitar-strumming cliche, Trevor and Simon’s 
piss take of humble folk musicians (“Swing your pants!”) was a sketch that rung 
painfully true to children of hippy-generation parents.

Wonkey Donkey (SM:TV)

A simple phone-in quiz spun into comedy gold by Ant and Dec’s increasing 
frustration at their callers’ inability to name a rhyming catchphrase 
represented by a stuffed toy.

Bonk & Boob (Wide Awake Club) 

A dull spelling quiz enlivened by gratuitous innuendo: when a contestant 
didn’t know a word they had to say “bonk”; get one wrong, and the hooter went 
“boob”. File under: you couldn’t get away with that now.



 