
It is the kind of revelation that could make you look at Ross Poldark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/poldark> completely differently. That 
might even make you question why you’ve been tuning in to watch him scythe some 
Cornish hay fields in a state of undress. Because apparently, when it comes to 
mowing meadows, the brooding star of Sunday night telly is proving a massive 
disappointment.

“There was a lot of sweating and grunting going on but the only time you’d mow 
like that would be in a competition,” expert scyther Chris Rileytold the 
Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/celebritynews/11550044/Poldarks-meadow-mowing-just-doesnt-cut-it-scything-community-says.html>
. “Scything is an efficient and poetic way of cutting rather than the way it 
was portrayed on Poldark, where it was this very aggressive, manly action.”

Poldark: We didn’t audition Aidan Turner with his clothes off
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/21/poldark-we-didnt-audition-aidan-turner-with-his-clothes-off>
Well that’s Poldark ruined, then. God only knows what we do with all the 
pictures the BBC happened to release of him standing topless in a field 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/tv/news/poldark-star-aidan-turner-criticises-bbc-for-releasing-photos-of-him-topless-10097683.html>
 preparing to mow, now that we know he’s officially useless with a scythe. But 
it’s not as if Ross is alone among dramatic characters in being surprisingly 
rubbish at what he does. Television has more than a sprinkling of people who 
can’t actually do their jobs:

DI Alec Hardy

Broadchurch <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/broadchurch> is not 
short of characters who seem a bit rubbish at their jobs – none of the lawyers 
came out of the last series exactly covered in glory – and it is television law 
that detectives must be flawed, but Hardy often looks like the policeman you’d 
least like to investigate anything. All those procedural mistakes at trial. 
Working through a heart problem that caused him to collapse. Not noticing for 
ages that it was his partner’s husband who had done the murdering, even when he 
went round for tea … and that’s before we get to his terrible stint as a 
training officer, in which he seemed determined to bore his audiences into 
leaving the force before they’d even really joined.

Daenerys Targaryen

The problem with having dragons as your special power is that you need to be 
able to control them. And inGame of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones>, Daenerys, Mother of 
Dragons, appears to be struggling with that essential element of dragon 
training – her increasingly grown-up children are rather too interested in 
roasting goats and children for their dinner and not at all impressed by her 
attempts to send them to their room. Never mind that she hatched them from 
petrified eggs on her husband’s funeral pyre, Drogon, Rhaegal and Viserion 
increasingly seem to call the shots.

DSI Stella Gibson

It took a whole second series of The Fall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-fall> for the icy DSI Gibson to 
finally capture Paul Spector, often due more to the writers’ determination to 
allow the complex killer to stay at large, than mistakes on her part. But not 
noticing the murderer you’ve been stalking is hiding in your own wardrobe and 
reading your dream diary? Come on! What kind of detective are you?

Siobhan Sharpe

So here’s the thing: W1A’s Siobhan Sharpe is the world’s worst public 
relations professional <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xjY0784vHN8> – and 
admittedly written as such by John Morton. But not to acknowledge her work as 
the head of Perfect Curve would be to ignorethe brilliant BBC rebranding 
exercise <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1EySLuYWTy0> catastrophic Wingategate 
PR support, and her thoughts on whether “actually going backwards” could be the 
future. Also worth noting: her Jubilympics ideadid actually become a thing 
<https://twitter.com/perfect_siobhan/status/282054380302237696>.
 