
Fans of the TV show Happy Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/26/happy-valley-realistic-tv-bbc-crime-drama-second-series>
 who live in the US have, over the past few weeks, had to take a few bothersome 
but more or less legal steps in order to watch season two, which concludes on 
the BBC next week and has, as with the first season, been monstrously good – 
the best thing on TV on either side of the Atlantic.

Happy Valley review: understated, refreshing – and with bodies already piling 
up
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/10/happy-valley-review-understated-refreshing-bodies-piling-up>
This should come as no surprise given that Sally Wainwright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/07/sally-wainwright-writer-happy-valley-second-series>
, the show’s creator, has been responsible for what feels like every British 
hit save for Downton Abbey in the past few years:Last Tango in Halifax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/nov/03/sally-wainwright-last-tango-halifax>
, which also played well in the US; and the crime dramaScott and Bailey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/apr/03/scott-and-bailey-british-cagney-and-lacey>
.

She should be mentioned in the same breath as Matthew Weiner or Aaron Sorkin or
Shonda Rhimes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/27/why-i-love-shonda-rhimes-screenwriter>
 or Jenji Kohan, orRyan Murphy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/02/the-people-v-oj-simpson-ryan-murphy-american-dream>
, who is a terrible writer but still signed a reported $24m development deal 
with Fox a few years ago, because that’s how the US treats star showrunners.

Wainwright, meanwhile, only won her first Bafta in 2013 and was turned down by 
ITV a few years ago for a second season of Unforgiven, her three-part drama 
that was as good as everything else she writes. Well done, chaps!

Compared to Happy Valley, even Broadchurch looks thin and phoney

One of the reasons for Wainwright’s success in the US is that, perversely, she 
isn’t courting it. Americans I know who love Happy Valley do so because it is a 
window into another world, just as British viewers felt transported while 
watching The Wire. It’s a quality that draws attention to the 
inferiority-complex under which so many British dramas labour – the fake 
American gloss of Luther, say, or Line of Duty. Compared toHappy Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/happy-valley>, even Broadchurch looks 
thin and phoney.

The show’s success is also, of course, down to a superlative cast – Sarah 
Lancashire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jun/03/happy-valley-end-of-series-tv-review-mark-lawson>
 is, at this point, inching into Dame Judi territory – and a lot of great 
writing. A tiny example: two women parting company after a night out and one 
says to the other, “text me as soon you get in”, which is a thing women say to 
each other in real life and not on TV, unless one of them is about to be 
murdered by the cab driver.

And the scene between Catherine and the therapist, which in lesser hands might 
have been played for laughs but was instead real, awkward and fraught with 
moral complexity.

I’m sure Wainwright does very nicely indeed, but, looking across the 
international TV landscape, it’s hard not to feel she isn’t getting her dues. 
If David Simon gets a 10,000-word profile in the Paris Review, so too should 
Wainwright.

Buttie-licious


With one episode left, I asked American friends how they were coping with the 
Yorkshire accents. Most said they’d gotten the hang of “’appen I did” and “us” 
as a possessive pronoun, as in “Us dad died when we were tiny.” But there was 
still a lot of confusion. I ask a friend to have a stab at, “down at cafe that 
does us butties”, and he said: “Something to do with his ass?”

“Whose arse?”

He looked panicked. “I don’t know. I heard the word butt.”

“It’s about a sandwich.”

“OK, I’m not getting sandwich.”

“What about ‘Up Ripponden’?”

I then had him pronounce “Sowerby Bridge” over and over, which was better 
comedy than anything I’ve seen for a long time.

Jolly good, Fellowes


‘We don’t have to have completely happy endings at Downton Abbey’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/aug/09/downton-abbey-ending-garety-neame>
This week was the Downton finale in the US. A few months ago I heard Julian 
Fellowes <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/julian-fellowes> interviewed by 
an American journalist, who asked him: “Where are you in the hierarchy?” To 
which, after a long pause, he replied: “I came, I suppose, from the sort of 
bottom of the top. We didn’t have much money, my grandfather was a younger son.”

There followed more caveats, no little pain at the vulgarity of having to 
articulate all this, and a final assessment of his family’s aristocratic 
position as a “minor one, but in the books”. Great drama.
 