
 Let’s go back to the start. Remember that opening scene? Sarah Lancashire, 
cool as you like in aviators, as Sgt Catherine Cawood, tells her sister the 
story of some council-estate sheep rustlers? At the time, it seemed like a 
daringly playful way to lead us to Catherine stumbling across the body of Tommy 
Lee Royce’s mother and kicking off the hunt for a serial killer. But no: the 
killer turns out to be the owner of the stolen livestock. Sally Wainwright, you 
fiendish genius.

You might say that this, like much of the breathless finale, is too neat. 
Season two’s quest to replace one central narrative with several interlocking 
stories has often made it less than the sum of its individual scenes. But what 
scenes! Put up with Catherine being airlifted into every part of the narrative, 
and episode six is magnificent: eventful but delicate, hypertense and softened 
with sly humour.

“Man up, princess! Use your initiative”

First up on Catherine’s to-do list: a visit to Ryan’s school, to lay down the 
law to the headteacher about “Miss Wheland” being a dangerous crank. A 
blood-freezing moment as she passes her potential nemesis on the way out.

Then Catherine discovers the carnage at the farm, because she chooses to go 
there and reassure Alison and Daryl that the sheep-rustlers will be dealt with. 
Alison is face-down in her son’s viscera and half-dead herself on pills and 
booze.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fhappy-valley-recap-the-series-two-finale-come-hell-or-high-bridge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F746ae40cf4615fafda6cb9d3beea949753128836%2F0_168_4284_2567%2F4284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Happy%20Valley%20recap%3A%20the%20series%20two%20finale%20%E2%80%93%20come%20hell%20or%20high%20bridge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fhappy-valley-recap-the-series-two-finale-come-hell-or-high-bridge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Happy%20Valley%20recap%3A%20the%20series%20two%20finale%20%E2%80%93%20come%20hell%20or%20high%20bridge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fhappy-valley-recap-the-series-two-finale-come-hell-or-high-bridge%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F746ae40cf4615fafda6cb9d3beea949753128836%2F0_168_4284_2567%2F4284.jpg>
 Carnage at the farm ... Catherine (Sarah Lancashire) pays Alison and Daryl a 
visit. Photograph: Ben Blackall/BBC/Red Productions 
While mothering a shocked Shafiq and saving Alison’s life (“You’re NOT lying 
down UNTIL you’ve been SICK”), Catherine works out why Alison killed her own 
child. The way she recites the caution – “I’m arresting you. On suspicion of 
murder” – fills those familiar words with tender tragedy. “You do not have to 
say anything” becomes a merciful assurance. In Catherine’s bloodied arms, 
Alison closes her eyes.

As it turns out, after this scene has wrapped Alison must have awoken again 
and become rather talkative. Wainwright has played to her strengths, focusing 
on the hard details and personal interactions of an extreme situation. The 
story moves on via CID high-flyer Shackleton, who relates to John Wadsworth the 
other thing Alison revealed about Daryl. “He also said he didn’t do that Vicky 
Fleming one ... and he told his mother, he wouldn’t have had to have done that 
last one if people hadn’t kept thinking he’d done that Vicky Fleming one.”

Really? Daryl said that, and Alison reported it while semi-comatose? We’ll 
take it, because it sets in train the end of John’s attempt to get away with 
murder.

“It makes you seem a little bit … unhinged”

First, though, it’s Catherine v Frances. Tommy Lee Royce’s whispering imp of 
death has been rumbled as a fraudster. Cecily Wheland is her deceased sister: 
stealing her identity and becoming an oversexed prison visitor is, for Frances, 
some kind of grief-induced psychotic episode. Catherine phones this info 
through to Clare, who is on her allotment and is filmed close-up, as if Frances 
might be … behind her! With a shovel!

It’s OK, she isn’t – she’s being arrested at the school and looks chastened as 
soon as the cops address her by her real name. So when Frances is bailed and 
Catherine turns up at her house for a little chat, the chances of our hero 
being murdered as planned have already receded.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fhappy-valley-recap-the-series-two-finale-come-hell-or-high-bridge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6bff2862816e6f2d388ac8a53c3054ec5939ff14%2F0_239_4288_2572%2F4288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Happy%20Valley%20recap%3A%20the%20series%20two%20finale%20%E2%80%93%20come%20hell%20or%20high%20bridge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fhappy-valley-recap-the-series-two-finale-come-hell-or-high-bridge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Happy%20Valley%20recap%3A%20the%20series%20two%20finale%20%E2%80%93%20come%20hell%20or%20high%20bridge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fhappy-valley-recap-the-series-two-finale-come-hell-or-high-bridge%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6bff2862816e6f2d388ac8a53c3054ec5939ff14%2F0_239_4288_2572%2F4288.jpg>
 A seething war of words ... Catherine (Sarah Lancashire) tells Frances 
Drummond (Shirley Henderson) some home truths. Photograph: Ben Blackall/BBC/Red 
Productions 
What takes place instead is a quietly seething war of words, as Shirley 
Henderson embodies someone whose wild misapprehensions are deeply set. Her 
needling whisper is almost inaudible as she explains how she sees Tommy as a 
product of his upbringing who deserves to know his son, whatever he has done – 
not that he has done anything. Frances holds a belief that dreadful experience 
has forced Catherine to abandon: everyone can be saved.

Catherine’s attempt to talk her round is a fantastic portrayal of what it’s 
like to try and reason with delusion – especially if, as in Frances’ case, 
there’s religious belief at the core of it. There are just too many layers of 
wrong to cut through.

While Catherine’s struggling with that, Det Supt Shepherd is on TV appealing 
for fresh info about the night Vicky Fleming died – watched by Neil, who 
realises he must do something, and John’s wife Amanda, who just … realises.

“What have I done? Nothing! Why? Why me?”

Yet again Wainwright finds the ideal solution to a problem her story has 
created. John has been wrestling with guilt ever since he killed his secret 
lover – but he’s not been able to say anything. Kevin Doyle’s done a brilliant 
job with micro-expressions, but … what else?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fhappy-valley-recap-the-series-two-finale-come-hell-or-high-bridge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d7dffb816d9f94eea56a3f2ee8aef052b9595ee%2F0_239_4288_2572%2F4288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Happy%20Valley%20recap%3A%20the%20series%20two%20finale%20%E2%80%93%20come%20hell%20or%20high%20bridge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fhappy-valley-recap-the-series-two-finale-come-hell-or-high-bridge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Happy%20Valley%20recap%3A%20the%20series%20two%20finale%20%E2%80%93%20come%20hell%20or%20high%20bridge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fhappy-valley-recap-the-series-two-finale-come-hell-or-high-bridge%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d7dffb816d9f94eea56a3f2ee8aef052b9595ee%2F0_239_4288_2572%2F4288.jpg>
 Undone ... the game is up for John Wadsworth (Kevin Doyle). Photograph: Ben 
Blackall/BBC/Red Productions/Ben Blackall 
The answer: that night, John drives himself to an unlit corner of Tesco car 
park to scream and pound the steering wheel, bemoaning his terrible luck. This 
is minutely observed – John’s been undone by his own pathetic cowardice, and 
can’t confront the vicious violence that came out of him when he was caught 
out. Of course he thinks he’s been hard done by. He’s just an ordinary bloke. 
He didn’t mean to strangle that woman. It was her fault! He makes that point 
forcefully, alone in his car outside a supermarket that’s closed for the night.

Before lunch the next day, the game is up. Witnesses who saw John and Vicky 
have come forward; Neil has explained Vicky’s blackmail methods. Ann has 
remembered John asking her where he might quickly get £1,000 ; Amanda’s beau 
Graham has come into the station with their theory. All this happens with 
thrilling, gathering speed.

Of course, it’s Catherine who takes Graham’s statement, and it’s she who runs 
into John as he makes a panicked exit. But if there’s a more exciting line of 
script than “Bravo November Four Five, I’m chasing – it’s complicated, but I’m 
chasing DS John Wadsworth, who I believe has been involved in the murder of 
Vicky Fleming!” on TV in 2016, I wanna hear it.

So John ends up on a high bridge with Catherine trying to talk him down. In 
two series full of phenomenal two-handers this is perhaps the best one ever. 
There’s so much here, from Catherine realising John has the suicide 
intervention training she lacks (“What should I be saying to you?”), to his 
macabre words when recalling how he violated Vicky’s corpse: “ridiculous” is 
the word he reaches for to describe what he did with the broken bottle, before 
he corrects it to “hideous”. Catherine acts as if she’s also forgotten the 
severity of the case – when it’s all over and she brusquely outlines to Mike 
exactly what John did and exactly how much sympathy she has, we see what an act 
it was.

It’s a deadly, gripping game of bluff that Catherine loses when she asks John 
if he has children, fatally undermining his effort to deny the consequences of 
his actions. “I love my kids,” he says, before letting himself topple – with a 
wry, apologetic half-smile, an appropriate ending for a story that has played 
from the start as the darkest farce.

“Yet another everyday story of country folk”

But that’s not a suitably Catherine-focused ending, so we return to her and 
Tommy Lee Royce. In another blast of off-screen verbosity, Alison – recovering 
in hospital and visited by a concerned Catherine – has revealed that she was 
raped by her father. Daryl was her half-brother as well as her son and was, 
Catherine says, an “aberration” who was always going to turn out bad.

Daryl was, Catherine thinks, the thing Frances told her nobody can be: born 
evil. She ponders this as she stares at Ryan – whose letter has by now arrived 
in his father’s hands, in prison – running happily through a field. Roll 
credits.

I wasn’t sure about this. It fits with the underlying theme of a main 
character who deals with other people’s traumas, but cannot escape the defining 
trauma of her own life. Now I realise thatHappy Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/happy-valley> is downbeat. But this 
was so pessimistic – Ryan’s so young! Tommy’s not coming out of prison any time 
soon! Catherine can do this! – that it felt a bit lurid. I half-expected Ryan 
to turn and smile for the camera like Damien at the end of The Omen.

Does it matter? Not terribly. This series was too good for one scene to alter 
the fact that Happy Valley was almost always on its game this year. And when 
Happy Valley is at its best, nothing can touch it.

Whither the Knezovices?

The “Halifax mafia” have gone from crucial cliffhanger material to one cursory 
mention in the final two weeks. Left open for series three, or just a loose end 
flapping in the bitter Rippenden breeze?

How’s about that, then?

Weeks after the BBC finally released a report into its handling of Jimmy 
Savile, he gets a terrifically uncompromising namecheck in one of the 
Corporation’s own most acclaimed and saleable dramas – listed by Catherine 
alongside Peter Sutcliffe, Ian Brady or “some other sad, twisted fuck”. 
Justifiable of course, but still … bold.

If you don’t laugh, you’ll cry

How typical of Happy Valley to inject more comedy into this episode than any 
other. Catherine almost breaking the fourth wall to describe the scene at 
Alison’s farm: “It was like Piccadilly Circus when I left ... more detectives 
than primetime TV.” The constable who helped pursue John first forgetting to 
apply the handbrake, then tripping over as he lagged behind Catherine. Even the 
casting of comic actor Steve Edge in the minor, straight role of Graham. All of 
it reinforced that laughter is never too far away, even in the most awful 
times. Hey, that’s life.
 