
Back in February, I noted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/feb/03/crosstfit-the-new-fitness-craze-has-a-lot-to-tell-us-about-late-western-capitalism>
 with some amusement that the organised fitness class Crossfit, famous for its 
demanding workouts and evangelical participants, functions as a sort of 
full-throated challenge to health and safety culture.

Crossfitters, who can afford to pay rather large membership fees, cough up 
such sums specifically because its discipline is demanding. If aquarobics is 
for your nanna, Crossfit is for that guy you work with who manages his stock 
portfolio while logging 10 miles at the treadmill desk during lunch.

Its exclusive focus on becoming the best, most extreme version of yourself 
encourages forsaking trivialities like tendon integrity and eating bread. 
Ideally, you want to be the kind of ripped, muscular Man of Action who could 
sling two squealing Nanny State weaklings over each shoulder in the event of a 
natural disaster (not that you would, because they should’ve thought about that 
before they chose not to commit themselves to a life of rugged 
self-improvement).

At the time, I was fascinated by why anyone would pay serious money to torture 
themselves this way. What kinds of ambient conditions produced the widespread 
uptake of Crossfit, a sport that would’ve been considered socially unacceptable 
and indicative of possible pathology just a few years ago? Well, my questionhas 
been answered 
<http://www.afr.com/p/lifestyle/sport/crossfit_founder_flexes_free_market_2SWwPxZeqPIK4nf9nSaJRN>
, to some extent, thanks to this piece in the AFR:

The fitness craze, booming in Australia and around the world, is American 
founder Greg ­Glassman’s grand experiment in lib­ertarian economics. [...]

“You set it up however you want, you run it however you want, you teach 
whatever you want – carte blanche,” says CrossFit Brisbane co-owner Wendy 
Swift. “The free-market model is such that they believe the good coaches, good 
gyms will thrive, and the poor coaches, poor gyms will go out of business. 
­Simple as that.”

Our enthusiasm for this particular hobby, at this particular time, is not 
arbitrary. If anything, when Joe Hockey declared that the Age of Personal 
Responsibilityhad arrived 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/11/hockey-dismisses-budget-critics>
, he was a few decades behind. His values, the government’s values, and the 
values that underpin Crossfit – a thoroughly Protestant work ethic, distrust of 
the state, and an abnegation of collective responsibility for mitigating market 
failures – are very similar. Crossfit is simply a captivating, sweaty Petri 
dish in which these beliefs are cultured to produce a display-quality specimen 
(his name isPukie the Clown 
<http://breakingmuscle.com/crossfit/why-pukie-the-clown-isn-t-funny>.)

You can see these beliefs everywhere. Young people are lazy and need to get a 
job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/17/generation-y-didnt-go-crazy-in-a-vacuum-how-can-we-enjoy-life-when-our-future-is-so-uncertain>
. Tax isbasically theft 
<http://www.smh.com.au/comment/is-it-really-so-radical-to-support-higher-taxes-to-fund-a-better-society-20140627-zsokc.html>
 when you really think about it. Welfare is unsustainable. Stinging the rich 
with higher taxes is class warfare, but a budget that leaves poor Australians 
worse off is justified because theydidn’t work hard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2014/oct/13/whichever-way-you-cut-it-the-federal-budget-hurts-the-poorest-hardest>
 like rich people do to earn their income on the open market.

This is a re-ordering of priorities. Crossfit world and federal budget 2014 
world both elevate the virtues of hard work, ownership andconservative deserts 
<http://mattbruenig.com/2012/04/05/the-three-conservative-philosophical-frameworks-rebutted/>
: everything else has to be squeezed in around those fundamental ideological 
commitments. Welfare, equality, fairness, gym instructor training standards: we 
might get to these later, but really, shouldn’t people be looking out for 
number one?

Perceiving ourselves as atomistic projections of a fixed inner agency, 
dismissing structural and common concerns as afterthoughts or conspiracies, 
allowing mad libertarians to open hundreds of Strain ‘N’ Sprain barns – well, 
the capitalism is getting later as we speak. I only hope that when the going 
gets tough, someone remembers poor Pukie the Clown.
 