
Leaving the single market would be damaging to almost every sector of the 
British economy, from manufacturing and energy to retail and financial 
services, according to a report commissioned by an alliance of Conservative,
Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> and Liberal Democrat 
politicians trying to stop a hard Brexit.

The study by the Centre for Economics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics> and Business Research found 
that every major wealth-creating sector would be affected negatively, with 
manufacturing hit if there were tariff barriers to EU trade and the creative 
industries suffering a “body blow” if there were strict controls on immigration.

Bank of England prepares to protect City firms from hard Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/27/bank-of-england-prepares-to-protect-city-firms-from-hard-brexit>
The report examines the consequences of leaving the single market in favour of 
a free trade agreement struck on a bespoke basis for individual industries.

Theresa May has hinted she favours this so-called “sectoral” approach but the 
Cebr report warns that “all major sectors are linked to the EU and could be 
harmed if the UK government sought a free trade agreement which prioritised 
some sectors over others”.

 The release of the report comes at a time of growing mobilisation among MPs 
and political figures trying to stop the UK heading for a clean break with the 
EU single market and customs union, which is favoured by the most Eurosceptic 
cabinet ministers and leading Brexit campaigners such as Michael Gove.

For the first time since the referendum, MPs from across the parties – Tory 
Anna Soubry,Chuka Umunna <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/chuka-umunna> of 
Labour and Nick Clegg from the Lib Dems – will appear together at an Open 
Britain event, pushing for continued membership of the single market.

Soubry will accuse those backing of a sector-by-sector deal of pursing a 
“simplistic fantasy”.


Umunna said: “Every major sector of our economy is linked to the single market 
and could be harmed through an arrangement that prioritises one sector over 
another.”

Of course the forecasts are bad: no one has a plan for Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/27/brexit-of-course-economic-forecasts-bad-no-plan>
The prime minister has so far refused to reveal her vision for Brexit, but 
gave a rare newspaper interview this weekend, saying she just wanted to “get on 
with the deal”.


However, it was reported in the Sunday Times that Mark Carney, the Bank of 
England governor, supports atransitional deal with the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/27/bank-of-england-prepares-to-protect-city-firms-from-hard-brexit>
 to cushion the impact for businesses, by keeping membership on similar terms 
until at least 2021.

Others warned it may be difficult to stick to the prime minister’s timetable 
of triggering article 50by the end of March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/01/theresa-may-to-propose-great-repeal-bill-to-unwind-eu-laws>
 and leaving two years later in 2019, while avoiding that pointbecoming a 
“cliff edge” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/21/government-working-hard-avoid-brexit-cliff-edge-business-theresa-may-cbi>
 causing an economic shock.


Lord Kerr, Britain’s most experienced EU negotiator, has estimated the 
government has aless than 50% chance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/27/chance-orderly-brexit-within-two-years-less-than-50-percent-lord-kerr>
 of securing an orderly exit from the EU within two years.


Brexit? I've no idea what's going on either, says Mark Carney
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/15/mark-carney-bank-of-england-brexit-treasury-select-committee>
In a speech at the London School of Economics, he claimed “the fog in the 
channel is getting thicker all the time”, adding even if an agreement was 
reached by spring 2019, there was a chance “a demob happy European parliament” 
in its final months before elections in 2019 would refuse to ratify the deal.

May could also face an obstacle if pressure mounts on the government to hold a 
second referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/25/brexit-sir-john-major-says-perfectly-credible-case-for-second-referendum>
 on the terms of the exit deal she strikes with the EU.

Emily Thornberry <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/emily-thornberry>, the 
shadow foreign secretary, this weekend left the door open to supporting a 
second referendum on the terms, saying the Brexit process had to be taken “step 
by step”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Femily-thornberry-the-british-public-needs-to-have-a-say-on-brexit-options-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Emily%20Thornberry%3A%20The%20British%20public%20needs%20to%20have%20a%20say%20on%20Brexit%20options%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Femily-thornberry-the-british-public-needs-to-have-a-say-on-brexit-options-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Emily%20Thornberry%3A%20The%20British%20public%20needs%20to%20have%20a%20say%20on%20Brexit%20options%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Femily-thornberry-the-british-public-needs-to-have-a-say-on-brexit-options-video&media=>
Emily Thornberry: The British public needs to have a say on Brexit options 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/nov/27/emily-thornberry-the-british-public-needs-to-have-a-say-on-brexit-options-video>
Asked about Labour’s position, she told BBC1’s Andrew Marr Show: “I think that 
we need to take this in stages and at the moment we cannot even have a debate 
as to how it is that we are going to leave theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> because the government claim they are 
keeping their cards to their chest.

She said the priority in negotiating a Brexit deal should be the economy, but 
appeared to also support greater controls on immigration, saying: “Now, do I 
think that too many people at the moment come into this country? I think that 
yes, I think they do.”
 