
21 March 2013

Mere, Wiltshire. Heavy skies, Uninterrupted rain, cold east wind. Temperature 
5C. In many almanacs, 21 March is the official start of spring. This bitter, 
grey day feels like midwinter but the Birtwistle house is warm and comfortable. 
The stone building was once a silk factory, in a narrow street in the middle of 
the town. It is approached through a grille-like gate up a single flight of 
iron stairs, recessed from the street. Thus the ground floor of the house is 
above street level. The deep slope down towards the entrance acted as a loading 
bay for carts to access the raised floor level directly, when the house was 
constructed, circa 1800.

Our first conversation, like many subsequent ones, takes place at Harry's 
kitchen table. The kitchen is well ordered, modern and spotless, surfaces clear 
and gleaming. Someone comes in to do housework but Harry clears away first 
anyway. He feels threatened by mess. A long table made of poplar, commissioned 
from a carpenter in France when the Birtwistles lived there in the 1980s, 
stretches nearly the length of the room. This is where we sit. The paint 
colours are those of stone or sky.

Outside, under the sullen sky, the trees look bare and melancholy.

Drawings and watercolours by Harry's oldest son, Adam Birtwistle 
<http://www.adambirtwistle.fr/>, hang on the wall behind the sofa. There are 
works by other artists elsewhere, including some small, delicate watercolours 
by Harry's late wife, Sheila.

The dominant piece of furniture is a big wooden chest of drawers painted a 
dark, dusty blue. Two earthenware bowls from Afghanistan, which arrived 
unsolicited in a consignment from a carpet-seller, sit formally on the table 
and contain lemons. There are always lemons on the table and if not lemons, 
limes, or sometimes both.

What are your earliest childhood memories? Set the scene of your first home, 
your parents, your upbringing.

Sunday afternoons. That's what comes to mind. They were different. We didn't 
have much room. I remember a big chassis pram pushed under the table. It was my 
pram, so this might be one of my earliest memories. I had no brothers or 
sisters. One end of the pram stuck out. When my son Adam was born we had the 
same kind… And I used to push it under the table, half sticking out, in exactly 
the same way.

Why were Sundays different?

There was a sort of melancholy. Everything stopped. There was nothing. It was 
significant even for people who didn't go to church – an idea of "Sunday best" 
right down to the clothes and the tea service. I remember the cups we had – 
they were very 1930s, straight "triangular", with green lines round the top. My 
mother went to the Methodist chapel. Or maybe it was Baptist – one or the 
other. No one knew the difference. I went to Sunday school. But I didn't go to 
the chapel until later when I played the hymns. I think my mother was very keen 
on my having Sunday suits.

Tweed suits, or what?

Tweed suits didn't come until my rebel days. I suppose they were serge or 
similar, with short trousers for quite a while.

Did both your parents work?

My parents had what was called a confectioner's shop in Accrington 
[Lancashire], but really it was a bakery. They baked, both of them. I think 
they had gone to some sort of night school, or done apprenticeships, to learn 
the skill – how to make bread commercially.

The downstairs had three rooms where most of the other houses in the row – 
terraced "two-up two-downs" – had just the two. Upstairs we had a bathroom, 
with a bath and wash-basin. I remember the roll-top and the big straight taps 
which were fixed so the water ran very close to the edge of the bath. I can see 
the green-grey limescale mark. It was probably the only bathroom in the street. 
But the toilet was outside in the back yard like everyone else's.
 Harry c.1947, aged about 13, playing clarinet in the uniform of the North 
East Lancashire military band. Photograph: East Lancashire Concert Band 
I remember sitting in a high chair – another of my earliest memories, which is 
very vivid – and being given lumps of dough to play with. Instinctively I still 
know how bread should be kneaded and pulled. I can watch someone doing it and 
know if the result will be any good or not. But that tactile thing of working 
with dough carried through to my abiding interest in clay and pottery. The idea 
of turning raw material into something else was part of the appeal.

We had a car, too, which set us apart. My father was quite entrepreneurial. I 
used to go off with him to the farmers beyond Clitheroe – the Trough of 
Bowland, as it's known – and get eggs and butter.

Were you close to your father?

We were different kinds of people. Or maybe in fact we were very similar but 
our paths diverged, and the context of our lives made us seem more different 
than we really were. I was his only son, his only child. That was important in 
defining how we were with one another. He was a dreamer, full of ideas and 
fantasies. He was called Fred. His brother was called Harry.

What was school like?

I'll come back to talking about school… when I know you better. It's difficult 
stuff.

We'll come back to it, then. What images or sounds dominated at that period?

Clogs. I used to lie in bed early in the morning and at a certain time, maybe 
around seven am, there'd be a tremendous clattering in the streets, getting 
louder and louder, and it was the sound of clogs. Workers were on their way to 
the mill. Half an hour later the same would happen again, maybe for a different 
shift in another mill. [One of the chief employers in Accrington at that time 
wasHoward & Bullough 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Howard+%26+Bullough+factory+accrington&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ei=j6JiU-CuKM7bPYijgaAM&ved=0CAcQ_AUoAg&biw=1150&bih=1143#facrc=_&imgdii=_&imgrc=u2lF0HUfblHk9M%253A%3BEaCPMq3RGvgouM%3Bhttp%253A%252F%252Fwww.cottontown.org%252FThe%252520Cotton%252520Industry%252FCotton%252520Industry%25252018th%252520to%25252020th%252520Century%252FPublishingImages%252FJapan%25252004.jpg%3Bhttp%253A%252F%252Fwww.cottontown.org%252FThe%252520Cotton%252520Industry%252FCotton%252520Industry%25252018th%252520to%25252020th%252520Century%252FPages%252FA-History-of-E-and-G-Hindle.aspx%3B640%3B372>
, makers of textile manufacturers' machinery used in cotton mills.]

There were people called "cloggers" who mended, like cobblers. There was a 
repair shop for clogs. You didn't leave them there. Instead you sat, in your 
socks, on a long bench with other people waiting while they had your clogs 
redone. They had metal strips, like horseshoes, that needed replacing. I 
remember sitting there holding my clogs.

I started at the church school in Accrington when I was approaching my fourth 
birthday. So, at the age of three, I remember my first proper shoes were a pair 
of clogs. And they rubbed the skin in deep gouges off my heels, so badly that 
the teacher had to cut the flapping skin off.

Tell me about your mother.

My mother – Margaret, always called Madge – was maybe five years younger than 
my father. I know they lost one or more children, miscarriages I think. I knew 
some of my mother's brothers. There was a problem to do with the break-up of 
the family business. I never knew much about it. But I was aware of tensions. 
Tom and Edgar, two of them, ran the place and lived either end of the building, 
which we thought of as the "kingdom". Edgar brought this chest of drawers – 
which I painted blue – to the house.

Here in your own kitchen it actually looks quite French?

No. The table is French. The armoire is French. But the drawers were from 
Accrington, from Uncle Edgar! I think I was nearly called Edgar.
 Portrait of the composer as a young man. Photograph: courtesy of the 
Birtwistle family 
So not Edgar, but why were you called Harrison? Isn't there a mystery about 
your name?

I don't know if I was registered on my birth certificate as Harrison or Harry. 
Harrison was my mother's maiden name. No one ever calls me Harrison except, 
when I was a child, to be posh – or unless they don't know me. But in some 
reference books my name is down as Harrison Paul, which it isn't, and never has 
been. I don't have a second name.

Was there any music at this stage? What do you remember?

In Accrington there was a military band – the East Lancashire military band, 
which I played in. That was very unusual. There were many brass bands but none 
in the area with woodwind except ours. One of the players lived in the next 
street and taught clarinet. So when I was seven, I started on the C clarinet. 
It has a sweet, mellow sound. It was easier to play because it was smaller. 
Haydn wrote for the C clarinet…Music <https://www.theguardian.com/books/music> 
came into my life.

Did you hear music as well as play it?

My father had a radiogram – a radio with built-in gramophone. I remember 
Richard Tauber singing Schubert <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G342nlHvbA4>. I 
remember one of Mendelssohn'sSongs Without Words. And the Donkey Serenade 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tD8o1Z9gr2k>. I never forgot the lines: 
"There's a song in the air/ But the fair señorita doesn't seem to care/ For the 
song in the air."

Did you take to the clarinet quickly?

I don't think, with hindsight, I was a natural as an instrumentalist or, 
really, as a musician. I was the only one doing it. It's what I did. Whether or 
not I had talent didn't really come into it. The thing about practice making 
perfect is misunderstood. Practice can help the untalented or the mediocre 
improve. But those who are naturals never practise. That's how it seems anyway.
Alan Hacker 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M3NJbkW7sTY&list=PLLWeCs0GRED3_2vwedrkwag4pnX2RYKQq>
 never practised [the clarinet], nor John Ogdon 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8q1tNCVGpt0> [the piano].

But I did. I worked hard at the clarinet, and soon after we got a piano too. 
And I think it was a sort of ambition of my parents that music would be a route 
I'd take. It was seen as something to aspire to. And coming from that sort of 
society, they thought it was a form of education too, and that you didn't 
really need any other sort of studying.
 Harry (top left) at Manchester University in the 1950s with fellow students 
including Elgar Howarth (back right, half-hidden), Alexander Goehr (bottom 
left), John Ogdon (glasses) and Peter Maxwell Davies (second right). 
Photograph: courtesy of Peter Maxwell Davies 
Were you writing music at this stage?

In retrospect, I can see that as I learned to read music and to understand 
about notation, so there was a sort of creativity at work – I made efforts to 
write my own music. It sounded like nothing. I wrote single lines and I've been 
doing it ever since!

17 August 2013

Wiltshire. High summer downpours interrupted by sharp sunlight. Temperature 
19C.

The plums, now heavy and ripe, are pulling down a bough of the tree. Harry has 
collected a large bowlful of the dusky purple fruit and is wondering what to 
cook…

The Moth Requiem Prom <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rO7sKJrzVC0>, for 12 
female voices – the BBC Singers – three harps and alto flute, has taken place. 
How did it sound in Cadogan Hall compared with the premiere in Holland last 
October – better, worse, different?

I didn't think, when I was listening to it, I wrote the piece I wanted to 
write. But to a degree I feel that with every piece I write. Lost 
opportunities, ideas I could have developed – hard to say what exactly. You 
hear things that happened as if by accident, that could have turned out 
differently. I wrote it under extremely difficult circumstances – Sheila was 
actually dying during that period. Moths are the metaphor…
 Harry with his wife Sheila at home in France, early 1980s. Photograph: C 
Lienhard 
For life changing, for Sheila, for yourself too, for old age…

Yes. Yes. It's about all those. It's about things that are no longer there. 
I'm nearing the end of my life, at least statistically. But I didn't want to 
write something indulgent and poetic.Robin Blaser 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/bio/robin-blaser>, whose The Moth Poem I set, 
had died in 2009. You know about him and the moth?

There was a sound, in a room, every evening. No one knew what it was. Turned 
out there was a moth in the piano and it had set the strings vibrating in its 
attempt to escape.

I was feeling sorry for moths. Poor moths. There's a lot of prejudice. Some 
people see a moth and immediately want to kill it.

People have quite serious phobias about them.

It's the fluttering. And the fact that they're creatures of the night… And 
they eat your cashmere. But in fact there are only two kinds that eat clothes… 
For what it's worth I enjoyed it more. It's not to do with the quality of the 
performance. Both were very good.

Aside from the question of mortality and extinction, you have always had a 
fascination with moths anyway, since childhood.

Yes, I've always thought that if I had more time – one of those things you 
always think – I'd have found out more about them, but I've never succeeded. 
I've just read about them as an amateur.

I told you what happened when I was a child?

Not about moths.

There used to be a thing on children's radio, a natural history programme. I 
can't remember what the form was. The entomologist was someone calledL Hugh 
Newman <http://www.britishpathe.com/video/moths>, an old-style naturalist. He 
had a butterfly farm in Bexley, Kent. I remember writing to him, aged about 12, 
and got a funny typewritten answer. Then I got a catalogue, and you could buy 
all the butterfly and moth equipment. I got a butterfly net, and a thing called 
a relaxant tray which is a tin box with some sort of jelly in the bottom. Once 
they were killed they would be "relaxed" and you could set them on a cork 
board. I did all that. It was mostly moths. There weren't many butterflies 
around that area of the north at that time.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FrO7sKJrzVC0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FrO7sKJrzVC0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FrO7sKJrzVC0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Not enough flowers?

I don't know. You'd see the usual cabbage white, red admiral, tortoiseshell. 
But moths you could get with molasses and beer and paint it on the bark of 
trees. That attracts them.

Anyway, the cheapest thing – I had no money – to buy in the catalogue were 
silkworm eggs. Cost nothing. I sent off for them and they arrived. They looked 
as if they'd been laid on cardboard. You know they're these huge moths – 
they're called worms but in fact they're moths. I kept them for a while. I put 
them in a drawer. Nothing happened for ages, God knows how long. And one 
morning I woke up and the whole wall was covered in these caterpillars, making 
their way – well I don't know where they thought they were going…

Wasn't your mother horrified at all these caterpillars crawling round your 
room?

No, not really.

And the Moth Requiem?

I used 12 Latin names – and 12 singers split into two six-part choirs, and 
multilayered. Robin's poem is interspersed. You can't really hear it as such. 
You're not meant to. But it's there…

You know I don't feel too well… I think I've taken the wrong pills…

Let's stop.

18 September 2013

 Wiltshire. The day is a mix of grey and gold. Temperature 17C. The season is 
on the turn.

Through the window, the garden begins to look tired: the ancient, towering 
beech trees are still a rich green but the silver birch has shed its leaves on 
to the gravel path to Harry's studio. "The quinces will be ripe in a few 
weeks," says Harry. "Then I'll bake some… "

You've got yet another different kind of tea?

[He is busy unwrapping a foil bag which, like all his other teas purchased on 
a recent trip to Japan, has an element of lucky dip and gadgetry: he retrieves 
a flat, scoop-like plastic spoon to measure the twiggy-looking leaves.] Yes. I 
don't know what it is. It's roasted, this one. Smell.

[It smells of musty woods.]
 Harry at work in his garden studio. Photograph: Eamonn McCabe 
You'd better update me on the piano concerto…

My relationship with this piece is very different from usual. I don't know 
what I'm doing or what it's going to turn out like. I'm being serious. Many 
more ups and downs. Yesterday I was feeling quite depressed. In the depths of 
despair, really. Today I'm euphoric.

But I wasn't when I got up this morning. Then I went to get some cash out of a 
hole in the wall and suddenly I saw a way forward. It's as if you are in a room 
with many locked doors and then you find that one opens and the sun's streaming 
in. Then the journey ahead looks clear. At least for a bit. It's quite 
interesting really…

The next day Harry rings me from London to say he has been thinking about the 
psychological aspects of writing this piano piece. "It's quite simple, yet 
quite manic. It's hot and cold. Sometimes I see the way forward, almost every 
detail of the journey. At the beginning of the week I knew exactly where I was 
going. But yesterday I couldn't see what I was doing at all. When I'm away I 
can see it. When I'm close I get stuck and question its validity." I ask if it 
is worse with this composition than with any others. "It's probably always like 
this. And it's much harder than when, as with opera, there's a narrative. It 
should be easier but there are endless choices. Have I said this before? Am I 
making any sense? I want to get back home and get on with it."

This is an edited extract from Harrison Birtwistle: Wild Tracks – A 
Conversation Diary With Fiona Maddocks 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571308118>
, published by Faber & Faber on 15 May, £22.50. To order a copy for £18 with 
free UK p&p, call 0330 333 6846 or go to guardianbookshop.co.uk

As part of the Barbican's Birtwistle at 80 
<https://www.barbican.org.uk/music/series.asp?id=1175> season, Harrison 
Birtwistle will be in conversation with Fiona Maddocks at the Barbican onSunday 
25 May <https://www.barbican.org.uk/music/event-detail.asp?ID=14786>, 5.20pm

The Moth Requiem 
<http://www.signumrecords.com/catalogue/choral/the-moth-requiem/sigcd368.html>, 
released on Signum, has been shortlisted for anRPS music award 
<http://www.rpsmusicawards.com/welcome>, being announced 13 May

• This article was amended on 4 May to correct the Manchester caption.
 