
If Bella Ramsey could cast any spell she liked, it would be one that instantly 
tidied her room. “I don’t often get round to it and would find it very handy,” 
she says. But that is where her similarities with most 13-year-olds ends. 
Described as “an incredible new child actress” by theRadio Times, Ramsey has 
already found fame as Lady Lyanna Mormont inGame of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/game-of-thrones-episode-by-episode>
. Now the talented teenager is set to cast a spell over children too as Mildred 
Hubble in the co-production between the BBC,Netflix and German broadcaster ZDF 
of a lavish new adaption ofThe Worst Witch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/game-of-thrones-episode-by-episode>
.

The magical new version of Jill Murphy’s series of books about Miss Cackle’s 
Academy for Witches will be broadcast as 12 episodes starting on 11 January on 
CBBC and will then stream on Netflix.

The collaboration between CBBC, Netflix and ZDF has allowed for a budget far 
beyond that usually spend on children’s television programmes. With special 
effects designed by theDoctor Who team and a school set in a castle to rival 
Hogwarts, some may compare it with Harry Potter.

But as Ramsey says: “It’s not Harry Potter for girls because girls like Harry 
Potter as well. Anyone can watchThe Worst Witch – it’s quite a versatile 
programme, even though most of the cast are female. Mildred Hubble is a witch 
for everyone. Boys can watch it too.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fworst-witch-children-tv-adaptation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72f7fd68d159e51e73d69d8685c5e342223c09ff%2F132_336_2862_3578%2F2862.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Harry%20Potter%20for%20girls%3F%20I%E2%80%99m%20not%20that%20kind%20of%20Worst%20Witch%2C%20says%20TV%E2%80%99s%20new%20Mildred%20Hubble&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fworst-witch-children-tv-adaptation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Harry%20Potter%20for%20girls%3F%20I%E2%80%99m%20not%20that%20kind%20of%20Worst%20Witch%2C%20says%20TV%E2%80%99s%20new%20Mildred%20Hubble&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fworst-witch-children-tv-adaptation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72f7fd68d159e51e73d69d8685c5e342223c09ff%2F132_336_2862_3578%2F2862.jpg>
 Bella Ramsey as Lady Lyanna Mormont in Game of Thrones. Photograph: Helen 
Sloan/Home Box Office 
In her first newspaper interview, Ramsey agrees there was a kind of sisterhood 
among the mostly female cast – which includes Wendy Craig, Amanda Holden and
Downton Abbey actors Clare Higgins, who plays kindly Miss Cackle, and Raquel 
Cassidy as the strict Miss Hardbroom.

Ramsey recalls that filming “was really good, it’s got lots of great 
parts…there were some challenges but there were always going to be”.

Those mostly involved the special effects, which included flying on 
broomsticks: “It was hard learning all the stunts we had to do. Continuity was 
a big aspect.”

She enjoyed reading the books and saw elements of Mildred in herself: “She’s 
clumsy and I’m quite clumsy – I’m always spilling stuff down me. I just had a 
cheese sandwich and spilt half of it down me.

“She always tries her best at everything, which is something I try to do.”

If the trajectory of the stars of previous series of The Worst Witch is 
anything are to go by, Ramsey has a good chance of making her career last well 
beyond her teens. The last time there was a TV adaptation of the books, 
Felicity Jones, currently finding fame in the lead role of theStar Wars offshoot
Rogue One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/13/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story-review-felicity-jones-gareth-edwards>
, played Mildred’s nemesis, Ethel Hallow. Ramsey has watched that version but 
describes the new version as “quite different”.

“Classic aspects have to stay the same but it’s been twisted to make it more 
modern for the 21st century,” she says. Updates include references to allergies 
and Mildred’s mother preferring to be called Ms rather than Miss.

Ramsey’s naturalness on-screen and maturity are evident and were praised by 
Game of Thrones actors.

“Although it is a really fun and amazing experience, it is a job and you’ve 
got to live up to what’s expected,” she points out. “There’s often a really 
tight team schedule so you’ve got to be able to fit things in. I want to make 
life easier for people rather than being a nightmare.”

Polite and modest, she does not mind the attention Game of Thrones – which she 
joined having been spotted auditioning forThe BFG  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/24/the-bfg-observer-review-mark-rylance-steven-spielberg-roald-dahl>
– has brought: “It always gives me a fuzzy feeling inside after anyone’s 
recognised me. I just feel so happy because they’ve been so happy to meet me, 
so I feel like I’ve made their day.”

The Worst Witch by Jill Murphy - review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/sep/11/the-worst-witch-jill-murphy-review>
Asked if Lyanna will return, she says: “There’s been speculation I’m coming 
back – we’ll have to wait and see.”

Her parents do not let her watch the violent Game of Thrones but she is 
allowed to watch footage of her acting: “When I watch it back I’m like, ‘Turn 
it off!’ I pick out stuff, thinking I should’ve done that better or I shouldn’t 
have pulled that face.”

Getting into acting “just kind of happened by accident”. There is some musical 
talent in the family as her businessman father Alex plays the trumpet and her 
older sister played in amateur groups, which Ramsey also went along to before 
she then auditioned to train at theTelevision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television> Workshop.

“I was doing it for fun and then it just happened, and I’m very thankful for 
it,” she says. She adds wisely that rejections for parts should be seen as 
“positive because the more you get rejected the closer you come to being 
accepted”.

Her busy schedule means her schooling is done online, and she likes to read 
books such as survival fictionThe Raft.

Ramsey has two films coming up, is voicing the lead in a Netflix animation 
series,Hilda, and taking part in a local production of Annie next year. She is 
looking forward to playing Annie but would love to play Miss Hannigan in 
future. Too tall to audition for the role of Matilda in the West End version of 
the Roald Dahl novel, she would instead like to play the fierce headmistress, 
Miss Trunchbull: “In the West End it’s played by a man, like a dame, so it 
might not be possible. I can only dream!”

Ramsey hopes to one day set up a performing school for children with special 
needs. But for now she is just enjoying acting. “I like the opportunity to be 
someone else,” she explains. “Acting lets you be in a place where no one’s 
judging you.”


• This article was amended on 29 December to correct Felicity Jones’s role in 
an earlier TV adaptation ofThe Worst Witch.

 