
After just over a decade, it seems as though the new series of TV Burp will be 
Harry Hill's last 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/sep/29/harry-hill-to-quit-tv-burp>. 
Whether the show will continue without him remains unclear, which might give us 
just eight more editions of inspired lunacy to relish – and then no more 
knitted character,no more Wagbo <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5pfNuYfmA7c>, 
no more bits of scenery that look like faces, no more "there's only one way to 
find out" fights or ludicrously banal TV Highlights of the Week.

Hopefully Burp will go out on a high. It has certainly had its ups and downs 
but may turn out to be one of the few programmes tojump the shark 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jumping_the_shark> and then reverse back over it. 
For a while it seemed to trade too much on mocking tawdry reality TV and I was 
not mad about the way celebrities appeared desperate to be in on the joke – a 
situation that reached its undeniable apotheosis when a phone directory of 
stars, including Ricky Gervais and Noel Fielding, allowed themselvesto be 
filmed saying the phrase "Ear cataracts" 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k3DwspMzjhQ>.

But at its best TV Burp did something very few comedy programmes – The 
Simpsons in its heyday is another that comes to mind – have managed in recent 
years. It is rare for a programme to appeal to absolutely all ages. Not even Dr 
Who can manage that. Like Springfield's finest yellow family, TV Burp works on 
all sorts of levels. There are knowing smirks from Hill for adults, puppets for 
the toddlers, pop culture references for hipsters and stupid soap send-ups for 
everybody.

This across-the-board appeal is summed up by the way TV Burp repeats have 
popped up everywhere from Sunday afternoon to post-pub slots. And while ITV has 
never really been able to build a comedy roster to follow it, despite trying 
with Al Murray and Jason Manford, TV Burp has arguably changed the way new 
comedians feel about doing populist telly. It is a pity Hill is going. ITV will 
never be the same again. Particularly if Paddy McGuinness is its face of 
Saturday night.

Oscar Wilde said that each man kills the thing he loves but I get the 
impressionHarry Hill <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/harry-hill> has 
actually fallen out of love with TV Burp. There were stories that he felt 
watching television for work spoiled the fun of it and rumours that he did not 
like his catchphrases – he allegedly refused to continue saying "chippy chips" 
at one point. Hill certainly had influence on broadcasting though: he should 
probably take a cut of Louie Spence's appearance fees, having "discovered" him 
on Sky's Pineapple Dance Studios.

There are many things I'll miss about Hill's TV Burp: Poetry Corner 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YO0fC9k5viQ>; his demolition of BBC3's reality 
TV output, from Freaky Eaters to Snog, Marry, Avoid even if his critiques did 
come over rather superior; and his ability to home in on the 
you-couldn't-make-it-up brand of programming,typified by Muslim Driving School 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uiy5iOptY1s&NR=1&feature=endscreen>. And then 
of course there is Hill's judiciously selected "Of The Week" moments.

Sometimes Hill may have stated the obvious – did we need someone to highlight 
the innate absurdity of Kilroy <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LayURys9txY>, 
for instance? But he stated the obvious in such a brilliant way we enjoyed 
hearing it.

If the series does survive in some form it will never be the same without 
Hill's playful postmodernism. Maybe there is a way back for him. Can we all 
have a whip-round to raise enough cash to get him to stay? Set Wagbo on him if 
he still tries to leave? Otherwise this is one TV Highlight of the Week that 
will be sorely missed.
 