
If you had to bet which brand of undies the Aussie girl next door wears, what 
would you put your money on? Her undies have to be cute, practical and 
unselfconscious, like she is. She’s nubile and rosy-cheeked in a way that 
invites lust while simultaneously disclaiming any knowledge of it – and her 
undies have to match.

Oh, right. Of course. Bonds. 

Bonds has used this archetype in marketing for years, maybe more than any 
other brand. Its models, Aussie girls to the core, are smiling, not pouting; 
bouncing, not writhing; playful, not seductive. Paragons of wholesome white 
femininity. Miranda Kerr, notIggy Azalea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/iggy-azalea>.

Except the newest face of Bonds is ... Iggy Azalea 
<http://blog.bonds.com.au/people/iggy-azalea-is-the-new-fancy-face-of-bonds/>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fhas-bonds-killed-the-aussie-girl-next-door-by-endorsing-iggy-azalea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F29%2F1430292483262%2F1a569db2-5809-4dbd-b863-e0df91e51564-764x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Has%20Bonds%20killed%20the%20Aussie%20girl%20next%20door%20by%20endorsing%20Iggy%20Azalea%3F%20%7C%20Eleanor%20Robertson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fhas-bonds-killed-the-aussie-girl-next-door-by-endorsing-iggy-azalea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Has%20Bonds%20killed%20the%20Aussie%20girl%20next%20door%20by%20endorsing%20Iggy%20Azalea%3F%20%7C%20Eleanor%20Robertson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fhas-bonds-killed-the-aussie-girl-next-door-by-endorsing-iggy-azalea%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F29%2F1430292483262%2F1a569db2-5809-4dbd-b863-e0df91e51564-764x1020.jpeg>
 ‘Azalea’s obnoxious racial politics and refusal of Australian identity make 
her far removed from Bonds’ usual girl next door.’ Photograph: Bonds 
Azalea’s claim to be the next official Aussie girl next door is a thin one. 
She grew up in Mullumbimby but moved to Los Angeles at 16 because she “never 
liked 
<http://www.ew.com/article/2014/04/11/iggy-azalea-the-new-classic-interview>” 
the Australian hip-hop and rap scene.

She is an odd choice for Bonds: she claims she took the gig because “it’s an 
iconic Australian brand 
<http://www.news.com.au/entertainment/iggy-azalea-to-celebrate-her-role-as-bonds100-birthday-girl-in-australia/story-e6frfmq9-1227318384690>
” despite being on recordrefusing to rap about growing up here 
<http://www.mtv.com/news/1967551/iggy-azalea-rap-australia-native/>.

And her relationship with her birth country would be the ultimate example of 
the cultural cringe if she hadn’t gone one step further and simply renounced 
the entire nation in favour of the US.

For her fans, many of them in the US, her Australianness is secondary to her 
whiteness, which she uses to enact black culture in pursuit of mainstream 
palatability.

She’s all of the noise and none of the street cred, the latest artist to take 
advantage of uncoded white neutrality to turn hip-hop, an art form with 
specific historical and political meanings, into something bland and 
non-threatening. This formula has worked as well for her in Australia as it has 
in the US.

She’ll shift units, even though her obnoxious racial politics and refusal of 
Australian identity make her about as far removed from Bonds’ usual girl next 
door, who is carefree, innocent and apolitical as you can get.

Again, a comparison with Miranda Kerr is instructive. Although she also lives 
in LA, Kerr maintains a purposeful respect for the Aussie-girl-come-good 
narrative, which insulates her from criticism.

She poses in Qantas cockpits 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/entertainment/sydney-confidential/hair-australia-im-home-miranda-kerr-with-smiling-son-flynn-showing-off-a-haircut-similar-to-his-dad-touches-down-in-sydney/story-fni0cvc9-1226902930537>
 and does shoots for David Jones on thebeaches of Broome 
<http://www.vogue.com.au/fashion/news/shore+thing+miranda+kerr+hits+the+beach+for+david+jones,18951?page=7>
. She understands that to take advantage of the lucre that comes from being a 
“home-grown beauty,” she has to pay her tithe to the nation.

Maybe Azalea has proven this requirement no longer applies. If she can occupy 
an advertising niche defined entirely by one white Australian stereotype, while 
refusing to defer to it in the slightest, maybe the cultural cachet of the 
Aussie girl next door is dead.

Back in 2009, Bonds was trying to widen the range of bodies permitted to enact 
the bouncy-accessible-cute formula. At the same time, the brand was was 
sandbagging its status as the cute underwear of choice for regular gals by
making their ads more racially diverse 
<https://zeroatthebone.wordpress.com/2009/04/09/on-the-bonds-ads/>. 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCTrPeSHVqJQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCTrPeSHVqJQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCTrPeSHVqJQ&media=>
These ads were a kind of progress – a concession to the inclusive demands of 
modern liberal feminism, which sees the realms of marketing and entertainment 
as of the utmost importance, because they are sites from which representational 
equality will trickle down.

From this perspective, the death of the Aussie girl next door at Iggy Azalea’s 
hands isn’t a tragedy for the archetype, or for Bonds.

But is it a step back from the “inclusive” Bonds of 2009? Not quite. It’s 
simply a sign that we shouldn’t rely on business to create the progressive 
norms we want to see reflected in the rest of society, because what they choose 
to represent will always be dictated by the market.

Back in 2009 the Bonds branded needed to depict racial diversity. In the 
future sexual minorities, gender parity ordisability 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ap2ikE54PrM> might be the best way to market 
underwear, and that’s what they’ll depict.

Assessing this as the result of moral concern on the part of image creators is 
hopelessly naive. Bonds’ racial sensitivities haven’t backslid since their 2009 
commercials because they never had any in the first place; you can’t 
anthropomorphise a brand.

They will always do whatever they think will sell more undies. If the 
constructed people and worlds they’re using to sell undies appear superficially 
liberal or tolerant, it’s a reaction to their customers’ changing tastes.

At no stage do Bonds, or companies like them, truly challenge the status quo. 
If Azalea alienates their consumers, they’ll get rid of her and use someone 
different.

Iggy Azalea is an obvious departure from their usual aesthetic and that choice 
might even have positive angles if you’re looking for them: I’ve heard her 
speak and rap, loudly, on multiple occasions, which, regardless of the content 
of her speech, could be read as a challenge. After all, the silent girl next 
door’s internal life is entirely in the imagination of those observing her.

The truth about adverts: selling the White Woman™
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/apr/29/truth-adverts-white-women-hank-willis-thomas-expose>
But this sort of analysis leads to endless weighings of representation and 
impact, totally unmoored from the material differences between classes of 
people for which identity politics is supposed to be a remedy.

None of this is to say that pop culture is an empty or arbitrary focus of 
critical attention. Just that Azalea’s new job is a reminder that in order to 
have political potential, responses to pop culture must see it for what it is: 
reactive, rather than transforming.
 