
“There was a funny moment when the door handle didn’t work properly,” recalls 
Ben Wright, lead singer of brutal death metal bandUnfathomable Ruination 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l7VqNSWgTs8>. “There I was inside a metal box 
of about 1.6 metres squared with the band and our gear – and 40 minutes of 
oxygen.” Did you think you might die? “ I did think it might have been more 
appropriate for another death metal band, Suffocation, to be in there.”

Unfathomable Ruination had been invited by the Portuguese artist João Onofre 
to enter a steel cube, called Box Sized Die, that had been placed outside 
London’s Gherkin as part ofthe Sculpture in the City festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2014/jul/03/death-metal-unfathomable-ruination-box-sized-die-art>
. The cube was hermetically sealed and soundproofed so that when the band 
started playing, no one outside could hear their set. They could only feel 
vibrations. “We could have just played a CD and no one would have been any the 
wiser.” But you didn’t? “No, I was bawling my head off.”

Onofre told the band the length of the performance was to be determined by how 
long the oxygen inside lasted. No one in the band, incredibly, thought to do a 
cover ofAir Supply’s All Out of Love 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JWdZEumNRmI>. Unfathomable Ruination were in 
radio contact with organisers on the outside and, happily, the door handle 
eventually worked. Which is how Wright survived to speak to me.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fmodern-art-glass-box-claustrophobic-trend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F6%2F1423238617255%2F0aeb9874-a59c-4d8c-91df-19ce444c3e7a-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Has%20art%20boxed%20itself%20into%20a%20corner%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fmodern-art-glass-box-claustrophobic-trend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Has%20art%20boxed%20itself%20into%20a%20corner%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fmodern-art-glass-box-claustrophobic-trend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F6%2F1423238617255%2F0aeb9874-a59c-4d8c-91df-19ce444c3e7a-2060x1373.jpeg>
 The metal band Unfathomable Ruination are locked in a soundproof box in London 
to play until the air runs out: João Onofre’s called the piece Box Sized DIE. 
Onofre’s cube functioned as a rebuke to a new trend for live artists to put 
themselves in see-through boxes, as if they were stuffed birds or pickled 
sharks. More and more performance artists are at it.Actor and model Milla 
Jovovich was locked in a glass cube for five hours 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-2333084/Milla-Jovovich-poses-cardboard-continues-perform-Venice-art-festival.html>
 at the 2013 Venice Biennale. Playing the part of a ditzy actress, she spent 
the time shopping for high-end goods online as the Plexiglas cube filled up 
with cardboard boxes. She tweeted: “how did i end up getting this much stuff?! 
lolol! i swear i’m very simple normally.”

And what was in the cardboard boxes? Tiny interns doing work experience 
performance art with Jovovich? Sadly, no. The boxes and the cube were part of 
artist Tara Subkoff’s Future/Perfect project, a critique of consumerism’s 
impact on our environment. Future/Perfect juxtaposed poignantly with Ai 
Weiwei’s installation Sacred at the Biennale. This consisted of six huge iron 
boxes containing fibreglass depictions of scenes from his 81 days in a Chinese 
prison, complete with guards and cell-beds. Sensibly, Ai Weiwei wasn’t in those 
boxes himself: he, unlike Jovovich, had a bit of previous with unsimulated 
incarceration.

PJ Harvey: Recording in Progress review – demystifying the rituals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/25/pj-harvey-recording-in-progress-somerset-house-review>
Late last year, an Australian reworking of Ibsen’s The Wild Duck, shown at the 
Barbican,put its actors inside a Perspex box as TV monitors registered the 
precise time everything took place 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/oct/27/the-wild-duck-review-ibsen-simon-stone>
. But, as with Jovovich, there was microcosm within macrocosm – this time, a 
little Perspex box with water and a live duck symbolising something or other. 
And right now PJ Harvey, like a perp in custody, is recording her new album on 
the other side of a sheet of one-way glass in the basement of London’s Somerset 
House.“It is like watching zoo creatures. You want to poke them with a stick, 
make them do stuff, screw and eat each other,” wrote the Guardian’s art critic 
Adrian Searle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/16/pj-harvey-somerset-house-recording-in-progress>
. Harvey told one interviewer: “You have to go through dull moments to get to 
the goods.” Well, you might have to, PJ, but do we? To be fair, it could have 
been worse: had PJ been a painter, spectators might find themselves literally 
watching paint dry.

Someone somewhere is doubtless already writing a tiresome thesis about today’s 
S&M consumerist-voyeurist ethos. Certainly, in today’s Plexiglas faceoff 
between artist and audience, it’s the latter that blinks first. Sure, we havea 
24/7 surveillance society 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jun/18/how-can-this-state-surveillance-be-legal>
, realising in CCTV theall-seeing panopticon 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Panopticon> that Jeremy Bentham imagined and 
Michel Foucault theorised, but sometimes even security guards nod off. Perform, 
monkey boy, damn you, one feels like yelling at these artists.

In 1988, Leigh Bowery 
<http://arielefraimashbel.blogspot.co.uk/2011/10/leigh-bowery-in-doffay-gallery-1988.html>
 preened, posed and lounged on a couch in a range of fetish outfits at the 
Anthony D’Offay Gallery. It proved, among other things, to be a shop window for 
his talents: Lucian Freud saw the fleshy Australian performance artist (“I 
found him perfectly beautiful”) and made him his latest muse.

And then there was Tilda Swinton, who spent 15 hours in a vitrine at London’s 
Serpentine Gallery in 1995, seemingly asleep. “I am lucky,” said Swinton. “I 
have a very strong and convenient bladder.” It was a remark that made me think 
of when Spinal Tap playedRock’n’Roll Creation 
<http://www.tcm.com/mediaroom/video/237534/This-Is-Spinal-Tap-Movie-Clip-Rock-n-Roll-Creation.html>
, each member emerging from pods, Invasion of the Bodysnatchers-style. But the 
bassist’s got stuck. Did he have a strong bladder, the world wondered, as 
roadies hammered at his pod doors and then tried to burn it open with 
oxyacetylene torches? Unacceptably, history has no answer to those questions.

Thankfully, Swinton survived to reprise her performance of The Maybe at New 
York’s Museum of Modern Art in 2013. A notice by the installation read: “The 
Maybe 1995/2013. Living artist, glass, steel, mattress, pillow, linen, water 
and spectacles.”The superb headline from the New York Post? “More in snore!” 
<http://nypost.com/2013/03/26/more-in-snore-tilda-keeps-moma-art-fans-guessing/>
 What was The Maybe about? Satire on celebrity? Actor “resting” between gigs? 
“The meaning of the piece has nothing to do with me,” said Swinton, who 
collaborated on it with artist Cornelia Parker. “It is entirely in the eye of 
the beholder.”

True, but some beholders were upset. “It was like the end of Snow White, when 
she’s lying in a glass box,” art lecturer Martina Margetts told the Independent 
after visiting the Serpentine. 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/the-big-sleep-since-monday-the-actress-tilda-swinton-has-been-lying-apparently-asleep-in-a-glass-case-for-eight-hours-a-day-the-centrepiece-of-an-exhibition-that-features-the-possessions-and-one-brain-of-famous-dead-people-the-maybe-at-the-serpentine-gallery-is-the-first-hit-of-the-new-season-20000-people-will-have-seen-it-by-the-time-it-closes-on-sunday-and-for-once-punters-and-critics-seem-to-be-in-general-agreement-1600120.html>
 “It was a bit unnerving. There were children crying, they didn’t know if she 
was dead or alive.” You made children cry, Tilda. Happy now?
 Michelle Olley is presented in a glass box as the climax of an Alexander 
McQueen fashion show at the V&A in 2001. Photograph: V&A 
Gwyneth Paltrow's coming … she's going to see my bits!!!
Michelle Olley's performance diary 
The late British fashion designer Alexander McQueen induced writer Michelle 
Olley to lie naked in a glass box in 2001 as the coup de theatre of a fashion 
show.Olley agreed and wrote a diary 
<http://blog.metmuseum.org/alexandermcqueen/michelle-olley-voss-diary/> about 
her experience, including the following entry: “Apparently Gwyneth Paltrow’s 
coming. GWYNETH PALTROW’S GOING TO SEE MY BITS!!!”

After Olley survived exposure to fashionistas while naked in a confined space 
with flying moths (“I wanted my knickers back on pronto”), she ran across 
Isabella Blow. Olley recalled the late magazine editor congratulating her on 
her performance, saying it “said something about me being Poseidon, the fish 
god – the beardy trident-carrying half-man, half-fish god, which puzzled me. I 
told her I thought I was more in the paganistic, full-moon Celtic style Venus 
of Willendorf mould – those lumpy female figures that keep popping up on 
Palaeolithic burial sites.” Nobody has that sort of conversation after the 
launch of Debenhams’ autumn knitwear range.

Two years later, David Blaine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/david-blaine> hung without food in a box 
suspended in mid-air beside the Tower of London for 44 days. Inspired by 
Kafka’s short story The Hunger Artist, Hermann Hesse’s Siddartha and, possibly, 
his burgeoning love handles, Blaine fasted while people hurled food and abuse 
at him. “I think it was a natural reaction,” said Blaine sweetly. “People 
didn’t know if it was real – was I cheating, was I secretly eating food, was I 
sneaking in and out? They were confused. Without their reaction, you really had 
nothing. I had friends ready to throw stuff at me in case nobody did that, in 
case it didn’t happen on its own.”

The following year, 16 performance artists took shifts to sit at desks inside 
a glass box in Trafalgar Square and read out lists of years for seven days and 
nights. “We want people to watch and think about the meaning of human existence 
and consciousness and mortality 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/1458081/Another-performance-in-a-glass-box-but-this-time-its-for-one-million-years.html>
,” said Margot Heller, director of the South London Gallery. Not since that 
yawnsomely long tracking shot of a traffic jam in Jean-Luc Godard’s film 
Weekend has boring your audience been so attention-sappingly deployed as an art 
tactic.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fmodern-art-glass-box-claustrophobic-trend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F6%2F1423240666790%2Ff07dd1a2-c2e3-45d8-a293-89ddf3d5917d-2060x1371.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Has%20art%20boxed%20itself%20into%20a%20corner%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fmodern-art-glass-box-claustrophobic-trend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Has%20art%20boxed%20itself%20into%20a%20corner%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fmodern-art-glass-box-claustrophobic-trend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F6%2F1423240666790%2Ff07dd1a2-c2e3-45d8-a293-89ddf3d5917d-2060x1371.jpeg>
 In Strasbourg, France, an actor takes part in a piece by Dries Verhoeven; the 
artist’s controversial recent work put himself on display as he scanned dating 
app Grindr. Photograph: Frederick Florin/AFP/Getty Images 
Last year, Dutch artist Dries Verhoeven put himself in a glass box 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/oct/09/grindr-dick-pics-privacy-invasion-contemporary-art-dries-verhoeven>
 inside a Berlin theatre, soliciting strangers on gay hook-up app Grindr. The 
resultant conversations with Grindr users were projected on to a screen outside 
in a public square. One of the first people to respond later released a 
statement on Facebook calling the project “digital rape” because he hadn’t 
known the conversation would be broadcast. Soon after, Verhoeven ended the 
project, but not before unwittingly posing a topical question: in a 24/7 
surveillance society, where omniscience isn’t just God’s thing, what should be 
private?

I feel a bit like an animal in the zoo
Jewish Museum volunteer 
Also in Berlin last year, the Jewish museum staged a show called The Whole 
Truth … Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Jews 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qcsaibr3auw>, in which Jewish volunteers sat 
in glass boxes and answered visitors’ questions. “I feel a bit like an animal 
in the zoo,” said Ido Porat, the first volunteer to sit in the box, “but in 
reality, that’s what it’s like being a Jew in Germany.”

Journalists noted that putting Jews on display in glass boxes was reminiscent 
of the bulletproof glass box that held the Nazi mass murderer of Jews, Adolf 
Eichmann, during his 1961 trial in Israel. “Step right up! See the Jews!” wrote 
Salon’s critic 
<http://www.salon.com/2013/04/01/jews_the_museum_exhibit_partner/> with 
pardonable sarcasm, underlining the show’s presumably unintended freak-show 
vibe. True, non-Jews could have asked Jews out for coffee if they wanted to get 
the poop, but society doesn’t roll that way.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fmodern-art-glass-box-claustrophobic-trend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F6%2F1423238850084%2F4364a8e7-9ea8-4e49-9a8a-958eec13a7ef-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Has%20art%20boxed%20itself%20into%20a%20corner%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fmodern-art-glass-box-claustrophobic-trend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Has%20art%20boxed%20itself%20into%20a%20corner%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fmodern-art-glass-box-claustrophobic-trend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F6%2F1423238850084%2F4364a8e7-9ea8-4e49-9a8a-958eec13a7ef-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Blind Light, by Antony Gormley, at London’s Hayward Gallery. Photograph: David 
Levene/Guardian 
One last glass box. In 2007, Antony Gormley invited visitors to wander through 
a steam-filled glass container 
<https://www.theguardian.com/arts/gallery/2007/may/15/1> at the Hayward 
Gallery. According to the sculptor, Blind Light, as the installation was 
called, undermined what architecture ought to do:“Architecture is supposed to 
be the location of security and certainty about where you are. It is supposed 
to protect you from the weather, from darkness, from uncertainty.” 
<http://www.antonygormley.com/uploads/files/BLIND-LIGHT-Sean-Kelly-Gallery-New-York-USA-Press-Release.pdf>
 So, instead of that, one wandered lonely in a cloud, occasionally bumping into 
strangers – for Londoners, it was like a reminder of what the city’s pea 
soupers were like before the Clean Air Act. For Gormley, it meant that each 
visitor could become “the immersed figure in an endless ground, literally the 
subject of the work”.

Absolutely. But it also meant that, just for once, we could have some time off 
from the modern penal servitude of looking.
 