
When the TV industry bangs on about itself, the viewing public gets restless. 
SeeStudio 60 on the Sunset Strip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/jul/03/your-next-box-set>. (I liked 
it.) But when a broadcaster makes a show all about its own management 
structure, the public nose is bound to be bent out of shape, no matter how good 
the writing. WithW1A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/mar/14/w1a-new-show-from-bbc-filipa-jodelka>
 the BBC hopes to continue the success of John Morton's superbTwenty Twelve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/apr/20/have-you-been-watching-twenty-twelve>
 (the mockumentary about London's Olympic Committee) by transplanting two of 
its characters –Ian Fletcher 
<http://www.digitalspy.co.uk/tv/news/a544800/bbc-twos-twenty-twelve-sequel-w1a-ian-fletcher-returns-in-first-picture.html>
 andSiobhan Sharpe 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/scottybryan/17-essential-pr-lessons-from-siobhan-sharpe-of-twenty-twelve>
, played byHugh Bonneville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mediamonkeyblog/2014/mar/11/high-bonneville-bbc-downton-abbey-w1a>
 andJessica Hynes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/oct/24/julia-davis-jessica-hynes-interview>
 – from the Olympic park to BBC HQ (the recently rebuiltNew Broadcasting House 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-22804844> in central London). All the meeting 
rooms named after venerable comedians ("We're meeting in Frankie Howerd") are 
real and real BBC staff can be seen typing away in the background. The line 
between fact and fiction is blurred, and then some.

As with Twenty Twelve, a cast of comic ninjas has been assembled to deliver 
Morton's trademark stop-start dialogue with the utmost skill. Bonneville's 
character, rather than being one of the monkeys at the zoo, now takes a more 
detached role, looking in from the outside as the self-regarding comic 
caricatures around him do everything in their power to not make any television. 
Hynes is now perhaps slightly overused as Siobhan, the verbally incontinent PR 
propelled entirely by the hot gas of media buzzwords. But there are new 
scene-stealers:Hugh Skinner <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p01twdkh> as 
hopelessly thick intern Will Humphries, Jason Watkins as superbly 
affable/sociopathic exec Simon Harwood, and Rufus Jones as effusive inanity 
fountain David Wilkes (who either gets all the best lines or just makes them 
sound that way). Then there'sSarah Parish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mediamonkeyblog/2014/mar/19/bbc-satire-w1a-true>
 as Anna Rampton, an unshakably confident git who – like so many in the 
fictional hierarchy – has no clear function. AndMonica Dolan 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2014/03/26/w1a-bbc-monica-dolan-filming_n_5036198.html>
 as Senior Communications Officer Tracey Pritchard – her catchphrase, "I'm not 
being funny", first used byRuth Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2013/dec/31/gavin-stacey-ruth-jones-mbe-new-year-honours-list-video>
 in Gavin & Stacey, is already wearing thin (and in scenes mirroring the show's 
ownsubplot about a Cornish news anchor 
<http://www.westbriton.co.uk/Cornwall-butt-joke-BBC-comedy-W1A-starring-Hugh/story-20832264-detail/story.html>
, there have been additional complaints that she should have been played by an 
actor who is actually Welsh).

The celebrity cameos, although now a little overdone in comedy sitcoms (blame 
Ricky Gervais'Extras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2007/dec/27/hasrickyrediscoveredhisfun>
), have been generally been flawless, withClare Balding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/dec/11/clare-balding-tom-daley-youtube-bbc>
,Carol Vorderman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/aug/20/carol-vorderman-my-family-values>
 and traditional BBC whipping boyAlan Yentob 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/feb/16/alan-yentob-bbc-compete-google-apps>
 all putting in on-point performances as themselves. And whenDavid Tennant's 
voiceover 
<http://tennantnews.blogspot.co.uk/2014/03/video-preview-clips-from-w1a-featuring.html>
 hits its mark, it's one of the funniest things on television. (After a BBC 
News photo mix-up in which a despot's wife is mistakenly captioned as Trudi 
Styler, the voiceover tells us: "Sting has phoned up Alan Yentob personally and 
called him an actual prick.") The general aim of the series is to lampoon the 
over-management and ridiculous office practices of the BBC on-screen, while 
they continue unabated in the real BBC, just out of shot. But commissioning 
such a self-critical show is like standing on a box and punching yourself in 
the face in front of a crowd of booing detractors. Does anyone outside the BBC 
care? Friends who work in offices assure me there is plenty to identify with in 
W1A. The same insidious corporate speak and ergonomic seating (one meeting 
takes place on two orange see-saws) pervade all large companies and many are 
enjoying Morton gently kicking that culture behind the knees.

The most interesting question is of whether the show is a victim of the 
culture it depicts. TheBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> commissioned 
a run of four episodes, but why only four when sitcoms usually come in sixes? 
Did they not have the budget? After the final installment (airing next 
Wednesday) I'm left with a sense that the story is unfinished. In fact, it's 
only just getting going. Is this another ingenious commissioning decision from 
the folding-bike brigade? Or did Morton (like Balding and Vorderman, who 
thought they were each fronting Britain's Tastiest Village in the show) believe 
he had six episodes when writing?

W1A is on Wednesdays, 10pm, BBC2.

What do you think of W1A? Should the BBC be poking fun at itself or are you 
already tired of the in-jokes? Let us know in the comments below.
 