
‘He was the life and soul of the party, but inside he was battling serious 
demons. He was a 25-year-old man who looked to have everything going for him, 
but he couldn’t vocalise his problems.” That is how Rowland Bennett describes 
his best friend Charlie Berry, who took his own life a year ago.

Suicide is the biggest cause of death for men under 49 
<http://www.mindcharity.co.uk/the-mind-directory/mental-health-rapid-response-service/>
 in the UK, and men are three times more likely to take their own lives than 
women. According to campaigners, most men thinking about suicide never talk to 
anyone about the problems that have brought them to crisis point.

After his friend’s death, Bennett, a booker and promoter in the music 
industry, became involved with the male suicide awareness charityCampaign 
Against Living Miserably <https://www.thecalmzone.net/> (Calm), organising its 
10th anniversary fundraiser night in London. “Since I’ve been involved, I’ve 
heard more and more people say ‘I lost a friend’ or ‘My mate, the party guy, 
killed himself’ – everyone has got those stories,” he says. “Men don’t want to 
be that guy talking about depression. They want to be the character people 
think they are.”

The cost of mental illness
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/may/17/economic-cost-of-mental-illness>
Male suicide research by the charity Samaritans 
<http://www.samaritans.org/about-us/our-research/research-report-men-suicide-and-society>
 suggests men often compare themselves against a “gold standard” of masculinity 
which is often incredibly difficult to live up to. The charity has highlighted 
the issue for middle-aged men, who have the highest rate of suicide of any age 
group. Research manager Elizabeth Scowcroft says that is probably down to a 
combination of factors, including relationship breakdown and financial 
pressures. “We need to think about ways we can engage with those who are most 
at risk, targeting the right people, encouraging them to seek help,” she says. 
“It’s about talking to people earlier rather than once they are at crisis point 
and feel they want to take their own lives.”

Calm’s chief executive, Jane Powell, says rather than focusing on particular 
risk groups, society needs to see suicide as an “every man” issue. “What’s 
frustrating is there is an overwhelming sexism when it comes to looking at 
this. At what point are we going to look at why more men – regardless of age – 
take their own lives than women?”

For Powell, while women in recent years have been given more freedom to define 
their roles, men are still expected to conform to society’s notions that they 
should not display weakness or vulnerability. But, she adds, the idea that men 
just need to shout louder about their problems is misleading: “Men are really 
good at communicating and understanding signs from society – and the signs they 
are getting are ‘man up, grow a pair’. We need to fight all those messages 
which say you have to be this way.”

 * In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the 
National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis 
support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. 
Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.



 