
The business case

The independent commission charged with deciding whether a new runway should 
be built in the UK started a report last year by declaring that air links were 
vital for the economy, trade and investment. It went on toselect Heathrow as 
the best site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/01/heathrow-third-runway-recommended-in-davies-report-on-airport-capacity>
. After 15 months of deliberation, on Tuesday,the government backed this verdict
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/25/heathrow-airport-expansion-gets-government-approval-gatwick>
.


Britain’s biggest airport has long since reached capacity, turning away 
airlines that would like to operate there. An enormous amount of high-value 
exports go through Heathrow, which carries more cargo than all other UK 
airports put together. Businesses have clustered around the airport and the 
Airports Commission, chaired by Sir Howard Davies, estimated that a third 
runway would provide up to 77,000 more local jobs.

Heathrow expansion decision condemned by senior Tories - live updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/oct/25/heathrow-gatwick-airport-expansion-decision-day-politics-live>
It would also stimulate economic growth throughout Britain, the commission 
said. More long-haul routes to emerging markets had been a mantra even before 
the UK voted for Brexit and a potential separation from its European trading 
partners. Heathrow has argued that only a hub airport with sufficient 
connections to other cities makes these routes viable. Almost three-quarters of 
long-haul flights out of Britain depart from Heathrow. An enlarged Heathrow 
could provide more connecting flights to the rest of the UK – allowing, for 
example, Scottish salmon fisheries to swiftly fly their produce around the 
world.

How true this turns out to be remains to be seen. Regional flights have a poor 
record at the west London hub, and airlines that pay a premium for Heathrow 
slots have preferred more lucrative routes than trying to grow new markets. 
Witness British Airways’ recent decision toditch Chengdu in favour of New 
Orleans. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/24/ba-scraps-service-chinese-city-airport-expansion-heathrow-chengdu-decision-runway>
 But the overwhelming view of business groups, looking at a share of the £211bn 
in extra economic growth and 180,000 jobs promised by the commission, is that a 
third runway is long overdue.Gwyn Topham

The environmental cost

Speaking in 2008, Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>
 said: “The third runway at Heathrow would undermine our national [climate 
change] targets.” The prime minister, having backed a third runway, might have 
changed her mind, but the move remains a giant leap of faith – without a 
parachute.

The truth is that sharp cuts in global emissions are urgently required and 
one-quarter of Britain’s carbon budget will need to be splurged on aviation by 
2050, according to the Committee on Climate Change.

Even keeping aviation emissions to this level requires increasingly efficient 
planes, biofuels and carbon taxes running into the hundreds of pounds per 
ticket. The committee has asked the government to come up with a strategy to 
show how these actions can be implemented.

Local residents on Heathrow's third runway: 'Kids love the planes'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/25/local-residents-on-heathrows-third-runway-kids-love-the-planes>
The response has been to pass the buck 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/467819/DECC_CCC_Mitigation.pdf>
. “The government believes that action at the global level is the most 
effective means of tackling aviation emissions,” the government said in October 
2015.

But global leaders are also passing the buck. The international aviation deal 
reached this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/06/aviation-emissions-agreement-united-nations>
 does not cut aircraft emissions. Instead, it offsets aviation emissions growth 
by paying other sectors to curb their emissions and is voluntary until 2027.

If the climate friendliness of the third runway depends on huge, politically 
unimaginable tax rises on flights by the UK government and an end to 
international buck passing, what is to be done?

Identifying the real reason for increased flights is key: it is not business, 
whatever proponents of runway expansion tell you. Theproportion of flights 
taken for work 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/546899/avi0108.ods>
 is small and has been flat or falling for a decade, according to government 
data.Damian Carrington



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fheathrow-approval-business-political-environmental-issues%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe477ea2ac2115ca2fa4014da908cbe2665a66111%2F0_137_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Heathrow%20approval%20puts%20business%20above%20political%20and%20environment%20issues&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fheathrow-approval-business-political-environmental-issues%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Heathrow%20approval%20puts%20business%20above%20political%20and%20environment%20issues&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fheathrow-approval-business-political-environmental-issues%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe477ea2ac2115ca2fa4014da908cbe2665a66111%2F0_137_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Boris Johnson once pledged to ‘lie down in front of the bulldozers’ if 
Heathrow’s third runway was approved. Photograph: Stefan Rousseau/PA 
The political fallout 

The wise politician avoids saying never. David Cameron’s “No ifs, no buts, no 
third runway” <http://www.no-ifs-no-buts.com/> quote was catchy and memorable. 
Three years later, he set up the Airports Commission. It was merely a way of 
backfilling evidence behind a decision already taken, some observers believed.

Cameron has gone. May, whose anti-third runway Maidenhead constituents will 
liven up her surgeries over the coming years, will grow tired of being reminded 
that she condemned Labour’s decision to authorise the third runway in 2009 on 
environmental grounds.

Approving the third runway now, like Hinkley, is part of May’s determination 
to invest in infrastructure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/17/theresa-may-prime-minister-prepared-to-risk-it-all>
. But she faces a torrid time from her party. The prime minister has set up 
some canny and innovative political arrangements to head off cabinet 
resignations. The decision on Heathrow was taken in a cabinet sub-committee, 
but the convention of collective responsibility ties all her senior ministers 
to the move.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Flayers-of-london-air-traffic-build-up-over-24-hours-video-animation&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Layers%20of%20London%20air%20traffic%20build%20up%20over%2024%20hours%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20animation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Flayers-of-london-air-traffic-build-up-over-24-hours-video-animation>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Layers%20of%20London%20air%20traffic%20build%20up%20over%2024%20hours%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20animation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Flayers-of-london-air-traffic-build-up-over-24-hours-video-animation&media=>
Layers of London air traffic build up over 24 hours – video animation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/video/2016/oct/25/layers-of-london-air-traffic-build-up-over-24-hours-video-animation>
In a highly unusual manoeuvre, they are licensed to dissent, but not campaign 
against the decision. That may be a tough line to police, given the verbal 
dexterity of her chief opponent, the foreign secretary, Boris Johnson. The 
education secretary, Justine Greening, alreadyunhappy over the grammar school 
decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/09/theresa-may-to-end-ban-on-new-grammar-schools>
, is another leading opponent and previously threatened to resign over the 
issue.

Zac Goldsmith, the MP for Richmond Park, could announce that he is standing 
down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/07/zac-goldsmith-heathrow-third-runway-vows-quit-mp>
 in protest. This would trigger a byelection in which he will almost certainly 
stand as an independent.

Away from Westminster, Conservative councillors are manning the barricades. 
West and south-west London boroughs including Hillingdon, Richmond and 
Wandsworth are strongly opposed. So are Labour-controlled neighbours such as 
Hounslow. TheLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> mayor, Sadiq Khan, 
could fund a legal challenge.

Theresa May will also have to face down criticism from as many as 60 hostile 
Tory backbenchers. But even if there is a majority against Heathrow expansion 
at Westminster, it is unlikely to delay the project. The only vote in the 
Commons, it seems, would be on the national policy statement for aviation, 
expected sometime in the next 18 months.

However, protests against the decision are likely to be the most committed and 
politically challenging since the poll tax in 1990.Anne Perkins 
 