
The first time I saw Helen Marten’s work at Chisenhale Gallery in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/nov/25/monkeys-mozart-helen-marten-artist>
, I knew I was in the presence of an artistwho thinks differently from 
<http://theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/dec/05/helen-marten-wins-turner-prize-2016-securing-second-big-award-in-a-month>
 the rest of us. Out of the artists in this year’s Turner prize,she was the one 
I wanted to win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/26/turner-prize-2016-review-tate-britain-micheal-dean-anthea-hamilton-helen-marten-josephine-pryde>
, although the exhibition as a whole felt a great deal livelier than recent 
years.

The first half of Anthea Hamilton’s installation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/may/12/turner-prize-shortlist-anthea-hamilton-michael-dean-helen-marten-josephine-pryde>
, with its giant set of buttocks, brick wallpaper and brick pattern Jacquard 
suit was certainly arresting, though the whole thing disintegrated a bit in its 
second half. I never did get to the bottom of her implausible chastity belts 
(though I got the bottom itself, soon enough). I felt a bit of a mismatch 
between Josephine Pryde’s photographs and the model train stalled on its tracks 
in the middle of the gallery. This wasn’t going anywhere. This, I believe, was 
a symbol for a stalled, post-Brexit Britain, sidelined and run out of steam, 
while people in her photographs kept their cool and checked their phones for 
news from elsewhere.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fhelen-marten-an-artist-who-thinks-differently-from-the-rest-of-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76ef438b1dcda7e7d3b7753f57cf3af944d9d6a3%2F0_18_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Helen%20Marten%3A%20an%20artist%20who%20thinks%20differently%20from%20the%20rest%20of%20us&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fhelen-marten-an-artist-who-thinks-differently-from-the-rest-of-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Helen%20Marten%3A%20an%20artist%20who%20thinks%20differently%20from%20the%20rest%20of%20us&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fhelen-marten-an-artist-who-thinks-differently-from-the-rest-of-us%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76ef438b1dcda7e7d3b7753f57cf3af944d9d6a3%2F0_18_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 Part of Helen Marten’s exhibition at the Tate Britain for the Turner Prize. 
Photograph: Martin Godwin for the Guardian 
After Marten’s win of the Hepworth prize for Sculpture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/nov/22/helen-marten-from-a-macclesfield-garage-to-artist-of-the-year>
 two weeks ago, and the fact that she was holding a concurrent solo show at the 
Serpentine Sackler Gallery at the same time as her outings for the Turner and 
the Hepworth, I was becoming convinced that the Turner judges would turn to 
Michael Dean. At first view, I enjoyed – if that is the word – Dean’s work, 
though beyond the pile of pennies and the abject stand-ins for a family of four 
that the government had decreed was the bare minimum provision to support for a 
year (minus one crucial, parsimonious coin), the installation seemed to me to 
be a pile-up of too many elements. Everything in it wanted to be read as a grim 
metaphor of one sort or another for the state of Britain now – but without the 
punch and depth, for example, ofMark Wallinger’s State Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/jan/16/humanrights.politicsandthearts> 
in Tate Britain’s Duveen Galleries in 2007.

In its way, Marten’s work is even more agglomerative than Dean’s, but the 
chain of associations, and the part-to-part relationships between its 
successive, hand-made and crafted elements enrich rather than confuse the 
complications of her work. As at the Serpentine and in Wakefield, she knows 
that amassing detail is not enough. There is a formal language at work here, 
leading the eye as well as the mind on a journey. Her art splices mental 
associations with an acute sense of materiality, scale and tactility. In her 
art, thinking is made concrete. It is more than free association or an 
unfocused interior monologue. We are forever losing the thread and refinding it 
with Marten. There are stems and branches, thoughts shooting off, parentheses, 
pauses for breath, full stops. The same happens in the best ofAnthony Caro’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jul/16/anthony-caro-in-yorkshire-review-sculpture-that-can-take-your-breath-away>
 work, but he was lousy at taking things beyond the abstract.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fhelen-marten-an-artist-who-thinks-differently-from-the-rest-of-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2f3583a763a54ace019152cac97a3bee51c0381%2F408_223_3421_2053%2F3421.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Helen%20Marten%3A%20an%20artist%20who%20thinks%20differently%20from%20the%20rest%20of%20us&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fhelen-marten-an-artist-who-thinks-differently-from-the-rest-of-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Helen%20Marten%3A%20an%20artist%20who%20thinks%20differently%20from%20the%20rest%20of%20us&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fhelen-marten-an-artist-who-thinks-differently-from-the-rest-of-us%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2f3583a763a54ace019152cac97a3bee51c0381%2F408_223_3421_2053%2F3421.jpg>
 Helen Marten’s Turner Prize exhibition. Photograph: Martin Godwin for the 
Guardian 
Like flow charts and route maps, the pleasure of Marten’s sculptural 
arrangements is in going from one part to another, to be arrested and to set 
off again. The whole thing has measure and pace, with enough dramatic 
interludes, staging points, flurries and intersections to keep your attention. 
Like several artists of her generation she has as much a playful and inventive 
way with language as she does with things.

This is certainly Marten’s year. Do these two significant prize wins, and 
three major exhibitions, leave her overexposed? Too many younger artists have 
suffered from too much success too soon, eventually getting better and better 
at less and less, trapped in an early signature style. The point is to go 
beyond it. Marten knows this; thinking differently is the way to go.
 