
A clause in the government’s help-to-buy Isa that could make it harder for 
first-time buyers to get on the property ladder has come under attack.

The scheme, launched by former chancellor George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> last year, promised to 
provide “direct government support to anyone saving for the deposit on their 
first home”.

It pays a 25% government “bonus” of up to £3,000 towards a deposit but some 
buyers may not have been aware that this is not paid until a property sale is 
completed.

That means buyers will not be able to count the funds towards their initial 
deposit required by mortgage lenders.

Labour leadership candidate Owen Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/owen-smith> described the technicality as 
“another Tory con – help-to-buy ISAs don’t help to buy. Another reason for a 
British New Deal to build houses we need.”


Related: Help to buy is riddled with loopholes that the privileged can easily 
exploit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/mar/11/government-help-to-buy-housing-scheme-house-of-cards>

David Lammy, Labour MP for Tottenham in north London, said he was “absolutely 
outraged on behalf of constituents, Londoners and all those priced out of ever 
owning their own home”.


Tom Copley, Labour’s housing spokesperson in the London Assembly, said he 
opposed the help-to-buy scheme because it made house prices even higher, but 
added: “It’s dreadful that people who took it up were lied to.”

The Treasury said the help-to-buy Isa was proving very popular and had helped 
more than 500,000 people save for their first home, with thousands of bonuses 
paid out already.

“It has always been the case that money saved in a help-to-buy Isa is for an 
exchange deposit, with the bonus of up to £3,000 per Isa from the government 
going towards the total funds available for the property transaction,” a 
spokesman said. “The government has published clear guidance and the industry 
is fully aware that the bonus is only paid on completion.”

Ray Boulger, of mortgage broker John Charcol, said a small number of property 
purchases did not proceed between the exchange of contracts and completion, 
which is why the scheme only pays out the bonus when a sale is finalised.

“It would be helpful to have it on the day of exchange, but it will probably 
not be a dealbreaker for most people,” he said.

However, it appears that some buyers were not aware of the technicality.

Danny Cox, head of financial planning at Hargreaves Lansdown, told the 
Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/08/19/help-to-buy-isa-scandal-500000-first-time-buyers-told-scheme-can/>
 that Isa providers should make it clear that the bonus will not be available 
at exchange.

The help-to-buy Isa allows potential buyers to save up to £200 a month on top 
of an initial £1,000 deposit.

The 25% bonus can only be used to buy a property in the UK that costs up to 
£250,000, or £450,000 in London.
 