
The Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> has told the 
government that its flagship scheme which has helped more than 79,000 buyers on 
to the housing market can be closed without any impact on the supply of home 
loans.

Help to buy was announced in March 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/mar/20/budget-2013-osborne-offers-homebuyers-help-to-buy>
 by the then chancellor George Osborne with the aim of encouraging lenders to 
provide mortgages requiring deposits worth 5% of the value of a property at a 
time when they were demanding bigger deposits.

The scheme is scheduled to close at the end of this year, and the Bank’s 
governor, Mark Carney, has told Osborne’s successor, Philip Hammond, that its 
closure would not affect customers with small deposits.

Carney told Hammond it was being used less by banks to guarantee lending to 
customers who would otherwise have been turned down for mortgages as their 
deposits would not have been large enough.

Under the scheme the government offers lenders the option to purchase a 
guarantee on mortgage loans where the borrower has a deposit of between 5% – a 
loan to value (LTV) of 95% – and 20%. The Bank said it has not posed a risk to 
financial stability or created a housing bubble.

Carney said: “Over the past year, use of the scheme has declined 
significantly. In [the first quarter of ] 2016, loans in the scheme accounted 
for only 3% of total mortgage lending for house purchase and 25% of lending at 
LTV [more than 90%], compared to 6% and 70% respectively in 2014”.

“Although use of the scheme has fallen, total lending at high LTV has has not 
declined. Instead more high LTV has taken place outside the scheme, as the 
availability of high LTV has recovered from its crisis lows,” the governor 
added.

However, Patrick Bamford of AmTrust International, Mortgage and Special Risks, 
which provides guarantees to mortgage lenders, said that lending to customers 
with low deposits was not rising as quickly as the rest of the market. Mortgage 
lending is up 19% over the last four quarters but up 8% on LTVs between 90 and 
95%, he said.

Peter Williams, executive director of the Intermediary Mortgage Lenders 
Association, said there was risk first-time buyers could be frozen out. “The
committee’s assertion that mothballing the scheme will not affect provision is 
not necessarily true.

“While the government always viewed the help-to-buy mortgage guarantee scheme 
as a short-term measure to boost high LTV lending, the reality is that such 
loans are still in relatively short supply.

“By ending the scheme and not lining up an alternative, policymakers are 
closing off a not un-important avenue to prospective first-time buyers. The 
scheme is costly for lenders, but some have been using it and its removal 
therefore poses the question of how high LTV lending will be impacted.

“It is paramount this part of the market does not diminish after the end of 
this year, which would push many aspiring buyers back to square one.”

The Council of Mortgage Lenders  
<https://www.cml.org.uk/news/news-and-views/a-government-scheme-that-worked/> 
has concluded that while such a scheme might be helpful amid the uncertainty 
prompted by the Brexit vote, it was difficult to argue it should be extended 
because of the amount of high LTV lending taking place outside the scheme and 
the fees the lenders are charged. Its research showed 79,000 loans were granted 
under help to buy with 95% of them outside London with an average LTV of 94% 
compared with 65% for mortgages outside the scheme.

The Bank’s assessment of help to buy coincided with data from the CML showing 
that mortgage lending in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/22/mortgage-lending-august-cml-housing-market-eu-vote>
 was at its highest since 2007.

Mohammad Jamei, senior economist at the CML, said: “Widely voiced fears in 
recent months about the housing market have proved to be wide of the mark.”

Other aspects of the help-to-buy scheme are scheduled to continue beyond the 
end of the year, including lending for new-build properties.

When it was launched the government said it would guarantee £12bn and by June 
2016 it amounted to £11.6bn 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/533332/h2b_mg_stats_final.pdf>
. Its use peaked in July 2014 when more than 4,000 loans were granted through 
the scheme.
 