
Picture a typical first time buyer. Chances are the image you have is of a 
young professional couple who’ve spent years scraping together a deposit, and 
are keen to own the roof over their heads so they can start a family.


I’ll hazard a guess that very few people instantly thought of the wife of a 
63-year-old Conservative MP: but,according to the Mirror 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/tory-mp-wife-used-taxpayer-7449766>, 
Peter Bone and his wife Jennie used the government’s help-to-buy scheme to buy 
a new constituency home, purchasing the £175,000 home in her name, with a 
£35,000 equity loan from the government.

Bone denies owning the property or having the help-to-buy mortgage, but said 
he could not comment on his wife’s financial interests. Who truly knows what 
their partner gets up to? Especially when you employ them to work in your 
office as an executive secretary at a cost of more than £40,000 to the 
taxpayer. Of course even if his wife did purchase the home using a help-to-buy 
equity loan, she is perfectly within her rights to do so: there is no cap on 
income for applicants, and these loans are available to first-time buyers and 
existing homeowners.

This story exposes the conflict at the heart of the government’s various 
schemes to quell the growing rage over UK house prices. People want to buy, 
because renting conditions are often precarious and expensive. But people can’t 
buy, because house prices are too high. And rather than address the root causes 
of the housing crisis – speculation, a lack of supply, a stilted economy and 
the collapse of the social rented sector – politicians opt to prop up an 
unsustainable housing market with state cash, to mollify homeowners who are 
understandably nervous of negative equity.

Most potential first-time buyers still can’t buy, because help to buy has 
predictably distorted house prices, but developers can pocket more cash with a 
government guarantee, and wealthy people can take advantage of it if they 
technically haven’t purchased a home in their own name before.

Equally, a loophole 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/loophole-means-buy-to-let-landlords-could-exploit-government-starter-homes-a6899056.html>
 in the details of the government’s flagship starter homes scheme could be 
exploited by prospective buy-to-let landlords – there is currently no 
stipulation that the buyer must live in the property. So potentially, wealthy 
parents could hand a child a lump sum to purchase a starter home with a 20% 
discount, then let the property out.

Rather than a sustainable and measured solution to the housing crisis, the 
government has built a house of cards: a few haphazard measures designed to 
temporarily boost the number of first-time buyers, without examining the 
foundations of the problem, but also leaving each scheme open to exploitation. 
In London, the capital’s specialised help-to-buy scheme doesn’t even require 
applicants to be first-time buyers to be eligible – they just have to be moving 
house.

A better solution would be one that tackled booming house prices and low 
building rates instead of throwing state cash at the problem and hoping it 
solves it, rather than simply gilding the pockets of the private sector.


Barely any serious people believe help to buy and starter homes can do 
anything except waste time and money while the housing crisis rumbles on and 
on, disrupting lives in the process. George Osborne continues to fiddle while 
young people’s hope of owning property burns. Stories like this, andyoung Tory 
MPs who have complained publicly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/feb/12/tory-mps-homes-cameron-housing-crisis>
 that they cannot buy homes, simply highlight how misguided and useless these 
policies are.

 * This article was amended on Friday 11 March, to make it clear that 
help-to-buy loans are available for first-time buyers and existing homeowners. 
Join the Guardian Housing Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/housing/register/> to read more pieces like 
this. Follow us on Twitter (@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/GuardianHousingNetwork/?ref=hl> to keep up with the 
latest social housing news and views.
 