
Rising house prices across much of England mean a government scheme to help 
buyers of newbuild property may have made more than £200m for the Treasury in 
its first two-and-a-half years.

The help-to-buy equity loan scheme gives buyers an interest-free loan for five 
years in return for a percentage stake in their property. When the home is 
sold, the buyer returns the same percentage of the sale price, meaning that any 
fall or rise in house prices affects the return.

Analysis by property firm Hometrack and shared with the Guardian suggests that 
a surge in house prices in some areas means the total value of homes bought 
through the schemesince its launch in April 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/mar/20/budget-2013-osborne-offers-homebuyers-help-to-buy>
 has increased by more than £1bn.

Under-35s in the UK face becoming permanent renters, warns thinktank
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/13/under-35s-in-the-uk-face-becoming-permanent-renters-warns-thinktank>
Assuming each buyer took the maximum 20% loan to buy the property, Hometrack 
said the government’s stake is worth £213m on the £2.7bn it has put up through 
loans.

The data is based on figures from the government which show that by the end of 
September 2015, 62,569 equity loans had been advanced to buyers of newbuild 
properties. Until 1 February, the maximum that could be borrowed across the 
country was 20% of any property costing up to £600,000; since then,borrowers in 
London have been able to borrow up to 40% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/12/help-to-buy-london-what-you-need-to-know>
, and 15,000 have registered interest in the extended scheme.

Hometrack’s analysis shows the biggest paper gains were made in areas with 
high levels of building and a buoyant housing market. In Milton Keynes in 
Buckinghamshire, 765 loans have been taken out by homebuyers, with a total 
value of £37.8m. Hometrack estimates that buyers have made an average of 
£33,364 each on their properties so far, while the government has a paper 
profit of £6.4m. Elsewhere in the same county, in Aylesbury Vale, 735 
properties have been bought with the use of loans worth a total of £39.1m, and 
the government so far stands to make a £4.4m gain.
Geographical spread of help-to-buy gains 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/02/help-tobuyequity/giv-27167JsJMHfg3p5QK/>
 Geographical spread of help-to-buy gains. 
However, in seven local authority areas the value of the government’s stake 
has fallen, Hometrack said. In Hartlepool, 240 homes had been bought by the end 
of September with the help of loans worth a total of £7.1m, official figures 
show. Hometrack’s calculations suggest the government’s stake is worth £106,483 
less than it has paid out, following years of falling prices. In Rossendale in 
Lancashire, 83 loans worth a total of £3m have been taken out, and the value of 
the government’s stake has fallen by an estimated £70,000.

Richard Donnell, research director at Hometrack, said the government’s profit 
was “incidental” to a scheme that had worked in restoring confidence to the 
housing market. “Clearly the government is not doing this as a money-making 
scheme, it is doing it to stimulate the market,” he said.

He added that the new starter home scheme, which will see properties built and 
sold for 20% less than market value, could cause problems for help to buy. 
“There is some concern for all of the people who have done well from their 
help-to-buy unit – the starter home has the potential to distort the market a 
bit at the local level.”

Each generation should be better off than their parents? Think again
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/14/economics-viewpoint-baby-boomers-generation-x-generation-rent-gig-economy>
Under the loan scheme, borrowers with a 5% deposit can use the scheme to buy a 
newbuild property, assuming that they qualify for a mortgage for the remaining 
75% of the purchase price. The loan is interest-free for the first five years, 
and can be paid off in chunks as the homeowner has more money, or in one go 
when the property is sold.

Builders have been among the main beneficiaries of the scheme, with some of 
the country’s largest developers reporting 30% of their sales through help to 
buy. However, the head ofTaylor Wimpey, Pete Redfern, recently said that the 
chancellor should consider “tapering off” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/feb/04/taylor-wimpey-ceo-rise-house-prices>
 the scheme.

Jeremy Duncombe, director of Legal & General Mortgage Club, said measures such 
as help to buy had been vital in supporting the market over the last few years.

“However, they can also boost demand in what is already a highly saturated 
housing market, which in turn is likely to put upwards pressure on house price 
inflation,” he said. “As such, this could be considered as counter-productive 
in terms of long-term impact on affordability.”
 