
Despite performing against Feyenoord and West Ham United, this was the big 
audition Henrikh Mkhitaryan dare not fluff. Not after what happened in his 
previous and only Premier League start forManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>. Then, José Mourinho 
named Armenia’s captain in the XI for the derby on 10 September and with 
Manchester City leading 2-1 at half‑time the manager substituted him and failed 
to provide him with even an appearance from the bench in the ensuing nine 
league matches.

Those starts against Feyenoord and West Ham were in the Europa League and EFL 
Cup respectively, and given the way Mkhitaryan was dropped the 27-year-old may 
have wondered when another chance in the league would arrive if he disappointed 
in this game.

Leighton Baines penalty earns Everton late point against Manchester United
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/04/everton-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
Mkhitaryan had certainly become a finer footballer in his absence from the 
side, with fans insisting he would have stopped the stuttering form thathas 
caused four consecutive draws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/manchester-united-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
 at Old Trafford (five in total) and only one win, at Swansea City, since 
September.

When discussing Mkhitaryan’s selection before the game, Mourinho was in gnomic 
form. “We are playing so well,” he said. “It doesn’t matter who is playing. I 
just feel that maybe they are more adapted to the characteristics of this game. 
Everybody’s playing well. [Juan] Mata, [Anthony] Martial. It’s about the 
characteristics of the game. I think [Anthony] Martial and Mkhitaryan are 
faster, transporting the ball into attacking areas and attacking spaces behind 
defences, so that’s it.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fmanchester-uniteds-jose-mourinho-rants-over-direct-everton-after-draw-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20United's%20Jos%C3%A9%20Mourinho%20rants%20over%20'direct'%20Everton%20after%20draw%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fmanchester-uniteds-jose-mourinho-rants-over-direct-everton-after-draw-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Manchester%20United%27s%20Jos%C3%A9%20Mourinho%20rants%20over%20%27direct%27%20Everton%20after%20draw%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fmanchester-uniteds-jose-mourinho-rants-over-direct-everton-after-draw-video&media=>
Manchester United’s José Mourinho rants over ‘direct’ Everton after draw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/dec/04/manchester-uniteds-jose-mourinho-rants-over-direct-everton-after-draw-video>
United began this match 10 points from the Champions League places, a direct 
result of the lack of matchwinners who might have ensured all three were taken 
in some of those five draws. In this sense Mkhitaryan was United’s great 
unknown: a player yet to be given a chance and who, as the Bundesliga 
footballer of the year and with an eye for goal, might provide a much-needed 
x-factor after what has been a middling campaign.

If he was to do so against Ronald Koeman’s eighth-placed Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> there was scant sign as the 
half-hour mark passed. Lining up on the right of a 4‑2‑3‑1, Mkhitaryan won a 
free-kick, perhaps luckily, when barging into Ramiro Funes Mori, and that was 
about it. Until then he had been peripheral but in this misfiring team that was 
hardly his fault. The United on show during the first half was the one which is 
leaden-footed and without spark: a team short on ideas and which belies the 
supposed sparkling talents possessed by Paul Pogba, Martial, Zlatan Ibrahimovic 
and, indeed, Mkhitaryan.

This was the latest outing in which Pogba started as the No10 yet when 
Mkhitaryan started to drift inside in search of action, there were flashes of 
the dimension he can add. Twice he zipped a pass off then raced along an inside 
channel and threatened to open up Everton.

Given what happened against City, Ibrahimovic’s lobbed finish over the 
onrushing and hapless Maarten Stekelenburg as half-time neared would have 
improved Mourinho’s mood and surely Mkhitaryan’s hopes of emerging for the 
second half.

The truth was that after the barnstorming 4-3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/04/bournemouth-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 between Bournemouth and Liverpool earlier in the day, United and Everton had 
come close to stinking Goodison Park out before the Swede’s opener.

But if he awaited the dreaded hook from the manager it never arrived and so 
out trotted Mkhitaryan after the intervaland he was to prove far more effective.
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/04/everton-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
 To begin with there was more of the wandering-around stuff, twice moving 
across to the left wing to initiate attacks and he even briefly took up the 
centre-forward position. The fluidity of movement here indicated how the former 
Borussia Dortmund man was settling more and more into the side’s pattern of 
play.

United were operating far better now and so was Mkhitaryan. When he received 
the ball along his right corridor there was a turn of speed and menace that Tom 
Cleverley scrambled do deal with – in the end he was forced to hack Mkhitaryan 
down as he skated past.

This, at last, was the form shown in pre‑season and in those starts in the cup 
competitions. From United’s quickest break Mkhitaryan twisted and turned and 
then shot: he was unfortunate to see the effort deflected away by Séamus 
Coleman to safety. It is a stretch to say he had become United’s best performer 
but the forward had become a consistent threat and there was some surprise when 
he was replaced on 84 minutes.

This was for Marouane Fellaini, who became United’s villain by giving away the 
penalty from which Leighton Baines equalised.

Another truism of the game is that attack is the best way to defend and 
Mkhitaryan was providing a consistent outlet for United each time they took 
hold of the ball and found him.

Why, then, Mourinho took him off was a mystery, though the manager did offer 
this: “When you have a player on the bench, with two metres, to play in front 
of the defensive line to win the match, [you do it].” It means Mkhitaryan is 
yet to complete 90 minutes in eight run-outs for United. On this showing, that 
may soon come.

Bournemouth 4-3 Liverpool: Premier League – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/dec/04/bournemouth-v-liverpool-premier-league-live> 