
At the weekend London’s new mayor, Sadiq Khan, outlined his plans for the 
capital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/08/election-results-spur-attempt-by-corbyn-to-unify-party-behind-him>
, saying: “The key thing for me is to tackle the housing crisis.” This was 
welcomed by those of us who have been campaigning on this issue. Less so what 
followed, with Khan adding: “I am bringing together an alliance of people from 
local authorities, housing associations, developers.” He can do much better 
than that. There have been enough summits and meetings. It is time for action 
and (if needs be) the shaming of the government by the mayor of London about 
the crisis that the government has itself contributed to.

The housing situation in the UK is so bleak that the key reason increasing 
numbers of people are becoming homeless is that they areunable to pay 
extortionate private sector rents 
<http://shelterpolicy.wpengine.com/2015/03/rising-homelessness-too-much-welfare-reform-and-not-enough-rental-reform/>
. In February 2016, the Financial Times described thehelp-to-buy scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/help-to-buy-scheme> as “help to cry” 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/0989bc0c-d0b0-11e5-831d-09f7778e7377.html#ixzz4481UmSX2>
, naming it “one of the most perversely named government policies ever”. 
Squatting is on the rise again despite beingoutlawed in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/sep/27/first-squatter-jailed-new-law>
: when people’s only choice is criminalised, the legitimacy of the law itself 
is discredited.

Rents continue to rise across the UK and in London
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/05/rents-continue-rise-uk-london> 
Nearly four out of five Britons say we are experiencing a housing crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/30/housing-crisis-poll-city-country-split-blame>
. I could try to shock you with the latest statistics on rising street 
homeless, deaths among the elderly unable to heat their poorly insulated homes, 
four-figure monthly or even weekly rents, mortgages that lastuntil you die 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/09/nationwide-raises-mortgage-borrowing-age-limit-to-85>
,beds in sheds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/01/beds-in-sheds-real-victims-housing-crisis-rent>
, three families to a flat, but you have probably become immune to them by now.

We don’t need to hear how bad the crisis is any more. We need it fixing, 
especially inLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>. This would dampen 
down the whole of the south-east housing market, and in turn the rest of the 
UK. So how can the new mayor go about addressing this issue?

Khan should start by explaining that London’s housing problems have not been 
caused by immigration, but rather by the housing laws of the UK. Laws that 
allow landlords to charge tenants so much for such low-quality homes. Laws that 
encourage others to hoard housing, leaving more and more of it empty in the 
very heart of the capital. London urgently needs rent regulation of its private 
sector. This might be outside the new mayor’s powers, but there is nothing to 
stop him campaigning on a similar scheme for the UK toBerlin’s rent cap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/01/rent-cap-legislation-in-force-berlin-germany>
.

Khan should petition for a new council tax system, one which fairly reflects 
the current value of homes

A few weeks ago the non-party political London Fairness Commission 
<http://londonfairnesscommission.co.uk/>, of which I am a member, reported on 
the consensus findings of a cross-section of Londoners, including business 
representation. It recommended that the new mayor advise that “affordable 
rents” mean 30% of household income, not 80% of the market rent; that the 
right-to-buy be suspended for five years within London, while our social 
housing supply is increased through building in London. The mayor can lobby for 
this on behalf of all Londoners. He should also use the mayor’s housing fund to 
provide more quality rented housing.

The commission also suggested that the new mayor should encourage a switch to 
longer-term tenancies to provide greater stability in the private rental 
sector. Khan will have to lobby central government for this. We suggested that 
he should champion mandatory registration of landlords – as already happens in 
some London boroughs – and undertake a review of the enforcement of quality 
standards in the private rental sector, in order to identify how enforcement 
can be strengthened and made more effective. And he should reduce or control 
the average cost of letting agents’ fees and charges, as has been done already 
in Scotland.

Sadiq Khan must decide who to side with: residents or developers?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/may/07/london-mayor-sadiq-khan-housing-residents-developers>
Khan should seek further devolution of powers to enable the introduction of a 
tax on landowners for land in London with planning permission that has not been 
developed within three years of permission being granted. And he should 
petition the government to re-establish dedicated grant funding programmes and 
support to local authorities to bring empty properties back into use, enabling 
local authorities to enforce their power to compulsorily purchase properties if 
required. And he should petition for a new council tax system which fairly 
reflects the current value of homes.

Ever since 2009, the UK government – first Labour, then the coalition, and now 
the Conservatives – has stoked up the London housing market through a series of 
budget initiatives. At first it was done to try to avert a house price crash, 
such as those in Portugal, Spain, Ireland and Iceland. But later it became more 
obvious that the goal was for prices in London to be as high as possible. They 
thought the market knew best and was simply indicating who should now leave the 
capital. The former mayor Boris Johnson expressed no desire to see rents and 
house prices stabilise, the more billionaires arriving (or just buying property 
to occasionally visit) the better.

However, now the majority of Londoners find that they are paying too high a 
rent or too great a mortgage and living with too much precarity. Each year they 
are joined by thousands more whose situation is even worse and many leave the 
capital. London has the potential to shift in a different direction as long as 
Khan lives up to his campaign promise and does not fail to work on housing 
every day of his term in office.

• Danny Dorling’s latest book A Better Politics is available here 
<http://www.dannydorling.org/books/betterpolitics/>
 