
Jacques Herzog, the more talkative half of the pair of boyhood friends who 
founded the architectural practiceHerzog & De Meuron 
<https://www.herzogdemeuron.com/index/projects/complete-works/426-450/438-new-vancouver-art-gallery.html>
, is worried about the world. “The things based on the five senses that we like 
so much, all these values – that we treat people well. They are in danger. 
There is such a threat around.” He is talking firstly about the threat to 
European urban civilisation from terrorism, followed some paces behind by his 
perception that “the middle class is disappearing”. He sees the loss of 
possibilities of common ground, of cultural experiences shared by different 
people. In which caseTate Modern <http://www.tate.org.uk/visit/tate-modern>, 
the vastly successful museum in Bankside, south London, might be considered a 
redoubt of this endangered world.

In 1995, to some bafflement among commentators, Herzog and Pierre de Meuron 
were appointed architects for what is now called Tate Modern. Who were they? 
Until that time their best-known works had been signal boxes and facilities for 
the herbal sweet manufacturerRicola <http://www.ricola.com/en-gb>. Why had this 
Swiss practice been chosen ahead of Britain’s glittering array of hi-tech 
modernists, who had been frustrated for years by Margaret Thatcher’s lack of 
interest in public commissions and Prince Charles’s hostility to contemporary 
architecture?

Tate had already been criticised for its decision to retain and convert grubby 
old Bankside power station for use as its new gallery of modern art, rather 
than commission a sparkling new statement of confidence in the future. It 
looked like architectural conservation gone mad. Feelings were compounded still 
further by the fact that, of all the entrants in the competition, Herzog and De 
Meuron proposed to do the least. Their rather modest drawings seemed to show an 
art gallery that still looked very much like the power station. It was only 
when Tate Modern opened, in 2000, that the drama and potential of its enlarged
Turbine Hall <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tate-modern-turbine-hall>
 became apparent.

There should be no safety rails in your architectural perception. You should 
be able to fall down

Now they are back, with the opening next month of their extension to Tate 
Modern 
<https://www.herzogdemeuron.com/index/projects/complete-works/251-275/263-the-tate-modern-project.html>
, one of an elite band of globally renowned Pritzker-prize-approved practices 
and of an even smaller subsection of that band who retain the ability to 
surprise with their work, who seem still able to invent rather than recycle 
their greatest hits. Their sweet factories and signal boxes have been augmented 
by theBeijing Olympic Stadium <http://beijingolympicstadium.com/>, towers and 
museums across the world, wineries and villas, Prada stores, pharmaceutical 
headquarters, several more stadia – including one proposed for Chelsea Football 
Club – a car park, apartment blocks. Their global/local geographic range 
includes Vancouver, São Paulo, Tokyo, Kolkata, Mexico, Miami, San Francisco, 
Tenerife, Minneapolis, Beirut, as well as 60 or more projects in and around 
their home town of Basel. They employ 422 people at the last count.

They have remained throughout in the same tranquil Rhine-side base, centred on 
an old grey bourgeois villa, but infiltrating and adopting surrounding 
buildings to form a village of studios and courtyards. At the centre are the 
two founding partners, whose fellowship has lasted for most of their 66-year 
lives. In some architectural partnerships there is a division of roles – one 
the artist, the other the businessman for example – but they have always 
insisted that theirs is an indistinguishable collaboration. They have 
complementary personalities, however. Herzog, shaven-headed, gym-toned, 
eloquent, alert with contained energy, is happy to be the public face of the 
practice. De Meuron has a more professorial manner and stays more in the 
background. As it happens illness prevents him from meeting me in Basel, so I 
have to catch up by phone.

They are not in the business of false modesty, especially Herzog. Last year 
they opened a new building to house an archive of decades of creativity – 
models, test samples, full-scale mock-ups of bits of building and the like, 
which thanks to their interest in exploring building materials is a vast 
magpie’s nest of things shiny, matt, bubbling, melting, perforated, sliced, 
assembled and moulded, chemical and natural, coloured and monochrome. It is at 
some risk of resembling a pharaoh’s tomb, but effort has gone into making it a 
working tool, a place where employees and others can learn how past projects 
were put together. The archive building, which is surmounted by several floors 
of flats, is an intriguing, partly menacing structure in an industrial area of 
Basel. “It is a great building,” says Herzog.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fherzog-de-meuron-interview-tate-modern-switch-house-extension%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92460bda54f7b8ac54347fd8133621217666245d%2F0_31_2247_2469%2F2247.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Herzog%20and%20De%20Meuron%3A%20Tate%20Modern%E2%80%99s%20architects%20on%20their%20radical%20new%20extension%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fherzog-de-meuron-interview-tate-modern-switch-house-extension%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Herzog%20and%20De%20Meuron%3A%20Tate%20Modern%E2%80%99s%20architects%20on%20their%20radical%20new%20extension%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fherzog-de-meuron-interview-tate-modern-switch-house-extension%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92460bda54f7b8ac54347fd8133621217666245d%2F0_31_2247_2469%2F2247.jpg>
 An artist’s representation of the Tate Modern extension. Photograph: © Hayes 
Davidson and Herzog & de Meuron 
Their Tate extension, which is partly a new building and partly the adaptation 
of previously inaccessible parts of the old power station, enlarges the 
already-not-small institution’s floor area by 60%. At £260m and nine years in 
the making, it will have cost more in time, money and agony than the first 
version. If they cause bafflement now it will be for a new reason: if in the 
proto-Blair era they were considered minimal, rarely straying from straight 
lines and right angles, their new work – to be known as the Switch House after 
the former electrical facility it partly occupies – includes a brooding 
pyramidal tower, a 64.5 metre-high stack of bricks, faceted and oblique-angled, 
that is anything but reticent. “It looks like a car park,” says a friend to me. 
It certainly goes against all the conventions of public cultural institutions, 
that they should look open, accessible, transparent and friendly.

But then Herzog and De Meuron don’t want just to be nice. Herzog says that 
they dislike “architecture that is totally affirmative – that says this is how 
the world is and we stay here for ever. Everyone wants solid ground under their 
feet but the important question is, how do you do all this and at the same time 
communicate transformation and doubt?” Their work is not just sunny and 
optimistic. They can also do decadent, crepuscular, uncanny, deliquescent, 
louche, lubricious.

Herzog has said that “the greatest inspiration is the existing world in all 
its ugliness and normality”. “The two of us from the beginning,” says De 
Meuron, “we were very interested in everything, not just canonic architecture 
from Egyptians up to modern times. Everything is interesting if you are ready 
and able to look at it. There should be no safety rails in your architectural 
perception. You should be able to fall down.”

Artists, says Herzog, are much better at uncertainty and instability than 
architects. He unexpectedly cites Leonardo da Vinci and the way he painted an 
angel’s wings: “You can see he was not a believer. When he paints the joint 
where the wings meet, when he has to work out how you attach a wing, you get a 
sense of his disgust and disbelief.” Great names of architecture, by contrast, 
seem to have no such doubt. “They were almost religious about their work, a bit 
absurd.Mies van der Rohe <http://miesbcn.com/>, Le Corbusier 
<http://www.fondationlecorbusier.fr/>: how can they be such heroes?”

Sympathy and collaboration with artists is a distinctive feature of Herzog and 
De Meuron’s architecture. They started out in the 1970s, an arid time for their 
profession, and insteadfound inspiration 
<https://www.herzogdemeuron.com/index/practice/writings/conversations/huerzeler.html>
 in working on an art project with Joseph Beuys when they were still students. 
Later they would work on the Beijing stadium with Ai Weiwei, whom they got to 
know before he became a worldwide celebrity. All arts, says Herzog, share the 
questions of “how things are made and why things are made. How organic 
substance goes with nonorganic. They reveal ways of looking at the world, what 
comes out when someone does a poem, a painting, a sculpture or a building.”

From contemporary art they learned that concept is more important than style – 
unlike other architects, Herzog and De Meuron avoid a signature look and 
instead seek almost obsessively to find a different set of materials, details 
and forms for almost every project. At the same time each, thanks to a 
consistent underlying attitude, is somehow recognisably theirs.

‘I don’t want to sound arrogant,’ says Herzog, ‘but the Turbine Hall was a 
stroke of genius’

They also learned to engage people in different ways, by combining the 
intellectual with the sensual: they like to build with substances that are 
delectable, perturbing, earthy, ethereal but in all cases fascinating and 
engaging. Their means include mud, black lava-like concrete, the multiple 
reflections of glass, copper, the printing of images on to glass, plastic or 
concrete such that a wall suddenly resembles the page of a book. They like to 
give their materials a perceptual twist, such as making the heavy look light or 
the transparent solid. There is a corresponding range in their projects: they 
can do a soothing wooden rehabilitation centre for people whose lives have been 
ripped up by spinal injuries, or the restoration as an arts centre of the 
sybaritic militia headquarters at the Park Avenue Armory in New York, where 
sons of the gilded age used to party between going out to subjugate 
insurrections of the starving.

Their affinity with artists helped them to win their first Tate commission, 
along with a refined gallery that they had by then realised in Munich. They 
have continued to design spaces for art ever since, such as the recent 
extension of theUnterlinden Museum 
<https://www.herzogdemeuron.com/index/projects/complete-works/351-375/356-musee-unterlinden.html>
 in Colmar, Alsace, which houses Grünewald’sIsenheim altarpiece 
<http://www.musee-unterlinden.com/en/collections/the-isenheim-altarpiece/>, the 
hallucinatory masterpiece of agony and exaltation that is one of the greatest 
works of Germanic renaissance art. Herzog and De Meuron’s design combines 
subtle insertions with spooky-gothic facades and stairs of baroque dynamism, 
and exhibits their ability to bring architectural personality to gallery 
spaces, while also respecting the exhibits.

Meanwhile their expansion and success has introduced them to bigger and 
sometimes cruder commissions. Their chaste early work has, to the dismay of 
purists, been augmented by spectacle, glitter, going on bling – the 
media-friendly Beijing stadium, for example, which imprinted itself on the 
consciousness of the world. In Basel they have created a long hangar, silvery, 
scaly and punctuated with a giant circle in the roof, to house the city’s trade 
fairs.

Working at scale puts them in the not-always-nice environments where power and 
money reside. TheirBlavatnik School of Government <http://www.bsg.ox.ac.uk/> in 
Oxford is a wondrous hatchery for future world leaders, but is also an 
oligarch-sponsored influence machine, a henhouse, as theNew Yorker noted, 
sponsored by the fox. LikeNorman Foster <http://www.fosterandpartners.com/>, 
Rem Koolhaas <http://oma.eu/>, the late Zaha Hadid <http://www.zaha-hadid.com/> 
or most architects of their stature, some of their commissions expose them to 
accusations of complicity with tyranny. The involvement of such a well-known 
dissident as Ai Weiwei in the stadium (though he later regretted it) was some 
inoculation against criticism, but the project was still clearly central to the 
propaganda of the People’s Republic of China.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fherzog-de-meuron-interview-tate-modern-switch-house-extension%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99fd9903a6ab211bd2b8f7ac5cbba5902b063b8e%2F0_1_5545_3327%2F5545.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Herzog%20and%20De%20Meuron%3A%20Tate%20Modern%E2%80%99s%20architects%20on%20their%20radical%20new%20extension%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fherzog-de-meuron-interview-tate-modern-switch-house-extension%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Herzog%20and%20De%20Meuron%3A%20Tate%20Modern%E2%80%99s%20architects%20on%20their%20radical%20new%20extension%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fherzog-de-meuron-interview-tate-modern-switch-house-extension%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99fd9903a6ab211bd2b8f7ac5cbba5902b063b8e%2F0_1_5545_3327%2F5545.jpg>
 Tate Modern’s Turbine Hall in the 90s, when it was still Bankside power 
station. Photograph: Brian Harris/Rex/Shutterstock 
No one has found the perfect answer to these questions, nor the right position 
between virginity and whoredom. Neither perfect purity – never engage with any 
government or institution that is any way questionable – nor complete 
complicity – work with absolutely anyone no matter what – makes sense. Most 
such architects argue that western governments and businesses work with nasty 
regimes, so it would be futile for architects to do otherwise, and that 
engaging with them might do more to change such societies than standing aloof. 
“These are good questions,” says Herzog. “I don’t know the answers because 
nobody does.”

Herzog and De Meuron are not shy of projects controversial for their scale and 
impact. In Paris they are designing the Tour Triangle, an 180 metre-high hotel 
and office building on the edge of the Boulevard Péripherique, that was first 
rejected and then, after some pushing and manoeuvring by mayor Anne Hidalgo, 
approved by city councillors. In Basel a 41-storeytower 
<https://www.herzogdemeuron.com/index/projects/complete-works/426-450/435-development-plan/IMAGE.html>
 for the pharmaceutical company Roche, white and stepped, now rises above the 
predominantly low-lying and historic city. A second, slightly shorter tower is 
on the way. In both Paris and Basel their towers have aShard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/the-shard>-like potential to change 
the perception and scale of their respective cities, for better or for worse.

Herzog is keen to argue that the Basel towers differ from the speculative and 
attention-seeking Shard, in that it grows out of the needs of Roche, which 
employs a lot of people in the city, for that much space on that site, not that 
they were “fighting for visibility”. The Paris project is the first skyscraper 
in Paris since the still-reviledTour Montparnasse 
<http://www.tourmontparnasse56.com/fr/> of 1973, but in Herzog’s view is 
justified by its location away from the centre. It is part of an emerging 
policy to put towers at the edge of the city, “which I totally support”.

London: the city that ate itself
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jun/28/london-the-city-that-ate-itself-rowan-moore>
Tate Modern <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tate-modern> brings 
together Herzog and De Meuron’s interests in both art and the brute forces of 
modern cities. “In Paris,” he says, “rigid control makes it so beautiful. 
London is the greatest city in the world, or at least in Europe, because it 
gives so much freedom to make money, to do deals. I guess you cannot do both 
things. The bad thing is that it is more of a struggle [to realise projects 
like Tate]. The good thing is that there is a network of the most powerful 
collectors and sponsors. They are great. There are also all these gangsters. 
That’s London”.

The “fight in London” is “more an individual fight”, in which cultural 
institutions and their architects have to carve out their physical niche amid 
the competing claims of property speculation. In this context Tate, and its 
director Nicholas Serota, constitute “a world wonder. It made itself a space. 
That is Nick’s great merit. He is the most powerful man in the art world and 
also the most gifted one. He made it a bastion of publicly accessible space.”

The first version of Tate Modern derives its power from the grand declaration 
of publicness that is the Turbine Hall. The already huge space in which 
electricity was generated was made still bigger by removing its ground floor 
and incorporating its former basement into the single void. It was an act of 
surreptitious extravagance in the architects’ low-key approach that was 
incomprehensible to the property developers advising Tate. Why would you want 
to give away all that useful space in the ex-basement? De Meuron says that the 
hall was “not in the brief, there was no requirement to have it, but it was 
given by the building. It created a wholly new way of showing art.” A series of 
large-scale installations, such asOlafur Eliasson 
<http://www.olafureliasson.net/>’s artificial sun and Carsten Höller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/carsten-holler>’s helter-skelters, 
made the hall into a new gathering place for London, Britain and indeed the 
world.

“I don’t want to sound arrogant,” says Herzog, who is not usually much 
troubled about giving such an impression, “but that was a stroke of genius.” In 
the new, updated Tate Modern, the main move is what De Meuron calls “the 
vertical boulevard”, a deliberately oversized staircase that winds its way up 
the inside of the brick tower. It connects to new art galleries carved out of 
the parts of the old power station that were still functioning electrical 
facilities in 2000, and to new spaces for education and other forms of public 
engagement, a restaurant and a viewing gallery at the top.

A high-level bridge connects back, across the Turbine Hall, to the galleries 
of the first phase, in order to create new ways of moving round the museum. 
This is a response to prodigious popularity – currently 5.7 million a year 
compared with the 2.5 million hoped for before it opened in 2000 – and it 
changes the balance of the whole complex. It will now be approachable from 
several directions, each offering a different experience. In its scale and 
multiplicity it will begin to resemble a city more than a building, although 
its monumental shape will still be well defined.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fherzog-de-meuron-interview-tate-modern-switch-house-extension%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f533558f485587ab6c46b39a28b130621d8450c%2F0_150_2000_2498%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Herzog%20and%20De%20Meuron%3A%20Tate%20Modern%E2%80%99s%20architects%20on%20their%20radical%20new%20extension%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fherzog-de-meuron-interview-tate-modern-switch-house-extension%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Herzog%20and%20De%20Meuron%3A%20Tate%20Modern%E2%80%99s%20architects%20on%20their%20radical%20new%20extension%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fherzog-de-meuron-interview-tate-modern-switch-house-extension%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f533558f485587ab6c46b39a28b130621d8450c%2F0_150_2000_2498%2F2000.jpg>
 Doris Selcedo’s Shibboleth installation ‘cracked’ the floor of the Turbine 
Hall. Photograph: Peter Macdiarmid/Getty Images 
“High attendance is fantastic for a museum but not always for you as a 
visitor,” says De Meuron. “Sometimes you need to be more quiet and peaceful. 
You need different experiences and different speeds, a variety of activity.” He 
therefore promises “different spatial constellations. The stairs are wider than 
we need them; we want to invite people to have a different kind of experience 
than to rush from one gallery to another. I am curious to see how people walk 
about it.” Whereas the older galleries are arranged in classical enfilades, one 
room leading to another, the new ones will include dead ends and spaces 
standing alone, which are likely to encourage more random patterns of 
exploration, and unpredictable combinations of eddies and stillness.

All of which will be represented on the outside by the aforementioned brick 
tower, unquestionably fortress-like, which is Tate and its architects’ response 
to the property free-for-all which, riding on the success of Tate Modern, has 
caused an anarchy of apartment and office buildings to rise on its doorstep. 
The brick pyramid is the museum’s bid to assert its presence – we had 
“literally to fight to get some space for the needs of Tate” – and its material 
is intended both to cohere with the old power station and assert its difference.

As Herzog explains, piling some refined Swiss biscuits on the table in front 
of him to illustrate his point, an earlier design envisaged stacked-up glass 
cubes, but the material was too similar to the developers’ stuff. “We realised 
that in order to survive we have to strengthen it,” he says. A paradoxical 
effect is that the private apartments ofNeo Bankside 
<http://www.neobankside.com/gallery>, the development by Rogers Stirk Harbour 
<http://www.rsh-p.com/> just across the street, are perfectly visible through 
their glass walls, whereas the public world of the vertical boulevard is only 
hinted at behind its brick veil.

Yet the precedent of the original Tate Modern – also severe on the outside, 
lively inside – shows that a building doesn’t have to gurn and wheedle to be 
popular. In this and other works, Herzog and De Meuron like to present a 
protestant moment of denial before pleasure, to forbid before welcoming, to be 
severe before generous. It is part of their worldview, different from most 
architects’, in which delight and beauty co-exist with more troubling or 
mysterious aspects of existence.

In this, Herzog believes, architecture can “play a very good role” in 
challenging another threat to culture, which he calls “the negative side of the 
digital world”. Building is “very archaic still, and we’ve gone back to more 
archaic stuff – gravity, smell, finding roots, not giving pictures, fake images 
or illusions that you can get on the internet”. It is all part, in their view, 
of defending and nourishing what is good about civilisation.

The new Tate Modern opens 17 June
 