
What is it? The single best show ever made about being on the outside of the 
window, looking in, little realising your side of the window totally wins.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVmMWF9lpVQw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVmMWF9lpVQw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVmMWF9lpVQw&media=>
Why you’ll love it: Imagine if your school days really were the best days of 
your life. How low are your expectations that things will pick up in the future 
if those days of rejection, identity confusion and communal showering were your 
best bits? Freaks and Geeks is for those of us who wouldn’t go back there if 
you paid us. If you didn’t fit in, this exquisitely lovely 18-episode portrait 
of the 1980s American high-school experience will push every button on your 
Casio scientific calculator. And it will spell 55378008 (BOOBLESS).


It was cancelled part-way through its first season, saved only by a vociferous 
fan campaign that ensured broadcast of the outstanding episodes, which had 
already been completed. See, even the show itself is the unpopular kid in the 
stairwell of life, misunderstood by all but a few people and insisting on 
wearing its cardigan pulled down over its hands.

Executive producer Judd Apatow and creator Paul Feig went on to dominate the 
Hollywood comedy market with films including Knocked Up and Bridesmaids, but 
nothing they have done since Freaks and Geeks even begins to equal its delicate 
brilliance.

The opening shot of episode one pans down from a jock and his cheerleader 
girlfriend snogging on the bleachers to the ones we’re really interested in: 
the unpopulars, skulking underneath the benches, knowing their place in the 
pecking order. The cast list reads like a roll-call of Before They Were Famous 
too. Linda Cardellini is Lindsay Weir (you might know her from ER and Mad Men), 
a good-hearted former mathlete, sullen yet principled, struggling with a 
burgeoning misfit identity, misunderstood by her wonderfully benign parents.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Ffreaks-and-geeks-netflix-judd-apatow-paul-feig%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61f291879f3bafa699fb3f317b6954dc35a58ebf%2F0_509_1979_1977%2F1979.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=High%20school%20antiheroes%3A%20Freaks%20and%20Geeks%20finally%20comes%20to%20Netflix&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Ffreaks-and-geeks-netflix-judd-apatow-paul-feig%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=High%20school%20antiheroes%3A%20Freaks%20and%20Geeks%20finally%20comes%20to%20Netflix&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Ffreaks-and-geeks-netflix-judd-apatow-paul-feig%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61f291879f3bafa699fb3f317b6954dc35a58ebf%2F0_509_1979_1977%2F1979.jpg>
(L-r) Martin Starr, John Francis Daley and Samm Levine in Freaks and Geeks 
Photograph: NBCUPHOTOBANK/Rex Features 
Her fellow “freaks” include James Franco as the swaggering but decent Daniel 
Desario, Seth Rogen as simply adorable lunk Ken Miller, Busy Philipps as the 
initially snippy Kim Kelly and Jason Segel as the musically frustrated Nick 
Andopolis. Lindsay’s equally brainy younger brother, Sam (John Francis Daley), 
knocks around with a most supreme bunch of geeks including the sublime Samm 
Levine as Neal Schweiber. Like a neurotic bank manager in kids’ clothes.

Priya Elan signs up for class with writer of Freaks And Geeks, Gabe Sachs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/jan/31/freaks-geeks-90210-gabe-sachs> 
Every performance perfectly captures a facet of the frustration of youth, and 
the nicely judged adults are seen through that gauze of youthful exasperation. 
My favourite character is a straight tie between guidance counselor Jeff Rosso 
(David Gruber Allen), an ex-hippy treading that difficult line between 
authority figure and friend, and the majestic Martin Starr as geek czar Bill 
Haverchuck. It was his thumbnail sketch for the wondrous Gilfoyle, the 
character he went on to play in HBO’s Silicon Valley. If the geeks worshipped a 
god, it would have Martin Starr’s face.

Above all, it is a show made with purest love and affection for the ones who 
couldn’t get the hang of high school. It’s not uniquely American or preoccupied 
with homecomings and proms. It just allows the small, everyday horrors of 
growing up to play out with minimum intervention and it’s beautiful.

Where: UK Netflix.


Length: 18 episodes

Stand-out episode: Every one a shining gem, but The Little Things (ep 17) is a 
masterclass of understated acting and writing with an intersex subplot and a 
visit from Vice-President George Bush.

If you liked Freaks and Geeks, watch: Undeclared (Amazon Prime), My So Called 
Life (DVD).
 