
The first episode of the new four-part documentary series Highlands: 
Scotland’s Wild Heart <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p03pjc9p> (BBC1) opens 
with the Cairngorms on fire. It says something about the last few months’ news 
that this barely registers beyond the vague thought that there are going to be 
even fewer post-apocalyptic sanctuaries than you once hoped.

But all is in fact well – this is the traditional annual muir-burn, the 
torching of last year’s heather to make room for new. Spring is nearly sprung 
in the Highlands. The ospreys who have recently flown back from west Africa 
know it, the roe deer know it, the red squirrels know it and the place is alive 
with preparatory activity.

The series comes from the folk who made the acclaimed Hebrides: Islands on the 
Edge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gallery/2013/jul/09/hebrides-islands-on-the-edge-in-pictures>
 three years ago. It is similarly narrated by Ewan McGregor – perhaps gathering 
his energies before he embarks onTrainspotting 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/jul/25/trainspotting-2-exclusive-teaser-trailer-for-danny-boyles-sequel-video>
 – and is another stately and satisfying delight. The camera lingers on 
precisely the bits you want to see again: how the osprey powers itself out of 
the water with a fish that weighs as much as it does in its claws, the dippers 
fledging under duress, the baby roe deer that makes Bambi look like a bull 
moose and the bottlenose dolphins swallowing and regurgitating (and swallowing 
and regurgitating) 20lb Atlantic salmon in Chanonry Point until they can get 
the damn things to stay down.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fhighlands-scotlands-wild-heart-review-bbc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84823f83f697f14c43d9983bbe1b473c82e4c34c%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Highlands%3A%20Scotland's%20Wild%20Heart%20review%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0majestic%20osprey%2C%20cute%20deer%20%E2%80%A6%20but%20no%20Nessie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fhighlands-scotlands-wild-heart-review-bbc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Highlands%3A%20Scotland%27s%20Wild%20Heart%20review%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0majestic%20osprey%2C%20cute%20deer%20%E2%80%A6%20but%20no%20Nessie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fhighlands-scotlands-wild-heart-review-bbc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84823f83f697f14c43d9983bbe1b473c82e4c34c%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 A bottlenose dolphin struggles with its salmon for tea. Photograph: Lindsay 
McCrae/Maramedia 
As the camera panned over Loch Ness I had a brief muir-burn of the heart – 
hope blazed that this would be the way the discovery of the monster, for whose 
proven existence I have longed since I first read about it 30 years ago and 
more, would be announced. Wouldn’t that be brilliant? Just to slip it into a 
quiet, charming documentary and enjoy the thought of every viewer suddenly 
sitting bolt upright on the sofa going “Eh? Did you hear that? I think Ewan 
just said…!” Alas, it was not to be. But the capercaillies lekking, the 
woodpile home of 100,000 wood ants, and the timberman beetles emerging from the 
mists of the Abernethy forest were almost magical enough.

One day, though, I reckon. One day…
 