
It was a lesson in how to do food if you’re a politician: queue for it 
yourself, order something delicious but not deep-fried and avoid unflattering 
or ridiculous photographs as you devour it. British politicians have a lot to 
learn from Hillary Clinton’s flawless trip to Chipotlefor a chicken burrito bowl
 <http://www.chipotle.com/en-US/menu/menu.aspx>.


For a start, Clinton reportedly went incognito 
<http://nypost.com/2015/04/14/hillary-clinton-goes-incognito-to-grab-some-chipotle/>
. This was seemingly not a trip for the cameras, but the thing those photo 
opportunities never sensibly recreate: an ordinary woman having an ordinary 
bite to eat.

That may be why the presidential candidate’s food stop-off went so well. But 
while her choice of food – rice, beans, grilled chicken, guacamole, salsa, sour 
cream – doesn’t appear to have been stage-managed, it is politically pretty 
smart: a healthy-ish choice, not impossible to eat, involving the king of all 
ingredients, the avocado. (Although possibly notif you are Peter Mandelson 
mistaking mushy peas for guacamole in a chippy 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-465577/Hagues-baseball-cap-Mandelsons-mushy-peas-True-tales-just-great-political-myths.html>
.)

 “It’s a fairly perfect order, when you think about it,” says food site Eater 
<http://www.eater.com/2015/4/13/8406753/what-did-hillary-clinton-just-order-at-chipotle>
. “You’re opting for chicken instead of beef, and don’t want that 
calorie-loaded flour tortilla, but you’re not so overly zealous as to get a 
salad.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2015%2Fapr%2F14%2Fhillarys-flawless-chipotle-choice-how-campaign-meals-can-make-or-break-a-politicians-image%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F14%2F1429026813606%2F7ba46657-ec63-474a-8314-03d662ccf770-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hillary's%20flawless%20Chipotle%20choice%3A%20how%20campaign%20meals%20can%20make%20or%20break%20a%20politician's%20image&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2015%2Fapr%2F14%2Fhillarys-flawless-chipotle-choice-how-campaign-meals-can-make-or-break-a-politicians-image%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hillary%27s%20flawless%20Chipotle%20choice%3A%20how%20campaign%20meals%20can%20make%20or%20break%20a%20politician%27s%20image&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2015%2Fapr%2F14%2Fhillarys-flawless-chipotle-choice-how-campaign-meals-can-make-or-break-a-politicians-image%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F14%2F1429026813606%2F7ba46657-ec63-474a-8314-03d662ccf770-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ed Miliband buying his bacon sandwich in London in 2014. Photograph: Andrew 
Matthews/PA 
Meanwhile, on the British election trail … politicians seem genuinely scared 
of food and yet irresistably drawn to it. Ever sinceEd Milliband and the Bacon 
Sandwich of Doom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/may/25/ed-miliband-david-axelrod-bacon-butty>
, they know that even the most humble butty has massive potential to trip them 
up. Somehow the bacon sandwich, that heavenly Sunday morning treat, has become 
a food so dangerous that Samantha Cameron,when faced with one last week 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/david-cameron/11519123/David-Cameron-avoids-bacon-butty-moment-but-wife-Samantha-digs-in-on-visit-to-Edinburgh.html>
, seemed to largely ignore it in the hope that it would go away. (Admirable 
willpower in evidence there: the lure of a bacon and egg butty when you’ve 
spent all morning schlepping between photo ops must be strong.)

David, meanwhile, handed her a knife and fork with which to eat it. 
Acceptable, I think when faced with a very nice dress and a hidden egg yolk 
that might at any moment spurt forth. And a great deal less ridiculous than 
Cameron’sown cutlery-assisted encounter with a hot dog over Easter 
<http://metro.co.uk/2015/04/06/david-cameron-doesnt-know-how-to-eat-a-hot-dog-5137713/>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2015%2Fapr%2F14%2Fhillarys-flawless-chipotle-choice-how-campaign-meals-can-make-or-break-a-politicians-image%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F14%2F1429026253506%2F9adc6d5e-9c42-40b1-82d2-30087a34eb93-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hillary's%20flawless%20Chipotle%20choice%3A%20how%20campaign%20meals%20can%20make%20or%20break%20a%20politician's%20image&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2015%2Fapr%2F14%2Fhillarys-flawless-chipotle-choice-how-campaign-meals-can-make-or-break-a-politicians-image%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hillary%27s%20flawless%20Chipotle%20choice%3A%20how%20campaign%20meals%20can%20make%20or%20break%20a%20politician%27s%20image&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2015%2Fapr%2F14%2Fhillarys-flawless-chipotle-choice-how-campaign-meals-can-make-or-break-a-politicians-image%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F14%2F1429026253506%2F9adc6d5e-9c42-40b1-82d2-30087a34eb93-1020x612.jpeg>
 David Cameron tackles an ice-cream during an election campaign walkabout in 
Torquay in 2010. Photograph: Adrian Dennis/AFP/Getty Images 
Because, while politicians cannot resist the “one of us” potential of food 
photo ops, it only ever seems to make them look the opposite – think of George 
Osborne’s attempts to look normalby tweeting his burger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/jun/27/george-osborne-burger-tweet>, 
only for it to be revealed as a (delicious) expensive number from Byron. All of 
Cameron’s good work in sitting down for a barbecue with real people in their 
actual back garden, was undone by his misguided use of a knife and fork to 
tackle a sausage in a bun. Never mind the delicious-looking Greek salad, or the 
Easter sunshine – if there was ever a way to prove that politicians live in a 
different world, this was it. Cameron might as well have had a massive neon 
arrow with POSH written on it pointing at its head. (We do know that Cameroncan 
eat a hot dog with his hands 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2015/04/07/david-cameron-uses-knife-fork-eat-hot-dog_n_7016204.html>
, like a normal person – maybe he was just copying President Obama).

Anyway, it was back to more cutlery-friendly items last week when the Tory 
leader tucked into a breakfast of fried bread, fried egg and haggis in 
Edinburgh. Which to be honest, does not sound like much of a vote-winner: I’m 
pretty sure Scottish people are not going to flock to Cameron on the basis of 
him eating haggis, and I’d question meals in which everything is fried. Not 
least becauseCameron has already been told off 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2012/05/23/david-cameron-urged-to-stop-eating-junk-food-hot-dogs-obama_n_1539193.html?>
 for eating them in public.

In more hilariously transparent attempts to eat national foodstuffs, the 
Conservative leader followed up his Scottish breakfast with Welsh cakes in 
Cardiff – presumably they were all out of leeks – made and ate some pies, had a 
drink of Welsh stout, and then,according to the Times 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/news/politics/article4404805.ece>, headed off to 
Cornwall, where he “sauntered off into the Cornish sunset in search of ‘fish 
and chips and a pint of Doom Bar’”.

God knows what that diet says of the electorate. Apparently the way to our 
(unhealthy) hearts is through fried things and booze – no fruit or vegetables 
required. And you can be sure that somebody, somewhere, has thought about all 
those messages: as fans of HBO political comedy Veep will know, eventhe flavour 
of frozen yoghurt <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2081045/> a politician chooses 
to eat is of utmost importance.

Even when nobody is there to see you gnawing, you can still come unstuck. 
Witness David Cameron’s troubles with a Cornish pasty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/mar/29/pasty-row-david-cameron> he 
remembered buying from Leeds station – although what he was doing buying 
Cornish pasties in Leeds, when he seems toregularly be on holiday in Cornwall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/aug/20/david-cameron-cornwall-fourth-holiday>
, I’m still not sure – or Ed Miliband’s and Ed Balls’sunseemly sprinting for 
Greggs’ sausage rolls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2012/mar/28/ed-miliband-sausage-rolls-greggs-pasty-video>
 in riposte.

Nobody benefits from all this public chomping – save the Facebook pages 
<http://www.facebook.com/pages/Politicians-Eating-Things/224114794303335> and 
Tumblrs <http://barackobamaeatingthings.tumblr.com/> dedicated to politicians 
eating things <http://politicianseatingicecream.tumblr.com/> in really weird 
ways. It’s time to drop the fake political meals before we’re all put off our 
food.
 