
A growing number of academics and activists are calling for US authorities to 
fully audit or recount the 2016 presidential election vote in key battleground 
states, in case the results could have been skewed by foreign hackers.

The loose coalition, which is urging Hillary Clinton’s campaign to join its 
fight, is preparing to deliver a report detailing its concerns to congressional 
committee chairs and federal authorities early next week, according to two 
people involved.

The new special relationship: what does Putin want from Trump?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/20/new-special-relationship-what-does-putin-want-from-trump-kgb>
The document, which is currently 18 pages long, focuses on concerns about the 
results in the states of Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin.

“I’m interested in verifying the vote,” said Dr Barbara Simons, an adviser to 
the US election assistance commission and expert on electronic voting. “We need 
to have post-election ballot audits.” Simons is understood to have contributed 
analysis to the effort but declined to characterise the precise nature of her 
involvement.

A second group of analysts, led by the National Voting Rights Institute 
founder John Bonifaz and Professor Alex Halderman, the director of the 
University of Michigan’s center for computer security and society, is also 
taking part in the push for a review, and has been in contact with Simons.

In a blogpost 
<https://medium.com/@jhalderm/want-to-know-if-the-election-was-hacked-look-at-the-ballots-c61a6113b0ba#.r70sjdi3x>
 early on Wednesday, Halderman said paper ballots and voting equipment should 
be examined in Wisconsin, Michigan, and Pennsylvania, warning that deadlines 
were rapidly approaching.

 “Unfortunately, nobody is ever going to examine that evidence unless 
candidates in those states act now, in the next several days, to petition for 
recounts,” he said.

The developments follow Clinton’s surprise defeat to Donald Trump in the 8 
November vote, and come afterUS intelligence authorities released public 
assessments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/07/us-russia-dnc-hack-interfering-presidential-election>
 that Russian hackers were behind intrusions into regional electoral computer 
systems and the theft of emails from Democratic officials before the election.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fhillary-clinton-election-vote-recount-michigan-pennsylvania-wisconsin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbad54b640cbf3838b26c9f00b247ed2fa71b2940%2F0_0_4996_3556%2F4996.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hillary%20Clinton%20urged%20to%20call%20for%20election%20vote%20recount%20in%20battleground%20states&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fhillary-clinton-election-vote-recount-michigan-pennsylvania-wisconsin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hillary%20Clinton%20urged%20to%20call%20for%20election%20vote%20recount%20in%20battleground%20states&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fhillary-clinton-election-vote-recount-michigan-pennsylvania-wisconsin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbad54b640cbf3838b26c9f00b247ed2fa71b2940%2F0_0_4996_3556%2F4996.jpg>
 Voters at the Cedarburg community center, in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. Trump has 
racked up reportedly disproportionate votes in counties using electronic 
voting. Photograph: Darren Hauck/Getty Images 
Having consistently led Trump in public opinion polls for months preceding 
election day in all three midwestern states, Clinton narrowly lost Pennsylvania 
and Wisconsin, and may yet lose Michigan, where a final result has still not 
been declared.

Curiosity about Wisconsin has centred on apparently disproportionate wins that 
were racked up by Trump in counties using electronic voting compared with those 
that used only paper ballots. The apparent disparities were first widely 
publicised earlier this month by David Greenwald 
<https://twitter.com/i/moments/797121503783329792>, a journalist for the 
Oregonian.

However, Nate Silver, the polling expert and founder of FiveThirtyEight, cast 
significant doubt <https://twitter.com/NateSilver538/status/801221907609579520> 
over this theory on Tuesday evening, stating that the difference disappeared 
after race and education levels, which most closely tracked voting shifts 
nationwide, were controlled for.

Silver and several other election analysts have dismissed suggestions that the 
swing state vote counts give cause for concern about the integrity of the 
results.

Still, dozens of professors specialising in cybersecurity, defense, and 
elections have in the past two days signed an open letter to congressional 
leaders 
<https://docs.google.com/a/guardian.co.uk/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdwQa-5YTdMJP4U1mqRLihr1wG4Kz8Nw58lTGFabrcZprUkYw/viewform?c=0&w=1>
 stating that they are “deeply troubled” by previous reports of foreign 
interference, and requesting swift action by lawmakers.

“Our country needs a thorough, public congressional investigation into the 
role that foreign powers played in the months leading up to November,” the 
academics said in their letter, while noting they did not mean to “question the 
outcome” of the election itself.

Halderman, the University of Michigan computer security expert, noted that 
this Friday is the deadline for requesting a recount in Wisconsin, where 
Trump’s winning margin stands at 0.7%. In Pennsylvania, where his margin is 
1.2%, the deadline falls on Monday. In Michigan, where the Trump lead is 
currently just 0.3%, the deadline is Wednesday 30 November.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&media=>
Why America elected Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/11/how-donald-trump-became-president-video>
Senior congressmen including Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina and 
Representative Elijah Cummings of Maryland have already called for deeper 
inquiries into the full extent of Russia’s interference with the election 
campaign.

Nonpartisan experts and academics have been in communication with Democratic 
operatives and people who worked on Clinton’s bid for the White House, who are 
being urged to officially request recounts in states where a candidate may do 
so.

New York magazine reported 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2016/11/activists-urge-hillary-clinton-to-challenge-election-results.html>
 that a conference call has taken place between the activists and John Podesta, 
Clinton’s campaign chairman.

Both Podesta and the acting Democratic National Committee chairwoman, Donna 
Brazile, have privately mused about the integrity of the election result, 
according to two sources familiar with the conversations.

Several senior Democrats are said to be intensely reluctant to suggest there 
were irregularities in the result because Clinton and her team criticised Trump 
so sharply during the campaign for claiming that the election would be “rigged” 
against him.

But others have spoken publicly, including the sister of Huma Abedin, 
Clinton’s closest aide. “A shift of just 55,000 Trump votes to Hillary in PA, 
MI & WI is all that is needed to win,” Hema Abedinsaid on Facebook 
<https://twitter.com/yashar/status/801177640291823616>, urging people to call 
the justice department to request an audit.

Alexandra Chalupa, a former DNC consultant who during the campaign investigated
links between Moscow and Trump’s then-campaign manager Paul Manafort 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/16/donald-trump-campaign-paul-manafort-ukraine-yanukovich>
, is also participating in the attempt to secure recounts or audits.

“The person who received the most votes free from interference or tampering 
needs to be in the White House,” said Chalupa. “It may well beDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, but further due diligence is 
required to ensure that American democracy is not threatened.”

Apathy and 'nonviolent anarchism': why did millions of US voters sit out the 
election?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/21/us-election-non-voter-why-not-donald-trump-hillary-clinton>
According to people involved, activists had previously urged Jill Stein, the 
Green party presidential candidate, to use rules in some states allowing any 
candidate on the ballot to request a review of the result. Stein is understood 
to have declined, citing in part a lack of party funds that would be required 
to finance such a move.

In a joint statement issued last month 
<https://www.dni.gov/index.php/newsroom/press-releases/215-press-releases-2016/1423-joint-dhs-odni-election-security-statement>
, the office of the director of national intelligence and the department for 
homeland security said they were “confident” that the theft of emails from the 
DNC and from Podesta,which were published by WikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/06/wikileaks-emails-hillary-clinton-campaign-john-podesta>
, was directed by the Russian government.

“Some states have also recently seen scanning and probing of their 
election-related systems, which in most cases originated from servers operated 
by a Russian company,” the statement went on. “However, we are not now in a 
position to attribute this activity to the Russian government.”

Asked on Tuesday whether the agencies had confidence that the election itself 
had been secure, a spokesman for the office of the director of national 
intelligence said: “Our colleagues at the department for homeland security are 
best positioned to address this.”

A spokesman for the department for homeland security, however, did not respond 
to requests for comment.
 