
After a gruelling 18 months on the campaign trail, Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> and Donald Trump cast 
their votes on Tuesday morning as millions of Americans headed to polling 
stations across the country.

Long lines of voters snaked across America as Clinton appeared quietly 
confident of becoming the first female president – but Trump clung to hopes of 
a historic upset.

US election 2016: polls open as Trump and Clinton aim to make history – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/nov/08/us-election-2016-polls-trump-clinton-results-live>
Their ballots follow those of the more than 46 million people who voted early 
this year, but it remained too early to say whether the scales were tipped 
toward the former secretary of state or her Republican rival, who on Monday 
filed a lawsuit alleging unfair voting practices in Nevada.

Clinton was greeted by flashing cameras at a school in Chappaqua, New York, 
where she voted with her husband, former president Bill Clinton. After filling 
out the ballot, Clinton was overwhelmed by hugs and handshakes outside the 
polling station.
 Guardian US political reporter Sabrina Siddiqui captures Clinton casting her 
ballot in Chappaqua, New York earlier on Tuesday. 
“It is the most humbling feeling, because I know how much responsibility goes 
with this,” Clinton told reporters outside Douglas G Grafflin elementary 
school, after casting her vote.

Hours later, Trump arrived at his designated polling site, PS 59 elementary 
school in Manhattan, where more than 80 voters were lined up in the dark before 
voting opened at 6am.

Asked whether he would concede if the networks called the election for Clinton 
on Tuesday night, Trump said: “We’ll see what happens.” In recent weeks, Trump 
has repeatedly said that he may not concede if he loses to his Democratic 
rival, warning in unprecedented remarks that the election could somehow be 
“rigged”.

On Tuesday afternoon, he told Fox News that if he lost, he would have to see 
“under what circumstances” that happened before he could concede. “I have to 
look at what’s happening,” he said. No independent report of voting 
irregularities had been confirmed by mid-afternoon.

The comments came just after Trump filed a lawsuit against Clark County 
<https://www.scribd.com/document/330439388/Trump-Nevada-Lawsuit>, Nevada, 
claiming four polling stations had allowed people to vote past the early voting 
deadline.

Clark County representatives said 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/card/trump-campaign-sues-accuses-nevada-county-keeping-polls-open-too-n679871>
 people who were in line before the polling stations’ closing time were allowed 
to vote after the deadline, in keeping with state law. Judge Gloria Sturman 
denied the Trump campaign’s request to preserve early voting records in Clark 
County. The campaign can appeal.

Democrats, meanwhile, fear that voter suppression activity may have depressed 
turnout in states like North Carolina, where they say changes to polling rules 
have disproportionately deterred African American voters in particular. As well 
as voter monitoring by the Department of Justice’s civil rights division, 
Barack Obama invitedoverseas observers from the Organization of American States 
 <https://twitter.com/OAS_official/status/796071824706719744>to scrutinize the 
US election for the for the first time.

‘Tough decision’

People cheered and booed 
<https://twitter.com/harrisoncomedy/status/796019537644847104> as Trump entered 
his voting station just before 11am,with his wife, Melania 
<https://twitter.com/colvinj/status/796025630747987969>, and daughter, Ivanka. 
“New York hates you!” yelled one person, while another cheered the candidate on 
with “Go Trump.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fdonald-trump-booed-as-he-arrives-to-vote-in-new-york-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%20booed%20as%20he%20arrives%20to%20vote%20in%20New%20York%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fdonald-trump-booed-as-he-arrives-to-vote-in-new-york-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%20booed%20as%20he%20arrives%20to%20vote%20in%20New%20York%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fdonald-trump-booed-as-he-arrives-to-vote-in-new-york-video&media=>
Donald Trump booed as he arrives to vote in New York – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/08/donald-trump-booed-as-he-arrives-to-vote-in-new-york-video>
Asked by reporters who he was voting for, Trump replied simply: “Tough 
decision.”

Before Trump arrived, two topless women protested inside the voting site, 
<http://www.nbcnewyork.com/news/local/Out-of-Our-Polls-Trump-Shirtless-Women-Escorted-Out-of-Manhattan-Polling-Station-400391281.html?_osource=SocialFlowTwt_NYBrand>
 shouting: “Out of our polls, Trump, out of our polls, Trump!”
US presidential election: five scenarios 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=569772bd-4556-4621-a8b0-3ee9683bf545>
 US presidential election: five scenarios 
The women, who were wearing jeans but no shirts, were escorted out of the 
station quickly.

Clinton began her day with at least a small step toward history, casting a 
ballot for herself at a polling site in her adopted hometown of Chappaqua. She 
arrived at the station, inside an elementary school, with husband Bill Clinton 
just under four hours after landing in Westchester from a final day of 
campaigning with four rallies across three battlegrounds.

Dozens of supporters had braved a chilly fall morning to greet the candidate 
they hoped would be the first woman to serve in the nation’s highest office. 
Chants of “I believe that she will win” and “Madame President” broke out as the 
Clintons emerged after voting in the company of an eager herd of locals who 
appeared to forget their own ballots in the company of the former – and perhaps 
future – first couple.

Clinton told reporters voting for herself was “the most humbling feeling”.

“I know how much responsibility goes with this and so many people are counting 
on the outcome of this election, what it means for our country,” she said. “And 
I will do the very best I can if I’m fortunate enough to win today.” Clinton 
also confessed to thinking of her late mother, Dorothy Rodham, who she has 
described as one of her greatest inspirations.

It was then a quiet afternoon for the Democratic nominee. She taped a series 
of radio interviews, and prepared for the night that will seal her fate from 
her home with a small group of confidantes. Clinton was set to watch the 
returns from The Peninsula, a luxury hotel that, incidentally, sits a block 
from Trump Tower on Manhattan’s Fifth Avenue. The mood within the campaign was 
cautiously optimistic, with few signs of a team bracing for the unexpected.

New, but untested, projections of real time voting patterns 
<http://www.slate.com/votecastr_election_day_turnout_tracker.html?live=true> 
also appeared to support the Democratic party’s belief that its voters were 
flocking to the polls, helping rally US stock markets for a second day running. 
But the Trump campaign reads the turnout signals in a different way, pointing 
out that the numbers of registered Republicans turning out to vote in 
battleground states were up on the level seen by Mitt Romney in 2012, while 
Democrats were seeing smaller turnout than for Obama.

Some residents of Manhattan’s Upper West Side cast their vote in Trump Place, 
a residential development built by the Republican nominee in the 1990s. The 
polling station’s name seemed to have no bearing on voting intentions for many 
of them. “He’s a misogynist, and he’s phobic of everyone who isn’t like him,” 
said Juliet Herman, a 52-year-old strategist.

Slava Hazin, 50, was one of the few outside Trump Place who said they were 
voting for Trump. “ABC,” he said. “Anyone but Clinton.”

Hazin said he “can’t stand Trump”, but as a Republican, he was voting for him 
anyway. “It was the worst lineup we’ve ever had,” he said of the original 
Republican candidates. “I mean, I’ve voted for some Republican duds but this 
really takes the cake.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhillary-clinton-voting-for-myself-was-the-most-humbling-feeling-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hillary%20Clinton%3A%20Voting%20for%20myself%20was%20the%20'most%20humbling%20feeling'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhillary-clinton-voting-for-myself-was-the-most-humbling-feeling-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hillary%20Clinton%3A%20Voting%20for%20myself%20was%20the%20%27most%20humbling%20feeling%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhillary-clinton-voting-for-myself-was-the-most-humbling-feeling-video&media=>
Hillary Clinton: Voting for myself was the ‘most humbling feeling’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/08/hillary-clinton-voting-for-myself-was-the-most-humbling-feeling-video>
Before polls opened on Tuesday morning, more than 46 million people nationwide 
had already voted – compared with the 32.3 million people who voted earlyin 2012
 <http://www.electproject.org/2012_early_vote>. The huge turnout broke early 
voting records in many states,with some predicting it would prove positive news 
for the Democratic party 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/11/clinton-trump-early-voting-230916>.

Hispanic surge

In Florida, a key swing state, nearly 50% of the state had already voted by 
the time polls opened on Tuesday morning. It was one of many states to see a 
surge in Hispanic voters, with 36% more of the population voting early in the 
election than had voted altogether in the 2012 election.

And in Ohio, thousands of people swamped county election board offices on 
Monday to take advantage of the campaign’s final early-voting hours, which were 
restricted this year by the Republican-controlled state legislature and 
Republican governor, John Kasich.

Party affiliations of early voters in Ohio have not been made public, but a 
decline in the percentage who are African American compared with 2012 gave 
supporters ofDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> 
cause for optimism that the Republican nominee would be able to clinch the 
state.

Hundreds of people – black, white, young and old – snaked around a parking lot 
in Akron to cast votes in Summit County, which has votedDemocrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> for president ever since Ronald 
Reagan’s re-election in 1984.

Poll workers share their thoughts on the election and fears of voter fraud
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/08/voting-poll-workers-rigged-us-election-clinton-trump-president>
In Youngstown, the center of Mahoning County, a former Democratic stronghold 
where Trump has this year enjoyed a surge in support among blue-collar workers, 
hundreds more people waited patiently in unseasonably warm sunshine to cast the 
final votes before election day.

Kevin Stillwell Jr was one of the county’s last early voters, waiting almost 
two hours in line to cast his ballot shortly before 4pm on Monday.

“It’s nothing,” Stillwell, a 20-year-old student at Youngstown State 
University, said of the wait he had endured. “It’s all worth it to have my say 
on who will be our president.”

Stillwell, who was raised in Canton, about 60 miles to the south-west, voted 
for Hillary Clinton, but without much enthusiasm. “They both suck, in my 
opinion,” he said. “But in this situation, the question is: which is the least 
worst?”

Trump’s claims in recent weeks of a “rigged election” had left people 
nationwide concerned that his supporters would attempt to intimidate voters at 
polling stations.

On Monday, two witnesses for the Democratic party testified in a Pennsylvania 
court that Trump’s claims had left them afraid that people armed with assault 
rifles would be coming to Philadelphia to watch the polls on voting day.

But in the north of the Pennsylvania city on Tuesday morning, at a handful of 
the voting divisions that recorded zero votes for Mitt Romney in 2012, there 
was not a single vigilante poll watcher standing outside the voting places – 
not even outside the ones that had given Barack Obama 100% of the vote.

Outside Meade elementary school in Philadelphia’s 47th ward, where one voting 
division had cast all 173 votes for Obama, there was a booth offering free 
smoothies, but no one who appeared to be monitoring the polls for Trump. Three 
members of the Clinton campaign’s voter protection team were present.

Gwen Frazier, 62, stopped to celebrate voting along with her son, Malik. Both 
had voted for Clinton. Trump’s comments about Muslims and Mexicans had left her 
convinced that he did not like African Americans either, she said. “What is he 
going to say to the foreigners overseas? How is he going to represent us?”

Malcolm Kenyatta, a 26-year-old North Philadelphia native who introduced 
Clinton at a rally here in April, said he had almost cried when he cast his 
vote.

“It’s a beautiful day to go vote for Hillary,” he said, greeting his neighbors 
as they came up to the polling place.

Outside a polling place in a public housing building in the 37th ward that had 
also recorded 100% of the votes for Obama in 2012, 42-year-old Anthony Newsome 
said that he did not trust Clinton and was not excited about her, but that he 
had voted for her. “She’s a lesser of two evils,” he said.

Trump seemed to have no policies and no plans, he said. “Honestly, I don’t 
think that he can read.”

The first election-day ballots were cast in rural New Hampshire, where Clinton 
beat Donald Trump handily with a 4-2 win in the township of Dixville Notch. 
Libertarian Gary Johnson was one vote short of tying with Trump, as was Mitt 
Romney, the 2012 Republican candidate, who had been written in.

Sarah Maslin Nir (@SarahMaslinNir) 
The scene at Susan B. Anthony's grave. And it's a scene. 
pic.twitter.com/mgQNwmsB9f <https://t.co/mgQNwmsB9f>
 <https://twitter.com/SarahMaslinNir/status/796009669525389312> November 8, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/SarahMaslinNir/status/796009669525389312> 
But in the three New Hampshire towns with midnight voting, Trump won overall 
with a 32-25 vote.

Meanwhile, in Rochester, New York, an election tradition took on even greater 
poignancy. Every year on election day,people visit the grave of Susan B Anthony 
<http://www.democratandchronicle.com/story/news/2016/11/07/anthony-grave-site-will-draw-a-crowd-on-election-day/93424370/>
, a driving force behind women’s suffrage, and place “I Voted” stickers on her 
tombstone. But this year, Mount Hope cemetery has planned for overflow crowds 
and extended its visiting hours in honor of the first female major party 
presidential nominee. Already, dozens of people have spent Tuesday morning 
queueing.

When the gates close there at 9pm ET, voters in the western US will still be 
casting their votes.

The last polls close at 1am ET, when the final ballots are collected in 
Alaska, where Trump is favored to win the state and its three electoral votes.
 