
Scarred by the 2015 general election and humbled by the Brexit vote, it’s 
hardly surprising that many in the British political and media class continue 
to hedge their bets on the 2016US presidential election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-elections-2016>, even as the climax of 
the contest draws near. The instinct for caution is understandable. These have 
been chastening times in British politics. No one wants to make three wrong 
calls in a row.

Michelle Obama campaigns with Clinton as Trump hits Ohio – election live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/oct/27/trump-clinton-news-vote-election-2016>
In the case of the US election, however, there is also an uneasy 
self-awareness of something close to groupthink. Unlike the UK general election 
or the EU referendum, where divisions within the political and media class were 
real and deep, there is something close to unanimity about British antipathy to
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. You have to be 
intensely anti-American or anti-Clinton – which some are – to positively wish a 
Trump victory on America and the world.

This helps to explain, though not to excuse, the reluctance to face the 
overwhelming probability about the US presidential contest. That probability is 
thatHillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>, with 
all her strengths and weaknesses, is going to win on 8 November, and is quite 
possibly going to win by a very large margin. Unless something quite 
exceptional and so far wholly undetected is happening – the instinct for 
bet-hedging, you see, is hard to shake off even here – Clinton will be taking 
over the White House in January.

The clearest and most immediate evidence is in the opinion polls, which 
consistently show Clinton ahead in the popular vote. That process has been 
strengthened by the televised debates and, in particular by the final debate, 
which Clinton clearly won, and in which Trump’s hostility to women seems to 
have had a lasting mobilisation impact.

That generally strong Clinton lead is also buttressed by local polling in the 
states where victory is essential under America’s electoral college system. 
With occasional exceptions, these polls show Clinton on course for a large 
electoral college win. Dismiss the polls if you like. But the fact that Trump 
and his running mate Mike Pence are spending time campaigning in states such as 
North Carolina and Utah shows that they are having to defend their own 
territories rather than attack in Clinton’s.

All this may change, of course. It’s the safest prediction in the book to say 
that the contest will narrow in the final days. But the general likelihood is 
surely that it will not narrow much. By this stage in 2012, only 9% of voters 
had not made up their minds. It seems unlikely that the proportion would be 
much different in such a bitterly contested election as this one has been. The 
big unpredictability this time is voter turnout. If Trump brings lots of new 
voters to the polls, and at the same time Clinton fails to bring significant 
parts of the Obama coalition to them, then an upset – which at this stage would 
be a much tighter Clinton win, not a Trump win – might just happen.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fpresidential-debate-highlights-clinton-and-trumps-final-face-off-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Presidential%20debate%20highlights%3A%20Clinton%20and%20Trump's%20final%20face-off%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fpresidential-debate-highlights-clinton-and-trumps-final-face-off-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Presidential%20debate%20highlights%3A%20Clinton%20and%20Trump%27s%20final%20face-off%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fpresidential-debate-highlights-clinton-and-trumps-final-face-off-video&media=>
Presidential debate highlights: Clinton and Trump’s final face-off – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/20/presidential-debate-highlights-clinton-and-trumps-final-face-off-video>
Even in an election as bitter as this one, the claim that lots of states are 
“up for grabs” is less true than ever. Since 1992, 31 of America’s 50 states 
have voted consistently in every presidential contest. In most modern US 
elections, people who consider themselves Democrats vote Democratic, while an 
equally large proportion of people who consider themselves Republicans vote 
Republican. A lot is always written at this stage in the campaign about the 
importance of self-described independents, but these voters tend to lean either 
Democratic or Republican, and to vote the way they lean too. One estimate puts 
the proportion of pure independents at only 5%. The veteran poll analyst 
Charlie Cook says that most voters are already “baked into the cake”.

Part of that is simply because of long-established demographic changes that 
advantage the Democrats. When Bill Clinton won in 1992, white voters cast 87% 
of the total vote. By the time of Barack Obama’s re-election in 2012, just 20 
years later, the white share had fallen to 72%. One prediction says it will be 
70% in November. If each demographic group votes the same way in 2016 as in 
2012, the Democratic lead will rise by about 1.5%. Trump has done nothing to 
combat this and plenty to feed it. In light of Trump’s attacks on women during 
the campaign, it seems likely that an even higher proportion of white women 
voters will move into the Democratic column too.

All this appears to be entirely consistent with the much discussed recent book 
Democracy for Realists <http://press.princeton.edu/titles/10671.html> by the 
American political scientists Christopher Achen and Larry Bartels. They argue 
that elections are not determined by voters’ policy preferences or ideologies, 
as many of us like to think, but “on the basis of who they are – their social 
identities”. Certainly the Achen-Bartels thesis chimes with the Brexit vote in 
Britain. In America, though, where race and ethnicity are such important 
components of social identities, but not the only ones, Trump’s consistent 
attempt to appeal to white male voters and alienate minority and female voters 
does not look like a winning strategy at all; indeed quite the reverse.

The view from Middletown: 'Trump speaks to us in a way other people don’t'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/membership/2016/oct/27/middletown-trump-muncie-clinton>
The immediate question, 12 days from the election, is less whether Clinton 
will win the presidency. It is more whether she can manage to persuade enough 
voters to elect a Congress that can work with her, not against her, as has been 
Obama’s fate for the past six years. The Democrats stand a good chance of 
winning the four seats necessary – Illinois, Wisconsin and two from seven other 
toss-up states – to regain control of the Senate (where 34 of the 100 seats are 
up for election). However, control of the House of Representatives (where all 
435 members are contested but incumbency is frequently decisive) seems likely 
to remain in Republican hands. All this suggests that Clinton will not have an 
easy presidency, even in the first two years, unless Republicans allow that to 
happen. Since Republicans expect to make gains in the 2018 midterms, they have 
little incentive to do that.

The Republican pollster Frank Luntz – whom Trump described on Twitter as “a 
total clown … a low-class slob” – said that if the campaign this autumn were 
about Trump, then Clinton would win; if it were about Clinton, then Trump could 
pull it off. Overwhelmingly, the campaign has proved to be about Trump. But 
that’s now about to change.

Increasingly, Donald Trump looks like a more incidental figure, preoccupied 
with hishotels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/26/donald-trump-opens-international-hotel-campaign-trail-brand>
 and his media ambitions. The big question in American politics is not whether 
Hillary Clinton will be president. It is what kind of president she is likely 
to be.
 