
“The hipster is a capitalist.” So said Matt Hancock, Theresa May’s new 
minister for digital and culture, who replaced Ed Vaizey in July this year. A 
standout soundbite from Hancock’s buzzword-ladenkeynote speech 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/minister-for-digital-and-culture-creative-industries-speech>
 delivered last Friday at theCreative Industries Federation 
<http://www.creativeindustriesfederation.com/> meet and greet event for 
culture’s great and good at the British Film Institute. Many creative 
industries “leaders” lapped up his speech which, as well as lauding 
micro-enterprising hipsters, also depicted James Bond delivering a post-Brexit 
“global calling card” – UK cultural capital – from his Aston Martin, bizarrely 
named-checked King Canute, and heralded “Uber-style dynamic pricing”.

Am I a hipster? You asked Google – here’s the answer | Joel Golby
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/08/am-i-a-hipster-google> 
Cultural capital has always been Britain’s soft power weapon of choice; the 
perfect accompaniment to a, let’s politely say, “proudly robust”, heritage of 
rampant jingoism that has long served to justify our lust for colonialism and 
imperialism in all its forms. Hancock recognises this, and the fact that the 
hipster epitomises both the old and the new. A perfectly preened vision of 21st 
century Conservativism.

The hipster may be a capitalist, although aren’t we all nowadays? The hipster 
is also ethical, sustainable and highly mobile. Retro, beautifully 
reconditioned fixed wheel bikes with 70s steel frames and state of the art aero 
wheels are their trusty steeds. With carefully coiffed beards and retro 
haircuts, they dwell in craft beer drinking dens, pop-up shops, tattoo 
parlours, andrestaurants selling cereal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/28/cereal-killer-cafe-protesters>
. The hipster is so very carefully considered: everything stylised; everything 
thought through.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Fhipsters-artists-gentrifying-capitalism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd51876fc291f65550004b7a4f0311b9b812b719f%2F0_204_5976_3584%2F5976.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hipsters%20and%20artists%20are%20the%20gentrifying%20foot%20soldiers%20of%20capitalism%20%7C%20Stephen%20Pritchard&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Fhipsters-artists-gentrifying-capitalism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hipsters%20and%20artists%20are%20the%20gentrifying%20foot%20soldiers%20of%20capitalism%20%7C%20Stephen%20Pritchard&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Fhipsters-artists-gentrifying-capitalism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd51876fc291f65550004b7a4f0311b9b812b719f%2F0_204_5976_3584%2F5976.jpg>
 Tattoo parlours – a favoured hangout of hipsters. Photograph: Sarah Lee 
A recent visit to my newly opened, “traditional barber” gave an insight into 
the world of the hipster. The thirtysomething owner “crafted” each haircut as a 
“unique experience”. Reclaimed barbering implements and blades hung on hidden 
magnetic pads beneath salvage yard beams; faux “hunting lodge” panelling was 
lit by wireless mood lighting; customers sat on “re-engineered” 1920s barbering 
chairs; hidden state-of-the-art speakers played tech-house from what appeared 
to be a vintage iPhone dock.

I asked the hipster owner and his beard-nurturing hipster customer (a 
tattooist from across the road) how they described themselves. “Socialists,” 
they replied, quickly adding that they were not looking “to build empires”, 
just to “make a living”. They had both left safe jobs working for the state and 
local government respectively. This led me to wonder aboutsuggestions that the 
hipster may represent some form of reincarnated frontiersman/woman or pioneer 
<https://briarpatchmagazine.com/articles/view/when-hipsters-dream>. In many 
ways, I think they do. Their styling certainly harks back to the mid-to-late 
19th century; to the British colonialists and the western frontiers. These 
people want to earn a reasonable living, independently, by “crafting” and 
“creating”. They, like the original pioneers, are explorers and artists and 
they are capitalists.

Unlike the colonising pioneer of the past, however, the hipster is postmodern, 
post-industrial, and post-Fordist. It is little wonder, then, that Hancock 
fetishises the hipster as both an ideal actor in his post-Brexit creative 
industries fantasy and an exemplar of small-scale, micro-enterprise: a 
capitalist. Anarticle in the Evening Standard 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/london/london-hipsters-key-to-boosting-british-economy-after-brexit-a3341091.html>
 suggested that the minister’s comments might surprise many hipsters, who pride 
themselves in “breaking away from the mainstream economy with 
independent-minded and ethical ideas and work practices”. But isn’t this an 
exact description of the kind of small-scale capitalist “innovation” that 
Hancock envisages as driving the core of Britain’s much-hoped-for creative 
industries revolution; itself a coded form of cultural imperialism?

The trouble is that this model of art as part-cultural civiliser, 
part-economic driver, part-social cohesion improver is deeply problematic. 
Hancock believes that knocking-up more glass-fronted “cultural quarters” will 
bring multiple benefits to everyone: “The lesson is clear: make an area 
interesting and you attract interesting people to work there.” You see, for 
Hancock, “cultural rebirth, connectivity, and economic revival go hand in 
hand”. And, of course, the hipster seems to personify these neoliberal ideals. 
However, whereas the minister said he was keen to avoid the state adopting a 
“top-down” and “prescriptive approach”, the state is actually doing exactly 
that, along with the support of capitalist bodies, like the Orwellian-sounding 
Creative Industries Federation.

Same old, same old. How the hipster aesthetic is taking over the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/06/hipster-aesthetic-taking-over-world>
It is the establishment that now sees the hipster as the embodiment of 
autonomous, small-scale capitalist expansionism. But it is not just the hipster 
cast in this role. Artists are the neoliberal state’s troops. Artists make the 
first move into post-industrial, post-welfare state wastelands like brownfield 
sites and council housing estates and sow the seeds of cultural capital. They 
attract hipsters before, eventually, being displaced by them and their new 
middle-class neighbours. Both the artists and (some) of the hipsters – the ones 
who haven’t “settled” yet – will move on, exploring, breaking away (again), 
developing new potential sites for capital “investment”. And so the cycle of 
gentrification starts over again.

Hancock knows this. Investors know this. The creative industries (in all their 
many increasingly homogeneous guises) know this. They believe in miracles 
because they create them. Hipsters are just the latest stylisation that fits 
perfectly with the rediscovery of the (economic) value of place. And, just like 
the gentrifying slogan,“Cupcakes are muffins that believed in miracles” 
<http://webgram.co/p/BJMvUdHAWvw>, it would seem that for Hancock, hipsters are 
people who believe in miracles. For now, at least.
 