
The last visit to Old Trafford left Arsène Wenger stern faced, forced to admit 
to feeling like a “bitter loser” as he strained to summon an explanation for a 
deep disappointment. It was not easy to digest a flaky performance that would 
be pivotal in the hunt for thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> title. From a position to 
breathe down Leicester City’s necks, Arsenal ended up choking.

Michael Carrick: Manchester United’s ageing but invaluable cog | Jonathan 
Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/18/michael-carrick-manchester-united-jose-mourinho>
A few months on, with Arsenal heading up the M1 and M6 again hoping to make a 
statement in terms of their title aspirations, this weekend’s challenge appears 
to have all the ingredients for another showpiece deflation: take one salty 
setting (a stadium where they last won a league game a decade ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/17/manchester-united-arsenal-title-old-trafford-ron-atkinson-1984>
), spice with thatwell-marinaded nemesis José Mourinho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/18/jose-mourinho-arsene-wenger-manchester-united-respect>
, mix ina few injury concerns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/17/arsenal-suffer-blow-as-hector-bellerin-is-ruled-out-for-four-weeks-injured-manchester-united>
 and key absentees, set the timer for an early kick-off on a Saturday in the 
north after an international break, and ice with November. The variety of 
pitfalls does not bode fantastically, even if Manchester United go into this 
tussle with problems of their own.

It has been Wenger’s job this week to paint a more optimistic picture, to try 
to prepare his team to feel relaxed, unshackled, raring to go at a venue where 
they tend to freeze. As far as perceived bad vibes are concerned, Wenger wants 
to turn them on their head. He responds with a defiant expression and 
determined words.

The psychology has all been internal – no matter what anyone else thinks 
outside the club, Wenger presents a different argument about that loss last 
term, when Marcus Rashford’s relentless dash left Laurent Koscielny and Gabriel 
looking aghast at one another, a midfield without the craft of Santi Cazorla 
was monochrome, and the collective experienced attack of Mesut Özil, Alexis 
Sánchez, Theo Walcott, Danny Welbeck and Olivier Giroudgot put in the shade by 
a teenage rookie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/28/manchester-united-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
.

Wenger regards that game as an anomaly. An aberration. He points to statistics 
to back up his point.Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> 
have lost only once away from home in the Premier League during 2016 and that 
was it. “That game was an exception,” he says. “We had other big games, we 
played at Manchester City, Tottenham, everywhere. On that day we didn’t turn up 
with a performance so that does not mean it is the normality – it is the 
exception of the year. We have to show on Saturday that is was the exception 
and we have to turn up.”

Wenger dismisses the idea there is some kind of psychological blockage when it 
comes to Old Trafford, even if it has become a habit to underperform when 
Arsenal walk out of that particular tunnel. “No, not at all,” he says. 
“Leicester won the league last year, we won at Leicester. And where did Man 
United finish last year?

“We beat Man United 3-0 at home in the same season. Today, you fail one time 
and the reaction is: ‘Oh, they failed, they will fail again.’ Life is not like 
that. If you turn up 25 times and you lose one game, people take that one game 
as a normality. No. You have to turn up the 25 times before, believe me.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fhistory-against-arsenal-wenger-manchester-united%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3abc9e3e56223fb4a39e1393e2d164f96167393b%2F0_0_3000_1775%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=History%20is%20against%20Arsenal%20but%20defiant%20Wenger%20paints%20optimistic%20picture%20%7C%20Amy%20Lawrence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fhistory-against-arsenal-wenger-manchester-united%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=History%20is%20against%20Arsenal%20but%20defiant%20Wenger%20paints%20optimistic%20picture%20%7C%20Amy%20Lawrence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fhistory-against-arsenal-wenger-manchester-united%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3abc9e3e56223fb4a39e1393e2d164f96167393b%2F0_0_3000_1775%2F3000.jpg>
 Arsène Wenger was sent to the stands at Old Trafford in 2009. Photograph: John 
Peters/Man Utd via Getty Images 
Taking a closer look at the generally strong performances on the road during 
this calendar year, it is striking that Arsenal did not eke out what you might 
call a standout victory – the kind of result that can send shockwaves. There 
were hard-earned draws at White Hart Lane and the Etihad, and a point away from 
home at the defending champions Leicester his season, but if they want to grow 
conviction that they can be a more competitive challenger this season (for 
themselves as much as anyone else) an in-the-spotlight away-day win would be 
worth something bigger than three points on the board. That has to be in 
Arsenal minds as they walk on to the pitch on Saturday lunchtime.

One thing that is far from Wenger’s thoughts is the Mourinho factor. The usual 
pre-match quiz on this subject met a dead bat. Is he not at all distracted by 
the history, the hex that has him still without a league win against a 
controversial rival? “No.” Never, at all? “No.” Not even when he was on the 
receiving end of some personal remarks? “He said some things, yes. But in life, 
everybody is responsible for what he says, and what he does. So I am 
responsible for what I say and what I do, not what other people say or what 
they do.

“I make mistakes in my life, and I regret every one I make, believe me. I 
would have loved to have a life without any mistakes. But unfortunately I am 
not even sure that Jesus did that.”

Ecstasy to agony: when Manchester United thumped Arsenal, then blew the title 
| Nick Miller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/17/manchester-united-arsenal-title-old-trafford-ron-atkinson-1984>
Wenger finds the pantomime dugout drama a barely relevant sideshow. “Before a 
big game like that it is ‘Mourinho v Wenger’ but that it is not what is most 
important, what is important is the quality of the game when it starts,” he 
says. “When you watch Real Madrid v Barcelona you want to see a football game 
and you are never disappointed because you see the quality of the game.”

Coaxing a quality performance from his team is at the forefront of his mind. 
It is not always straightforward getting a team to “reconnect” after an 
international break, and Wenger has a couple of big selection calls to make. 
The trickiest concerns the replacement for Héctor Bellerín at right-back, and 
as a knock-on effect, who is selected on the right of midfield to offer extra 
protection. Carl Jenkinson is only recently back from a cruciate-ligament 
rehabilitation, and has painful memories of the last time he appeared for 
Arsenal at Old Trafford. He was sent off in theinfamous 8-2 calamity in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/aug/28/manchester-united-arsenal-premier-league1>
. Alternatives are shifting a central defender across in Gabriel or Rob 
Holding, or using one of the makeshift options from midfield who has covered at 
full-back before like Francis Coquelin or the young Ainsley Maitland-Niles. 
Whoever gets the call is in for an intense challenge.

Up front Sánchez will want to play, but Giroud is ready to step in if the 
Chilean is deemed not superhuman enough to be risked after his efforts with a 
heavily strapped hamstring in Santiago last Tuesday. Getting personnel 
decisions right is a big thing. Getting the mindset right – something they 
failed to do last season at Old Trafford – is even bigger.
 