
Federal investigators on Friday questioned the engineer who was operating the 
commuter train that crashed in New Jersey a day earlier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/29/new-jersey-train-crash-hoboken-injuries>
, killing one and injuring more than 100 people.



Authorities named the woman killed and revealed that train engineer Thomas 
Grayling has answered investigators’ questions and was cooperating, after being 
released from hospital following the crash at a major transportation hub in 
Hoboken during Thursday morning’s rush hour.

But the cause of the crash, and whether it could have been prevented by safety 
devices, remains unclear. Rail investigators have pulled one of the train’s 
black box data recorders from the wreckage and on Friday were struggling to 
extract the second one intact from a forward-facing camera on the front of the 
train, the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) reported.

The two recorders are expected to contain information on speed, braking and 
other conditions that will help experts piece together the operation of the 
equipment and the actions of the engineer immediately before theNew Jersey 
Transit commuter train crashed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/29/new-jersey-train-crash-hoboken-injuries>
.

Fabiola Bittar de Kroon, the woman who died in the crash, was not a passenger 
on the train but was killed by falling debris. She was a 34-year-old mother of 
one daughter described as having a “big and genuine heart

“I am speechless and feel like the world stopped for some moments,” Cecilia 
Marques, a former co-worker at a company that specialized in travel to Brazil, 
told the Associated Press. “I had the privilege to get to know and work with 
Fabiola for some years, and I can say she was a great, talented” woman.

De Kroon previously worked in the Brazilian legal department of SAP, a 
technology firm, the company said in a statement.

She had just dropped her toddler daughter off at daycare before rushing to 
catch a train, according to daycare director Karlos Magner.

“We had a good talk for like a minute,” he said. “She said she was in a rush.”

A bystander, Rahman Perkins, tried to help De Kroon but could only comfort her 
as she lay trapped by metal debris that had fallen from the partially collapsed 
ceiling.

“I just told her to fight for your breath, think about your family, think 
about your friends, think about tomorrow,” Perkins said. “I just wanted her to 
feel special and just don’t think about the pain, don’t think about whatever 
this chaos is, don’t worry about it, you’ll be fine.”

Perkins said he tried to hug the woman as she died.

“I saw that beauty in her. I saw that peace,” he said. “I want [de Kroon’s 
family] to know she was that same person, she wasn’t mangled, she wasn’t all 
over the place, she was just there and unfortunately she didn’t make it.”

Engineer Gallagher, a 29-year veteran of New Jersey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/new-jersey> Transit, was released from the 
hospital on Friday afternoon. Fifteen of the injured were still in the 
hospital, including two in intensive care.
Stephen Nessen (@s_nessen) 
The #Hoboken <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Hoboken?src=hash> crash site is 
boarded up, generators running, trains silent.pic.twitter.com/xvSOy2P6by 
<https://t.co/xvSOy2P6by>
 <https://twitter.com/s_nessen/status/781808458710544384> September 30, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/s_nessen/status/781808458710544384> 
Meanwhile, early on Friday morning commuters faced a confusing and dark journey
 <https://twitter.com/s_nessen/status/781808458710544384> into New York City. 
Reporters on the scene captured images of a lightless and signless transit hub, 
where commuters had to navigate an unfamiliar station to reach a ferry to New 
York.

Governor Chris Christie of New Jersey and Governor Andrew Cuomo of New York 
avoided commenting on Thursday on whether positive train control, a safety 
devicewidely used in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/14/amtrak-promises-automatic-braking-crash>
 and ordered by the federal government, could have prevented the crash.

The speed limit heading into the station is 10mph.

“The train came in at much too high rate of speed, and the question is: why is 
that?” Christie said.

More answers were expected from a National Transportation Safety Board 
investigation, including from event recorders recovered from the accident, 
vice-chairman Bella Dinh-Zarrsaid on Friday morning. 
<http://abcnews.go.com/US/wireStory/fatal-train-crash-investigators-seek-answers-42466667>
.


The implementation of positive train control has been delayed in New York and 
New Jersey, despite repeated deadly crashes in the area, including in the Bronx 
and in Valhalla, New York, on a Metro North train and near Philadelphia on an 
Amtrak train.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fnew-jersey-train-crash-hoboken-data-recorder-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Data%20recorder%20recovered%20in%20deadly%20New%20Jersey%20train%20crash%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fnew-jersey-train-crash-hoboken-data-recorder-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Data%20recorder%20recovered%20in%20deadly%20New%20Jersey%20train%20crash%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fnew-jersey-train-crash-hoboken-data-recorder-video&media=>
Data recorder recovered in deadly New Jersey train crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/sep/30/new-jersey-train-crash-hoboken-data-recorder-video>
The crash has also put a renewed focus on New Jersey Transit, an organization 
some critics say has been “systematically starved 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/30/nyregion/nj-transit-executive-director.html?_r=0>
” by Christie’s cuts and a lack of state transportation funds.

Despite high-profile recent exceptions, rail continues to be one of the safest 
ways for passengers to travel in the US. Each year, roughly seven passengers on 
mainline trains are killed, according torecent research 
<http://journalistsresource.org/studies/environment/transportation/comparing-fatality-risks-united-states-transportation-across-modes-time>
.

Cuomo and Christie both cautioned against jumping to conclusions about the 
role that the lack of positive train control played or did not play in the 
tragedy.

The NTSB has been pressing for some version of the technology for at least 40 
years and the industry is under government orders to install it, but regulators 
have repeatedly extended the deadline at railroads’ request. The target date is 
now the end of 2018.

Over the past 20 years, the NTSB has listed the lack of positive train control 
as a contributing factor in 25 crashes. Those include an Amtrak crash last year 
in Philadelphia in which a speeding train ran off the rails along a curve. 
Eight people were killed.

In 2011, a Port Authority Trans-Hudson or Path commuter train crash in a 
separate section of the Hoboken station injured more than 30 people. The NTSB 
found the engineer failed to control the speed of the train as it entered the 
station and investigators also determined a contributing factor was the absence 
of positive train control.

“They’ll have to answer for themselves, but at the end of the day if safety is 
job one … then you have to have a better record than New Jersey Transit has 
right now,” said New Jersey senator Bob Menendez, noting that the transit 
agency said in a 2016 Federal Railroad Administration report that it did not 
have positive train control on any locomotive or segment of track.

“That means zero across the board,” he said. “They need to do better than zero 
across the board.”
 