
A train crash in Hoboken, New Jersey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/new-jersey>, left at least one person dead 
and 108 people injured on Thursday.

A New Jersey Transit train derailed during the morning rush hour and crashed 
into Hoboken terminal, one of the busiest stations in the state and a huge 
commuter hub for those traveling to and from New York City.

The dead victim was a woman who was hit by debris while waiting at the 
terminal, New Jersey governor Chris Christie said at a press conference, adding 
that most of the injuries were suffered by people on the train.

“The silver lining is there has only been one fatality so far,” New York 
governor Andrew Cuomo added.

“These are difficult times over these past weeks and months; between terrorist 
attacks, natural disasters, we have had our hands full in this country, we have 
had our hands full in the north-east,” Cuomo said. Earlier in September, Ahmad 
Khan Rahami was arrested for planting multiple bombs across New York and New 
Jersey.

Michael Larson, a New Jersey Transit employee, said he saw the train come into 
the station at a high speed, hop over the bumper block, and travel 40ft before 
hitting the waiting room and coming to a rest.


“I couldn’t believe what I was seeing,” Larson told CBS. “It was initially, 
just a horrendous, horrendous exploding noise. Concrete dust, electrical wires 
and the train flying into the depot.” He said people were kicking out the 
windows of the train to try to escape the wreckage.

Christie confirmed 108 people had been injured on the train, which was 
carrying 250 passengers.

Injured passengers have been transferred to the Hoboken University medical 
center and Jersey medical center by New Jersey Transit buses, officials said. 
Each hospital had about 40 “walking” patients, with roughly 10 in emergency 
care in Hoboken, and eight in Jersey City.


“We’re all hands are on deck, all our surgeons, our specialty surgeons as well 
as our critical care nurses,” a spokesperson for the Hoboken University Medical 
Center said.

“I was thrown into the chair in front. I banged my leg,” said Maria, a 
40-year-old woman limping beside her 19-year-old son outside of the medical 
center.

She said she had been commuting from New Milford, New Jersey, to Hoboken when 
the accident happened. “People were so scared. Me and another lady were hurt.” 
She would not give her surname, though she said she worked “in accounting”.

“The woman sitting beside me was so good to me, she wouldn’t leave until she 
knew I was OK.”

Inside Jersey City Medical Center, the closest trauma center to the site of 
the crash, workers described emptying out the cafeteria to make room for the 
sheer volume of patients from the accident.

“We had to basically shut down the whole cafeteria because we didn’t have 
enough space,” said Gilbert Salgado, a sanitation worker inside the hospital. 
“They had them just sitting down trying to treat them. It was completely full.”

Most of the patients who arrived were not in serious condition, said Mario 
Castillo, a nurse’s assistant. “Thank God the patients were not grave 
patients,” he said.
Hoboken train crash site 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/09/Hoboken-Map/>  Hoboken train 
crash site 
Near the station, the scene remained chaotic at 11am, with dozens of emergency 
vehicles in attendance with their sirens going and media attempting to film 
evidence of destruction outside the station.

The train had left Spring Valley, New York, at 7.23am and crashed at 8.45am, 
authorities said.

Freight train conductor William Blaine, 53, said he felt “death was following” 
him after he saw the train crash.

He said he was just outside of view of the train in a nearby Dunkin’ Donuts 
when he heard a “kaboom” and “the whole place shook”. He ran to the track, he 
said, to try to help.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fnew-jersey-train-crash-hoboken-injuries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72c6f8e87f4b39a22b0eddc6499c35add8487757%2F0_0_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hoboken%20train%20crash%3A%20one%20dead%20and%20more%20than%20100%20injured%20in%20New%20Jersey&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fnew-jersey-train-crash-hoboken-injuries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hoboken%20train%20crash%3A%20one%20dead%20and%20more%20than%20100%20injured%20in%20New%20Jersey&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fnew-jersey-train-crash-hoboken-injuries%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72c6f8e87f4b39a22b0eddc6499c35add8487757%2F0_0_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 People are treated for their injuries outside after a NJ Transit train crashed 
in to the platform at Hoboken terminal. Photograph: Eduardo Munoz Alvarez/Getty 
Images 
Blaine said the train came into Hoboken station fast – at around 30mph. 
Typically, he said, a train would slow down as it pulled into the station at 
30, then 20, 15, and then one or two miles per hour until it hit a bumper at 
the end of the platform.

Blaine also said he stepped over the dead body of a woman, who may have been 
hit by falling iron and steel debris. Officials did not confirm this to the 
Guardian.

The Hoboken incident marks the fourth train crash in the past three years 
along the eastern seaboard, something critics say highlights the dire state of 
infrastructure and safety technology on trains in the US.

New Jersey Transit has consistently delayed installing safety technology that 
would prevent accidents by automatically slowing or stopping trains when they 
are going too fast, a system known as positive train control (PTC). The federal 
government has consistently extended the deadline, which is now set at 2018, at 
the request of the railroads.

The most deadly incident was last year, when an Amtrak train derailed in 
Philadelphia after going too fast around a curve. The crash left eight people 
dead and more than 200 injured. The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
ruled that it could have been prevented by PTC.

The NTSB reached the same conclusion about a 2013 accident in New York, which 
left four people dead and 61 injured. It was New York’s deadliest train crash 
in more than two decades.

Federal and local investigators from the Port Authority of New York and New 
Jersey, NTSB, and Federal Railroad Administration were on the way to the scene 
to investigate the causes of Thursday’s crash and survey the extent of the 
damage.

Speaking from Washington DC, the NTSB’s vice-chairman, Bella Dinh-Zarr, said 
the agency would be assessing the role that PTC could have played in the system.

“We are ready to hit the ground running,” Dinh-Zarr said.

Governors Cuomo and Christie said that it was premature to say PTC could have 
prevented the accident until the cause was verified.

“We know what happened, we don’t know why it happened,” said Cuomo.

Earlier, Christie told CNN there was nothing to indicate the crash was 
anything more than an accident.

Witnesses have said the driver of the train was passed out at the front of the 
first car when the train came into the platform. It remains unclear if the 
train was equipped with an “alerter” system, which sounds an alarm if the 
engineer is inactive for 25 seconds, and initiates brakes after a further 15 
seconds.

The crash left the terminal severely damaged with steel infrastructure exposed 
and hanging from the ceiling.

New Jersey Transit trains were not running into Hoboken in the wake of the 
crash and several roads leading to Hoboken were closed by police. The train 
terminal is more than 100 years old, and repairs will probably be protracted. 
Given that Hoboken is major transit hub through which all major train, bus and 
ferry traffic that connects the states of New Jersey and New York runs, it 
could have a serious impact on transportation in the region.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fofficial-says-100-injured-jersey-train-crash-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Official%3A%20more%20than%20100%20injured%20in%20New%20Jersey%20commuter%20train%20crash%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fofficial-says-100-injured-jersey-train-crash-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Official%3A%20more%20than%20100%20injured%20in%20New%20Jersey%20commuter%20train%20crash%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fofficial-says-100-injured-jersey-train-crash-video&media=>
Official: more than 100 injured in New Jersey commuter train crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/sep/29/official-says-100-injured-jersey-train-crash-video>
Hoboken is NJ Transit’s fifth-busiest station with 15,000 boardings per 
weekday, and is the final stop for several train lines and a transfer point for 
many commuters on their way to New York City.


NJ Transit provides more than 200m passenger trips annually on bus, rail and 
light rail lines. More than 100,000 people use NJ Transit trains to commute 
from New Jersey into New York City daily.

Cuomo cancelled a trip to Israel for Shimon Peres’s funeral because of the 
crash.
 