
Home Office transfers of unaccompanied minors who were registered in the Calais
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/calais> refugee camp have stopped, meaning 
up to 1,000 children are unlikely to be given sanctuary in the UK.

The immigration minister Robert Goodwill said more than 750 refugee children 
from Calais had arrived in the UK. Officials said all the children taken from 
the camp in early November had been interviewed and those eligible to enter the 
UK had been moved.

“Many have been reunited with family members already in the UK, while others 
are being cared for by local authorities across the UK. The remaining children 
are safe and in the care of the French authorities,” Goodwill said.

Charities expressed concern about the fate of those who had been interviewed 
and found to be ineligible for transfer. They said that if the Home Office 
closed the door to legal transfers, more unofficial camps would spring up near 
the port as children desperate to join relatives in the UK tried to make their 
way illegally via people traffickers and lorries.

Safe Passage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/09/the-charities-supported-by-the-guardian-and-observer-2016-appeal>
, a charity that offers legal support to refugee children applying to join 
relatives in the UK, said it estimated several hundred Calais children remained 
in France despite having a legal right to be in the UK. It has more than 40 
live cases of children it is trying to help to relocate.

Alf Dubs, the Labour peer whose amendment to the Immigration Act commits the 
government to giving homes to vulnerable refugee children travelling alone, 
said: “I’m dismayed to learn that transfers are about to cease having only just 
begun. Had the bridge been pulled up so soon after the start of the 
Kindertransport, through which my life was saved, many of us would never have 
made it to Britain.”

Mike Penrose, Unicef UK’s executive director, said: “Bringing 750 children to 
safety in the UK over the last six weeks is a real achievement. That progress 
is worth celebrating, but we must be clear that the job is not finished. The 
government must provide assurances that the system will continue to work for 
the children who have not yet reached safety. If sustained, safe and legal 
routes to the UK are not made available to children, they will continue to fall 
into the hands of smugglers and traffickers.”

Many unaccompanied minors currently dispersed around France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> complain that they have been left in 
the dark about their future by French and British authorities.

This week a Sudanese radiographer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/08/sudanese-refugee-in-uk-voices-fears-for-brother-stranded-in-france>
 living in Liverpool after fleeing Darfur made an emotional plea to the 
government to be reunited with his teenage brother, who remains inFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> five weeks after the Calais migrant 
camp was demolished.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fchild-migrants-after-calais-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20Calais%3A%20what%20has%20happened%20to%20the%20refugee%20children%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fchild-migrants-after-calais-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20Calais%3A%20what%20has%20happened%20to%20the%20refugee%20children%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fchild-migrants-after-calais-video&media=>
After Calais: what has happened to the refugee children? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/08/child-migrants-after-calais-video>
Mohamed Adam Hamad Ahamed said he was becoming increasingly anxious about the 
mental state of his 17-year-old sibling Moubrak. He had fled death threats in a 
Darfur camp for displaced people and now faced another “situation” in France, 
he said.

His hopes of seeing his brother for the first time in two years were raised 
when he received a phone call from a Home Office official in mid-October. But 
he has not heard anything since.

Although the remaining children from Calais look unlikely to travel to the UK, 
the Home Office said it would continue to transfer other children from Europe 
in coming months. “The Dubs process has not ended. More eligible children will 
be transferred fromEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, in 
line with the terms of the Immigration Act, in the coming months,” Goodwill 
said.
 