
Two days after the BBC again aired Cathy Come Home 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cathy_Come_Home>, Ken Loach’s 1966 drama about 
homelessness, up pops the Resolution Foundation to remind us that the problem
hasn’t gone away 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/31/cathy-come-home-50-years-homelessness-mental-health-problems>
. Far from it, in the opinion of some experienced observers.

According to the thinktank’s latest report  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/02/home-ownership-in-england-at-lowest-level-in-30-years-as-housing-crisis-grows>
, which led Tuesday’s Guardian and Radio 4 news bulletins, home ownership is at 
its lowest level (64%) since 1986, when Margaret Thatcher’s election-winning 
boom in council house sales was still gathering momentum. It peaked at 71% in 
April 2003.

There ought to be no surprise there then, yet people are surprised that the 
policies of successive governments since Thatcher have contributed in different 
ways to making a bad situation worse by stoking up demand for homes while 
inhibiting their supply. The result has to be higher prices.

Even framing the question in terms of owner occupation is part of the problem. 
As the redoubtable Peter Hetherington was quick topoint out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/19/will-theresa-may-fix-broken-housing-market>
 from Newcastle when Theresa May promised to tackle inequality, the real focus 
should be affordable, social housing to rent.

That’s where the big hole has opened up and Tory councils have joined the 
chorus of protest against the folly of investing £2bn in affordable homes 
between now and 2020 while the total housing investment programme will be 
£44bn. Homebuilding is at its lowest level since the 1920s.


Before Thatcher started bribing people with their own money by selling off 
public assets cheaply in 1979 (housing wasn’t the only fire sale auction) 
council and housing association completions – the latter the result of a 
cross-party consensus of the early 70s – had accounted for up to 50% of new 
homes, many of them good ones too, not dodgy high-rise system built jobs. In a 
good year nowadays they may be 15%.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fhoming-in-on-the-housing-crisis-where-did-it-all-start-to-go-wrong%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13ec98dc90a778732f7f264d90cb5bb100100fab%2F0_89_2315_1389%2F2315.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Homing%20in%20on%20the%20housing%20crisis%3A%20where%20did%20it%20all%20start%20to%20go%20wrong%20%7C%20Michael%20White&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fhoming-in-on-the-housing-crisis-where-did-it-all-start-to-go-wrong%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Homing%20in%20on%20the%20housing%20crisis%3A%20where%20did%20it%20all%20start%20to%20go%20wrong%20%7C%20Michael%20White&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fhoming-in-on-the-housing-crisis-where-did-it-all-start-to-go-wrong%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13ec98dc90a778732f7f264d90cb5bb100100fab%2F0_89_2315_1389%2F2315.jpg>
 Cathy Come Home highlighted the problem of homelessness. Photograph: 
Moviestore Collection/Rex 
But, as we can all see in towns and cities all over Britain, the current 
priority of housebuilders is samey-looking brick and glass blocks constructed 
on brownfield sites for expensive purchase or rent, often via the buy-to-let 
(BTL) market. One man’s home is another woman’s pension investment. That’s 
where most of the £44bn is going, some of it to provide investment havens for 
foreign money. They’re the flats with no lights on.

Nothing wrong with home ownership, though the British have a fetish not shared 
by all our neighbours who are happy to rent affordably: low ownership levels in 
Germany help explain why individual net worth is lower there.


Where it started to go wrong in Britain was when councils were forced to sell 
off their better properties to sitting tenants, but not allowed to keep the 
money and replace them.Housing <https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> 
associations that took the strain (and were often better landlords at that 
stage) are now being subjected to similar, ever tighter pressures.

Home ownership in England at lowest level in 30 years as housing crisis grows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/02/home-ownership-in-england-at-lowest-level-in-30-years-as-housing-crisis-grows>
It worked for a while when deregulated mortgage markets boomed and higher real 
incomes more than covered rising house prices, naively regarded as a one-way 
bet. But once inward migration soared after the 2004 “Accession 10” countries – 
led by those industrious Poles - joined the EU, wages stagnated, then the banks 
squeezed mortgage deposits after the funny money crash of 2008, we could see 
what would happen.

The property bubble, which had grown so fast, burst in some parts of the 
country, recovered again in others. Ex-council tenants cashed in on their 
windfall gain by selling to BTL landlords or young professionals who could 
still afford to buy in up-and-coming areas. Rents rose to reflect higher 
values, the poor and the young got squeezed unless the Bank of Mum and Dad 
stepped in.

So the crisis is partly inter-generational, as you would expect from the 
Resolution Foundation, whose chair is the ex-universities minister, David “Two 
Brains” Willetts, who wrote a book called The Pinch about the boomers’ failure 
to do better by the kids, though it didn’t stop him whacking up student tuition 
fees to £9,000.

As chancellor, George Osborne got some of this. But his remedy was assorted 
subsidies for first-time buyers , which inevitably helped push up prices even 
further because not much was being done to build the kind of property the new 
generation wanted and could afford. Demand was stimulated faster than supply. 
The “key worker” subsidy may have done more harm than good.

In fairness to the fallen chancellor he also started to make it harder for 
speculative foreign investors to escape stamp duty by using companies to buy 
property, he curbed the tax benefits of BTL properties, not least by imposing 
capital gains tax on profits of investment properties made after 2015 and he 
made the “slab system” of stamp duty payments on really expensive property more 
sensible (and costly to wealthier owners).

The crisis isn’t all the fault of wicked capitalist builders or the rich. 
“Ordinary people” live differently now too: more live alone, they don’t all 
want three-bedroom semis in the suburbs. The fact that inner-city living in 
apartment blocks is back in fashion, as part of urban regeneration of our 
rundown city centres, is a reminder that this policy – like most policies – has 
an upside as well as a down. We can see that in our neighbourhoods too.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fhoming-in-on-the-housing-crisis-where-did-it-all-start-to-go-wrong%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58dcf11b0a349fbbf69f7a15f62f035cf3f3466b%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Homing%20in%20on%20the%20housing%20crisis%3A%20where%20did%20it%20all%20start%20to%20go%20wrong%20%7C%20Michael%20White&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fhoming-in-on-the-housing-crisis-where-did-it-all-start-to-go-wrong%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Homing%20in%20on%20the%20housing%20crisis%3A%20where%20did%20it%20all%20start%20to%20go%20wrong%20%7C%20Michael%20White&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fhoming-in-on-the-housing-crisis-where-did-it-all-start-to-go-wrong%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58dcf11b0a349fbbf69f7a15f62f035cf3f3466b%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Residents in St Ives backed plans to restrict second home ownership in a 
referendum. Photograph: Matt Cardy/Getty Images 
But what to do about those now losing out in both rental and owner occupancy 
stakes?

Obviously, Britain has to build more affordable housing, preferably in the 
right places. That means relaxing planning laws – the coalition has tried that 
too for home improvements – even in the sacred green belt. The section 106 
rule, which allows councils to share planning gain with a developer by getting 
social housing on part of the site, is cumbersome and slow, loaded the 
developer’s way. Tory policy has made that worse.

Ideally, the government would do something along the lines of the South 
Koreans and use assorted housing corporations to impose the state’s grip on the 
supply of land, possibly even buying it up without planning permission, ie 
cheaper, from farmers and others, so that the taxpayer gets any windfall cash. 
That’s probably asking too much, even of May the Superwoman.

But any sensible action that wasn’t driven by vote-catching ideology would be 
welcomed by Tory councils too. Don’t rule it out. Nick Timothy, May’s bearded 
chief of staff, is a clever Birmingham boy and fan of his city’s municipal 
hero, Joe Chamberlain, who cleared Victorian slums and ranmunicipal utilities 
to benefit the poor.

Where will the money come from? Interest rates are low and income streams 
(rent) all but guaranteed, so it’s a good time to borrow. Devolving more power 
back to councils is good, but not if you don’t devolve more money too.

So property taxes may have to rise, both to raise money and in the interest of 
fairness. Remember thebedroom tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/27/the-bedroom-tax-explained>, 
designed retrospectively to squeeze people out of rooms they don’t “need”? The 
regressive nature of council tax, Michael Heseltine’s panic replacement for the 
poll tax in 1992, means that rich properties attract zero marginal tax rates 
for ever larger homes while modest homes are over-taxed.

So either an unpopular property revaluation or some higher rate council tax 
bands are needed. They currently plateau at £320,000, a rate set in 1991. In 
Mayfair, you could barely buy a garage for that now.

It is also madness to have a 50% “discount” on second homes, which are such a 
blight in beauty spots. No wonder St Ives has leda revolt  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/06/st-ives-cornwall-backs-residents-only-home-ownership-plan-referendum>
to stem the flow. It’sspreading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/31/cornwall-fightback-second-homes-house-prices-ban>
. No wonder too that in 2013 the right to levy an “empty homes premium  
<http://researchbriefings.parliament.uk/ResearchBriefing/Summary/SN02857>” of 
up to 150% was conceded to councils.

As with dodgy bankers, making a noisy example of some dodgy foreigners 
laundering ill-gotten gains through estate agents’ doors might help dampen the 
market and improve public confidence. Plenty of such ideas exist that would 
start easing the supply chain and throttling back a demand side that will stall 
sooner or later, perhaps as a consequence of Brexit. Every cloud …
 