
A new house price index is published on Tuesday, bringing together the reports 
published by the Land Registry and theOffice for National Statistics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/office-for-national-statistics> (ONS).

The Land Registry previously put together an index based on the prices of 
properties that had previously been sold, which meant no new-build costs were 
captured, while the ONS included only mortgaged sales, so cash purchases were 
not reflected. The new index, the Official house price index, will replace 
these and aims to offer a more accurate picture of prices across the UK.

The new index is the only one published by government agencies, but there are 
several other snapshots of the market published each month. Each is put 
together in a different way and, as a result, has a different outcome. We look 
at what each one shows.

Official house price index

This index will be produced monthly by the ONS and published by the Land 
Registry.

Each month there will be five reports: a monthly UK summary, and separate 
monthly reports for England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. There will 
also be some new statistics, including data on first-time buyer and cash buyer 
prices.

The index will be based on data from a range of sources – the Land Registry 
and Registers of Scotland will provide price-paid data, while the Council of 
Mortgage Lenders will provide information about the different types of buyer. 
The Valuation Office Agency will provide information about property attributes 
– the size and number of rooms, for example.

The figures will be mix-adjusted to allow for the fact that different houses 
are sold in different monthly periods. The price data will be calculated using 
a geometric average in line with the previous Land Registry index – geometric 
averages give similar results to a median, whereas arithmetic averages (as were 
used in the ONS index) are what you would usually refer to as a mean. 
Arithmetic averages tend to lead to a higher average price due to the larger 
impact of higher value properties on the mean.

Halifax 
<http://www.lloydsbankinggroup.com/media1/economic_insight/halifax_house_price_index_page.asp>

Compiled by Halifax, now part of Lloyds Banking Group and one of the UK’s 
biggest mortgage lenders, this reports on the whole of the UK.

The monthly report shows the average price agreed on a property being bought 
using a Halifax mortgage, and the percentage change in the price over the month 
and year. A quarterly survey shows regional data. Halifax “standardises” the 
figures from its mortgage approvals data so that instead of comparing the 
prices of one set of houses one month with another set of houses the next, it 
tracks the price of a “typical house”. The figures are also seasonally adjusted.

Halifax started publishing data in January 1983, but the index in its current 
form began in April 1984.


Current UK average house price: £213,472  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/07/uk-house-prices-inch-up-06-in-may-halifax>

Nationwide <http://www.nationwide.co.uk/hpi/default.htm>

Another mortgage lender’s index, this time from the UK’s largest building 
society. It shows the average UK house price using data from mortgages it has 
approved during the month. Several types of property are removed, including 
buy-to-let and right-to-buy properties, plus very small or very large homes 
(there are specified limits for each type of property). Nationwide then 
“mix-adjusts” the prices to come up with the price of a “typical house”.

The society has quarterly figures dating back to 1952 and monthly figures 
dating back to 1991, although it changed its methodology in 1993.

Current UK average house price: £204,368 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/01/house-price-inflation-slows-stamp-duty-increase>

Rightmove <http://www.rightmove.co.uk/house-prices.html>

Rightmove is a website which advertises properties being sold by 90% of UK 
estate agents, and its index shows the average asking price of those newly 
listed in England and Wales during the month, and the percentage change in that 
price over the month and over the year. Recently, Rightmove also introduced 
average prices for first-time buyers, “second steppers” and those at the “top 
of the ladder”.

The index is based on up to 200,000 listings, with a few thousand homes 
removed each month to get rid of anomalies. It only reflects new asking prices 
– not if a property that was listed in a previous month is reduced or raised in 
price. The figures are not seasonally adjusted.

Rightmove began keeping records in August 2001 and reporting on them in August 
2002.


Current England & Wales average house price: £308,151 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/16/average-asking-price-first-time-buyer-home-buy-to-let-stamp-duty>

Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors <http://www.rics.org/>

Rics, the trade body for surveyors, reports each month on how its members 
think the property market is behaving in their area. The report is based on a 
monthly survey of 450-500 UK surveyors who are asked 10 questions covering 
changes in prices, sales and interest over the previous three months, and what 
they expect to happen over the next year. They are also asked for firm figures 
on how many homes have been sold and how many are for sale.

The data is seasonally adjusted and regionally weighted using long-term 
averages based on Land Registry figures. If an area represents 10% of sales, 
responses from that area will be weighted to represent 10% of the overall Rics 
figure. Numbers are crunched to produce a net balance, so instead of telling us 
how many surveyors think prices will go up and how many think they will go 
down, the index subtracts the proportion forecasting a fall from the proportion 
forecasting a rise – so if 10% think prices will rise but 20% think they will 
fall, it says -10% think there will be a fall. This does not mean a 10% fall is 
being predicted.

The index has been running since January 1978.

Current forecast: 10% more Rics members said they expected house prices to 
fall than to rise over the next three months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/09/eu-referendum-uk-housing-market-house-buyers-decline-inquiries>

LSL Property Services/Acadametrics 
<http://www.acadametricstest.com/acadHousePrices.php>

Acadametrics, a consultancy which specialises in the assessment of risk in 
property and mortgage portfolios, compiles the index for LSL, a property 
company which owns estate agency firms and surveyors.

It covers England and Wales and shows the average price of a property bought 
and registered with the Land Registry over the past month. It shows monthly and 
annual changes and the number of sales.

Land Registry gathers all of its data for sales reported during a month, 
including sales completed in previous months, and calculates average prices. 
These prices are mix adjusted to provide an average price which isn’t skewed by 
changes in the types of properties sold month-on-month. The data includes cash 
sales as well as those financed with mortgages.

It has been published since September 2003 (originally it was the FT house 
price index), but data going back to 1995 has been added.


Current England & Wales average house price: £293,599 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/10/buy-to-let-landlords-likely-to-increase-rents-to-offset-higher-costs>



 