
Because some of my editors are British and don’t know what it’s like to fire 
guns into the wilderness and shoot a nation of pure liberty into being, they 
asked me to explain the new season ofHouse of Cards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/house-of-cards>. Does its version of 
America, like,make sense? While I’d never go broke telling them “just rewatch 
the UK version”, maybe that’s best. Because, Christ, is this show dumber than a 
bag of hammers.

Previous seasons of House of Cards were already extremely silly. Democratic 
House whip Francis Underwood wants vengeance for being passed over for 
secretary of state (uh …), rams an education bill through Congress in a trice (
OK …), kills a Pennsylvania gubernatorial candidate to induce the 
vice-president to resign and run for governor (ahaha), then is tapped for the 
vice-presidency by the president who passed him over for secstate (lmao). The 
second season isso ass-backwards 
<http://www.marketwatch.com/story/10-things-house-of-cards-gets-wrong-2014-02-20>
 that it’s not even worth summarizing here.

Season three is somehow worse. President Underwood proposes a new program 
called America Works, which will “eliminate unemployment” by creating 10m jobs 
in infrastructure, defense and public-private partnerships with only a $500bn 
budgetary outlay. In exchange, he will destroy social security, Medicare, 
Medicaid and “entitlements”. Even before you remember that Underwood is 
supposedly a Democrat, every part of this is insane.

 * One, unemployment happens! It’s a naturally occurring economic condition. 
Sometimes people change jobs, and sometimes it’s cheaper to give unemployed 
people checks than fabricate jobs where we have to pay for training, materials, 
and buildings that meet OSHA guidelines. 
 * Two, expanding defense spending is a poor make-work policy, because it 
creates a product with an end-user who doesn’t buy anything. You can buy bomb 
parts and pay someone to assemble them, but ultimately the Iraqi family who is 
provided with the bomb at high velocity doesn’t cut you a check. Make-work 
projects are better directed to stuff that can be resold in the economy or that 
lasts forever – like those over-engineered post offices practically every town 
in the south has courtesy of the WPA. 
 * Three, killing Medicaid makes sense only if Underwood can somehow magically 
heal anyone with a disability that prevents them from working, then give them a 
job. 
 * Four, killing Medicare only makes sense if all these jobs provide people 
with health insurance, which Underwood can somehow also mandate through magic. 
 * Five, God help you if you can figure out what killing social security 
accomplishes. To use the same sum he does, do senior citizens all un-retire and 
start working at Walmart as greeters who earn $37,000 per year?

Lastly, $500bn might cover only some of America’s infrastructure needs 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wpzvaqypav8> – the only part of Underwood’s 
plan verging on reality. Yet ostensibly the House of Cards universe is vaguely 
like our own, where Republicans screamed “generational theft” over the $800bn 
2009 Obama stimulus, which was about$2.1tn short of the CBO-projected 
production gap 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2009/02/13/opinion/13krugman.html?ref=paulkrugman>. 
Meanwhile, the current Republican Congress won’t fund a one-cent popcorn fart 
unless you cut a matching cent from food stamps.

Fair play to House of Cards: its Congress balks too. So Underwood raids the 
Fema budget to fund a trial run of America Works in Washington DC. He is 
somehow not immediately impeached.

Over in Real America, the Tea Party protested against Obama’s communist 
tyranny on tax day in 2009, despite the fact that they were paying taxes at 
rates the Bush administration budget had set, and despite the fact that Obama’s 
tax plan cut the next year’s rates for all but the highest earners. OK.
 Kevin Spacey and Robin Wright in the second season of House of Cards. 
Photograph: Nathaniel Bell/Netflix 
Somehow – help us, O Lord – the foreign policy is worse. Underwood and his 
wife Claire, who he has named UN ambassador via recess appointment (what?), are 
determined to put a UN peacekeeping force in the Jordan valley (why?). This 
despite the fact Israel despises the UN and that the US security council veto 
is the only thing that’s spared Israel that organization’s formal censure 
roughly 50 times.

Anyway, for their peacekeeping force, they must enlist the support of Russia’s 
President Notputin, because he will care for some reason.

But President Notputin has the hots for Claire Underwood. Notputin then 
assents, even after Claire throws him under the bus at the Moscow press 
conference announcing the accord, because she’s had an attack of consciencefor 
no damn good reason after two seasons of imperturbable ruthlessness. Notputin 
then stages an attack on his own peacekeeping troops (seriously?), baits 
Underwood into sending a Seal team into a trap (OMG), which Underwood can only 
solve by meeting himin the Jordan valley, man-to-man (are you kidding me?). So 
there are the two presidents, chillin’ in a war zone, like some modern update 
of the Field of the Cloth of Gold – only they’re in the middle of a desert and 
wearing green camouflage (I want to die).

Every other part of the show is just as nonsensical, most of it reading like 
it was cribbed from a year’s worth of Politico articles. The Democratic 
frontrunner hammering Underwood is a populist woman solicitor general 
(Elizabeth Warren, you’re now also Donald Verrilli!). It would only be slightly 
sillier if the writers had picked the surgeon general.

Then there’s stuff out of left field: Underwood’s chief of staff flies to a 
foreign country to personally beat up a hacker in order to get an address so he 
can personally plot a murder. If you think any of this makes sense, email me 
your full name, birthdate, bank login information and social security number, 
otherwise your computer is going to blow up in five minutes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F06%2Fhouse-of-cards-not-making-sense%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F6%2F1425659027210%2F7a3cceeb-ae9a-48ca-a348-7a69939ed825-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=House%20of%20Cards%3A%20not%20about%20to%20start%20making%20sense%20any%20time%20soon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F06%2Fhouse-of-cards-not-making-sense%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=House%20of%20Cards%3A%20not%20about%20to%20start%20making%20sense%20any%20time%20soon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F06%2Fhouse-of-cards-not-making-sense%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F6%2F1425659027210%2F7a3cceeb-ae9a-48ca-a348-7a69939ed825-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ian Richardson as Francis Urquhart in the original UK version of House of 
Cards. Photograph: PR 
Saying that you should just rewatch the UK House of Cards is an easy argument, 
but it’s almost impossible not to fall back on it, for two reasons.

 * The UK version ended after roughly 620 minutes. The American one is at 
roughly 1,950. If you might walk away disappointed by the ending, 10 hours is a 
lot less frustrating investment than 32 and counting. 
 * The UK’s parliamentary system makes all these machinations both more 
logical and more satirically poignant. The UK’s Francis Urquhart never has to 
switch branches of government to attain power and then contend with the 
structural opposition of a Congress to exercise it; he only has to outmaneuver 
the handful of Tory boobs in line in front of him. Frank Underwood has to 
bizarrely help a sitting president before sabotaging him, then face a system of 
checks and balances that prevents him from acting on his ambitions. The 
recalcitrance of Congress perversely makes him a sympathetic character and 
undermines the message that he’s a cruel man seeking power as an end in itself. 
This was perhaps the most cutting aspect of Francis Urquhart’s ambition: that, 
once he realized it, he didn’t really have a Plan B, despite all the latitude 
in the world to exercise it. Power was the goal; then he had to wait out the 
clock to serve longer in office than Margaret Thatcher, just for the sake of 
doing so. Even Underwood’s America Works program reads like a satirically 
toothless version of Urquhart’s gambit in series two, To Play the King, in 
which he brings back national service. In it, you see a man who publicly 
champions English tradition while working to destroy any vestiges of power in 
England’s oldest governmental tradition, the monarchy – all to stop social 
leveling and racial comity. Meanwhile, his message to poor people is that 
government should provide them nothing except discipline and a rifle. If you 
hated the Tories, you could take away an extremely reductive but acidic 
satirical reading of them: go ahead and die, or join the army.

Ultimately, the American House of Cards is gutless satire. It has always read 
like the creation of a kid in a 12th-grade government class who almost made it 
to the end of the semester and suddenly thought, “Hey, waitaminute, what if 
some of these guys are bad???” 

For all the evil of Underwood and his henchmen, surrounding characters are 
risibly sincere. The UK series didn’t even bother. It trusted that the audience 
shared its contempt and wouldn’t be titillated by one winking bad man, instead 
rounding out the cast with a parliament of whores and public school twats. The 
establishing shots all through series one, of the Houses of Parliament from 
across the Thames, foregrounded rats clambering over coils of rope at dockside. 
This was your heritage, O nation of Jack Tars: a government of vermin. The 
American version has never had a single image of such clarity.

Ian Richardson was playing Richard III in a rotting post-empire, and Kevin 
Spacey <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/kevinspacey> is another 
too-sympathetic TV misanthrope who breaks all the rules, including the fourth 
wall. Those rules don’t mean much in a world whose satirical stakes are at best 
muddled – especially when that world doesn’t functionally make a lick of damn 
sense.

 