
House prices <https://www.theguardian.com/money/houseprices> rose for the 
fourth successive quarter at the beginning of 2013, according to figures 
released by mortgage lender Halifax.

Prices in the first three months of the year were up by 1.2% on the previous 
quarter, and up by 1.1% on the same period in 2012. The lender's latest 
snapshot of the housing market showed a 0.2% increase in March, which followed 
a 0.5% rise in February.

The average price of a UK home is now £163,943, more than £35,000 below the 
peak price of £199,612 recorded by the index in August 2007, and less than 
£10,000 above the recent trough of £154,663 in April 2009.

Despite noting an ongoing increase in house sales and predicting a further 
pick-up in prices, the lender said it expected "significant constraints" on 
demand to remain in place for the rest of the year.

"Weak income growth and continuing below-trend economic growth are likely to 
remain significant constraints on housing demand during the remainder of this 
year," said Martin Ellis, Halifax housing economist. "Overall, we expect to see 
a modest increase in UK house prices during 2013."

The downbeat prediction came despite George Osborne's intervention in the 
housing market in the budget with the Help to Buy scheme, which will offer help 
to first-time buyers and underwrite mortgages for homes worth up to £600,000.

It also follows indications by lenders that they intend to increase the number 
of mortgages they make available in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/apr/03/banks-report-increase-mortgage-availability>
.

However, the number of mortgage approvals for house prices show that the 
housing market made a sluggish start to the year, with approvals falling 5% 
between January and February to the lowest level since September 2012.

Halifax's rival lender Nationwide reported no price growth in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/mar/28/london-house-prices-outstrip-peak>
, but put the average price of a UK home at a very similar figure of £164,630. 
It said prices were up by just 0.8% year-on-year, but the lenders use different 
methodology for this figure, with Halifax comparing quarterly data while 
Nationwide compares that of a single month.

Howard Archer, chief UK economist at IHS Global Insight, said Halifax's 
figures reinforced his belief that house prices might see a small gain in 2013.

"However, it remains hard to see house prices making a decisive move upward in 
2013 given the still difficult and uncertain economic environment," he said. 
"And the slip in mortgage approvals in February reported by the Bank of England 
is a reminder that periodic relapses in housing market activity and prices 
remain highly possible."
 