
Never mind your hot dog legs <http://hot-dog-legs.tumblr.com/> – show me the 
actual sausages. If there is any better use for Instagram than perving on 
friends’ holiday eating, I don’t know it. Those sun-baked fruit platters, 
dishes of oil-slicked seafood, trays of colour and texture and sometimes 
slightly unidentifiable stuff, are the best reasons to travel. Long after the 
tan has faded and the stress returned, a whiff of something familiar and 
delicious can transport you back to a table warmed by the sun, and the food 
shared around it.

So when it comes to choosing where to spend those precious two weeks of summer 
holiday, food is almost as high in my priorities as sunshine. Not in a tour of 
top-class restaurants sort of way – though I have (more organised) friends who 
plan their trips exactly like this, with their dinner bookings made almost 
before their flights – but with markets, street food and local restaurants more 
in mind. Where will we eat well – and affordably – for the length of our 
holiday?

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2015%2Fjul%2F14%2Fholiday-food-turkey-greece-italy-argentina%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F13%2F1436808341218%2F01f2e9c2-95fe-4360-a8b0-f3be4de4b3db-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20food%20makes%20a%20holiday&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2015%2Fjul%2F14%2Fholiday-food-turkey-greece-italy-argentina%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20food%20makes%20a%20holiday&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2015%2Fjul%2F14%2Fholiday-food-turkey-greece-italy-argentina%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F13%2F1436808341218%2F01f2e9c2-95fe-4360-a8b0-f3be4de4b3db-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Floating fish sandwich stalls on the Bosphorus in Istanbul. Photograph: Jon 
Hicks/Corbis 
For us that’s often Turkey: returning from town, fingers already stained the 
deep red of cherries, with bags of stickily ripe green figs to be eaten with 
sharp, creamy local yoghurt;Balık ekmekçi – grilled fresh fish and onions 
wrapped firmly in pillowy bread 
<http://istanbuleats.com/2014/11/emin-usta-fish-sandwich-superhero/> – devoured 
on the banks of the Bosphorus, under the watchful eye of hopeful seagulls; 
piles of crisp, fragrant calamari to be fought over with friends. (Bad luck if 
one of those friends is me.)

It will be Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/07/help-greece-go-on-holiday-cheap-beautiful>
 for many, for reasons other than good food (though, from delicious meze to
stifado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2005/sep/24/foodanddrink.shopping>, 
Greek cuisine can stand with the best of them). For others it’s Italy: a 
Sicilian holiday dinner ofpasta with sardines, sultanas, anchovies and pine nuts
 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/foodanddrink/recipes/8779724/Pasta-con-le-sarde-recipe.html>
 still talked about in revered tones by those who ate it; my first bite of 
pizza in Naples still memorable more than a decade later; and oh god, the 
gelato. And of course, there’s France, an ordinary salad of tomatoes, shallots 
and garlic with a chucked-together vinaigrette made almost legendary one family 
holiday by a combination of ripe fruit and hazy evening sunshine.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2015%2Fjul%2F14%2Fholiday-food-turkey-greece-italy-argentina%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F13%2F1436808427296%2F8fafc464-aec4-47dd-9052-5b7a5e6102a1-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20food%20makes%20a%20holiday&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2015%2Fjul%2F14%2Fholiday-food-turkey-greece-italy-argentina%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20food%20makes%20a%20holiday&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2015%2Fjul%2F14%2Fholiday-food-turkey-greece-italy-argentina%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F13%2F1436808427296%2F8fafc464-aec4-47dd-9052-5b7a5e6102a1-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Menu outside La Maroma steak house in Buenos Aires. Photograph: Alamy 
One friend travelled to China to basically celebrate his own street-food 
festival – he says he’s still yearning for the rice noodle skewers that come 
doused in chilli or cumin salt, and fried using an old hand iron and a tin 
sheet. Others visited Argentina for the ultimate steak and red wine (the 
amazing pasta and ice cream an unexpected bonus), and Sri Lanka for its richly 
spiced curries and incredible daal.

Sometimes the food adventure is in the actual travelling. A journey on the 
trans-Siberian railway where it became quickly clear that every item on themenu 
was mutton, regardless of its description as something else entirely. A train 
ride to Syria where there was a sign for a buffet car but no actual carriage 
beyond it, resulting in hasty picnics of bread, hard-boiled eggs and ripe 
peaches assembled from station kiosks. A flight to India, where the usual sad 
airline food was replaced with an awe-inspiring curry, with impressive sides, 
popadoms, and pickles.

And sometimes the food adventure is not in restaurants at all, but in home 
kitchens. I often end up on self-catered jaunts because if you love to cook, a 
table full of great produce and lots of time in which to prepare it can be a 
proper luxury, for a couple of nights at least. There’s something particularly 
lovely about doing this in Britain: ditching the supermarket and snuffling out 
local foods.
 Taverna tables at Karavomilos lake, Kefalonia, Greece. Photograph: Alamy 
But better still, of course, is sitting at the home table of a local. A friend 
who has a Lebanese husband raves about traditional mezze and Beirut streetfood, 
but saves her highest praise for home-cooked Lebanese dishes such as bemyeh 
(rice vermicelli, okra and meat stew) and laban ummo (yoghurt soup with lamb 
chunks). I’ve always thought it’s how Airbnb should work, but I’ve yet to be 
offered a meal by anyone.

Holiday food: how to find the best restaurants abroad
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2013/aug/05/holiday-food-best-restaurants-abroad>
Can you really recreate that holiday taste when you get home? After a 
year-long stay in Sydney I yearn for properly ripe avocadossmashed on to toast 
with lime, olive oil and coriander <http://reubenhills.com.au/docs/menu2014.pdf>
, to no avail. But I turn often toSabrina Ghayour 
<http://www.sabrinaghayour.com/#welcome>’s excellent cookbook, Persiana, for a 
mouthful of Turkey and Syria without the airfares. The joy of perfect tomato 
bulgar wheat, and chicken fragrant and tart with preserved lemons.

A friend’s chilli is worth traveling for in its own right – we will joyfully 
skip across town (or even country) to devour it – but it’s also the result of 
24 years trying to replicate a revelatory Mexican food experience on a 
childhood trip to California. (He won’t ever outdo that first real chilli 
moment, he says, but he’s getting closer. The trick? Lots of time, bourbon and 
beer.)

Talking of which, even those who love the country cannot recommend traveling 
to Germany for the food – “I can honestly say I have never been anywhere in 
Germany for the cuisine, nor been tempted to cook a massive pork knuckle or 
make potato soup when I got back,” says a translator friend who visits often 
and has great affection for the place. But the beer? That’s an entirely 
different matter.
 