
On New Year’s Day in 2002, Italians gathered in Rome to throw their lire into 
the Trevi fountain. There were celebrations as Italians took possession of the 
new euro notes and coins that became legal tender as the clocks struck midnight.

But hopes that the advent of the single currency would provide a fresh start 
for Italy’s economy were misplaced. The growth performance of the eurozone as a 
whole has been poor, but Italy’s has been dismal. Greece and Spain at least had 
booms before their painful busts; Germany and France have managed to claw back 
the ground lost in the deep recession of 2008-09.

But national output per head in Italy is only 4% higher than it was 15 years 
ago. The economy is still smaller than it was in 2008.Unemployment is at 11.6% 
<http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/File:Unemployment_rates,_seasonally_adjusted,_October_2016.png>
, labour market participation is low, andits birthrate  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/13/italy-is-a-dying-country-says-minister-as-birth-rate-plummets>
in 2014 was the lowest since the modern Italian state was founded in 1861. If 
there was a contest for the unwanted title of the sick man of Europe in the 
21st century, Italy would walk it.

Euro falls to 20-month low after Italy government's referendum defeat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/05/euro-falls-to-20-month-low-after-italy-referendum-defeat>
The eurozone’s third biggest economy has one central problem: the goods and 
services it produces are more expensive than those of its rivals. This lack of 
competitiveness means that it has suffered the biggest drop in export market 
share of any developed country.

There are three reasons for this. Firstly, Italy’s manufacturing sector has 
traditionally been dominated by small companies, many of them family-owned. 
These businesses have been reluctant to invest, poor at innovation, and were 
slow to take advantage of the the new information technology when it came on 
stream in the 1990s. Productivity has increased less rapidly than in Germany or 
France.

Secondly, Italy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> has tended to 
specialise in low-cost manufactured goods, a segment of the global economy that 
has been dominated by China since it gained membership of the World Trade 
Organisation in 2001.

Italy’s competitiveness problem is not new. Since the second world war, it has 
tended to have higher costs and higher inflation than rival countries. But up 
until it joined the euro, Italy was able to restore competitiveness by 
devaluing the lire, which made exports cheaper. With that option no longer 
available, Matteo Renzi has been trying a different approach: structural 
reforms of Italy’s labour market.

These, though, have proved unpopular, and explain why Renzi’s constitutional 
changes were heavily defeated in the referendum.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fitalys-far-right-northern-league-referendum-sends-warning-to-eu-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Italy's%20far-right%20Northern%20League%3A%20referendum%20sends%20warning%20to%20EU%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fitalys-far-right-northern-league-referendum-sends-warning-to-eu-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Italy%27s%20far-right%20Northern%20League%3A%20referendum%20sends%20warning%20to%20EU%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fitalys-far-right-northern-league-referendum-sends-warning-to-eu-video&media=>
Italy’s far-right Northern League: referendum sends warning to EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/05/italys-far-right-northern-league-referendum-sends-warning-to-eu-video> 