
Loneliness is everywhere in the world of psychology these days – the subject 
of so manystudies 
<http://nymag.com/scienceofus/2016/09/you-can-inherit-loneliness-suggests-a-new-nature-study.html>
,articles 
<http://www.latimes.com/science/sciencenow/la-sci-sn-loneliness-heart-risk-smoking-20160419-story.html>
 andtalks <https://www.ted.com/talks/guy_winch_the_case_for_emotional_hygiene> 
that you sometimes wish the loneliness researchers would go away, so you could 
just get some damn time to yourself. Perhaps you knew that loneliness can be 
lethal: it’s linked to heart disease, insomnia and depression, and isa better 
predictor than obesity of an early death 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/06/health/lonliness-aging-health-effects.html?_r=0>
.

But the new spin on loneliness is that we ought to welcome it, in modest 
doses. “As long as we then do what we should do – reconnect with people – then 
loneliness is a good thing,”the German psychologist Maike Luhmann told the US 
website Vox <http://www.vox.com/2016/6/7/11844724/loneliness-explained>. “This 
is a sign from our psychological systems that there’s something off.” It’s a
“biological warning system” 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/national/health-science/loneliness-can-be-depressing-but-it-may-have-helped-humans-survive/2016/09/02/c01a15f4-38a0-11e6-8f7c-d4c723a2becb_story.html>
 that evolved over millennia, alerting us to potentially dangerous levels of 
isolation. True, isolation isn’t so dangerous today: a friendless Londoner is 
less likely to starve, or be eaten, than a friendless prehistoric 
hunter-gatherer. But there’s a reasonthe pang of loneliness hurts so much 
<http://www.oliverburkeman.com/books>.

This notion gets greeted with surprise – loneliness, a good thing? – but the 
surprising thing is that we ever imagined otherwise. Why would we have 
developed this response to isolation if it didn’t serve some purpose? (As the 
psychology writer Melissa Dahl points out 
<http://nymag.com/scienceofus/2016/10/what-to-do-when-you-feel-lonely.html>, 
the same can be said for boredom, a warning that you need more meaning in your 
life, and for anxiety, which helps prepare for potential threats.) This becomes 
obvious if you consider physical pain. A throbbing ache in your abdomen isn’t 
pleasant, but it’s a “good thing” if it prompts you to head to the doctor’s and 
address whatever’s causing it. In programming parlance, pain isn’t a bug; it’s 
a feature.

Want to boost confidence? Channel Wonder Woman | Oliver Burkeman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/21/do-power-poses-work-oliver-burkeman-public-talk-confident>
If we tend to resist thinking about emotions in this way – as warning bells – 
that’s probably because it sounds like dispensing blame. Telling lonely people 
they ought to get out more seems to imply it’s their fault they’re lonely. 
Likewise, some forms of depression are a rational response to a bad situation 
you need to address: maybe it’s time to leave a relationship, or confront an 
inner conflict. But we’d rather not hear that; blaming a “chemical imbalance” 
<https://digest.bps.org.uk/2016/07/29/10-of-the-most-widely-believed-myths-in-psychology/>
 seems less daunting. We treat depression as the problem, when it’s often 
better thought of as a symptom.

The nasty twist in this is that loneliness, like depression, can turn chronic. 
A vicious circle begins. You come to see your surroundings as hostile – they’re 
making you feel bad, after all – so you respond to others in unfriendly ways, 
or avoid contact altogether. (That’s your early warning system on the blink: in 
Paleolithic times, it might have helped a highly isolated person to be 
hyper-alert to threats, but not any more.) This kind of loneliness demands a 
skilful response: you need to heed the warning bell, whilenot heeding the 
thoughts to which it gives rise, telling you to pull away. Reach out, even if 
it feels unappealing. Once again, the analogy with physical pain is helpful. 
Surgery’s rarely appealing, either, but sometimes it’s exactly what you need.

oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com>
 