
Where does the drive to succeed come from? And if it results in exceptional 
achievement (as defined by external norms such as power, status and wealth) 
does that have to go hand in hand with being a troubled, agonised person?

The latest evidence suggests that genes play little part – see box below – and 
that nurture is critical, whether it be carrot or stick. In my case, for 
instance, purely because I was the only boy with three sisters, I was treated 
completely differently by my father. Despite my repeated failure at school, he 
constantly encouraged me to see myself as clever and I eventually did OK. He 
gave no such encouragement to my sisters in their academic careers 
(fortunately, my mum did).

I would go so far as to say that, had I been swapped at conception with one of 
my sisters, she would be writing these words. Each person’s unique history, 
starting before birth, sets them on particular paths, explaining why siblings 
differ. Think of yourself as a character in a movie and ask, what’s my 
backstory?

At the simplest level, performance is nurtured through teaching – for good or 
ill. I can teach my son his times tables but, equally, if I am a pickpocket by 
profession, show him how to do that.

Then there is modelling. My driving is shamefully disobedient of traffic 
regulations (learned from my father’s example) – perhaps my children will model 
that or perhaps they will copy my wife’s conscientiously lawful approach. That 
depends on our family dynamics – perhaps my son will follow me; my daughter her 
mother.

Which brings us to identification, in which the child makes the parent’s 
behaviour or injunctions part of themselves. They do that out of the mixture of 
love and maltreatment that all of us experience.

The love bit is obvious enough. My son asked me to explain about office 
politics when I was writing a book on it. Because we love each other, he ran 
with the ideas, trying out ingratiation on a teacher at school by complimenting 
him on his tie, with pleasing results: as someone he loves, he identified with 
my interest and put it to his own use.

But, while there are exceptions, it’s maltreatment that seems to fuel 
exceptional achievement more than anything. It’s not that genetic little bit 
more that enables it – it’s trauma and adversity.

For instance, one in three exceptional achievers in all fields that have been 
studied lost a parent before the age of 15 (compared with 18% before modern 
medicine). That applies equally to prime ministers, American presidents, 
British entrepreneurs and exceptional writers. These people are driven by the 
pain of loss and a terrifying loss of control to wrest their destiny from fate.

The specifics of the childhood adversity often shape which interest is 
pursued. In the case of Gina Ford, for example, she slept in her mother’s bed 
until the age of 11. That played a big role in her becoming the author of books 
thattry to persuade mothers to get their babies sleeping on their own from the 
start 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2003/jan/29/familyandrelationships.healthandwellbeing>
.

Whereas Ford prescribes strict routines, Penelope Leach’s childhood made her a 
passionate advocate of demand-led, infant-centred care. Leach’s father 
favouritised her older sister and was authoritarian. Her parents divorced when 
she was 12 andLeach’s books take her adored mother’s side, and lots of hugging 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/feb/26/politicsphilosophyandsociety.healthandwellbeing>
.

Of course, exceptional success does require exceptionally hard work. The 
classic illustration is the fact that all professional orchestral soloists who 
have been studied have done at least 10,000 hours of practice. No orchestral 
players have done so (they average 8,000 hours).

But why do some put in that extra 2,000 hours, and why do some become 
emotionally healthy exceptional achievers? The very different stories ofTiger 
Woods <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tigerwoods> and the three Polgár 
sisters, the grandmaster chess prodigies, illustrate this well.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fhow-to-raise-a-brilliant-child-without-screwing-them-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9884dc78608df822bd99c8f12638f646bf25c5c%2F0_179_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20raise%20a%20brilliant%20child%20without%20screwing%20them%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fhow-to-raise-a-brilliant-child-without-screwing-them-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20raise%20a%20brilliant%20child%20without%20screwing%20them%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fhow-to-raise-a-brilliant-child-without-screwing-them-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9884dc78608df822bd99c8f12638f646bf25c5c%2F0_179_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Tiger Woods, aged 15, with his father Earl celebrate his victory at the 1991 
USGA Junior Amateur Championships in 1991. Photograph: Rick Dole/Getty Images 
Woods’ father, Earl, had a thwarted ambition to be a baseball star. A second 
marriage to Kultida, a tough and intelligent member of Thailand’s ruling elite, 
led to their only son. Earl said that he had a sense from the birth onwards 
that this baby would become “the greatest man to walk the earth”. That surely 
said more about him and his unfulfilled ambitions than it did about the baby.

From nine months, Tiger was hitting golf balls and his first appearance on 
television occurred when he was two and a half,already exhibiting an 
astonishing golf swing <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MxPmzIKBris>. His 
parents were implacable, ruthless and imaginative hothousers. Along the way, 
both boy and man were hijacked as a vehicle for their aspirations.

His compulsive and increasingly risk-taking addiction to casual sex seems to 
have been an attempt to reclaim something for himself. There is a large body of 
evidence showing that exercising self-control, doing “good” things (such as 
practising golf all day from infancy) leads to “ego-depletion”. That produces a 
much greater likelihood of doing “bad” things as compensation. Put crudely, if 
you do that dreaded paperwork or housework for an hour, you may feel more like 
scoffing a chocolate bar or having a drink afterwards.

Interestingly, the exception to the ego-depletion rule is where the person is 
doing the self-controlled act because they feel they have chosen it – 
self-determined, rather than feeling it is imposed. Which brings me to the 
Polgár sisters.

In the 1960s, László Polgár was a Hungarian educational psychologist who had 
written several scientific papers on the effectiveness of practice in creating 
excellence. Explaining his passionate convictions to his future wife, Klara, 
she fell for him as well as his arguments. They chose chess for their 
experiment because it has an objective metric by which achievement can be 
measured. Neither were exceptional chess players.

As luck would have it, Klara gave birth to three daughters. There had been no 
female grandmasters and it was widely assumed that women were genetically 
incapable of the cognitive skills entailed in exceptional chess, and were 
consequently excluded from top tournaments.

Starting with his eldest daughter, Susan, Polgár was careful to treat it as a 
playful activity, turning it into a fantasy of dramatic wins and losses. 
Whereas Earl and Kultida Woods had coerced perfection from Tiger, the Polgárs 
encouraged enjoyment,

By the time Susan had turned five, she was excited by playing and spent 
hundreds of hours practising. She was entered into a local competition and 
treated it as fun, winning 10-0, causing a sensation.

Meanwhile, her younger sisters were intrigued and László allowed them to feel 
the pieces, seeing them as toys, with no formal tuition until they were five. 
Interviewed recently, all three girls described playing the game as something 
that they loved doing – it never felt like a chore. Instead of messing about 
playing Monopoly, netball or going to the local swimming pool, chess was just 
what the Polgár family enjoyed.

Sure enough, in 1991 the eldest daughter became the first female grandmaster. 
The second daughter had 10 straight wins against male grandmasters, a 
performance rated the fifth best in the history of chess. Her younger sister 
became a grandmaster at the age of 15, the youngest ever, of either gender.

Polgár understood that coercion was less valuable than small children’s need 
to enjoy fantasy play. Consequently, his daughters all seem to have grown into 
satiable, well-balanced people rather than success addicts.

A strong clue to the dynamics of the Polgár family comes from a fascinating 
footnote to the story. When the eldest daughter had been crowned as the first 
female grandmaster, a Dutch billionaire offered to pay for the Polgárs to adopt 
three boys from a developing nation to show that the experiment could be 
replicated. They turned him down, Klara feeling they had made their point.

For parents, the implications are clear. Most of us say we just want our 
offspring to be happy, but most also want them to do well at school and beyond.

Hothousing is not the way – it creates needy, hungry and lonely adults. 
Emotional distress is common in exceptional achievers. British senior managers 
are actuallymore prone to narcissism (me-me-me grandiosity) than patients in 
mental hospitals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/apr/18/medicineandhealth>. American ones 
are four times more likely to be psychopathic than the general population. It’s 
the same in the arts.Top rock stars really are more suicidal than normal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/dec/24/health-health-and-wellbeing>
. The more they were maltreated as children, the more likely they were to die 
prematurely. Comics and actors suffer more, withcomics especially likely to be 
depressive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/16/psychosis-comedy-genes-comedians-mental-health>
.

If you really care a lot about having an exceptional child, just ensure that 
your children love you and you them, along with the inevitable maltreatment 
that comes with the parenting territory.

By all means have aspirations for them (a child whose parents have none is 
emotionally neglected), but if they are going to be an emotionally healthy 
exceptional achiever, it must authentically come from them.

While no exceptional achiever, I do speak whereof I know. My parents were both 
psychoanalysts, obsessed with the nature-nurture debate. There is no gene that 
has caused me to be writing about this subject. It came out of the subtle mix 
of maltreatment and love that led to my identification with them. If you stop 
to think about it, it’s probably the same for you and your ambitions …

• Oliver James is a chartered psychologist and psychotherapist at the Bowlby 
Centre. Not In Your Genes by Oliver James is published by Ebury Press, priced 
£18.99. To order a copy for £14.99, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/family-politics.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846.

@oliverj_psych <https://twitter.com/oliverj_psych>

Your genes don’t dictate your achievement

It’s the best kept secret of modern science: 16 years of the Human Genome 
Project <http://www.genome.gov/10001772> suggest that genes play little or no 
role in explaining differences in intelligence. While genes have been found for 
physical traits, such as height or eye colour, they are not the reason you are 
smarter (or not) than your siblings. Nor are they why you are like your 
high-achieving or dullard parents, or their forebears.

Very likely, you will simply not believe this and are sure from your own 
experience that it’s “a bit of both” nature and nurture.But those genes that 
have been found only explain 1%-5% of any psychological traits 
<http://thebowlbycentre.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/Not-in-Your-Genes%E2%80%94Time-to-Accept-the-Null-Hypothesis-of-the-Human-Genome-Project.pdf>
.

This is not just my opinion, it’s something scientists call “missing 
heritability”.Robert Plomin, one of the world’s leading geneticists, told the 
Guardian last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/feb/18/psychologist-robert-plomin-says-genes-crucial-education>
: “I have been looking for these genes for 15 years and I don’t have any.”

Having searched under the molecular genetic carpet and behind the sofa, it’s a 
well-concealed truth that genes that confer significant heritabilty are neither 
there nor likely to be found.

Of course, babies are born different and biological transmission of traits 
does occur – it’s just not genetic. For instance, there is abundant evidence 
that dyslexia or autism may be due to what happens during pregnancy, 
prematurity or difficulties during the birth itself. About a third of babies 
are born “difficult” for these reasons, but it has been proven many times over 
that the right kind of nurture can correct it.

That it’s not genes is extremely good news. It means that most babies have the 
potential to succeed in conventional terms in exams and careers. There is no 
inherent reason why children from low-income families cannot succeed as much as 
those from affluent homes.

Studies show that purely through believing that its abilities are not fixed, a 
child can increase its performance in key subjects such as maths. If parents or 
teachers do not start from the assumption that abilities are fixed, children 
perform better. But even more important than mere beliefs is actual nurture.

Oliver James

Carrot, not the stick: Dos and don’ts


Do …

• Encourage your child to enjoy the la-la land of fantasy play as much as they 
like, at least until age seven.

• Show unconditional love when they are under five.

• From birth, assume their abilities are limitless.

• Put enjoyment of activities ahead of competitive success.

• Be relaxed about whether they are exceptional, while celebrating it if it 
happens.

• They will be exceptional because you have high standards but they need to 
identify with those standards by choice.

Don’t …

• Coerce them into activities when small – do the opposite of what is 
recommended by hothousing or tiger mothering books.

• Beware of the “little devil” attribution to children as babies and toddlers 
– do not assume bad intentions before they are capable of them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fhow-to-raise-a-brilliant-child-without-screwing-them-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdfbe6056f6cc0e6c396c6bdfb142bf70ad7a94f%2F0_0_1680_1307%2F1680.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20raise%20a%20brilliant%20child%20without%20screwing%20them%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fhow-to-raise-a-brilliant-child-without-screwing-them-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20raise%20a%20brilliant%20child%20without%20screwing%20them%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fhow-to-raise-a-brilliant-child-without-screwing-them-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdfbe6056f6cc0e6c396c6bdfb142bf70ad7a94f%2F0_0_1680_1307%2F1680.jpg>
 Tiger Woods, aged two, demonstrates his golf swing on US television. 
Photograph: CBS via Getty Images 
• No strict regimes – punishment and making a child feel like a bad person 
crushes the imagination and self-motivation that underly emotionally healthy 
achievement.

• No imposition of your own perfectionism. The answer to “I got 98% in maths” 
is not “What happened to the other 2%?”

• No colonisation of your child with your own unfulfilled aspirations: let 
them choose the field in which they excel (if you have a good relationship with 
them, it will almost certainly be one that arises out of your own interests).

Oliver James
 