
Andrew Fleming, director

I grew up in Los Angeles and always found it such a peculiar place. You have 
this glossy city, the LA most people think of, but there’s this whole other 
side to it: eerie, mysterious, almost gothic. That’s what I wanted The Craft to 
be like.

I hadn’t wanted to direct the film. At first, I was just brought in to work on 
the script. I’d recently finished a horror movie called Bad Dreams and I didn’t 
want to make the same thing again. But then I realised The Craft was 
essentially a character piece: the story of four teenage girls not fitting in 
at school as much as one about spells and witchcraft. I didn’t want the witches 
to have pointed hats or fly around on broomsticks. I wanted themto look like 
they were in the Cure <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0115963/?ref_=nm_flmg_dr_21>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Doa-fbQ7SbyM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Doa-fbQ7SbyM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Doa-fbQ7SbyM&media=>
 Witching hour … the trailer for The Craft 
That said, I did want it to feel authentic, and I hired somebody who could 
advise us onWicca <http://wicca.com/celtic/wicca/wicca.htm>, a form of 
witchcraft. Her name was Pat. She was great – she became our spell consultant. 
Some of the incantations in the film are traditional, but some we wrote 
ourselves. Pat would rework them, make them realistic, but not too realistic – 
the spirit the girls invoke is called Manon, who’s invented. We thought it 
would be more respectful tomake a god up 
<http://thecraft.wikia.com/wiki/Spells_and_Rituals>.

Our witchcraft adviser wrote a spell to make the film No 1 at the box office

It was exhausting – a lot of location work, a lot of nights. One time we 
started to film outside because the forecast was good, only to be caught in a 
massive deluge. And once a flock of crows just flew in out of nowhere. Another 
incident has becomepart of folklore 
<http://thoughtcatalog.com/christine-stockton/2013/07/25-little-known-facts-about-the-craft/>
: we were shooting on a beach, the girls were doing an incantation, and we’d 
carefully worked out tide times. Then, as we were filming, the sea suddenly 
rushed in and washed away the whole set. No one could understand it. But when 
you’re shooting horror movies, weird stuff happens.

It wasn’t all bad, though. One day, Pat came up to me and said she’d written a 
spell to make us No 1 at the box office. It worked.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fhow-we-made-the-craft-horror-movie-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa09e9a11b3add3831143b392dbc37d69fbe5d3b3%2F0_174_3136_1881%2F3136.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20we%20made%20The%20Craft&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fhow-we-made-the-craft-horror-movie-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20we%20made%20The%20Craft&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fhow-we-made-the-craft-horror-movie-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa09e9a11b3add3831143b392dbc37d69fbe5d3b3%2F0_174_3136_1881%2F3136.jpg>
 ‘Terrifying gifts’ … The Craft. Photograph: Moviestore/Rex Shutterstock 
Robin Tunney, actor

I had rats dumped on my head and I had scenes with hundreds of snakes 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/leonoraepstein/10-weird-things-you-probably-dont-know-about-the-craft#.uk0LLGYXN>
. I asked Andrew if we were actually going to do it with real snakes. He said: 
“Didn’t you read the script?” I thought they would be fake. And the hours were 
punishing – we’d shoot all day Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, then through the 
night on Thursday and Friday, often until 6am. I felt jetlagged the whole time.

Maybe that explains some of the strange stuff. But my memory is that Fairuza 
Balk <http://www.fairuza.com/>, who plays Nancy, was actually into witchcraft. 
She seemed to know a lot about it, and there’s an authenticity to her 
performance. Maybe, in the moment, I believed it all, too.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fhow-we-made-the-craft-horror-movie-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a9745ed8fce5eec038b4b2b19ac6da807bd2f0b%2F0_35_3312_2282%2F3312.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20we%20made%20The%20Craft&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fhow-we-made-the-craft-horror-movie-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20we%20made%20The%20Craft&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fhow-we-made-the-craft-horror-movie-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a9745ed8fce5eec038b4b2b19ac6da807bd2f0b%2F0_35_3312_2282%2F3312.jpg>
 Fairuza Balk, left, and Robin Tunney Photograph: Moviestore/Rex Shutterstock 
The movie’s a metaphor: most people don’t enjoy high school, or they feel 
alienated by it. You’re living in your parents’ house, you don’t have any 
independence. But these characters escape all that with their amazing and 
terrifying gifts. They can cast spells that make people fall in love with them. 
They have power over their friends – and enemies. They’re able to take revenge. 
I think that’s why so many people gravitated towards it.

These days, there’s this kind of factory in Hollywood, churning out young 
girls who look totally identical. You get the odd independent film with a young 
protagonist who looks awkward, but that becomes the point – that she’s fat or 
can’t get a boyfriend. In its way, it was radical: it was a mainstream movie, 
but one of our leads was African American and no one was taller than 5ft 3in. 
We were nobody’s ideal of physical perfection.
 