
While filming in South Africa in 2013, Reggie Yates experienced the two 
scariest moments of his TV career to date. “The director, sound man and I got 
caught up in a fight between two gangs,” he explains. “One of the guys pulled 
out a gun and I thought: ‘All bets are off.’ We got out of there, but we met up 
with one of the gangs again later on in this little hut and they all had their 
machetes out. I thought: ‘This could go wrong at any minute,’ but it didn’t. I 
think a lot of that came down to the respect we showed them; I don’t wear a 
bulletproof [vest] in these places, because [that would be] saying that I don’t 
trust someone or I think I’m better.” He laughs before adding: “It could’ve 
been worse!”

Reggie Yates: Race Riots USA review – an impartial observer's indignance leaks 
through
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/sep/30/reggie-yates-race-riots-usa-review>
Spend any time with Yates and it’s clear he’s very much a “could’ve been 
worse” sort of guy. He’s relaxed, likable and – unsurprisingly for someone who 
has presented innumerable hours of live TV – an effortless talker. From modest 
beginnings growing up with his Ghana-born mother and two siblings on a north 
London council estate, the 33-year-old has packed more guises into his three 
decades than many TV personalities manage in double the time.

Starting out as a child actor in 90s barbershop sitcom Desmond’s, he went on 
to work as a kids’ TV presenter alongside pal Fearne Cotton on shows including 
CBBC’s Smile. Then came a move into radio DJing on 1Xtra, before a gig as the 
anchor of Radio 1’s Official Chart Show. Somehow he’s also found time to voice 
cartoon rodentRastamouse <http://rastamouse.com/wp/> and appear in Doctor Who, 
as well as writing and directing his own short films (his latest, Shelter, 
stars W1A’s Jessica Hynes). It even transpires during our conversation that 
he’s a “massive interiors nerd”, who teases that he might one day open a 
furniture store.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Freggie-yates-in-a-texan-jail-bbc3-documentary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf621ebd3f77e6c4ceaba05cc37ef97310fc94f4%2F0_140_2100_1260%2F2100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Reggie%20Yates%20went%20from%20kids%E2%80%99%20TV%20to%20confronting%20neo-Nazis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Freggie-yates-in-a-texan-jail-bbc3-documentary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Reggie%20Yates%20went%20from%20kids%E2%80%99%20TV%20to%20confronting%20neo-Nazis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Freggie-yates-in-a-texan-jail-bbc3-documentary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf621ebd3f77e6c4ceaba05cc37ef97310fc94f4%2F0_140_2100_1260%2F2100.jpg>
 Taking prisoners... Yates samples the life of an inmate. 
Currently, Yates is best known, not for his lamp-flogging abilities, but as 
one of the nation’s leading young documentary makers. In recent years, he has 
fronted a range of “extreme” youth-oriented programmes for BBC3, investigating 
difficult issues affecting young people in different parts of the world. These 
have ranged from knife crime in Cape Town and far-right Russian politics to the 
fragile state of British masculinity, and he also explored tensions in Ferguson 
in a one-off film, Race Riots USA. Impressively, he scooped the best presenter 
gong at the RoyalTelevision <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television> 
Society Awards in March for the Russia programmes. His latest series, The 
Insider, which kicks off this week, sees Yates get even closer to his subjects 
as he embeds himself in hostile environments for a week at a time. In the first 
episode, he heads to a Texan jail where the inmates are struggling with their 
mental health, while the second instalment sees him alongside the Mexican army 
as they fight drug cartels.

Although you wouldn’t guess it now, Yates was initially hesitant about a foray 
into factual programming. “In my early to mid-20s, my life wasn’t about 
educating my audience in any way,” he says. “Then the controller of BBC3 at the 
time, Danny Cohen, said I should be doing docs, and asked me to front one on 
autism [2010’s Autistic Superstars]. I was adamant that I wasn’t right to do 
it, but all the reasons I gave Danny as to why I wasn’t a good fit were his 
reasons why I was. I said: ‘There are no young black guys presenting these 
shows, and I come from more of a music background; why is anyone going to 
listen to me?’ And he said: ‘It’s because there’s no one like you doing this 
that you have a point of difference.’”

Suddenly it clicked. “I thought: ‘Oh, yeah! Maybe that could be the thing that 
makes these films interesting.’ So I did it, and loved it. I was on camera in a 
way I’d never been before, and I was learning with the audience. When you’re in 
these environments as a non-journalist, you’re not turning up with a plan of 
attack. You’re just meeting people and finding out how their experiences speak 
to an issue.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtNxWeGECyz0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtNxWeGECyz0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtNxWeGECyz0&media=>
Indeed, one of the reasons why Yates’s style is so engrossing is the calm, 
understanding way he responds to experiences and opinions that differ wildly 
from his own. There’s a particularly impressive example of this in the Russia 
series, when a group of neo-Nazis hurl racist abuse at him during a march. 
Rather than angrily confront the perpetrators, he tries to engage with them, 
keen to understand the motivations behind their hate. “Why have you come here 
today?” he asks a group of younger protesters, who proceed to tell him that 
they’re supporting the Ku Klux Klan and that he should “burn on the cross”.

Although he’s visibly appalled, Yates then walks away calmly and continues 
observing the hordes. Similarly, when he meets notorious “meninist” Roosh V 
during his Extreme UK series, he offers him the opportunity to explain his 
questionable views on women without shaming him, even going on a tour of his 
apartment. Yates almost humours him as he subtly challenges his books and 
articles, allowing the pick-up artist to paint himself into a corner all by 
himself. “Haven’t you done that?” asks V, when Yates reminds him about a 
passage where he admits to having sex with a woman who was half-asleep. “No!” 
says Yates, eyes popping out of his head, yet he allows the bizarre tirade to 
continue. In an age of no-platforming, he keeps the dialogue going in spite of 
his own emotions – namely disbelief and discomfort.

These shows are just one part of a wider trend for factual programming aimed 
at switched-on young audiences disillusioned with much of the world around 
them. Once limited to your Panoramas or Dispatches, in recent years a youth 
subgenre of documentary has emerged, fronted by personalities such as Yates, or 
even celebrities like Charli XCX. BBC3 is at the forefront of the change, 
having made increasingly probing shows in recent times, including entire 
seasons on race and disability that aired last year. Social media makes it easy 
to gauge the popularity of this output, as when the hashtag #suicideandme 
trended nationally during Professor Green’s 2015 BBC3 film of the same name.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Freggie-yates-in-a-texan-jail-bbc3-documentary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe848a73f71c0c9a2ef7ba3e235bf0ecc0f8b8acf%2F0_244_3265_1959%2F3265.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Reggie%20Yates%20went%20from%20kids%E2%80%99%20TV%20to%20confronting%20neo-Nazis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Freggie-yates-in-a-texan-jail-bbc3-documentary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Reggie%20Yates%20went%20from%20kids%E2%80%99%20TV%20to%20confronting%20neo-Nazis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Freggie-yates-in-a-texan-jail-bbc3-documentary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe848a73f71c0c9a2ef7ba3e235bf0ecc0f8b8acf%2F0_244_3265_1959%2F3265.jpg>
 Yates goes on patrol with the Mexican army in The Insider. 
And despite its move to a streamlined online operation, recent commissions 
such as a second series of the Bafta-winning Life And Death Row and Black 
Power: America’s Armed Resistance – which landed a repeat airing on BBC1 – have 
been more incisive and politically charged than ever. It’s worth noting too the 
output of Vice, which regularly produces documentaries on contemporary culture, 
on everything from Spitman – a Londoner who solicits teens for unusual sexual 
favours – to Jeremy Corbyn. It’s an area that Yates reckons will continue to 
attract new blood. “I think that more presenters will look towards docs now, 
because of young people’s appetite for factual programmes,” he says.

Reggie Yates: spinning lots of plates - and discs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/may/02/rastamouse-television> 
How would he have responded to seeing someone of his ethnicity and background 
making the sorts of films that he’s involved in now when he was towards the 
lower end of BBC3’s target 16-34 age bracket? “I would’ve bloody loved it!” he 
exclaims. Growing up, the majority of his on-screen idols were black US 
entertainers like Will Smith. There were a few factual faces who caught his 
attention as a teen, though. “I was blown away by Louis Theroux,” he says. 
“With Weird Weekends he was doing these fun, loose programmes that were 
completely different to anything I’d seen before. He was really relatable.” 
Michael Moore was another early influence. “Bowling For Columbine was the first 
documentary I’d ever seen in the cinema. It was heartbreaking.”

Theroux’s influence is clear in this new series, as Yates spends 24 hours a 
day fully immersed in his new surroundings. In the first episode, he’s quick to 
integrate with his fellow inmates at Bexar County Detention Center in San 
Antonio, adapting to their way of life and acting as a confidant, night and 
day. The resulting exchanges with people such as Alex, a teenager with bipolar 
disorder who is hiding his suicidal thoughts from the jail staff, are rawer 
than any of Yates’s previous material. His producers offered him what he 
describes as “the TV presenter option”, “which means: ‘If at any point you feel 
uncomfortable, we’ll get you the fuck out of there and you can stay in a 
hotel,’” he explains. “But after seeing how much these men opened up to me, I 
thought it would be disrespectful to go and have a sauna and come back the next 
morning. That’s not a fair trade.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Freggie-yates-in-a-texan-jail-bbc3-documentary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c4cdb3f98fa993d8203763e55a46c225ab42a98%2F0_585_2646_1588%2F2646.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Reggie%20Yates%20went%20from%20kids%E2%80%99%20TV%20to%20confronting%20neo-Nazis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Freggie-yates-in-a-texan-jail-bbc3-documentary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Reggie%20Yates%20went%20from%20kids%E2%80%99%20TV%20to%20confronting%20neo-Nazis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Freggie-yates-in-a-texan-jail-bbc3-documentary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c4cdb3f98fa993d8203763e55a46c225ab42a98%2F0_585_2646_1588%2F2646.jpg>
 Yates in his radio days. 
The theme of crime and punishment held a particular resonance for Yates. As a 
youngster, he says that prison was “on my radar. Not because I was having 
problems with the police, but because there were flats getting raided on my 
estate. It wasn’t just something that happened on Crimewatch.” He makes clear 
in the film that he was keen to avoid any trouble while growing up, and now 
wanted to deepen his understanding of life behind bars. “I went in there 
thinking jail might be about bravado. In reality it was about beating your own 
demons and not allowing the environment to win,” he says. “I didn’t see that 
coming at all, and I’m really glad that I was able to have that experience.”

Yates’s investigative yet empathetic approach has won him praise not only from 
prize-givers, but from the millennials who have seen him make the move from 
Saturday morning TV to heavy social issues (not to mention everything else in 
between). “I never liked the idea of being a role model, but now I realise I’ve 
got no choice in the matter,” he says. “I’ve gone from getting tweets 
complimenting me on my haircut or my suit, to people saying: ‘After watching 
your programme on gay people from black and Asian communities, I came out to my 
parents’. And I think: ‘Holy shit, these films are actually doing something!’” 
As he delves deeper into his subject matter than ever before, it’s the sort of 
thing he’ll be hearing a lot more.

The Insider: Reggie Yates In A Texan Jail is available from Tue, 4pm, BBC3 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p03ymv61>
 