
The Chinese Restaurant

Jeremiah Bosgang and his boss Rick Ludwin found themselves in a real bind 
after a table-read for aSeinfeld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/seinfeld> episode in 1991. The script 
they’d just heard had Elaine, George and Jerry doing nothing except waiting for 
a table at a Chinese restaurant. There was no action beyond a pay phone call 
and an attempt to bribe the maître d’. The pair had championed many of the 
show’s stranger moments, but now they were considering shutting it down.


They’d been worried about the script from the get-go. Was this thing missing 
pages or something? There was no story! What would the other NBC executives 
say? To Bosgang, it confirmed the network’s worst fears about Larry David and 
Seinfeld – that they couldn’t hack it making a sitcom long-term. They didn’t 
think they could sell a concept this flimsy. They’d gone to the table-read in 
hopes of seeing progress – but there’d been no change. Now they sat in 
Bosgang’s car and agreed that killing the script was too provocative. David, 
especially, would not take this lightly. But they also knew how precarious 
Seinfeld’s future was. They had to say something.

Indeed, David balked even when Ludwin said – gingerly – “If you feel 
passionate about this, which you obviously do, go do it, and we’ll hope for the 
best.” He took David for a walk around the lot and allowed him to vent. David 
was adamant it was a funny half-hour of television about life’s little 
frustrations. It was Seinfeld. If the network didn’t like this, they didn’t 
like the show.

In fact, the script baffled even the man who played the Chinese restaurant 
host. Actor James Hong expressed his confusion. The director Tom Cherones saw 
it as similar to his own early feelings about the show. “That doesn’t matter,” 
he told Hong. “Just go with it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhow-seinfelds-funniest-moments-came-to-life-the-junior-mint-the-chinese-restaurant-the-contest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46018f58fbb69ac5f169441613aa1af6522d1fa4%2F0_0_1035_727%2F1035.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Seinfeld's%20funniest%20moments%20came%20to%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhow-seinfelds-funniest-moments-came-to-life-the-junior-mint-the-chinese-restaurant-the-contest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Seinfeld%27s%20funniest%20moments%20came%20to%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhow-seinfelds-funniest-moments-came-to-life-the-junior-mint-the-chinese-restaurant-the-contest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46018f58fbb69ac5f169441613aa1af6522d1fa4%2F0_0_1035_727%2F1035.jpg>
 Way too flimsy a concept? … the Chinese Restaurant episode. Photograph: 
Seinfeld 
The episode did not go down well with Ludwin and Bosgang’s colleagues, but no 
one stopped it from airing. And when it ran, critics understood what NBC did 
not. “Like real life, but with better dialogue,” wrote Kit Boss in the Seattle 
Times. “Seinfeld doesn’t feel like sitcom television,” New York magazine’s 
Chris Smith said. “It feels more like a conversation with your funniest 
friends.” Over time, the episode would stand as a turning point for the series 
and a groundbreaking bit of television.

Everyone won: the producers made the show they wanted, and the network looked 
good for airing it. In fact, the Chinese Restaurant showed that a sitcom could 
tackle more highfalutin qualities than had ever been attempted before: this was 
TV’s version ofSamuel Beckett’s Waiting for Godot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/10/waiting-for-godot-book-that-changed-me-nicolas-lezard>
.

The Junior Mint
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhow-seinfelds-funniest-moments-came-to-life-the-junior-mint-the-chinese-restaurant-the-contest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb4732cae50fa292e5dce9d19376a70dd40326ae%2F0_0_3000_2055%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Seinfeld's%20funniest%20moments%20came%20to%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhow-seinfelds-funniest-moments-came-to-life-the-junior-mint-the-chinese-restaurant-the-contest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Seinfeld%27s%20funniest%20moments%20came%20to%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhow-seinfelds-funniest-moments-came-to-life-the-junior-mint-the-chinese-restaurant-the-contest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb4732cae50fa292e5dce9d19376a70dd40326ae%2F0_0_3000_2055%2F3000.jpg>
 ‘They let some amateur in and he came up with this stupid, unsterile story’ … 
the Junior Mint. Photograph: NBC via Getty 
Andy Robin got his first Seinfeld script assignment in the fourth season, when 
he was already a fan. He felt a kinship with David and Seinfeld. Although he 
was in his 20s, he loved stuff from the 50s and 60s, smooth crooners like 
Johnny Mathis and Petula Clark. He knew he could throw some Burl Ives into a 
Seinfeld script and Larry and Jerry would get it.


He had been editor of the Harvard Lampoon and worked as a writer at Saturday 
Night Live. When he got the call from the Seinfeld office, he knew he’d 
stumbled on something big and felt a huge responsibility to keep the show 
great. How would he maintain that quality? Or would he be the one to ruin it?

Now he couldn’t write a thing without ripping it apart. His desperation led to 
some bizarre pitches, none more than the one that became his first episode, The 
Junior Mint.

He had some reasonable plots lined up: Jerry dates a woman whose name he can’t 
remember; Elaine visits an old artist boyfriend in hospital to rekindle their 
romance when she sees he’s lost a lot of weight; George buys a piece of art by 
Elaine’s paramour in case he dies in surgery and the value shoots up. Tying 
them all together was the tough part, out of which came one of the show’s first 
memorably absurd moments: when Jerry and Kramer observe the artist’s surgery 
from the gallery above while they snack on Junior Mints, only to drop one into 
the open body cavity below.
 The Junior Mint. 
Robin was happier at Seinfeld than he’d been at Saturday Night Live. SNL was a 
surprisingly corporate environment; all anyone talked about were ratings. 
Everything felt overly cautious and full of fiefdoms. People who had been there 
for decades were protective of their power.

He was happy to have escaped. But now he’d wrecked his career, and possibly 
the whole show, with this dumb Junior Mint plotline. Robin couldn’t believe 
David approved it; this was crazy. People would say, “They let some amateur in 
and he came up with this stupid, unsterile-hospital-environment story.”

He called David mid-draft and said, “This can’t happen.” 

David’s reply: “Just write it.” 

When Robin finished, he was proud of one part: the storyline in which Jerry 
forgets the name of the woman he was dating. He tries to find out his 
girlfriend’s name through acts of subterfuge, like digging in her purse. She 
mentions that her name rhymes with a female body part. Exasperated, he guesses: 
is it Mulva? Bovary? No, but she realises: “You don’t know my name, do you?”

The disgraceful genius of Julia Louis-Dreyfus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/02/julia-louis-dreyfus-disgraceful-genius-veep-seinfeld>
Jerry finally figures it out when she leaves in a huff, and he shouts his 
final guess after her: Dolores. Could this have been the first 
network-television acknowledgment of the clitoris? It seems likely. Cloris was 
the scripted choice for her real name, but when the warm-up comedian asked the 
studio audience to guess her name, someone said Dolores. David and Seinfeld 
decided it was better and subbed it in at the last minute.

Director Tom Cherones liked Robin’s Junior Mint script more than its author 
did. He always enjoyed Seinfeld’s weirder challenges, like the climactic fall 
of a piece of candy into a body mid-surgery. The small chocolate disk wouldn’t 
show up on camera in flight, so he shot a York Peppermint Pattie – about four 
times the size – instead. Viewers wouldn’t be able to tell the difference 
without other objects in the shot for comparison.

Robin was shocked no one complained. The audience at the taping laughed, but 
when he saw the edit he still hated it. Finally, it aired. The public revolt he 
expected did not happen, but he was still convinced he’d ruined the show. It 
wasn’t up to his expectations of himself or Seinfeld.

In fact, Seinfeld himself cited the episode as a milestone: if it could pull 
this off, it could do no wrong. Anything was game. Even Jerry’s character 
reached a new level of darkness in this particular script. As Kramer begs Jerry 
to join him in the surgical gallery, Jerry sighs, “All right, all right. Just 
let me finish my coffee, then we’ll go watch them slice this fat bastard up.” 
Seinfeld’s face can barely contain the glee at getting away with this line.

After the episode, Robin could barely function, so cowed was he by the 
pressure of working on Seinfeld. He often started a script, then scrapped it 
two-thirds of the way through when it didn’t click. And the acclaim for The 
Junior Mint only made matters worse – there was so much pressure to top his 
first try.

The Contest
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhow-seinfelds-funniest-moments-came-to-life-the-junior-mint-the-chinese-restaurant-the-contest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b862a47ec5f257fd0daad0418dfdfbd0baf2ba3%2F6_0_642_385%2F642.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Seinfeld's%20funniest%20moments%20came%20to%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhow-seinfelds-funniest-moments-came-to-life-the-junior-mint-the-chinese-restaurant-the-contest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Seinfeld%27s%20funniest%20moments%20came%20to%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhow-seinfelds-funniest-moments-came-to-life-the-junior-mint-the-chinese-restaurant-the-contest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b862a47ec5f257fd0daad0418dfdfbd0baf2ba3%2F6_0_642_385%2F642.jpg>
 Masters of their domain … The Contest. Photograph: Seinfeld 
After each raucous table-read, David held court in the office he shared with 
Seinfeld. The two would sit at their facing desks, surrounded by writers. The 
network reps had no place to sit – perhaps by design. A rep might offer a small 
suggestion: “Jerry’s too harsh in this scene.” David would fidget with the golf 
club he kept in the corner, then answer: “Nah, I don’t think he’s that harsh.” 
David and Seinfeld were in charge now they were on their way to their vaunted 
Thursday-night time slot and No 1 ratings ranking.


But all the writers braced themselves for a confrontation over The Contest, 
David’s masturbation episode in the fourth season. The trick, in a broadcast 
sitcom, was to launch this as a plotline without offending standards and 
practices. George explains it to his friends this way: “My mother caught me.” 
Doing what, asks Jerry. “You know. I was alone. I stopped by the house to drop 
the car off … My mother had a glamour magazine … So one thing led to another …” 
George explains that his shocked mother screamed, fell, threw her back out, and 
ended up in hospital.

But the real action begins when George says to his friends, “I’ll tell you one 
thing. I am never doing that again.”

“What, in your mother’s house?” asks Elaine. “Or altogether?”

“Altogether.” George’s certainty elicits groans all around. “What, you don’t 
think I could do it?”

“Well,” Jerry says, “I know I could hold out longer than you.” George smirks. 
“Care to make it interesting?” George, Jerry, and Kramer wager $100 each on who 
can hold out the longest. Elaine wants in, too, but the guys balk. “It’s easier 
for a woman not to do it than a man,” Jerry protests. “We have to do it. It’s 
part of our lifestyle.” But they relent, as long as she gives them odds; she’ll 
put up $150.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhow-seinfelds-funniest-moments-came-to-life-the-junior-mint-the-chinese-restaurant-the-contest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f14cf516f4ac2b8b909516d1d37352458da1e1f%2F0_0_1310_737%2F1310.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Seinfeld's%20funniest%20moments%20came%20to%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhow-seinfelds-funniest-moments-came-to-life-the-junior-mint-the-chinese-restaurant-the-contest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Seinfeld%27s%20funniest%20moments%20came%20to%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fhow-seinfelds-funniest-moments-came-to-life-the-junior-mint-the-chinese-restaurant-the-contest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f14cf516f4ac2b8b909516d1d37352458da1e1f%2F0_0_1310_737%2F1310.jpg>
 The Contest. Photograph: Seinfeld 
To keep this up as the main thrust of a primetime show, the writers had to 
come up with a euphemism for masturbation. They went one better: they came up 
with a new term. To abstain from masturbation was to be “master of your 
domain”. This allows the characters free and easy discussion of their sexual 
thoughts and exploits without one dirty word. The humour came from the script’s 
abstinence from even the word “masturbation,” much less anything more graphic. 
An early draft had George using the word “tugging,” but even that was cut. 
Kramer caves because of the woman walking around her apartment naked with her 
shades open, and later sleeps with her. Elaine caves when she stands behind 
John F Kennedy Jr in a workout class. Sly scenes depicting each character in 
bed at night clarify the status of each contestant: those who are still 
“masters” toss and turn, while those who have been satisfied sleep well.

As with most Seinfeld plotlines, it came from a real-life bet David was 
involved in. (He claims to have won.) The table-read went well, with even more 
laughs than usual. Still, the subject matter left the writers sure that the 
network would protest. Julia Louis-Dreyfus, meanwhile, kept waiting for the 
executives to object specifically to Elaine’s participation. A woman talking 
about masturbation in primetime seemed an obvious place to draw the line.

Instead, a shock. “It’s perfect,” the network said. “Don’t touch it.” They had 
come a long way since the showdown over The Chinese Restaurant. The episode 
helped Seinfeld win its first Emmy, and “master of my domain” became the show’s 
first catchphrase.

This is an edited extract from Seinfeldia 
<http://books.simonandschuster.co.uk/Seinfeldia/Jennifer-Keishin-Armstrong/9781476756103>
: How a Show About Nothing Changed Everything. The book is available in the US 
and Australia now and in the UK on 28 July.

 