
Many people thought the Labour party would struggle to top the disaster of 
losing the general election, but it has silenced the doubters by somehow 
contriving to lose its own internal leadership election. Voters have signed up 
to support it, and Labour has reacted witha purge of such generalised unfairness
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/20/labour-leadership-election-rejected-supporters-express-their-anger>
 that I’m almost starting to doubt that its leading lights really wanted to 
bring democracy to Iraq. It must be easyweeding out applications from those who 
don’t share Labour values 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/25/labour-union-leader-vote-jeremy-corbyn-pcs-mark-serwotka>
 – surely the very fact that they’ve made a decision and put their name to it 
is a huge beacon saying “Outsider!” A party that sees enthusiasm as a negative 
– at least that’s a quality that may win back Scotland.

Perhaps Harriet Harman’s handling of the whole debacle is a brilliant piece of 
marketing designed to make whoever takes over seem like a genius. There’s an 
easy way to find genuine Labour supporters – they boasted about voting Green in 
this election and kept quiet about voting Lib Dem in the last. Naturally, what 
Labour fears is not Tory entryism, but the horror ofinfiltration by the sort of 
people Labour is supposed to represen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jul/28/harriet-harman-we-are-weeding-out-bogus-labour-leadership-voters>
t. Most columnists seem to feel that the party should plump for one of three 
fairly unpalatable options as at least they can win an election, just not this 
election, as there are too many people voting.

Confusion and anger over Labour leader ballot | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/28/confusion-and-anger-over-labour-leader-ballot>
Every photo of the candidates looks like the staff room of a failing 
comprehensive feigning amusement at being photobombed by the janitor.Liz Kendall
 <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liz-kendall>, with her permanent air of 
an office manager who has just come back from a course, couldn’t lure a voter 
out of a burning building – and her whole campaign is based on changing Labour 
to be whatever people who hate it want it to be. Meanwhile, Burnham, who looks 
as if he has carved Fireman Sam’s face off and laid it carelessly across his 
own skull – and would soon have Labour polling lower than Mrs Brown’s balls – 
wants to change the party into something bold and exciting. You’ve got to ask 
the question: well, why hasn’t he? It’s not as if he’s spent the last 15 years 
working at Asda.

Yvette Cooper, whose name sounds like something Jeremy Corbyn drove in the 
1960s, says Corbyn doesn’t have answers for the future. She doesn’t have a 
particularly firm grasp of the future either, as she spent the first three 
months of this year telling us that Ed Miliband would be prime minister. Of 
course, as Cooper and Kendall have pointed out,there is sexism in the coverage 
of the contest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jul/20/sexist-coverage-liz-kendall-female-politicians-damage-voter-perceptions>
, as there is everywhere. Cooper must wonder just how entrenched it is when her 
call to end detention for asylum seekers was overshadowed byJeremy Corbyn 
taking the night bus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/gallery/2015/aug/01/politicians-on-public-transport-in-pictures>
.

Leaders around the world are nervous about Corbyn winning and becoming PM, as 
they know every time they visit the UK he’ll present them with another bottle 
of his homegrown elderflower champagne. I’m enjoying senior Tory peers calling 
Corbyn a “throwback”. A guy in a horsehair wig wearing a cape, who got a job 
for life because his great-great-great-grandfather had a knack for picking out 
the healthiest slaves? We can safely assume that Corbyn is no longer on the 
establishment’s Christmas card list. But he has been added to their other list, 
right below the crossed out name of Dr David Kelly.

Labour is now so passive, it might as well be led by an out-of-office email
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/27/labour-is-now-so-passive-it-might-as-well-be-led-by-an-out-of-office-email>
Corbyn has met with extremists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/20/dyab-abou-jahjah-arab-extremist-problems-jeremy-corbyn>
. Meeting someone doesn’t mean you agree with them – I’ve met Olly Murs, but 
that doesn’t mean I think you gotta hold on, hold on to what you’re feeling, 
that feeling is the best thing, the best thing all right. In the age of 
Facebook, we know that calling someone “friend” isn’t necessarily an 
endorsement, and generally signals an attitude somewhere between antipathy and 
disgust. Of course, it’s very difficult to have a career in politics without 
meeting a variety of people who support mass murder. Indeed, some of them will 
have been leading the Labour party. Britain is always in an awkward position 
talking about fighting extremism whilewe support and arm extremists such as 
Saudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/08/britain-arms-trade-saudi-arabia-blogger-weapons-raif-badawi-sentence-lashes>
. Our exact moral position is unclear. We’re opposed to beheadings unless 
they’re for sorcery? Something like that.

I wouldn’t be tempted to vote for someone bland, thinking that they might play 
better in the media. The media will thoughtlessly monster whoever is elected, 
just as I will. Those who hope for favours from the press would dowell to 
remember how Ed Miliband was savaged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/may/06/sun-ed-miliband-labour-mail-telegraph-election>
 simply for looking and sounding like some cruel alien satire on humanity. I 
feel pessimistic about Corbyn’s chances of doing anything if elected, but maybe 
I can afford to be. Maybe if I was being sanctioned or discriminated against or 
evicted, I would have to hope. Perhaps the politics of optimism always feels 
self-indulgent to those who don’t really need it. In any case, I’m pretty 
confident that the election itself will result in a landslide for Robert Mugabe.
 