
Antony Gormley, artist

I was rather standoffish at first. There was a site near Gateshead, an old 
pithead, andthe local council wanted to build something 
<http://www.gateshead.gov.uk/Leisure%20and%20Culture/attractions/Angel/Background/Background2.aspx>
. I think there’d been some kind of international competition, but they hadn’t 
been terribly pleased with the results. I said: “I don’t make art for 
motorways.” But then I saw a photograph of this mound on the hill, with a deep 
valley below. It looked like something from the iron age, really extraordinary. 
So I went for a look.

As I walked up to it, I remember a local councillor saying: “We need one of 
your angels.” It struck me as a good idea: something bearing witness to the men 
who’d worked there, but alsopointing to the future 
<http://www.antonygormley.com/projects/item-view/id/211>. I realised early that 
it’d need to be at least three doubledecker buses high. I did a few sketches, 
pretty thumbnail, and then made models: five or six, hand-size at first, ending 
with a human-size version. It took about a year. We ended up making an 
actual-size model of the knees, to understand how the scale would work. The 
biggest challenge is making a thing that looks as if it’s the right size, 
rather than a small thing made big.

At first I said, 'I don't make art for motorways'

Quite a lot of people didn’t want it: there was a campaign to stop the Angel, 
lots of negative stories 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/the-angel-with-a-dirty-face-1330855.html>
. A local paper dug up pictures of some totalitarian winged figure commissioned 
during the Third Reich and ran it under the headline:NAZI … BUT NICE 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/tyne/content/articles/2008/02/07/angel_anniversary_antony_gormley_feature.shtml>
. I nearly pulled out – I had no interest in foisting this thing on anyone. But 
the planners talked me round, the council backed it, and people started to get 
on board.

Right from the beginning, I’d been thinking of ships and the Tyne – a ship’s 
hull turned inside out. We spent months driving around engineering firms in the 
north-east in an old van. This was the early 1990s, when the shipyards were 
going and the mines were being shut. Eventually, we found a place that had what 
we needed, with specialised welders and plate-workers. The structure was 
fillet-welded, which isan amazingly precise skill 
<http://www.twi-global.com/technical-knowledge/job-knowledge/fillet-welded-joints-a-review-of-the-practicalities-066/>
 used to make vessels watertight. That was the magic moment, really, finding 
out you could make it in 6mm ship-plate. It was thrilling, making weekly visits 
up to Hartlepool, watching this skeleton turn into a hull.

I think that’s why the Angel worked: it was an extraordinary collective 
effort, requiring thousands of conversations. As it went on, I had less and 
less to do with it. The Angel was made by the skills of the north-east.

John Thornton, engineer

The foundations were massive: we had to put in concrete piles, 20 metres deep 
<http://www.gateshead.gov.uk/Leisure%20and%20Culture/attractions/Angel/Facts.aspx>
. But that was the easy part, relatively. You just do some sums based on the 
weight and factor in the wind. It was the ankles that were hard. They had to be 
slim, even though that’s where all the stress is, that’s where all the hard 
work is being done. When the wind is blowing on a human being, you move 
constantly to compensate. Obviously, we couldn’t do that here, so we had to 
think carefully about how to make them strong enough.

It was the ankles that were hard – they had to be strong but slim

The second big thing was the wings: flex is fine, but if they begin to 
flutter, it’s game over. They’ll tear the structure apart. Antony’s first 
drafts had tapered wings like a Spitfire’s, but in the end we went for ones 
that were quite chopped-off. It’s funny: the Angel is huge, it weighs 200 
tonnes. But, with the wind and the weather, it was as if it was actually flying.

They had to transport the body and wings separately on low loaders during the 
night. Streets had to be cleared of all their fixtures, and whole areas 
cordoned off, everyone watching from a distance. I wasn’t worried that it would 
fall down: in engineering, the things that go wrong are the things that are 
done so frequently someone forgets to check. Even so, it was a relief when the 
crane lowered it into place. It felt like a religious experience.

I had to talk my wife out of buying a cushion with a picture of the Angel on 
it. I thought it was a bit much. But whenever I pass it, I think: “That’s nice, 
I did that.”
 