
“Make sure you put in some advice about how to tell the kids,” a colleague 
urged me.

My first response was: “I don’t know if I can. It’s such a difficult topic.” 

“You have to,” she insisted. “You know how much our patients struggle with 
this. I know Karen does.”


 I looked across at the row of chemotherapy chairs and realised to my dismay 
that nearly half of the patients receiving chemotherapy that day were parents 
of young children. A 40-year-old patient called Karen caught my eye and smiled. 
Karen was a lovely woman, an actor. She had played good roles in local 
productions but her work had come to a sudden halt when she was diagnosed with 
cancer. Things looked good for many months, but lately she had become unwell 
and started another round of chemo. I had always been open with her, so she 
knew that this time, my expectations of chemo were modest. She had decided she 
would give it a good try but if things were still not looking up after a few 
weeks, she would stop treatment and concentrate on being home with her three 
children, aged four, six and 10, and her husband, Jim.

 I suspect there is no cancer patient and parent who doesn’t fret about what 
and how to tell the children but, surprisingly, this is another topic rarely 
brought up in the consultation. Many pa­tients don’t feel it is a doctor’s role 
to advise them on such personal matters, or they imagine that they might be 
wasting their time discussing these issues when there are so many medical 
questions swirling in their mind.

 I must also confess that most of my enquiries about the children of cancer 
patients go something like this:

 “How are the kids doing?” 

 “OK. Thank you for asking.” 

 “That’s good to hear.” 

 As I write this I find myself reflecting that this desultory exchange is 
designed to protect both parent-patient and doctor from the awkwardness of 
discussing the single most difficult aspect of a serious illness: the dread of 
leaving young children behind.

 Shortly after Karen sat down last week, I went through the checklist. 

 “And how are the children?” 

 “I’m really worried about them.”

 “Tell me more,” I said, swallowing my apprehension. 

 “I will need your help in explaining things to them. I don’t know where to 
start.”

 Fearing that I would mess up the task, I promptly suggested the help of a 
skilled psychologist but Karen wasn’t interested. “I’m too tired, doctor. Plus, 
you’re a mom, so you must have some idea about what to say to the kids. I just 
want you to guide me through it.” She looked at me with such hope that I 
promised to do my best.

 Karen died two years after the date of her diagnosis. Her chil­dren were such 
an integral part of her life that we touched on them on nearly every occasion 
we met. Her devotion to her children’s welfare and, by extension, the welfare 
of other similarly placed children, was so profound that I know she would be 
proud to let me share how we navigated each downward step in her journey. I 
hope Karen’s story helps you navigate yours, if you are in this unenviable 
situation.

‘If I’m OK, they are OK’

 Karen’s lung cancer was a bolt from the blue. She had never smoked, had no 
family history and was simply unlucky. When the diagnosis was confirmed, we 
also discussed that its spread meant that it was not curable. However, with 
several recent advances in treating her type of cancer, I was optimistic about 
keeping her well. Karen wanted to tell the children and overcame her husband 
Jim’s early ambivalence.

As doctors, we dream about having the time to get everything right | Ranjana 
Srivastava
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/27/as-doctors-we-dream-about-having-the-time-to-get-everything-right>
 She sat them down one evening and told them that she had been diagnosed with 
an illness called lung cancer. She deliberately chose to use the correct 
terminology rather than Jim’s suggestion of calling it a lump. We had discussed 
the fact that children fell down in the playground and got lumps and bumps. She 
didn’t want the children to think that all lumps were sinister. Their eldest, 
Alyssa, had seen the ads depicting cancer on cigarette pack­ets and her first 
question was if her mother had been smoking cigarettes. Karen and Jim had 
always pointed at the images as the consequences of smoking. Karen assured her 
daughter that she had never smoked and that sometimes people developed cancer 
for un­known reasons. Robbie, their middle son, wanted to know if she was going 
to die. He had a classmate who had just lost her grand­father to lung cancer. 
“I’m not dying right now, darling,” Karen told him. “I hope to get better with 
treatment.” The youngest child, Emily, at four years old, didn’t understand any 
of the conversation. She jumped on her mother’s back and chirped: “Can we play 
hide-and-seek now?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fnov%2F29%2Fhow-do-you-tell-your-children-you-have-cancer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5824e5b626a5c450a4a599e8b846c7ae800d3c4a%2F0_289_5760_3461%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20do%20you%20tell%20your%20children%20you%20have%20cancer%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fnov%2F29%2Fhow-do-you-tell-your-children-you-have-cancer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20do%20you%20tell%20your%20children%20you%20have%20cancer%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fnov%2F29%2Fhow-do-you-tell-your-children-you-have-cancer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5824e5b626a5c450a4a599e8b846c7ae800d3c4a%2F0_289_5760_3461%2F5760.jpg>
 Chemotherapy treatment. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
 As she began chemotherapy, Karen decided to hope for the best and plan for 
the worst. She set about consolidating a support system for the children. She 
did this by calling upon a small group of parents whose children were friendly 
with hers. She told them openly what she knew: that she had lung cancer that 
was not curable. Her oncologist felt there was good treatment available but she 
was likely to become sicker with time. Karen told them that she had stopped 
working as she wanted to maximise her time with the children, but on the 
occasions when she was too unwell, she would need the parents’ help. The 
parents, who were also Karen’s friends, were shocked, but felt proud to be 
asked to play a helping role.

Over the next few weeks, they worked out a system that meant each child had 
one or two additional adults to rely on if Jim and Karen were both busy. On 
chemotherapy days, Emily was dropped off and picked up from kindergarten by her 
friend’s mum. When Jim couldn’t make it to Robbie’s soccer practice, another 
father took him. Alyssa walked to her friend’s house after school and was later 
brought home by the friend’s mother after the girls had finished their 
homework. When Karen felt well, which was almost always in the initial months, 
the extra help was not needed, but having a roster in place meant that the 
other adults were not surprised at being rung at short notice.


 Jim’s parents were frail and elderly and needed help themselves. But Karen’s 
parents were able to assist. While they weren’t able to drive the children back 
and forth from their activities, Karen’s mother cooked healthy dinners and her 
dad helped with garden maintenance. Both offers freed up Karen and Jim to take 
care of other things.

Cancer's emotional impact should be taken as seriously as physical effects | 
Ciaran Devane
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/may/02/cancer-emotional-impact-physical-effects>
 A practical thing Karen discussed early with her children was rearranging 
after-school activities that required prolonged parental involvement. She 
explained to the children that while she was keen to maintain their activities, 
her illness meant that they all had to make some adjustments. For Alyssa this 
meant finding a French class closer to home rather than the one she had become 
used to, which was a five-hour weekend commitment. For Emily it meant moving a 
gymnastics class. Robbie offered to reduce the frequency of his painting 
lessons. Karen was initially apprehensive that she was asking too much of her 
children, to give up what they liked, but she soon realised that they felt 
proud to be helping their mum and gladly adjusted to their changes. Karen spoke 
to her children’s school early in the piece, too, letting them know about her 
diagnosis and the changes in their lives. The counsellor agreed to keep a close 
eye on all three and periodically provide updates to Karen and Jim.

 One day Robbie came home, upset that a boy in his class had said he would 
catch cancer from his mum. On hearing this, Alyssa complained that she was sick 
of being asked if she was all right. Little Emily, meanwhile, carried on, 
seemingly oblivious to any­thing being out of the ordinary. Karen instinctively 
felt angry on behalf of her children, but used the occasion to discuss her 
cancer with them further. She reassured Robbie that cancer was not con­tagious 
and explained to Alyssa how much her friends and their parents cared about her. 
Karen also told them that her being sick was not the children’s fault and that 
people sometimes said awk­ward things because they didn’t know how to express 
their true feelings. Karen felt that this gave the children permission to 
discuss any other concerns they might have about her and bring home any 
comments they had heard on the playground. Sure enough, one day Robbie said to 
Jim: “My friend said that cancer only happens to old people. Was he being mean 
to mum?” Jim was able to explain that cancer also happens to young people, but 
his friend was prob­ably puzzled because he had not met anyone like that. 
Alyssa asked if her mum would lose all her hair like someone’s aunty did and 
Karen reassured her that her therapy was different so she would not.

 Things went smoothly for nearly nine months and everyone fell into a 
comfortable pattern. One day, Karen came in for a quick visit with all three 
children, whom she left in the waiting room to watch TV when I called her in. I 
asked how the children were doing and she replied that they were surprisingly 
normal. “They watch my face and if I’m OK, they are OK.”

 Sadly, I won’t forget that day because it was when I had to tell Karen that 
after more than a year of stability, the cancer had be­gun to spread to 
critical areas that concerned me. I also observed that she did not look as well 
as she had in the last few months. We talked about changing treatments and 
hoping for the best while expecting that treatments down the line would not 
work as well as the initial one. She listened worriedly and then burst into 
tears. “Oh, what a bad day to bring the kids,” she said in a woeful 
understatement. Then I watched in admiration as she rose and washed her face in 
the sink, reapplied her lipstick, and said: “We will handle it. I will talk to 
them.”

‘I know they understand the seriousness of it’

 Some weeks later, when we met again, I reluctantly asked how her talk had 
gone with her children. She said that directly after her consultation, she took 
them out for ice cream and enjoyed the occasion while suspending her fears. 
Later, with Jim present, she told the family that the cancer was becoming 
active again. She explained that she may feel some more pain but showed them 
the new tablets I had prescribed her to manage it. She mentioned the need to 
travel more frequently to hospital for the new treat­ment, but she would adjust 
her needs as far as possible to meet theirs. They needed to be prepared to have 
other adults assist­ing them more than usual. Karen talked seriously but kindly 
and slowly, telling the children that she wanted them to know the truth from 
her rather than hear snatches of conversations elsewhere that left them 
wondering what was going on. She told them that she would always be honest with 
them. This is when Alyssa asked if her mother was going to die.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fnov%2F29%2Fhow-do-you-tell-your-children-you-have-cancer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31a4ed4d2f23d510f3be6a86dfc10e39ee6894d1%2F0_49_5212_3128%2F5212.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20do%20you%20tell%20your%20children%20you%20have%20cancer%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fnov%2F29%2Fhow-do-you-tell-your-children-you-have-cancer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20do%20you%20tell%20your%20children%20you%20have%20cancer%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fnov%2F29%2Fhow-do-you-tell-your-children-you-have-cancer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31a4ed4d2f23d510f3be6a86dfc10e39ee6894d1%2F0_49_5212_3128%2F5212.jpg>
 ‘Little Emily, meanwhile, carried on, seemingly oblivious to any­thing being 
out of the ordinary.’ Photograph: Cultura RM/Alamy 
 “I will probably die one day from this cancer, but the doctor says it’s not 
happening yet. So I plan to take the new treatment and be as well as possible, 
and I promise to let you know if things are not working out.” Karen said that 
this was the question she had been most dreading, but tackling it honestly had 
been far easier than offering excuses. Robbie had always been deeply 
perceptive. “But Angie’s grandma died in her sleep. What if that happens to 
you?” To this she replied: “I suppose this could happen, but if I die in my 
sleep, you know that daddy is healthy and perfectly able to look after you with 
the help of all our wonderful friends and fam­ily.” Karen said that since she 
could not reassure him about how or when she would die, she wanted to emphasise 
that they had a support structure in place that they had experienced and 
trusted. They would not be left alone.

 As Karen began her new treatment, the children again settled into their 
routine and accepted a slightly different normality. Al­though it’s easy to 
relate Karen’s experiences here, I found it heart-wrenching to hear her 
accounts at the time. It seemed unfair that anyone, especially innocent 
children, should have to go through such grieving. But when I brought this up 
with Karen, she said with typical perspective: ‘Doctor, it is what it is. I 
just want to prepare them for life without me and know that I have done my very 
best.” She also said that she was struck by how well the chil­dren took the 
news and how supportive they were. She observed: “Sometimes I wonder why 
they’re not sad or crying, but I know they understand the seriousness of it.”

 For all but a month of the two years she had cancer, Karen avoided 
hospitalisation. Her symptoms were remarkably few and always manageable. 
Although she slowed down significantly, she often sat in the car with Jim or a 
friend to see her children off to school and pick them up. She chatted to the 
school counsellor and was assured they were doing admirably well under the 
circum­stances, which made her feel good.

‘Letting them in’

 The next big change came when she became very breathless and had to be 
hospitalised. Fluid was drained from one lung and she made a good recovery but 
was very tired. Emily visited her in hospital but her older children decided to 
wait for her at home. Karen sent them a message but didn’t insist on their 
coming in, believing this was their way of coping and perhaps slowly coming to 
terms with her dying.

 When Karen got home she again sat down with her children. She told them that 
a scan had shown things becoming worse, which matched how she was feeling. 
Alyssa asked if she was in a lot of pain and she truthfully answered she wasn’t 
but the drugs she was taking made her drowsy. She told the kids not to mistake 
her drowsiness for disinterest. “You know that seeing you always makes me 
happy.” Emily remained affectionate and playful but seemed to sense something 
was wrong. She began to sit quietly with her mother and pat her hand or fetch a 
glass of water. Karen gave her daughter a lot of hugs and kept telling her how 
much she was loved. On one of her last visits, Karen told me that Robbie 
suddenly seemed distant and didn’t want to talk about her illness even when 
asked. She worried that this meant he would struggle after her death but Jim 
helped her realise that their son had always been quietly perceptive and 
strong. “Robbie knows he can ask me anything, so I won’t push him into any 
conversations.” I admired Karen and Jim’s maturity and ability to view things 
from their children’s perspective.

 Soon after this, Karen was admitted to hospice one day when the children were 
at school. She was too weak to remain at home and needed assistance with 
activities, including toileting and feed­ing. But her mind remained alert. I 
visited her there and she asked me how long she had. It was a distressing 
exchange for us both but I told her that I thought time was very short.

 That evening the children visited her in hospice. Jim had explained where she 
was and what to expect. He showed them pictures of her oxygen tubing and her 
room. He agreed with Alyssa that their mum looked gaunt and not like the mum 
they had even a few months ago. He told Emily that her mum was sick and was 
going to meet God. Robbie asked if it was going to be quick and Jim said the 
doctor expected it to be, but it would relieve mum of more suffering because 
the cancer could not be cured.

 On Karen’s suggestion, Jim gave the children a choice. He said they could see 
their mum on Skype or FaceTime or visit her in hospice. He told them their mum 
understood this might make them sad and she was proud of what they had put up 
with so far. Alyssa and Emily wanted to go but Robbie wasn’t sure, so Jim took 
the girls. Karen greeted her daughters with a smile and told her she was 
comfortable. She introduced them to her nurse, who praised their mum and told 
them how proud Karen was of them. The girls beamed at the compliment. Emily 
looked around curiously and was delighted to notice some of her pictures stuck 
to the wall.

 Alyssa later told Robbie that she had felt nervous earlier be­cause she had 
feared her mum would be crying, but seeing her comfortable made her happy. This 
gave Robbie the strength to go in later himself. He was greeted similarly by 
his mum, who also told him that it was okay to feel odd being there and he 
didn’t have to stay. This gave Robbie permission to ask his dad soon afterwards 
to take him home. Emily came every day but mainly played with the toys outside.

 In hospice a volunteer had asked Karen whether she wanted to dictate or film 
a memento for her children. Karen started cau­tiously but became too distressed 
to continue. She told me that she felt she had shared enough with her children 
in the past two years that she was happy they would remember her. I held her 
hand and agreed.

 Four days later, Karen became unconscious. She was sedated and looked 
peaceful. Jim was devastated but true to Karen’s prom­ise, kept the children 
involved till the end. They all came to visit and expressed a wish to remain 
there. “Mom always looked after us, now it’s our turn to stay with her.” Jim 
asked the nurse whether this would harm the children psychologically, but she 
assured him that she had seen other children present at a parent’s death. The 
priest arrived and they prayed together. One after the other, they all said 
goodbye to Karen. When the older children cried, Emily copied them. Jim just 
held them and reassured them he would look after them. All the grandparents 
arrived in time to watch Karen breathe her last.

 Some months later, Jim dropped by to say thank you to the staff. Naturally, I 
asked about the children. He said that they were sad but appropriately so. They 
were continuing with their activi­ties and talked about their mum when they 
wanted. They talked to her, too. Every night they told their mom about 
something that had happened during the day. He encouraged this and, in fact, 
liked to tell them that she would be proud. “They ask me if I miss her terribly 
and I say I do, but she would like us all to go on being happy. I think they 
worry about being disloyal to her memory and I tell them that she will always 
be their mom.”

 Jim admitted that he had been initially unsure about “letting the kids in”, 
but Karen convinced him that it was best to be honest and sensitive with them 
for long-term benefit. He had feared they were being burdened but realised now 
that being involved at an age-appropriate level was the best way forward. Jim 
now belongs to a parent support group, where he counsels other parents about 
talking to children about cancer.

 When Karen first asked me to help I was anxious because I scarcely knew what 
the best advice was. I don’t think she needed my help. By turns, I was struck, 
saddened and humbled by the decisive way in which she dealt with her blow. She 
also left me with a meaningful prototype for advising future patients who ask 
the same question and I no longer feel as apprehensive discussing the matter. I 
can’t help thinking that Karen would be surprised but quietly delighted at her 
legacy.

 * Ranjana Srivastava is the author of So It’s Cancer, Now What?  
<http://www.penguin.com.au/contributors/6347/dr-ranjana-srivastava> (Penguin)
 