
Calls for increased, sustained funding for organisations working to end 
violence against women and girls are at the heart of this year’s16 days of 
activism <http://16dayscwgl.rutgers.edu/> against gender-based abuse.

At the UN’s official launch of the annual campaign, where attendees draped 
themselves in scarves of orange – the colour the UN has chosen to mark action 
against violence – the UN secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, said governments 
needed to step up their support of women’s movements and civil society groups 
to address what is a human rights violation, a health concern and a major 
obstacle to development.

Funding for women’s rights groups in poor countries falls by more than half
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/08/funding-womens-rights-groups-poor-countries-falls-awid-forum-brazil>
It is estimated that one woman in every three 
<http://www.unwomen.org/en/what-we-do/ending-violence-against-women/facts-and-figures>
 will be sexually or physically abused in her lifetime. In some countries, 
40-70% of murdered women are killed by their partner, said Ban, statistics that 
“almost defy belief”.

“What is even harder to understand is why. Why men prey on women and girls; 
why societies shame the victims, why governments fail to punish deadly crimes, 
why the world denies itself the fruits of women’s full participation,” said 
Ban. “The world cannot afford to pay this price.”

The executive director of UN Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women>, Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, added 
that tighter laws to protect women were needed, along with improved 
implementation of legislation. “The price of no change is much higher, and 
unacceptable,” she said.

While bilateral funding for gender equality programmes from Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development countries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/08/funding-womens-rights-groups-poor-countries-falls-awid-forum-brazil>
 has more than quadrupled since 2002 – from $8bn (£6.4bn) in 2002 to $35.5bn in 
2014 – just 8% of the $9.8bn that went to civil society groups reached 
grassroots organisations in poorer countries, and just a fraction of that went 
to female-led organisations. The Association for Women’s Rights in Development 
estimated theaverage annual income for women’s rights groups to be $20,000 
<https://www.awid.org/publications/watering-leaves-starving-roots>.

The 16 days of activism against gender-based violence begins on the 
International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against Women 
<http://www.un.org/en/events/endviolenceday/> on Friday and ends on Human 
Rights Day <http://www.un.org/en/events/humanrightsday/> on 10 December. If 
you’re taking part, we’d like to hear from you.

Will you be campaigning for more money for women’s groups? Petitioning your 
local leaders for action to end violence in your neighbourhood or country? 
Turning your local area orange? Or taking part in other ways? Tell us what has 
inspired you to take part.


Send us your photos, stories or video via GuardianWitness and we’ll include 
our favourites in coverage of the campaign.

• GuardianWitness <https://witness.theguardian.com/> is the home of content 
created by Guardian readers. Share your video, pictures and stories, and browse 
contributions submitted by others. Posts will be reviewed prior to publication 
on GuardianWitness, and the best pieces will feature on the Guardian site.
 