
Long-suffering savers are facing another painful chop in interest rates with 
banks and building societies this week withdrawing their best deals – an 
unintended consequence of the government's newFunding for Lending 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2012/oct/01/funding-for-lending-fails-ignite-mortgage-borrowing>
 scheme designed to help stimulate the economy.

Fixed-rate bonds that were offering more than 4% interest are being cut to 
3.5%, while cashIsas <https://www.theguardian.com/money/isas> paying 3% are 
falling to the 2% region.

Virgin Money, (formerly Northern Rock) this week pulled one of the highest 
paying accounts (2.85%) for Isa transfers replacing it with an account at 2.4%. 
Marks & Spencer will cut its Isa rate from 3% to 2.75% on 10 December, while 
Nationwide and Santander have also wielded the axe.

Market watchers blame the £80bn Funding for Lending 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/funding-for-lending> scheme, introduced 
in August by the Treasury and operated by the Bank of England for the falls. As 
banks have been able to access cheap funds from the scheme, they are less keen 
to offer high rates to attract cash from savers.

The scheme was designed to encourage banks to lend more to consumers with 
mortgages and loans. Headline loan and mortgage rates have certainly come down 
– such as the launch ofTesco's 1.99%  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2012/oct/19/tesco-record-low-mortgage-deal>
mortgage deal – but savers appear to be paying the price.

Savings <https://www.theguardian.com/money/savings> analysts say Funding for 
Lending has reversed a much-needed rise in savings rates seen over the past 12 
months. A month ago the top five paying Isas in Money's best buy tables were 
all paying significantly more than 3%. This week you can still obtain a 3.25% 
rate for new money, but many of the best looking deals have been withdrawn, and 
the remaining ones are not expected to last much longer.

A month ago the West Brom building society's 60-day notice websaver Isa paid 
3.18%. This was withdrawn at the end of last month. Its current best deal is 
the 90-day notice Isa which pays 2.5% on balances over £15,000 – and it's 
available in branch only.

Marks & Spencer, another big payer in the savings market over the past 12 
months, announced it will be dropping its Isa rate from 3% to 2.75% on 10 
December. It has also cut many of its fixed-rate products by a similar amount. 
Santander has withdrawn its Direct ISA Issue 11 paying 2.75% and replaced it 
with Issue 12 paying 2.50%.

The Nationwide – another competitive Isa provider of recent years – lowered 
rates on 12 October. It is paying now 2.65% for its onlinevariable Isa 
<http://www.nationwide.co.uk/savings/cash_isa/onlineisa/default.htm>, but only 
if you have £25,000 in your savings pot. For smaller deposits it is paying 
2.55%-2.6% on it most attractive Isa for those with balances over £1,000.

Anna Bowes, a director of savingschampion.co.uk 
<http://www.savingschampion.co.uk/>, which monitors rates closely, says recent 
weeks have seen a "flood of interest rate changes for new customers".

"Providers deny that the Funding for Lending scheme is to blame, but it can be 
no coincidence that rates started to fall at around the time the scheme was 
introduced in August. There appears to be an alternative source of cheaper 
funds available, which means that the appetite for raising money from savers 
seems to have waned. This has been reflected in the interest rates being 
offered."

She says fixed-rate bonds have fallen from a high of 3.65% earlier in the 
year, to the current level of 3.10% for one year. Four-year deals have fallen 
from 4.20% down to 3.80%.

A spokeswoman for Moneyfacts, compiler of Guardian Money's best buy tables, 
made a similar observation.

"Money provided by this scheme to banks means they no longer need to rely on 
savers to fund mortgage books." She said many banks were reacting to cuts 
elsewhere by reducing rates as they didn't want to be left at the top of the 
interest rate table, and be overrun with applications as a result.

"Savers need to shop around for the best rates and move quickly when they find 
the account they want, as it may not be around for long. It's also apparent 
that they need to keep a close eye on the variable rates of interest that they 
are earning," says Bowes.

A Bank of England spokesman said Funding for Lending will help savers by 
boosting the economy. "The Funding for Lending scheme was designed to support 
the economy. By reducing funding costs, it should allow banks to increase 
lending to UK households and firms. This should boost spending in the economy, 
and so help to create jobs and raise incomes. Ultimately, the best way to 
support savers is to encourage sustainable economic growth."

Savers should act fast to obtain the 3%-plus savings rates before they 
disappear. If you are yet to use this year's tax-free Isa allowance (of up to 
£5,640) theCoventry building society 
<http://www.coventrybuildingsociety.co.uk/savings-and-investments/cash-isas.aspx>
 is the place to go. Its 60-day notice Isa is paying the top rate of 3.25%, but 
it doesn't allow transfers in. The top paying account that will allow you to 
move any previous year's Isa is the Post Office. Its 3.01% rate includes a 
1.26% fixed bonus for the first 18 months. Note you can only make two 
withdrawals a year.

The Post Office's easy access Reward Saver is also paying 3% – withdrawals 
need 30 days' notice, and there's a minimum investment of £500. NatWest is 
paying 2.85% on its e-savings accounts while the Nationwide/Derbyshire is 
paying 2.75% on their online savings accounts. There are several one-year 
savings bonds paying 3%. The State Bank of India is offering the top-paying 
five-year bond at 4.2%, although savers may want to ask whether they want to 
tie their money up for that long.
 