
Seen from a certain perspective, the last few months on planet Earth have been 
pretty unreservedly amazing. Nobody died from smallpox. Almost nobody 
contracted polio. Hospital operating theatres weren’t generally filled with the 
screams of patients undergoing surgery without anaesthetic, and no war claimed 
anything like the single-day death toll of the first hours of theBattle of the 
Somme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/18/zero-hour-on-the-somme-hugh-sebag-montefiore>
, 100 years ago this week.Britain decided the question of European Union 
membership via democratic vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>, not armed conflict, and 
women were entitled to participate – an astonishingly recent state of affairs. 
Though we don’t have all the figures yet, it’s likely thatgun violence in 
America continued its long-term decline 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2015/12/03/weve-had-a-massive-decline-in-gun-violence-in-the-united-states-heres-why/>
 and thatextreme poverty around the world continued to fall 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2015/10/04/world-bank-forecasts-global-poverty-to-fall-below-10-for-first-time-major-hurdles-remain-in-goal-to-end-poverty-by-2030>
. Oh, and that working people on both sides of the Atlantic enjoyed
unprecedented quantities of leisure time 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2014/05/the-myth-that-americans-are-busier-than-ever/371350/>
. Even if you don’t believe in the inevitability of human progress – maybe 
things really will get worse again in the future – it’s hard to deny that we’re 
having a good run.

But it hasn’t felt that way, of course. If you paid even scant attention to 
the headlines, or to social media, even before the shock of the Brexit vote, it 
felt peculiarly, unremittingly bad:the killings in Orlando 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/orlando-terror-attack>, and the failure of 
gun control efforts in their wake;the return of English football hooliganism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/11/euro-2016-french-police-tactics-raise-fears-of-more-clashes-with-england-fans>
; the nastiness unleashed by the Brexit referendum; and thenthe horrifying 
killing of Jo Cox MP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/16/labour-mp-jo-cox-shot-in-west-yorkshire>
 – all against the backdrop of the advance of bothDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> and the Zika virus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/zika-virus>. (Climate change didn’t go 
anywhere, either.) The news recently has had a mean, vindictive air about it, 
as if crafted by a comic-book supervillain solely to dispirit you personally: 
just when you think a week can’t get worse, you learn that your favouriteStar 
Trek actor was killed in a freak accident in his driveway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jun/19/anton-yelchin-star-trek-actor-dies-car-crash>
, ora two-year-old boy by an alligator at Disney World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/15/disney-world-alligator-attack-boy-search>
. All these incidents were appalling for those directly involved. For the rest 
of us, the apocalyptic feelings are somewhat harder to explain. We know, 
rationally, that people in every era have always believed that theirs was the 
worst in history – and that, by many yardsticks, things are better than ever. 
Yet the conviction that Everything Is Terrible remains. And now it is joined by 
the conviction that everything is uncertain, too, fuelling an escalating 
anxiety about the future.

Is it possible to remain happy, or even marginally optimistic, in such 
circumstances? Obviously, you could just cease consuming news entirely. That’s 
long been the advice of a certain breed of expert, for whom despair-inducing 
headlines are simply a distraction from what really matters. “Out of the 
approximately 10,000 news stories you have read in the last 12 months,” Rolf 
Dobelli, author ofThe Art Of Thinking Clearly 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/art-of-thinking-clearly-better-thinking-better-decisions-2.html>
,wrote in this newspaper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/apr/12/news-is-bad-rolf-dobelli>, “name 
one that – because you consumed it – allowed you to make a better decision 
about a serious matter affecting your life, your career or your business. The 
point is: the consumption of news is irrelevant to you.”

But this is no use if you’re the kind of person for whom keeping abreast of 
the state of the world at largeis one of the things that really matters. For 
us, checking out from the news isn’t an option – especially not in the face of 
sudden economic and political uncertainty, when it feels entirely possible that 
the news could have a very personal impact. The trouble is that, when it comes 
to getting an accurate grip on things, the modern media and the human brain are 
both strikingly poorly designed.

You’ve probably heard, in recent years, about the numerous cognitive biases 
that prevent us accurately assessing risk, so that we fear terrorist atrocities 
more than car accidents, for example, because it’s easier to call to mind vivid 
images of terrorism. But there’s another problem so fundamental, it tends to 
escape our notice: news, by definition, is about things that happen, rather 
than things that don’t. Asthe cognitive scientist Steven Pinker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/steven-pinker> points out, you never see a 
news reporter speaking breathlessly live to camera from a foreign land because 
war hasn’t broken out there. And there will always be sufficient bad news to 
fill a half-hour bulletin, or a news website’s home page. Perfectly reasonably, 
most of us value stability and security in life, and fear sudden change. Yet 
stability isn’t news, which means that the headlines inevitably focus more on 
what we fear than on what we value. We’re subjected to an undifferentiated, 
unrelenting mishmash of Bad Events, in which one isolated incident of violent 
crime is accorded no less status than an ecological crisis that threatens to 
destroy the species. News, in the words ofthe French social theorist Pierre 
Bourdieu <https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/jan/28/guardianobituaries.books>
, becomes “a series of apparently absurd stories that all end up looking the 
same, endless parades of poverty-stricken countries, sequences of events that, 
having appeared with no explanation, will disappear with no solution – Zaire 
today, Bosnia yesterday, the Congo tomorrow.”

Widespread despair has tangible effects: it fuels the rise of Donald Trump and 
movements like Brexit

And things are even worse than that: we have evolved deep-seated instincts to 
treat news that need not affect us personally as if it does, arguesDeirdre 
Barrett <https://connects.catalyst.harvard.edu/profiles/display/Person/39720>, 
a Harvard Medical School psychologist. In the distant human past – before mass 
media, among many other things – it made sense to respond with alarm to the 
news that a small child had been killed by an alligator: after all, it could 
only have been a small child from your own community, “so you might have to 
head out with a group of others to clear the alligators out of a nearby pond”. 
Meanwhile, a death toll of 50, as in Orlando, “might be the biggest thing that 
had happened in your locality for generations”. No wonder we feel overwhelmed: 
week after week, we learn about, and respond emotionally to, events of a kind 
that in prehistoric times might have occurred once every few years at most.

The dark cloud of negativity generated by unhappy news doesn’t remain confined 
to our feelings about national and international events, however. It spreads to 
distort our view of the rest of our lives, according to studies conducted by
Professor Graham Davey <http://www.sussex.ac.uk/profiles/8681>, of the 
University of Sussex, and his colleagues. “Our research shows that when you 
show people negative news stories, as opposed to positive or neutral ones, they 
grow more anxious, and rate their own personal problems as significantly more 
problematic,” Davey says. “They catastrophise about them more. They make 
mountains out of molehills.”

And yet it’s negative news people seem to want: calls for more positive 
content in news programming cut little ice with Davey. “I vividly remember, 
when we were doing this research, putting together a tape of 15 minutes of 
positive news,” he recalls. “You know: people overcoming cancer, people winning 
lotteries, good news about the economy. And people were just absolutely bored 
by it.”

This points to something especially unfortunate about the psychology of 
anxiety, in the wake of an event such as the Brexit shock. We generally detest 
uncertainty – arguably more than we detest bad news – and our instinct is to 
respond by compulsively seeking more information, in an effort to assuage the 
anxiety. But since the future is intrinsically unknowable, that effort only 
drives home to us how little we can know – making the anxiety worse.

And there is another, subtler reason you might find yourself convinced that 
things are getting worse and worse, which is that our expectations outpace 
reality. That is, things do improve – but we raise our expectations for how 
much better theyought to be at a faster rate, creating the illusion that 
progress has gone into reverse.

Pinker, who makes this argument in his book The Better Angels Of Our Nature 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/better-angels-of-our-nature.html>, highlights 
the example of bullying. Once upon a time, he told me, it was seen as “a part 
of boyhood: stamp it out and you’d raise a generation of pantywaists”. When 
Pinker was a child, he said, it would have been unthinkable for the US 
president to give a televised speech decrying the evils of bullying,as Barack 
Obama did in 2011 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yre-bA8zwqA>. In principle, 
it’s good to pay attention to the real psychological harms it causes, except 
that, “because we now care about something that we formerly let slide, we think 
there’s a crisis in bullying”. Similarly, with the passing decades, we’ve also 
greatly expanded the circle of those whose suffering we take seriously in the 
first place, thereby increasing the number of stories with the capacity to 
distress us. To be upset by images of desperate Syrian refugees, you must first 
believe that Syrian refugees are as human as you are – a stance that wouldn’t 
have been a given in the Britain of centuries past. If the news makes you 
miserable, you can flatter yourself to this extent, at least: you’re miserable 
only because youcare.

Planet's happiest human – and his app
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/29/planets-happiest-human-and-his-app>
On the other hand, who really cares if you’re miserable? There’s an 
understandable argument that it is comically self-absorbed to worry about how 
the news makes you feel. Assuming you had no direct connections to those killed 
in Orlando, say, or to the family of Jo Cox, it is hardly one of the most 
salient aspects of either story that they caused you to feel depressed. It’s 
quite possible that the direct impact of Brexit on your family will be much 
less bad than you feared: there’spowerful psychological evidence 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/posteverything/wp/2016/03/02/you-may-think-youll-move-if-trump-wins-but-heres-why-you-wont-really-do-it/>
 that such shocks leave people’s underlying happiness levels largely unchanged 
in the long term. Perhaps we should all get over ourselves, especially if the 
long-term trends are mainly positive.

The catch, though, is that widespread despair at the state of the world has 
tangible effects: for one thing, it fuels the rise of politicians such asDonald 
Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, and populist movements 
for sudden change such as the Brexit campaign. “With the drumbeat of bad news,” 
Pinker explains, “there’s an unhealthy conviction that we’re in a state of 
crisis, that things have never been worse, that they’re going to hell – and 
that opens the door to demagogic politicians. If things have ‘never been 
worse’, then our only hope is for the existing system to collapse, so that 
something better can rise from the rubble.”

In an ironic vicious circle, then, the despair that people feel – about 
developments including the rise of Trump – is the same kind of thing that fuels 
the rise of Trump. (The campaign to leave theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> seemed similarly focused on sweeping 
away the status quo and hoping for the best.) The sense that the world is an 
increasingly terrible place, whether or not it really is, is itself a 
phenomenon with real effects that we can’t afford to ignore.

But if everything feels so hopeless, how are we supposed to motivate ourselves 
to do anything about it? This is a line of questioning familiar toDerrick Jensen
 <http://www.derrickjensen.org>, a writer and co-founder of the radical 
environmental movementDeep Green Resistance <http://deepgreenresistance.org/en/>
. “There’s this idea that if you know how bad things are, you have to go around 
feeling miserable all the time,” he says. “But I’m not miserable; I’m quite a 
happy person.” We tell ourselves we need to feel hopeful in order to take 
constructive action, yet in fact, Jensen argues, hope can be a barrier to 
action. In the environmental context, it allows people to cross their fingers 
and tell themselves that some technological innovation, or a visionary 
politician, will arrive at the last minute to stave off catastrophe. As Jensen 
puts it: “Hope is what keeps us chained to the system, the conglomerate of 
people and ideas and ideals that is causing the destruction of the Earth… Hope 
is a longing for a future condition over which you have no agency; it means you 
are essentially powerless.”

The solution to despair is to let yourself feel it – then take action: 
volunteer, make a donation, join a campaign

The principle might be extended beyond environmental concerns to every 
depressing aspect of the world today. Stop telling yourself that you need to 
feel upbeat, and it begins to seem less pointless to make some tiny effort to 
address one or two of those problems: to take on a small weekly volunteering 
role here; to make a modest donation to charity there. The solution to feeling 
so despairing about the news, in short, is to let yourself feel despairing – 
and take action, too. “One of the great things about everything being so fucked 
up,” Jensen likes to say when speaking to audiences, “is that no matter where 
you look, there’s a lot of work to be done.”

Don’t kid yourself that you will single-handedly eradicate nationwide or 
global problems; instead, define and pursue small-scale goals, like joining a 
campaign with some connection to the issues that trouble you the most. Focus on 
activities you enjoy: these will be much easier to sustain. And there is 
certainly some relief in attending to your own wellbeing. Exercise, sleep, time 
spent in nature, meditation and socialising are all proven paths to increased 
happiness; they’re cliches, but only because they really work – and it isn’t 
self-indulgent to make time for them.

Paradoxically, it’s through taking action, despite not feeling happy about the 
situation, that a deeper kind of happiness can arise. (That’s certainly the 
implication of research on theemotional benefits of volunteering 
<http://bmcpublichealth.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1471-2458-13-773>, 
charitable giving, community involvement and political protest.) Jensen has 
written that people sometimes ask him why he doesn’t just kill himself, if 
things are as bad as he says. “The answer is that life is really, really good. 
I am a complex enough being that I can hold in my heart the understanding that 
we are really, really fucked, and at the same time that life is really, really 
good. I am full of rage, sorrow, joy, love, hate, despair, happiness, 
dissatisfaction, and a thousand other feelings. We are really fucked. Life is 
still really good.”
 