
The turkey has been eaten, the presents unwrapped and the Queen’s speech 
watched. Which can only mean one thing – it’s time to get ready for the 
post-Christmas sales.


No matter how much we’ve indulged over the festive season or how many gifts 
we’ve received, there’s something about the chance to bag a bargain that lures 
us out into the cold and damp, whatever we promised ourselves after last 
season’s buying binge.


Personally, I use the January sales to get a head start on next Christmas, 
buying not just presents but ribbons and gift bags, wrapping paper and cards, 
all for far less than the RRP. Perhaps I’m an extreme case: I tend to use every 
sale as an opportunity to plan ahead and save money on anything from socks to 
soap to store cupboard ingredients.


Six ways to stop the Christmas spend, spend, spend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/thinking-about-money/2015/dec/09/six-ways-to-stop-the-christmas-spend-spend-spend>
What exactly is it about a 50% off sign that makes our hearts soar so? For 
self-confessed bargain-hunter Suzanne Noble, from London, it’s all about the 
joy of discovery.


 “I love picking over things in sales and rummaging and finding designer 
clothes for a fiver,” she says. “One of the best things I ever found was a 
knee-length Moncler quilted coat in a charity shop for £12.99, which, when I 
looked on the internet, was worth about £600. I’ve worn it to death.”

Noble, founder of discount website Frugl <http://www.frugl.com/>, says being 
thrifty is in her blood. “I come from a family of bargain-hunters. My father is 
an extreme bargain-hunter and my kids are the same. I was brought up in a 
fairly comfortable household and yet saving money was always something that we 
felt good about. But I have friends who really struggled when they were growing 
up and they find the idea of bargain-hunting repulsive. One friend loves buying 
things at retail price, and part of it is that she’s so proud that she can now.”


Our attitude to money is definitely shaped by our upbringing, confirms Alex 
Gunz, a retail and marketing expert at Manchester Business School. “For some 
people, spending money is painful, so it’s a case of ‘I’ll find bargains or not 
buy things’,” he says, “whereas for other people it’s actually kind of fun. 
There’s this intrinsic satisfaction of being a hunter and having the skill to 
know when and where things are on sale.”


Businesses are well aware of these tendencies, and use them to boost sales, 
for example by playing up the element of fun.


 “Take discount bins,” says Gunz. “Some shoppers will methodically sort 
through them, perhaps separating out the blue clothes and the red clothes, and 
shop assistants will actually mess it all back up, because the point of it is a 
treasure hunt. It’s legibility versus mystery. There are some people who want 
to come in, get what they want and leave, but there are other people who want 
to explore. And the more time you spend in a shop, the more money you spend.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Fdec%2F26%2Fsecrets-of-the-january-sales-revealed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f39985f03652dbf357930956cec6fd2d2342c20%2F0_386_5759_3454%2F5759.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20survive%20the%20January%20sales&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Fdec%2F26%2Fsecrets-of-the-january-sales-revealed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20survive%20the%20January%20sales&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Fdec%2F26%2Fsecrets-of-the-january-sales-revealed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f39985f03652dbf357930956cec6fd2d2342c20%2F0_386_5759_3454%2F5759.jpg>
 Bagged it! Photograph: Irfan Khan/LA Times via Getty Images 
But why do we chase a bargain even when we don’t need what’s on offer? “In a 
consumer environment, we’re driven by our fear of loss rather than our want to 
gain,” says consumer psychologist Dimitrios Tsivrikos, of University College 
London. “We’re more scared of missing out on products or services rather than 
thinking, ‘Fantastic – gaining that product or service will make my life 
better.’ So that fear drives us to buy unnecessary things.


“In a retail environment this becomes more prominent because people copy each 
other. From an evolutionary perspective we’re competing, we don’t want to miss 
out on resources. So the more busy the stores are, the more we’re going to 
spend because we’re imitating everyone else. That’s why you see the drama on 
Black Friday – people are literally fighting each other over TVs they don’t 
really need; they’re defending their resources in a public arena.”


Retailers use this tendency to their advantage, says Tsivrikos: “When they say 
something is available for a ‘limited time only’, that sense of urgency will 
encourage us to buy something we don’t really need.”


Noble admits she has fallen prey to clever discount marketing, and made 
purchases that weren’t necessarily wise. “I bought a beautiful long suede 
Burberry coat that was about £150 reduced from £700,” she says. “I thought, 
‘It’s so gorgeous and it’s practical’, but I’ve worn it twice. In fact, I’m 
thinking about selling it. It’s been sitting in my wardrobe for three years.”


Louise Croft <http://paupertoprincess.com/>, a 26-year-old blogger from Poole, 
is more sceptical when it comes to the sales. “I always like to check them out 
– I can’t resist a browse – but I try and be strict,” she says. “Just because 
it’s 50% off it doesn’t mean it’s cheap.


“I set myself a £5 limit on clothing and I hardly ever break it. It’s the only 
way to avoid being tempted constantly. Your perception of price soon moves 
downwards and £6 feels crazy expensive.”


Instead of competing with the hordes during the sales, Croft prefers to do her 
bargain-hunting in charity and secondhand shops. “I get so excited when I find 
something great in a charity shop – it’s an amazing feeling to know you’re 
going to look as good as everyone buying high street or designer clothes, but 
with your own unique spin and at a fraction of the price.


“Whenever I’m buying things elsewhere I can’t help but convert it into charity 
shop currency. I’m that annoying person in Topshop going, ‘I could get 10 
dresses in a charity shop for that!’”


If you’re still tempted to try your luck in the sales, Tsivrikos has several 
tricks to stop you ending up with so-called bargains that you’ll never get any 
use from. “Visit the store either early in the morning or late at night,” he 
advises. “Avoid peak times, so you’re not going to be inspired to copy others 
and buy too much.


“It’s best to go on your own, because when you introduce social dynamics 
you’re more likely to try to impress each other and buy things you shouldn’t. 
Otherwise, go with people who you trust but who you don’t want to impress.


 “Also, go to a store with a full stomach - people buy more when they’re 
hungry, because they feel a need that must be satisfied.”

Alternatively you could stay home where it’s warm and dry, and avoid 
temptation in the first place. As long as you can stay away from the internet 
bargains, that is.

 