
When Ian Paisley stood up in the European Parliament in 1988 to denounce the 
Pope as the Antichrist 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1988/10/16/weekinreview/headliners-papal-audience.html>
, or when Martin McGuinness was jailed in the Irish republic in 1973 forrunning 
arms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2009/oct/10/martin-mcguinness-interview>
, no one could have imagined that either man would become the subject of a 
major international film. But that is exactly what is happening at the Venice 
film festival, as The Journey receives its world premiere, with Timothy Spall 
playing Paisley and Colm Meaney playing McGuinness.


The Journey review – Northern Ireland history lesson recast as bromance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/07/the-journey-review-ian-paisley-martin-mcguinness>
The Journey contains both literal and figurative meanings: it is about the 
friendship that developed between these clashing figures of Northern Ireland’s 
conflict-riven Troubles, and which enabled the peace process solidified by the 
Good Friday agreement to continue and achieve previously unthought-of levels of 
stability and progress. But it also alludes to a real-life journey in a private 
jet the pair took together when they were thought to be barely on speaking 
terms, returning fromnegotiations at St Andrews 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2006/oct/08/uk.northernireland> in Fife, 
that appeared to trigger the thaw in their relations.


Little is known about what, if anything, was said in their conversation during 
the trip, but the idea was enough to plant a seed in the mind of Nick Hamm, the 
Belfast-born director of The Hole andKilling Bono 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/apr/03/killing-bono-neil-mccormick-review>
. Hamm says: “Paisley and McGuinness not only had a friendship but also a 
semi-political relationship of need. There’s no doubt that these two 
individuals were implacably opposed to each other, but what fascinated us was 
how these two people – so different in age, morality and politics – ended up 
having a friendship. And it was a friendship that to a certain extent 
underpinned the peace agreements after 2006. If they hadn’t had that 
relationship, it’s my understanding that the back-channelling that went on 
after that would not have been so successful.


“How do you dramatise that? We knew for a long time that Northern Irish 
politicians often travelled together, to avoid getting shot or blown up, 
basically. They had an underlying agreement, even though they never admitted 
it. That for us was the starting point.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fpaisley-mcguinness-journey-venice-film-festival-nick-hamm-colin-bateman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f6b4039c430ad071523622250ddd4c7ab516996%2F0_133_1861_2571%2F1861.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Paisley%20and%20McGuinness's%20journey%20to%20peace%20ended%20at%20Venice%20film%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fpaisley-mcguinness-journey-venice-film-festival-nick-hamm-colin-bateman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Paisley%20and%20McGuinness%27s%20journey%20to%20peace%20ended%20at%20Venice%20film%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fpaisley-mcguinness-journey-venice-film-festival-nick-hamm-colin-bateman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f6b4039c430ad071523622250ddd4c7ab516996%2F0_133_1861_2571%2F1861.jpg>
 Writer Colin Bateman. Photograph: Crispin Rodwell/Rex Features 
The script for The Journey was written by Colin Bateman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/colin-bateman>, the prolific Northern 
Irish novelist, who says that the lack of concrete information made his job a 
little easier, and allowed for some manipulation of detail to improve the 
film’s dramatic potential. Bateman says: “It would be difficult to set a film 
on a small jet so we made the decision to put the film in a car; that allowed 
us to stop, have them get out, and things like that.


“After the script was written, we went and met with both the Paisley and the 
McGuinness camps, and they each told us completely different versions of what 
happened on the plane. The Paisley side said: ‘Oh they got on fine, they were 
joking and laughing right from the start.’ The McGuinness side said: ‘Nothing 
happened, they just said hello.’ That freed me up. At the end of the day, all 
films based on historical events are fiction anyway – even documentaries. If 
you weren’t there, you’re just putting things together afterwards. This is 
drama: we’re not pretending it’s 100% fact; it’s a story that explores how 
things might have got to where they are today.”


The Journey takes place in 2006, during negotiations for what became known as 
theSt Andrews agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2006/oct/17/northernireland.devolution1>: 
these were talks aimed at restarting the Northern Ireland Assembly, which had 
been in effective suspension since apolice raid on the Stormont offices of Sinn 
Féin in 2002 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stormontgate>. In the intervening 
period, Paisley’s Democratic Unionist party, which had opposed the 1998 Good 
Friday agreement, had overtaken the Ulster Unionists as Northern Ireland’s 
largestunionist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/notesandqueries/query/0,,-185487,00.html> party. 
The uncompromising Paisley therefore became the central figure in the St 
Andrews negotiations, and the presumptive nominee for first minister should 
agreement be possible.


McGuinness’s position was equally critical: he was chief negotiator for Sinn 
Féin, who by 2003 had become the largestnationalist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/08/nationalists-northern-ireland-elections-good-friday-agreement>
 party in the Northern Ireland assembly. However, Bateman says, at the start of 
the St Andrews talks “they had literally never spoken to the unionists”, and, 
according to Hamm, refused to cooperate with the UK government in security 
matters, and were not part of the unspoken travel agreement. “They didn’t have 
any of that,” says Hamm. “The Northern Ireland office used to rent private 
jets, and we knew the one that McGuinness and Paisley shared had been rented 
fromChris de Burgh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/nov/05/chris-de-burgh-family-values>
. That was hilarious in itself.”


“What happened on that journey we don’t know, but what we do know is very soon 
after that they sat together in Stormont, privately, and started to make sense 
of the peace agreement.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fpaisley-mcguinness-journey-venice-film-festival-nick-hamm-colin-bateman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcac5ca79976d3c4d006f58e531fe5c8755fe2357%2F0_0_2500_1667%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Paisley%20and%20McGuinness's%20journey%20to%20peace%20ended%20at%20Venice%20film%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fpaisley-mcguinness-journey-venice-film-festival-nick-hamm-colin-bateman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Paisley%20and%20McGuinness%27s%20journey%20to%20peace%20ended%20at%20Venice%20film%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fpaisley-mcguinness-journey-venice-film-festival-nick-hamm-colin-bateman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcac5ca79976d3c4d006f58e531fe5c8755fe2357%2F0_0_2500_1667%2F2500.jpg>
 After the thaw … Ian Paisley, left, is sworn in as Northern Ireland’s first 
minister at Stormont in 2007, with Martin McGuinness as deputy first minister. 
Photograph: Reuters 
Hamm says that as soon as Bateman turned in his script, the ball started 
rolling very quickly. “It was so good it attracted talent and money 
immediately, and it got financed more quickly than any other movie I’ve worked 
on.” Bateman has proved adept in the past at picking his way through the 
political minefield that the Troubles still represent – but in any case seems 
more exercised about a Photoshopped version of the cover of his first novel, 
Divorcing Jack, onto which the face of “Mrs Terror”,Isis propagandist Sally 
Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/17/isis-british-connections-jihadists-bring-fight-to-west>
, has been superimposed. (“It’s the Daily Mail’s fault. Every time they run a 
story on Islamic State,they reproduce it 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3609046/I-wouldn-t-Central-London-June-July-ENGLAND-BOOM-British-ISIS-recruiter-known-Mrs-Terror-issues-chilling-threat-summer-terror-campaign.html>
.”)

Northern Ireland power sharing saved
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/17/northern-ireland-power-sharing-saved>
Neither unionist nor republican side has been permitted to screen or indeed 
veto any part of the film, Hamm says. “We were clear when we set out we wanted 
to make a fair, balanced film, but that doesn’t mean we were going to be 
anodyne – we were prepared to make both sides feel uncomfortable. We wanted to 
be respectful of both parties’ ideologies. You can watch this film as a 
nationalist and feel equally uncomfortable and celebratory as anyone from the 
unionist side. Otherwise we are wasting our time.”


Ultimately, however, The Journey’s success is likely to be judged by how it 
fares outside the UK and Ireland, where Paisley and McGuinness are far less 
well-known figures, and where their individual political stances will be less 
resonant. Hamm is confident that it will translate. “In the end, it’s about two 
people who are relatively unlikable, and represent relatively reprehensible 
views, culturally speaking, to most people as we understand it. Neither was 
that popular, in global terms, but we are trying to say something about the 
nature of politics: in the end, you have to talk. It doesn’t matter if you 
don’t like what someone is saying; you have to sit down with them.”
 