
Baby talk <https://www.theguardian.com/science/2004/dec/20/evolution.science>, 
it’s generally agreed, is silly and self-indulgent and does nothing for the 
baby, an approach as faulty in its logic as that of the English person speaking 
louder that the non-English person might better understand him. I don’t do baby 
talk to my babies. I do, however, do something that, I realised recently, is 
almost as bad – an over-correction every bit as mannered as pulling faces or 
piping up in shrill tones – and that is talking to them as if they are 40.

There is a rationale for this: it aids language development, increases vocab 
and doesn’t condescend to the baby. But I suspect that’s not why I or anyone 
else does it. The real reason, I think, is that it is a discreet form of status 
signalling, an effort to distinguish oneself from all those pandering 
helicopter parents and to assert, if only to oneself, that in spite of spending 
a large part of each day changing nappies or talking about Elmo, one can still 
formulate a sentence with subclauses.

I noticed it at the park at the weekend. A man was pushing his toddler in the 
swing next to ours, and the child, who wanted to get down because he preferred 
another swing, was revving up for a tantrum. “What you’re doing is absurd,” 
said his father in measured tones. “You have free will, of course. But you are 
proposing to stop doing something you’re enjoying because you can’t do 
something you think you’d enjoy more but that isn’t available at this time, and 
that is simply an absurd position to hold.”

This was, on one level, funny – just as I find it funny, if my children grab 
Madame Bovary from the shelf, to give them a detailed plot summary, or to point 
to the Play-Doh snakes they’re making and start talking about genetic variants. 
But it was also a performance and, as such, was less for the benefit of the 
child than for the other parents within earshot – and this struck me as creepy, 
or at any rate sufficiently detached from the kid’s interests to undo the 
advertised benefits. I resolved to stop doing it myself.

Then, on Sunday, I overheard a conversation on a subway platform and decided 
there was a middle way. A woman stood with her young daughter, looking at the 
printed-out changes to the schedule, which, she said, were a vast improvement 
on subway statements of yore, which used to be in a tiny font and didn’t accord 
with any recognisable reality. There was no archness in her tone – it was quiet 
and conversational and completely in earnest – and the child, who was about 
four and can’t have understood the half of it, nodded gravely and looked up at 
her mother, rapt by the assumption she was taking it in.

Try it? You won’t like it 


Sometimes old formulations surface unbidden, bypassing my conscious responses. 
One night this week we had spinach pie for dinner, or rather I did, since I 
couldn’t get anyone under the age of two to eat a bite. “Don’t like it,” came 
the response from the first, then the second child, to which I replied with the 
swiftness of reflex, yanking me back 35 years to a different table, a different 
time. “How do you know if you haven’t tried it?” As soon as the words were out 
of my mouth, I knew they were futile. For whatever reason, all the food items 
my mother subjected to this pat rationalisation are the things I continue to 
hate.

Back to the bad old days 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fhow-should-you-talk-to-your-child-parents%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f493a38b7e112dda77377f30a3ae90bd8f859f3%2F103_0_1793_1076%2F1793.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20should%20you%20talk%20to%20your%20baby%3F%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fhow-should-you-talk-to-your-child-parents%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20should%20you%20talk%20to%20your%20baby%3F%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fhow-should-you-talk-to-your-child-parents%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f493a38b7e112dda77377f30a3ae90bd8f859f3%2F103_0_1793_1076%2F1793.jpg>
 Hidden Figures: the film comes out early next year. Photograph: Hopper Stone, 
SMPSP/© 2016 Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation 
I went to a screening of Hidden Figures 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RK8xHq6dfAo&t=2m59s> this week, a forthcoming 
movie about African-American women doing groundbreaking work at Nasa in the 
1960s. It was a good film; but what struck me is that, with Trump as 
president-elect, something has happened to the feelgood factor of considering 
how far we’ve come from the bad old days.

This movie, which focuses on a little-known corner of academic segregation, 
ends with a character meeting Barack Obama, the implication being that history 
is an ultimately progressive force. This was probably never true; but for the 
first time, that fallacy feels starkly apparent.
 