
One of the most common reasons people cite for not opening a bank account or 
share dealing account on the internet has to do with concerns for security. The 
launch yesterday of a hi-tech national police unit to tackle cyber-crime proves 
the police are taking such internet fraud seriously. Computer hackers have 
attacked at least four large internet banks in Britain, although, so far, no 
customer is known to have lost money. Banks are reluctant to report the thefts 
because of the fear of bad publicity.

While organised fraud is something only the police can tackle, there are steps 
that consumers can take to ensure their internet banking or share dealing is as 
secure as possible.

When you sign up with an online dealer they should tell you, under the Data 
Protection Act <http://www.dataprotection.gov.uk/principl.htm>, whether they 
intend to pass your details on to a third party, and give you the option to 
deny the request to do so. They may or may not give you the option of being 
removed from mailing lists for information about their products and services.

Once signed up, you will be sent a confirmation of your username, which is the 
first bit of information you give when you log in. You also need to remember 
your password. Don't use the same password for several sites, and don't write 
it down. Try to construct a password that is not a recognisable word, and 
instead choose a list of letters and numbers that hold special significance for 
you.

When you go to a site and log in to a secure area, the location address at the 
top of the site should change.

The beginning of the address, which usually reads "http://" should change to 
"https://" to indicate you have switched into a protected zone.

If you are using Microsoft Internet Explorer  
<http://www.microsoft.com/windows/ie/default.htm>or Netscape Navigator  
<http://my.netscape.com/?s=>on a PC or Mac, a small padlock icon should appear 
in the bottom right-hand corner of your screen.

You have to use whatever internet defences there are, and ask companies about 
their compensation policy if thieves worm their way into secure areas.

Other measures you can take to help the banks and brokers: 

 Change your password frequently. This is a difficult habit to get into but 
it is a good security measure.

 Log out when you have finished your session. Don't leave your computer 
terminal unattended while you are still logged on.

 Try not to let people look over your shoulder when you are conducting a 
transaction.

 Treat e-commerce as you would credit card transactions - don't hand out 
personal information and be sure you know whom you are dealing with.

 Keep a record of transactions. Most sites give you confirmation of this 
onscreen and you can print out the details. Others send you confirmation in the 
post.

 Beware of spelling mistakes when inputting the address of the website. 
Hackers can register common misspellings of well-known companies as domain 
names.

Marianne Curphey is the editor of Money and the author of E-cash, the 
complete guide to managing your money online. Find out how to control your own 
finances, search for a mortgage online, move bank accounts, submit your tax 
form online, invest in shares and find the best websites for financial 
information. E-cash is published by Pearson Education and is available at 
bookshops or viawww.uk.bol.com 
<http://www.uk.bol.com/cec/cstage?eccookie=&ecaction=bolprditmview&PrdId=>
 