
While Donald Trump’s bizarre coronation as the Republican presidential 
candidate unfolded in Cleveland this week, some 400 miles to the east another 
king of the American right was facing execution.

Roger Ailes <https://www.theguardian.com/media/roger-ailes>, Fox News chairman 
and chief executive, Rupert Murdoch’s closest general and èminence grise to a 
gallery of Republican presidents, was negotiating his exit from a job he has 
held for 20 years, his reputation in shreds amid allegations of sexual 
impropriety at the network – the latest reportedly from Fox News’s brightest 
star.

As Fox News parsed every second of Trump’s accession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/19/donald-trump-nominated-president-republican-convention>
 in Cleveland, Fox PR people batted away reporters keen to ask star anchor 
Megyn Kelly whether she had beensexually harassed by Ailes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/18/roger-ailes-fired-fox-news-sexual-harassment-gretchen-carlson>
. 21st Century Fox, the news channel’s parent company, had already confirmed an 
investigation into earlier allegations of harassment but attempted to dampen 
down speculation that Ailes was out in a series of chilly statements.

Roger Ailes built the Republican party – now both are crumbling in plain sight
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/20/roger-ailes-republican-party-convention-crisis>
In a scene that echoed the countless political sex scandals Ailes has 
overseen, the fallen Fox boss left the News Corp building on Sixth Avenue in 
New York in the supportive company of his wife, Elizabeth Tilson, on Tuesday 
night, trailed by photographers.

By Wednesday morning the game appeared to be over. Under the headline “What 
The Fox!”, Murdoch’s New York Post reported: “Roger Ailes, who built top-rated 
cable networkFox News <https://www.theguardian.com/media/fox-news>, was out as 
chairman last night, sources said.” In the bottom right corner of the front 
page a big, smiling picture of Ailes was inset with the images of two women he 
allegedly propositioned: Gretchen Carlson, who has sued Ailes, and Kelly.

A day later he was out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/21/roger-ailes-leaves-fox-news-sexual-harassment-claims>
. In a statement, Murdoch praised Ailes for his “remarkable contribution to our 
company and our country”. In their own statement, Murdoch’s sons, no fans of 
Ailes, also praised the fallen TV king but noted: “We continue our commitment 
to maintaining a work environment based on trust and respect.”

The beginning of the end for the once unassailable Ailes came earlier this 
month when Carlson, a former co-host of top rated Fox & Friends,filed suit in a 
New Jersey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/06/fox-news-gretchen-carlson-roger-ailes-sexual-harassment>
 court, claiming Ailes “sabotaged her career because she refused his sexual 
advances and [she] complained about severe and pervasive sexual harassment”.

Ailes has denied any wrongdoing and characterized Carlson’s claims as revenge 
for her demotion following a ratings slide. Kelly has yet to comment on the 
allegations, first made in New York magazine, that she was also the target of 
Ailes’s unwanted attentions.

It’s an ignominious end to a stellar career. Before creating the US’s most 
popular cable network Ailes helped Richard Nixon, Ronald Reagan and George HW 
Bush capture the White House.Murdoch told Ailes’s biographer 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/2013/03/roger-ailes-biography-excerpt>, Zev 
Chafets, the two “have a close personal friendship”.

Tellingly, Murdoch has not ridden to Ailes’s defence. Not all the Murdoch clan 
are fans: his sons James and Lachlan, heirs to the empire, have both clashed 
with Ailes. They reportedly regard his politically and socially conservative 
views as anachronistic and, in a battle that mirrors the one going on in the 
Republican party, have pushed for Fox to be more inclusive and less combative 
on issues such as race, sexuality and gender.

Matthew Freud, the British PR executive and husband of Murdoch’s daughter 
Elisabeth, told the New York Times in 2010 that he and other family members 
were “ashamed and sickened” by Ailes’s “horrendous and sustained disregard of 
the journalistic standards”. But while Fox was flying Rupert wasn’t listening, 
not even to his sons, and Ailes seemed untouchable.

Just over a decade ago, Lachlan Murdoch lost a corporate spat with Ailes that 
led him to quit the US for Australia; Ailes literally moved into his office. A 
little over a year ago, Murdoch announced his sons were taking over more of the 
running of the company. Speculation was rife that Ailes was out, but Murdoch 
stepped in to kill that speculation and renewed his favourite’s contract with a
ringing endorsement. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/25/roger-ailes-renews-fox-news-contract>

The two had “a special relationship”, said Murdoch. “Lachlan, James and I are 
delighted that Roger will be leading key businesses for us and our shareholders 
for years to come, and he has our unwavering support.”

Perhaps he could have survived one lawsuit. But with Kelly reportedly 
encouraging other women to come forward and Carlson’s lawyers claiminganother 
20 women have contacted them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/21/roger-ailes-sexual-harassment-accusations-fox-news>
 about Ailes, the Most Powerful Man in Television had become a liability.

“Elite espouser of conservative family values undone by sex scandal” seems 
like a perfect Fox story. At least, if the protagonist was a Democrat. But this 
is one sorry tale that Fox, and theRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans>, must wish could be swept 
away, at least until after November’s election.


Trump versus Hillary Clinton is shaping up to be one of the fiercest political 
dog fights in recent history. After a rocky start to their relationship, with
Trump attacking Kelly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/20/megyn-kelly-donald-trump-fox-news-truce>
 and the network, peace has been declared – a peace that Ailes had brokered. 
Now the Republicans have lost their most decorated general even before the real 
battle has even begun.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Froger-ailes-fox-news-ideology-conservative-baby-boomers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16de86d8cae194e5be85c97423527f30182f8eb4%2F0_0_3935_2361%2F3935.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Roger%20Ailes%20disgraced%20Fox%20News%20and%20tarnished%20a%20unique%20legacy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Froger-ailes-fox-news-ideology-conservative-baby-boomers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Roger%20Ailes%20disgraced%20Fox%20News%20and%20tarnished%20a%20unique%20legacy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Froger-ailes-fox-news-ideology-conservative-baby-boomers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16de86d8cae194e5be85c97423527f30182f8eb4%2F0_0_3935_2361%2F3935.jpg>
 Roger Ailes leaves Fox News on Tuesday with his wife, Elizabeth Tilson. 
Photograph: Drew Angerer/Getty Images 
In his book The Loudest Voice in the Room, New York magazine reporter Gabriel 
Sherman – who broke much of this week’s developments 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2016/07/sources-kelly-said-ailes-sexually-harassed-her.html>
 – details the Fox boss’s management style: he does not seek out breaking news 
or scoops, he looks for through-lines and narratives, for ways to shoot and 
stage the news, not what news to break.


Benghazi, Clinton’s emails, Obama’s birth certificate: these are stories that 
Fox has pounded in its relentless drive to stir up its loyal viewers. But it 
seems it’s the ideology behind these topics as much as the news itself that 
interests Ailes. The common theme? Liberals are liars.

It’s been a lucrative philosophy: Fox News’s revenue is much larger than its 
cable competitors CNN and MSNBC, and its newsgathering operation is far, far 
smaller. “Fox has nothing like the Time Warner Center of the Atlanta CNN 
headquarters,” said one commentator who has regularly appeared on Fox. “Fox is 
far scrappier, CNN an impressive, vast organization.”

Fox News’s “top-rated” status is significant in light of the uniquely 
TV-centric election going on at the moment. Its ratings aren’t necessarily that 
attractive to advertisers unless they’re committed to the news format, because 
of the age of the network’s demographic – Fox’s median viewing age is 67, and 
at 49 viewers are assumed to have formed their buying habits and don’t pull 
nearly as many ad dollars from firms trying to find converts to new products. 
But advertising is secondary for Fox News anyway – the network is in 94.7m 
households, for each of which it receives a dollar a month.

But it turns out that demographic is incredibly important for other, even more 
significant reasons than the welfare of advertisers, namely that there’s a 
product that changes every few years in which baby boomers are 
disproportionately interested: politicians.

Young voters “punch below their weight” at the polls, according to a recent 
report by Pew research, which said in May that though voting-age millennials 
were now as populous as baby boomers, they were not nearly as inclined to show 
up in force. Boomers began turning 65 in 2011.

In Ailes, a man who would personally hand out conservative talking points to 
commentators on his network’s slate of mostly talk shows, the Republicans (and 
Murdoch) found a man who was uniquely tuned to the fears and desires of those 
ageing, conservative voters.

Born in 1940 in Warren, Ohio, Ailes had a tough childhood. A haemophiliac, his 
father reportedly beat him with an electrical cord. When his parents divorced 
his mother claimed Ailes’s father had threatened to kill her.

After graduating from Ohio University and working for campus radio, Ailes 
started at the very bottom of the broadcast world as a property assistant on 
Cleveland’s NBC affiliate, KYW-TV, and worked his way up to producer and then 
executive producer of that station’s locally produced variety program, The Mike 
Douglas Show. Within six years of beginning as a lowly prop assistant, he led 
the show to national syndication and had an Emmy to show for his efforts.

For two years he tried to run a wire service-style conservative syndicated TV 
network called TVN for beer magnate Joseph Coors, a rare professional failure, 
and after a long stint in political consulting and speechwriting for everyone 
from Nixon to Barbara Bush, he returned to the medium he loved to breathe life 
into CNBC, a then sleepy financial news network, before founding Fox News for 
Murdoch in 1996. From there, every step of the way, his political instincts 
have informed and shaped his subordinates’ news coverage.

Fox News took the concept of a popular and inexpensive medium, talk radio – 
Bill O’Reilly, Sean Hannity and many of Fox’s other major draws over the years 
are seasoned and talented radio hosts – and turned it into attractively staged 
television, complete with a few reporters to provide only as much gravitas as 
necessary. It wasn’t news on the cheap, it was a new kind of entertainment, and 
one at which Ailes proved the master. Until Tuesday. Now the news he once 
showed such ability to control has spun him out the door.
 