
Spare a thought for a vegetarian this Christmas. The annual meat festival can 
be a trying time for anyone who eschews flesh for ethical or health reasons. 
The traditionalChristmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> 
centrepiece of a whole turkey or roast pork with its crown of crackling is an 
upwards-raised finger at ideals the vego holds dear. Moral high ground? Just 
think of those innocent cattle sweetly a-lowing at the birth of the baby that 
started this whole palaver. Why shouldn’t the season of goodwill extend to all 
creatures great and small?
 You don’t need duck fat to cook the perfect roast potato. Photograph: Dan 
Matthews for the Guardian. Food styling: Jake Sargesson 
Christmas isn’t about point scoring. It’s about survival, and not feeling like 
the poor relative when everyone around you is wiping gravy off their chin. 
Being a vegetarian at Christmas is much like being a vegetarian at any other 
time of the year, only with far greater reserves of forbearance required. You 
can rely on one or all of the following things happening: A well-meaning but 
definitionally challenged relative will say, “But you can eat prawns, can’t 
you?’’ A self-styled comedian – usually an older male relative – will wave a 
piece of crackling in your face saying, “Go on, you know you want to.” A bunch 
of junior relatives will chime in – “But vegetables have feelings too!’’

Ignore them. Revenge will come later, in the form of that soap-on-a-rope Kris 
Kringle gift. For the moment, the best chances of survival begin with getting 
in on the cooking action. Lip service to vegetarians is a very popular national 
sport, characterised by the liberal application of cold pasta salad. But you 
can save yourself from the stodge.

First, decide what sort of vegetarian (or vegan) you want to be. Special 
occasions put into sharp relief the vegetarian paradox bubbling away under 
celebratory occasions. Call it the Christmas conundrum. Is it necessary to 
mimic the meat hierarchy by having one star of the show and a constellation of 
support dishes? If you decide the table needs a centrepiece, it’s easy enough 
to Google “tofu turkey’’.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Faustralia-food-blog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F24%2Fhow-to-survive-christmas-if-youre-a-vegetarian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F24%2F1419381364812%2F2e7540a3-82cd-4b9e-83ae-3092bcfe2629-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20survive%20Christmas%20if%20you're%20a%20vegetarian&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Faustralia-food-blog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F24%2Fhow-to-survive-christmas-if-youre-a-vegetarian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20survive%20Christmas%20if%20you%27re%20a%20vegetarian&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Faustralia-food-blog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F24%2Fhow-to-survive-christmas-if-youre-a-vegetarian%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F24%2F1419381364812%2F2e7540a3-82cd-4b9e-83ae-3092bcfe2629-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Yotam Ottolenghi’s parsleyand lemon cannellini bean salad. Photograph: The 
Guardian 
But haven’t we grown out of that? Christmas is not a time for tofu. Nor is it 
a time for veggie burgers or pasta. There are vego riches to be found in the 
field of Asian cookery, but laksa hardly comes out singing Jingle Bells. For 
the best approximation of a classic Anglo Christmas feast:

 * Stuff it. Stuffing doesn’t need meat. Stuffing does not need to actively 
stuff. Stuffing is an end to itself. Sage and onion, fried bread, a teeny bit 
of garlic, throw in the oven wrapped in foil. Call it confit stuffing if you 
want to get all poncy about it. Tastes magnificent with roasted potatoes. Who 
needs something’s flesh? 
 * Make the potatoes your business. Quick. Before someone else does and 
decides to get all Fergus Henderson by cooking them in duck fat. There’s 
nothing wrong with a good old-fashioned olive oil potato. Impress the pants off 
everyone by doing double-cooked potatoes, if the mood takes you – hell, even 
triple cook them. But don’t let yourself be denied their golden, salty crunch. 
 * Gravy. Same principle as stuffing. Gravy does not need meat to make sense. 
Make yours with butter, onion, mushrooms, good-quality vegetable stock and a 
dash of cream. 
 * Vegetables no longer have to sit at the back of the bus. Yottam Ottolenghi 
is the man of the season when it comes to vegetables justifying their existence 
without recourse to sad side dish status. Also see the likes of Karen Martini 
and Jamie Oliver, both accessible recipe writers learned in the ways of the 
vibrant, textural salad. Celebrate the fact any chef worth his or her sea salt 
is hip to toasted nuts and ancient grains. If Christmas isn’t a time to crack 
out the ancient grains then when is? 
 * Embrace the festive ingredients. Cherries. Hazelnuts. Red berries. Figs. 
Stonefruit make an excellent addition to salads when grilled, boosting the 
flavour profile of just about anything. 
 * Give thanks. It’s easier to be a vegetarian in an Antipodean Christmas than 
a northern hemisphere one. Embrace the fact that it will probably be 35 degrees 
followed by a thunderstorm at around 3pm. European vegetarian Christmas 
suggestions invariably involve a great deal of handwringing about what is 
missing rather than what is available. Feel smug. 
 * If all else fails, drink.  