
Tony Hsieh, who runs the online shoe retailer Zappos, is worth more than half 
a billion pounds. Helives in a camper van with his pet alpaca 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-switch/wp/2015/07/21/why-a-ceo-worth-840-million-lives-in-a-trailer-park-with-his-pet-alpaca/>
, and likes to run oddball experiments at his company: last year, he essentially
abolished all the managers 
<https://newrepublic.com/article/122965/can-billion-dollar-corporation-zappos-be-self-organized>
. In short, he’s a wealthy eccentric. So when I heard he’d developed an amazing 
solution to email overload, I wasn’t hopeful; I assumed it involved paying 
someone else to answer it (maybe the alpaca?). But I was wrong. Hsieh hasn’t 
“solved email” – spoiler alert: nobody ever will – but after testing his 
system, I can report that it makes things much saner. He calls it“Yesterbox” 
<http://www.yesterbox.com/>, because the premise is that you should stop 
focusing on email received today, except when urgent, and instead try to deal 
with everything that came in yesterday. It’s an idea so simple, your first 
response might legitimately be, “Huh? What difference could that make?” A big 
one, it turns out.

Trying to stay on top of email is a losing battle partly because there’s 
always more coming in and partly because it’s self-defeating: sending an email
usually triggers another in response 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/dec/12/time-management-asset-debt-oliver-burkeman/print>
, leaving you no better off. But yesterday’s email isn’t like that. Yesterday 
has already happened, so the number of incoming messages is fixed. Not even the 
meanest boss or neediest friend can make further claims on your time in the 
past. And so, in your Yesterbox, you’re no longer on a treadmill: one email 
dealt with means one fewer to deal with; the target you’re aiming for isn’t 
receding constantly into the distance. “There is a sense of completion when 
you’re done, which is amazing,” Hsieh writes. (In Gmail, using today’s date as 
an example, you can show yesterday’s emails by searching “before:2016/4/15 in: 
inbox”.) Admittedly, if you’ve thousands of emails from earlier than yesterday, 
you’ll need a separate plan for those. Try moving them into a folder called 
“backlog”, and spending half an hour a day on them until they’re gone.

The Yesterbox strategy turns your inbox into what the productivity coach Mark 
Forster calls a “closed list”: it can’t get any bigger. His book,Do It Tomorrow 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/do-it-tomorrow-and-other-secrets-of-time-management.html>
, explores ways of applying the “yesterday” focus to tasks besides email. One 
option is to write your to-do list for the day, rule a line underneath, and add 
all further incoming to-dos beneath it, except for emergencies. Aim to finish 
the tasks above the line. Then, next day, draw another line, so that 
yesterday’s incoming items become today’s closed list, and so on.

What does your inner voice say to you?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/18/what-does-your-inner-voice-say-to-you>
What Yesterbox won’t do, regrettably, is turn a fundamentally unmanageable 
workload into a manageable one – but productivity tricks can’t do that. Rather, 
in addition to that “sense of completion”, it’s powerfully clarifying: if your 
average daily output isn’t a match for your average daily input, it won’t let 
you trick yourself otherwise. Then you can start making tough decisions: which 
emails to strategically neglect; which deserve only short answers. When you 
focus on today, it’s easy to convince yourself that victory over email is 
coming, sometime in the future. Forget it. Start living in the past instead.

oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com>
 