
I know I risk having my British citizenship revoked for saying this, but I 
admired how Jonathan Dunne – the American behindthose “Tube chat” badges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/29/tube-chat-campaign-provokes-horror-among-london-commuters>
, encouraging conversation on the London Underground – responded to the 
hostility his project provoked. He ordered twice as many badges, recruited 
volunteers,and plunged back into the fray 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/londons-most-persistent-american-will-not-quit-until-tube-riders-talk-to-each-other-1476364466>
. Don’t get me wrong: true to my nationality, my first instinct is that anyone 
proposing more conversation between strangers should be imprisoned without 
trial. But on reflection, that reaction’s odd. After all, Tube chat isn’t 
encouragingunwanted conversation (if you aren’t up for talking, don’t wear a 
badge). The main objection seemed to be how excruciating it would be to have to 
listen to other passengers’ stumbling attempts at dialogue. And when you’re 
that horrified by the prospect of humans willingly engaging in mundane 
activities in public, isn’t it possible the problem isn’t with them?

Because the truth – according to an accumulating body of research, and now a 
book,When Strangers Meet 
<http://www.simonandschuster.com/books/When-Strangers-Meet/Kio-Stark/TED-Books/9781501119989>
, by theAmerican educator Kio Stark 
<https://www.ted.com/talks/kio_stark_why_you_should_talk_to_strangers> – is 
that people really are happier when they talk to strangers, even when they 
predict they’ll hate it. This topic quickly gets derailed byquestions of street 
harassment 
<http://nymag.com/scienceofus/2016/09/questioning-a-books-advice-to-talk-to-strangers.html>
, but Stark is clear she’s not excusing that. (Nobody who thinks it’s OK to 
pester a woman to remove her headphones,as per that sleazy blogpost that went 
viral this summer 
<http://www.themodernman.com/dating/how-to-talk-to-a-woman-who-is-wearing-headphones.html>
, will find solace in Stark’s argument.)

But her book suggests that the right way to combat a culture of obnoxious 
interactions between strangers is to foster a culture of sensitive, empathetic 
ones instead – not to shut down the whole idea, which feels rather like 
capitulating to the creeps. Done right, she says, encounters between strangers 
create “beautiful and surprising interruptions in the expected narrative of 
your daily life… You find questions whose answers you thought you knew”.

Can moaning ever make you happy? | Oliver Burkeman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/04/minor-irritations-complaints-make-you-happy-buddhism-oliver-burkeman>
Legitimate fears of harassment aside, we probably hate the idea of striking up 
such conversations because it combines two ubiquitous stumbling blocks on the 
path to happiness. One is how bad we are at “affective forecasting”, or 
predicting what will make us happy:when asked by researchers to imagine talking 
to someone on the train or bus <http://psycnet.apa.org/psycinfo/2014-28833-001/>
, plenty of people are appalled; when asked actually to do it, they report 
enjoying the journey more. The other problem is “pluralistic ignorance”, 
whereby we follow a rule because we assume everyone else supports it, when 
really they’re assuming likewise. And so the carriage remains mute, even though 
many might be secretly yearning to talk.

I don’t expect the curmudgeons reading this to buy the argument. I barely buy 
it myself, which is why my recent attempts to talk more to strangers have been 
so faltering. (Also, I’m still traumatised by trying it on a recent trip to 
Sweden, apparently the only country worse at public small talk than the Brits.) 
But that’s the thing about affective forecasting: we can’t trust our own 
predictions. So you’re certain you’d never wear a Tube chat badge? Maybe that’s 
just a sign you should.

oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com>
 