
Sleep deprivation used to be a badge of honor: a sign you were busy and 
important and very much in demand. Snoozing was losing and sleep was for wimps. 
Now, however, Arianna Huffington’sThe Sleep Revolution 
<http://ariannahuffington.com/books/the-sleep-revolution-hc>, a call-to-bed 
that promises to transform your life, “one night at a time”, is a New York 
Times bestseller, and Huffington is crisscrossing the country urging people to 
“sleep their way to the top”.


The Sleep Revolution by Arianna Huffington – digested read
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/17/the-sleep-revolution-by-arianna-huffington-digested-read>
 Meanwhile, the sleep industry has woken up big time and a slew of startups 
are reinventing where, when and how we sleep – as well as how much we’re 
prepared to pay for it. Companies like Casper are gettingmillions of dollars 
<http://www.inc.com/magazine/201603/liz-welch/casper-changing-mattress-industry.html>
 in funding to disrupt the mattress market. Sleep salons likeYeloSpa 
<http://yelospa.com/> let urbanites nap – just a $1 a minute!

For the more upmarket snoozer, luxury hotels are offering “sleep retreats” 
<http://www.corinthia.com/press-releases/corinthia-hotel-london-launches-sumptuous-sleep-retreat-and-combines-5-star-luxury-with-medical-physical-and-nutritional-expertise/>
; north of $1,000 gets you dinner and a movie about sleep. You might want to 
pack your performance pajamas; amoisture-wicking cami 
<http://www.sheex.com/sheex-womens-cami/d/1061_c_300_cl_1176> for a cooler 
night’s sleep sets you back $66. And if you’re staying home, you can upgrade 
your bedroom with everything from amattress cover 
<https://www.eightsleep.com/buy-now/> ($249) with a sensor that tracks your 
sleep to a brainwave-monitoringsleeping mask <https://neuroon.com/> ($299) that 
lets you nap more efficiently.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fsleep-habits-eight-hours-health-wellness-arianna-huffington%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86334df72cc6dda357146b5d35257830b592f978%2F38_0_1452_871%2F1452.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20a%20good%20night's%20sleep%20became%20the%20ultimate%20status%20symbol&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fsleep-habits-eight-hours-health-wellness-arianna-huffington%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20a%20good%20night%27s%20sleep%20became%20the%20ultimate%20status%20symbol&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fsleep-habits-eight-hours-health-wellness-arianna-huffington%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86334df72cc6dda357146b5d35257830b592f978%2F38_0_1452_871%2F1452.jpg>
 Neuroon, a ‘smart’ sleep mask. Photograph: Neuroon 
Sleep hasn’t just been corporatized – it has infiltrated corporations. A 
number of companies already boast nap pods and Huffingtonpredicts 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/arianna-huffington-office-nap-rooms-conference-rooms_us_57025cbfe4b0a06d58060ff1>
 that nap rooms in offices are going to be “as common as conference rooms” in 
the next two years.

So how did this happen? How did sleep, something humans have done since long 
beforeHuffington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/01/arianna-huffington-uber-directors-huffington-post>
 awoke to it, suddenly become so fashionable?

A number of factors feed into the way we’re putting a higher value on sleep – 
both culturally and financially. Health and wellness have become more 
aspirational, for one.

Our bodies have become input/output devices to be monitored and optimized, and 
sleep is another data set to be tracked

Getting enough sleep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/17/the-sleep-revolution-by-arianna-huffington-digested-read>
 is a natural fit for the sort of lifestyle in which paying $10 for green juice 
and $34 for a SoulCycle class is the norm. Then there’s the rise of the 
quantified self through wearable technology. Our bodies have become 
input/output devices that we monitor and optimize for greater efficiency, and 
sleep has become another data set to be tracked and hacked. What Huffington 
emphasizes about sleep, after all, is not that it rests you but that itrestores 
you. Sleep, she says, is the ultimate performance enhancer.

The main reason sleep’s stock has gone up, however, is that very few people 
can actually afford to sleep much. Forget Birkin bags and superyachts: getting 
eight hours of rest has become the ultimate status symbol.

You know how Arianna Huffington gets her eight hours? Well, for one thing, she 
has “nine or so” assistants, according to a recentNew York Times profile 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/05/magazine/arianna-huffingtons-improbable-insatiable-content-machine.html?_r=0>
. Huffington calls them her “A-Team”; they do everything from running her 
errands to planning her travel to loading the Huffington Post on her computer 
in the morning. According to the Times, most of the A-Team can only endure 
about 12 months of the work because it’s so taxing. The low pay also means many 
of them take second jobs. Basically, they don’t sleep so that Huffington can … 
and can sell books about it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fsleep-habits-eight-hours-health-wellness-arianna-huffington%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d873dcb2456c57df4068f82f5ea40afbd4c820b%2F0_326_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20a%20good%20night's%20sleep%20became%20the%20ultimate%20status%20symbol&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fsleep-habits-eight-hours-health-wellness-arianna-huffington%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20a%20good%20night%27s%20sleep%20became%20the%20ultimate%20status%20symbol&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fsleep-habits-eight-hours-health-wellness-arianna-huffington%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d873dcb2456c57df4068f82f5ea40afbd4c820b%2F0_326_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 How does Arianna Huffington get her eight hours? With the help of her ‘nine or 
so’ personal assistants. Photograph: Mike McGregor for the Observer Magazine 
“Sleep is one of humanity’s great unifiers,” writes Huffington 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/arianna-huffington/sleep-revolution-transforming-your-life_b_9577242.html>
 in one of her many articles about sleep. But while the need for sleep may be 
one of humanity’s unifiers, the ability to actually get a good night’s sleep is 
emblematic of society’s great divisions.

Getting enough sleep isn’t just a question of valuing sleep enough to go to 
bed at the right time; it’s a question of going to bed in the right 
neighborhood, and in the right body. Numerous studies show that you’re more 
likely to sleep poorly if you’re poor. It’s hard to sleep if you’re worried 
about your safety or haven’t had enough to eat. It’s hard to sleep if you’re 
one of the15 million American <http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/workschedules/> 
shift workers who work irregular hours. Research has also found that there’s a
black/white sleep gap 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2015/10/the-black-white-sleep-gap/454311/>
. One study shows that while white people sleep an average of 6.85 hours, 
African Americans sleep an average of 6.05 hours. They also have a lower 
quality of sleep. Researchers have attributed this, in part, to the stress of 
discrimination.

A good night's sleep is emblematic of society's great divisions

Want to know who gets the most sleep and the best quality of sleep in America? 
Wealthy white women. <http://www.uchospitals.edu/news/2006/20060703-sleep.html> 
Which, if I’d hazard a guess, is probably the same demographic Huffington is 
targeting her book at. Huffington positions her proselytization of sleep as a 
“revolution”, but really it’s a rebranding. Getting enough sleep is the new “
leaning in 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/shortcuts/2016/may/10/sheryl-sandberg-life-without-partner-widowed-facebook-single-parent>
”: advice for the 1% that ignores the socioeconomic elephant in the room. The 
very real sleep crisis we face isn’t down to a few rich people thinking it’s a 
waste of time; it’s down to the 99% not being able to afford to spend time 
sleeping. (Oh, in case you’re wondering, Sheryl Sandberg hasendorsed 
<http://ariannahuffington.com/books/the-sleep-revolution-hc> Huffington’s book, 
saying “Sometimes we need to sleep in to lean in!” Sure! Just make sure to 
brief your assistants first.)

While sleep is currently enjoying a moment, I’ve got a feeling it will be 
short-lived. Sleep may be a performance enhancer, but it’s an inefficient one. 
The real prize is finding a way to negate sleep deprivation so humans can 
function on less sleep. Unsurprisingly, the military is at the forefront of 
this research. In 2008, the Pentagon published a report called “Human 
Performance <https://fas.org/irp/agency/dod/jason/human.pdf>” which examined 
the possibility of a future in which soldiers could perform at their peak with 
only a couple of hours’ sleep. “Suppose a human could be engineered who slept 
for the same amount of time as a giraffe (1.9 hours per night). This would lead 
to an approximatelytwofold decrease in the casualty rate. An adversary would 
need an approximately 40% increase in the troop level to compensate for this 
advantage.” The report goes on to look at the effects of ampakines, a class of 
drugs that modulate neurotransmitters in the brain, to remove the effects of 
sleep deprivation.

Eventually, humans will figure out a way to hack sleep. Spending a third of 
your life unconscious won’t be a luxury anymore; it’ll be something only the 
poor will be forced to do. At which point we may need a whole new sort of sleep 
revolution.
 