
Let's get one thing clear: we're not comparing Tony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> to Lord Voldemort. No, really 
we're not. But it struck the books desk today that a competition we ran at the 
time of the release of JK Rowling's final Potter tome, asking readers for their 
predicted (or funniest) first line of the novel might work rather well for 
Blair's eagerly-awaited (by some) political memoir, A Journey, which hits the 
shelves tomorrow.

Just to refresh your memory and alert you to the full potential for "it was a 
dark and stormy night" <http://www.bulwer-lytton.com/> horrors, here are a few 
of the gems that have emerged about the book over the last few weeks in the 
run-up to publication.

The book was originally to be called "The Journey" but a last minute article 
tweak saw it become "A Journey". The BBC suggest that the change "... was aimed 
at making it sound less pompous or even messianic, although publisher Random 
House has described it as a 'minor editorial decision'."

It was assumed by many that the book's £4.5m advance would go towards paying 
the mortgage on Blair's £3.5m home near Hyde Park but, in a typically 
tactically astute move,Blair announced last week that he would be handing over 
all that he makes from the book 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2010/aug/16/tony-blair-royal-british-legion>
 – the full advance and any royalties – to the Royal British Legion.

"It also means people who disagree with his actions can buy the book and read 
it without feeling they are paying him money," shrugged Benedicte Page, 
associate editor of the Bookseller – and, sure enough,the book shot up the 
Amazon pre-order sales chart 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2010/aug/17/tony-blair-book-preorder-sales> 
immediately after the deal was announced.

However, those customers need not bother taking their books to the Big Blair 
Signing at Waterstone's in Piccadilly next week. Anybody wanting their edition 
signed by the former PM must show proof that they bought it at Waterstone's. 
And they'd better not expect any cute little notes in the front either.
Customers have been told 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/blog/2010/aug/11/tony-blair-security-book-signing>
 they "cannot be photographed with Blair, there will be no personal 
dedications, and all bags, backpacks and briefcases must be checked in, along 
with cameras and mobile phones, before meeting the former Labour leader. Blair 
will sign a maximum of two books per customer."

But what will be the first line these eager Blairites read?

Here's our own Digested Reader, John Crace 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/series/digestedread>, to kick it off:

"As George Bush and I held hands and fell to our knees on the floor of the 
Oval Office to pray for the safe return of our brave boys from Iraq, my phone 
rang: it was the Holy Father. 'Bless you my sons,' he said. 'God is with you. 
You are doing his work' It was as though a weight had been lifted from my heart 
for I knew that whatever the doubters might say, I was treading the Path of 
Self-Righteousness."

Or...

"Fuck the lot of you!"

He also suggests a least likely first line: "I'm sorry, I made several 
disastrous mistakes."

Bearing in mind that the publisher promises a "frank, open, revealing" book, 
written – sick bags at the ready - "in an intimate and accessible style", 
please do share your thoughts on the most and least likely first lines of Tony 
Blair:A Journey <https://www.theguardian.com/books/a-journey>.

Finally, Random House has declined any serialisation deals, and no review 
copies are being sent out until the day of publication. So your guess really is 
as good – or as bad – as ours.
 