
You know how frustrating it is when you put a cartridge in your printer, and 
it tuts at you about “not an approved part”, after which, printing becomes even 
more of a lottery than usual? Now you can get the same experience with light 
bulbs.

In mid-December, Philips – best known for the fabulously popular compact 
cassette and then the fabulously unpopular digital compact cassette – released 
a firmware update for its Hue LED light bulbs and controllers. Apart from 
having a rather HAL-like appearance, with a glowing red centre surrounded by 
blackness, the Hue is meant to let you control the colour and brightness of 
your bulbs, all from the comfort of your smartphone.

At this point I pause to wonder who feels an urgent need to change the colour 
and brightness of their lights from their phone. Do they also have black satin 
sheets, R Kelly playing on low volume and mirrors on the ceiling? Although 
apparently there are uses if you combine them with aHue Disco app 
<https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/hue-disco/id581258186?mt=8> so you can 
synchronise light effects with music, which sounds much the same thing, but 
there are parents with excitable kids who love it.

For everyone else, it seems like the latest example from the Internet of 
Useless Things; why can’t you just stand up and turn a couple of lights off? 
(Don’t bother with dimmers; they’re designed to waste electricity.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fphilips-hue-led-bulbs-proprietary-charles-arthur%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f294f9cff170d9e4e4164b7ca7666a3dc384e95%2F0_0_1000_1000%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20many%20tech%20firms%20does%20it%20take%20to%20change%20a%20light%20bulb%20for%20the%20worse%3F%20Only%20one%3A%20Philips&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fphilips-hue-led-bulbs-proprietary-charles-arthur%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20many%20tech%20firms%20does%20it%20take%20to%20change%20a%20light%20bulb%20for%20the%20worse%3F%20Only%20one%3A%20Philips&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fphilips-hue-led-bulbs-proprietary-charles-arthur%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f294f9cff170d9e4e4164b7ca7666a3dc384e95%2F0_0_1000_1000%2F1000.jpg>
 The Philips Hue lightbulb and attendant app. Photograph: PR 
But anyway. Some people like Hue. The firmware update, however, had no 
particularly obvious benefits to you, the user. Instead, it was apparently 
devised solely to block the use of any “non-approved” bulbs in Hue sockets, 
thus boosting Philips’s profit by making you pay for pricier ones.

This moves us into the Internet of Ridiculous Things. How exactly can Philips 
dictate that, after you’ve paid for the sockets, it gets to decide what you can 
do with them? But, as journalist Cory Doctorowpointed out 
<http://boingboing.net/2015/12/16/philips-promises-new-firmware.html>, any 
Americans who tried to tweak the software would have faced a fine of up to 
$500,000 under the Digital Millennium Copyright Act. In anFAQ on its developer 
site <http://www.developers.meethue.com/documentation/friends-hue-update>, 
Philips said it “upgraded the software for Hue to ensure the best seamless 
connected lighting experience for our customers. This change was made in good 
faith.” But then it admitted to having “underestimated” the impact on the 
“small number” of people using third-party bulbs.

The other wrinkle, though, is that all the bulbs were using the Zigbee 
protocol – an “open, global standard” – for their control. Yet Philips decided 
that it would close down its corner of that standard and henceforth make its 
device work only with approved bulbs.

Companies build things around standards and insert their own proprietary 
elements all the time. That’s essential to most business models: some parts are 
built around open standards, some around your closed secret sauce. (Google, 
built on Linux, doesn’t open-source its search algorithms; Apple, famous for 
its app “walled garden”, uses BSD Unix and contributes to open-source 
projects.) But what’s different about this is that Philips shifted the ground.

You started off being able to put in third-party bulbs, and then it decided 
you couldn’t, and enforced that through a software rollout you couldn’t avoid: 
the firmware update appeared as a menu item that wouldn’t go away. 
Unsurprisingly, the uproar forced the company to backtrack within 48 hours and 
promise even newer firmware that wouldn’t be so picky. (I paraphrase.)

Watching Philips get this so wrong brings to mind its debacle with digital 
compact cassette (DCC), a format introduced in 1992 that offered the sound 
clarity of digital but also introduced digital copy protection that prevented 
you making copies. Customers didn’t see the point and stayed away. Yet 20 years 
later, Philips still hasn’t learned that lesson: in the digital age, you can 
flourish only by using openness and pairing it with a closed method, not by 
being closed all the time – and especially not by moving the digital goalposts 
to close formerly open areas.

If the Hue, and other internet of things products, aren’t to go the way of the 
DCC, makers will have to consider carefully where they set the boundaries of 
open and closed.
 