
What has the European Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank> done? 

Mario Draghi <https://www.theguardian.com/business/mario-draghi>, the ECB 
president, has announced four key measures:

 * A cut in the main interest rate used across the eurozone from 0.05% to zero.

 * A cut in the deposit rate from -0.3% to -0.4%.

 * Increasing the amount of bonds the ECB is buying, under a process called 
quantitative easing, by €20bn to €80bn. Crucially, this will now include bonds 
issued by companies and not just by governments. 
 * New ultra-cheap four-year loans to banks, allowing them to borrow from the 
ECB at negative interest rates. 
Why is this a significant move?


The ECB wants to get money into the financial system by discouraging banks 
from holding on to deposits and instead lend out money as cheaply as possible 
to businesses and households.

The 19 countries in the eurozone have had a negative interest rate for 
deposits since June 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/05/european-central-bank-cuts-deposit-rates>
. But this is the first time the ECB has set the rate at which it lends to 
banks to zero.

ECB cuts eurozone interest rate to zero to jump-start economy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/10/ecb-cuts-eurozone-interest-rate-to-zero>
Since June 2014, the ECB has been trying to discourage banks from holding on 
to savings by cutting the deposit rate to -0.1%. Since then it has cut it to 
-0.2%, then to -0.3% last December and the rate has now been cut to -o.4%.

By increasing the amount of quantitative easing and the type of bonds it is 
prepared to buy up, the ECB is also signalling it wants to get more money 
pumped around the eurozone financial system.

Why is this happening? 


The ECB is keen to stimulate the eurozone, against the backdrop of an 
imperilled global economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/19/imf-cuts-global-growth-forecasts>
.Data in February  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/12/eurozone-recovery-falters-greece-recession>
showedGreece <https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> fell back into 
recession and Italy slowed to near stagnation. Germany, the eurozone’s largest 
economy, grew by just 0.3%. On top of weak growth, inflation is negative – 
which can discourage businesses and consumers from spending.Headline inflation 
dropped to -0.2% in February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/29/negative-inflation-ecb-under-pressure-eurozone-support>
, down from 0.3% in January. Today, Draghi has said he expects growth of just 
1.4% across the eurozone this year, down from 1.7% three months ago.

Do other countries have negative rates? 

Sweden’s central bank became the first to lend at a negative rate when in 
February 2015 it announced a negative repo rate – its main lending rate to 
commercial banks. Other countries that have negative rates for deposits include 
Japan, Switzerland and Denmark.

Will it work?

Ultra-low interest rates create difficulties for commercial banks because it 
makes it harder for financial institutions to lend profitably. The ECB, though, 
is trying to mitigate the impact by allowing the rate at which banks borrow 
over the long term to drop into negative territory, too.

Analysts at the consultancy Capital Economics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics> said: “There is no guarantee 
that its latest ‘bazooka’ will be any more effective than previous ones in 
securing the strong and sustained growth required to eliminate the threat of 
deflation in the currency union and allow the peripheral countries to tackle 
their debt problems. The ECB has belatedly delivered, but it can’t work 
miracles.”


And Michael Martins, an economist at the business lobby group the Institute of 
Directors, said the move could prove counterproductive. “Monetary policy is not 
enough to wakeEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> from its 
slumber. The ECB has felt compelled to act because of the stubborn deflation 
stalking the continent, but without individual governments stepping up to the 
plate and implementing more structural reforms, the impact of a further 
loosening in monetary policy will be limited.”
 