
Howard Marks, described as Britain’s best-loved retired dope dealer, has made 
many public appearances since he found himself in the dock at the Old Bailey in 
1981, but none will have quite the poignancy of the show he will give on 
Friday. He has beendiagnosed with inoperable bowel cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jan/24/howard-marks-inoperable-cancer-mr-nice>
, but is determined not to go too gentle into that good night and will duly be 
joined by a raft of musicians and performers in what will in effect be a 
tribute concert.

 Marks, 69, has been making a living since his release from jail in 1995 with 
one-man shows in which he recounts his cannabis-smuggling exploits. He has 
acquired a large following among those who made his autobiography, Mr Nice, a 
bestseller and then watched him portrayed in thefilm of the same name 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2010/sep/28/mr-nice-howard-marks-ifans> 
by Rhys Ifans.

I tend to live life on the hard shoulder these days … the fast lane might as 
well be going in the other direction

“I’m looking forward to it for many reasons,” Marks said of the concert at the 
Forum in north London, at which Ifans will also be appearing, along withSuper 
Furry Animals <https://www.theguardian.com/music/super-furry-animals>, John 
Cooper Clarke, Alabama 3, Cerys Matthews and a host of others. “The quality of 
the artists, all of whom are performing for free, is astounding. I’m nervous as 
fuck about doing my particular performance, which is why I’m doing it very 
early on, so I can enjoy what comes afterwards. It will be my first show for 
over six months. I am well out of practice but am certain it’s the sensible 
thing to do.”

 Friday, he believes, is likely to be a special night, although he reckons the 
most memorable show he has given since he emerged from Terre Haute federal 
penitentiary in Indiana 20 years ago was in Blackpool on 5 November 1998.

 “I was on tour doing shows nightly,” he said. “The expected audience turnout 
at each would never be less than 400 and would usually be 600 to 800. The 
biggest was 1,700 in Glasgow. But at Blackpool there were 50. I suppose one can 
blame bonfire night, which I’m told is deliberately designed to interface with 
the famous illuminations – a stoner’s delight. I had no chance. But I did learn 
how to deal with a small audience, and that came really handy over the years.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWLafSIMYNrQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWLafSIMYNrQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWLafSIMYNrQ&media=>
 The Real Mr Nice - trailer 
 Of his health, he said: “I tend to live life on the hard shoulder these days 
and only occasionally venture into the slow lane. The fast lane might as well 
be going in the other direction. I have stopped taking medical marijuana and 
I’m participating in randomised clinical trials and must stick to the 
chemotherapy given me. I’m OK with this as the tumours are still reducing. The 
strong likelihood is that they’ll start growing again this year, but the longer 
I keep them at bay, the better.”

 Although the concert is seen by some as a chance to catch Marks in action one 
last time, he said: “I must point out this isn’t meant to be a farewell concert 
– it’s me trying to get back on the road.”

Howard Marks reveals he has inoperable cancer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jan/24/howard-marks-inoperable-cancer-mr-nice>
 Nick Reynolds of Alabama 3, who will be taking part on Friday, said: “He’s a 
one-off, a lovely guy and he’s like family – he was very close to my dad [the 
great train robberBruce Reynolds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/feb/28/bruce-reynolds>]. It should be 
quite a night – it’s a last hurrah for Howard so we’re very happy to be there.”

 Proceeds from the concert will go towards supporting Marks during his 
treatment, helping to finish a documentary film, and to the Mr Nice charitable 
foundation, which will be launched on Friday.
 