
Howard Bingham, who has died aged 77, was a photographer who became Muhammad 
Ali’s closest friend and shot perhaps a million of images of the fighter. “I 
think we became friends because I didn’t want nothing from him,”Bingham said in 
2004 
<https://www.bostonglobe.com/metro/obituaries/2016/12/17/howard-bingham-muhammad-ali-personal-photographer/FOedbLGVfQtHve2MyUzvvK/story.html>
. “We just became friends, and we stayed friends.”

The pair met in 1962, when Bingham was sent by a local black newspaper to a 
press conference for a boxing match at theLos Angeles Memorial Sports Arena  
<http://www.webgalleria.com/george-logan>between Cassius Clay, as Ali was known 
then, and George Logan. Afterwards, Clay was standing on a street corner with 
his brother when Bingham pulled up in his car and offered to show them round 
the city. The trip culminated with a visit to Bingham’s family home, where his 
mother cooked them dinner. A friendship was born that lasted untilAli’s death 
in June <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/04/muhammad-ali-obituary>. 
“He was there for my father when my father had no one,” said the boxer’s eldest 
son, also called Muhammad Ali. “When he lost all his money, his titles, Howard 
was the friend who was always in his corner.”

Bingham began covering local news events at a time when black radicalism was a 
growing force in US cities. In the early 1960s he photographedRon Karenga 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maulana_Karenga>, a prominent black power 
leader, and Malcolm X, who had befriended Clay in 1962 and subsequently became 
his spiritual mentor. As Bingham’s friendship with Clay deepened, he watched at 
close hand as the boxer becameworld heavyweight champion in 1964 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/1964/feb/27/boxing> and, a few months later, 
publicly announced his membership of theNation of Islam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/nation-of-islam> and the change of his 
name to Muhammad Ali. In August 1965, when Ali travelled to Sweden, Bingham 
accompanied him, thus missing one of the biggest news stories of the year: the 
Watts race riots in Los Angeles that raged for six days and left 34 people dead.

The following year he covered what he described as a “mini-riot” in LA and his 
photographs were published in Life magazine. “Even though all their star 
photographers were shooting that night, it was my photographs they ended up 
using,” he told me,when I interviewed him in 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/oct/25/black-panthers-photographs-howard-bingham>
. “I’m an easygoing guy but I have no fear. I wasn’t worried about getting 
hurt. After that, they put me on a riot retainer.” Wherever riots broke out 
that summer, Bingham went.

He photographed social unrest across the US, including the intense rioting 
that broke out inDetroit in 1967 
<http://www.blackpast.org/aah/detroit-race-riot-1967> – “It was wild, bullets 
everywhere. I didn’t know if we were going to get out alive.” That summer, Life 
made contact with the nascentBlack Panther party 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Black_Panther_Party>, which had been formed the 
previous year in Oakland, California, requesting access for a journalist and 
photographer to do a story on the organisation. The Black Panthers’ minister of 
information, Eldridge Cleaver, was in jail, but, from his cell, gave Life the 
go-ahead on one condition. “He said they could do the story, but only if I took 
the photographs,” Bingham said. “That was the first surprise, as I had never 
even met him.”

Cleaver had heard about Bingham through his reportage for the LA Sentinel and 
his grassroots activism in the many community schemes instigated and funded by 
Ali. Throughout 1968, Bingham and a young black journalist from New York,
Gilbert Moore 
<https://www.brooklynmuseum.org/community/blogosphere/2010/08/09/brooklyns-finest-gilbert-moore/>
, spent months observing the Black Panthers in action. Bingham photographed the 
group’s leaders, including Bobby Seale, Stokely Carmichael,Angela Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/angela-davis>, and Eldridge and Kathleen 
Cleaver, as well as their sharply dressed members at sit-ins, protests and 
rallies. He also gained access to the left-leaning celebrities that supported 
them, such as Jane Fonda and Leonard Bernstein. However, Life magazine refused 
to publish the ensuing article, prompting Moore’s resignation. Many of the 
images were published for the first time in 2009 for Bingham’s book, Howard L 
Bingham’s Black Panthers 1968, which includes a reflective essay by Moore.

Bingham went on to photograph the funeral of Martin Luther King 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mU1634eB6uk> and the election campaign of 
Robert ennedy for Life magazine. His work also appeared in Sports Illustrated, 
Ebony, Look, Newsweek, People and Playboy, and, for a time in the 1970s, he 
worked as a stills photographer for Hollywood films, including The Candidate 
(1972) and All the President’s Men (1976).

In 1978, Bingham unsuccessfully ran for Congress as a Democrat. Though he 
enlisted the support of Marvin Gaye, Barry White and Richard Pryor, all of whom 
performed in a fundraising concert for him, the event was badly organised and 
poorly attended. “Nobody came,” he recalled, “but the party afterwards was 
fantastic!”

Bingham was born in Jackson, Mississippi, one of eight children of Willie 
Emmaline <http://articles.latimes.com/1994-05-22/news/ls-60815_1_howard-bingham>
 and Willie E Bingham Jr. His father was a Baptist minister who also worked as 
a Pullman porter. The family moved to Los Angeles when Howard was four. After 
an initial interest in music, Howard studied photography at Compton Community 
College, but failed his finishing exam. Undeterred, on leaving he successfully 
pestered the picture editor of theLos Angeles Sentinel <https://lasentinel.net/>
 for work. Initially, he learned through his mistakes, saying later: “I went 
off on jobs, came back with underexposed film, blurred film, no film, and I 
always had an excuse for what went wrong.”

Throughout most of his eventful life, Bingham lived in the same small house in 
south-east LA, photographing people and events in the community and fundraising 
for local charities. His friendship with Ali took on a more protective aspect 
as the erstwhile world champion succumbed toParkinson’s disease in the 1980s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/04/muhammad-ali-parkinsons-greatest-battle>
. Bingham spent up to 100 days a year with Ali, accompanying him on his 
frequent trips abroad. He oversaw Ali’s poignant appearance at the opening 
ceremony of the 1996 Olympics in Atlanta, where the former boxer, now frail and 
faltering,lit the Olympic flame <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=80wMMFAcweQ>. 
As Ali’s health deteriorated, Bingham often spoke on his behalf at fundraising 
events, overcoming a long-time speech impediment in the process. In 1998, 
Sports Illustrated ran a storyon their friendship, that was headlined, Who’s 
That Guy With Howard Bingham? 
<http://www.si.com/boxing/2015/09/23/muhammad-ali-howard-bingham-si-vault-frank-deford>

Bingham published several books on his friend and hero, including Muhammad 
Ali: A Thirty-Year Journey (1993), and Muhammad Ali’s Greatest Fight (2000), 
and worked as a producer onAli <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0248667/>, 2001, 
Hollywood biopic starring Will Smith (Bingham was portrayed by Jeffrey Wright).

“Millionaires could not have done the things that I have done because of my 
friendship with Ali,” Bingham said in 1993. “I’ve met presidents, kings and 
queens … I feel very fortunate just to have been his friend.” The feeling was 
mutual and Bingham liked to tell the story of how, when he and Ali met Nelson 
Mandela in Dublin, Mandela embraced them both before turning to Ali and saying: 
“Do you know how lucky you are to have a friend like Howard Bingham?”

His marriage to Carolyn Turner ended in divorce. He is survived by his son, 
Dustin, and his granddaughter. Another son, Damon, predeceased him.

• Howard Leonid Bingham, photographer, born 29 May 1939; died 15 December 2016
 