
Huffington Post editor-in-chief Arianna Huffington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ariannahuffington> has pledged to defend 
contributors to its new Arabic-language offshoot if they are persecuted by 
governments in the region for what they write on the site.

Speaking on Monday following the launch of HuffPost Arabi, Huffington said the 
organisation would offer help, including legal funding and extensive coverage 
acrossHuffington Post <https://www.theguardian.com/media/huffington-post>, for 
anyone persecuted for opinions published on the site.

“One of the reasons why we are going to be based in London and Istanbul is to 
make it clear avoiding any kind of censorship and control is absolutely key to 
our coverage,” said Huffington. “We will support [contributors] in every way.”

“We would stay on the story relentlessly. Very often somebody is arrested and 
there is a flurry of articles and they disappear from the picture. I think our 
goal is to stay on the story and work with our friends in the media.”

As well as employing professional journalists, Huffington Post takes 
contributions from unpaid bloggers, and isaiming to recruit 1 million 
contributors 
<http://www.capitalnewyork.com/article/media/2015/06/8571049/arianna-huffingtons-next-million-mark>
 globally.

Huffington Post Arabi is the 14th localised version of the site, and is run in 
partnership with Integral Media Strategies, which is based in London but draws 
on a network of journalists in the Middle East.

The Middle East is one of the most dangerous areas for journalists and 
governments regularly persecute people for airing anti-establishment opinions. 
Australian al-Jazeera journalist Peter Greste spent 400 days in an Egyptian 
jail after being accused of supporting terrorism beforebeing deported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/feb/01/joy-release-peter-greste-egypt>. 
Two of his colleagues still face an uncertain futurefollowing a retrial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/04/egypt-al-jazeera-journalists-retrial-court-closing-arguments>
 which is due to deliver its verdict at the end of this month.

Integral chief executive Wadah Khanfar, a former director general of 
Qatari-owned news network al-Jazeera who is editorial director of Huffington 
Post Arabi, said the site would not be able to retain or keep contributors if 
it did not offer support.

He said: “If they have published something on the platform, the platform 
itself has published it, if he is fought against because of his opinion, of 
course we have an obligation to support him, otherwise we will scare people 
out.”

“I know we are navigating a territory that is very complicated. Without 
assuring people, and continuing to assure them we might find people not being 
able to express their opinion and that is a disaster for everyone.”

Huffington said the site would be unique in offering an alternative to the 
polarised media that dominates in most of the region.

She said: “By providing in the Arab language a place where you can see those 
many opinions with which you can disagree, without immediately wanting to shoot 
them, that fact in itself is going to make a difference.”

Khanfar added: “The most difficult situation the media has found itself in in 
the Arab world is polarisation and utilisation. It has become a political tool 
in the hands of governments and the hands of certain people who own it. The 
space for objective, or at least balanced reporting has shrunk too much.”

As well as covering stories about the troubles facing the region, Huff Post 
Arabi intends to focus on more positive events in the region with a section 
called “Huloul” which means solutions in Arabic.

“I don’t think right now we are getting a full picture. We are getting a very 
distorted picture, because most of what we are seeing is the violence. We want 
to give an accurate picture. We don’t want to give a rose-coloured picture, but 
an accurate picture is not 99% violence, which is what we are getting,” 
Huffington said.
 