
Five years after it was first mooted HuffPost Australia went live on Tuesday 
morning <http://www.huffingtonpost.com.au>– a day before it was slated to 
launch.


The big launch story was an exclusive video interview with foreign minister 
Julie Bishop <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/julie-bishop> about 
the same sex marriage debate which is dividing the Coalition, called “I am 
showing leadership on same sex marriage”. In the piece Bishop refused to say 
whether she supported same sex marriage or not.


The Huffington Post’s founder, Arianna Huffington, introduced the local 
version of her global site ina blogpost titled “HuffPost Down Under” 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/arianna-huffington/introducing-huffpost-australia_b_8000452.html>
.


“When I visited Australia last year, I was overwhelmed by its sheer vastness 
and beauty,” she wrote. “It is a country like no other – in fact, it’s a 
continent, a country and an island all in one.”


HuffPost Australia’s editor-in-chief Tory Maguire, a former News Corp 
Australian opinion editor,announced on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/_Tors/status/633430728722649088> that the new website was 
up “a little early” and also penned a piece on the changing nature of work in 
Australia.


The US version of the site <http://www.huffingtonpost.com/?country=US> 
featured a large “G’Day Australia” to welcome the 15th edition of HuffPost and 
a photograph of Sydney’s Harbour Bridge and Opera House.


Local content on HuffPost Australia, which has taken offices at Sydney’s 
Circular Quay, included pieces on the impact of the smoking ban in prisons, the 
penalty rates debate, Arnott’s biscuits and the illegal poaching of seahorses 
from Sydney Harbour.


Posts from celebrity writers included an article by shadow infrastructure 
minister Anthony Albanese about transport; one from Liberal Democrats senator 
David Leyonhjelm admitting he had smoked dope and inhaled, and another from the 
first female Wiggle, Emma Watkins. There were also links from the front page 
pointing to other sites, including toa Guardian Australia feature about rugby 
league player Ian Roberts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/aug/18/the-courageous-journey-of-ian-roberts-rugby-leagues-first-openly-gay-player>
.


HuffPost Australia has also assembled a team of bloggers, who somewhat 
controversially agree to write unpaid in return for exposure to the site’s vast 
global audience.


An approach to marketing executive and media commentator Dee Madigan to write 
unpaidcaused some unwelcome pre-publicity 
<http://mumbrella.com.au/dee-madigan-slams-unsolicited-request-to-blog-for-free-for-huffington-post-as-insulting-306109>
 for the website last month.


There were some early technical hitches to iron out on the site, with multiple 
links opening to blank pages.


Now owned by AOL Inc, Huffington Post 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/huffington-post> is one of the most 
successful digital platforms in the world and already has editions in Britain, 
Canada, France, Spain, Italy, Japan, the Maghreb, Germany, Brazil, South Korea, 
Greece and India.


After years of false starts HuffPost partnered this year with Fairfax Media 
for its Australian launch andhired Maguire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/may/01/huffington-post-appoints-australian-editor-as-local-edition-revs-up>
 and chief executive Chris Janz to build an editorial team.
 