
A huge deposit of untapped oil, possibly the largest ever discovered in the 
US, has been identified by the US Geological Survey (USGS) in westTexas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/texas>.


The USGS estimated 
<https://www.usgs.gov/news/usgs-estimates-20-billion-barrels-oil-texas-wolfcamp-shale-formation>
 that 20bn barrels of oil was contained within layers of shale in the Permian 
Basin, a vast geological formation that stretches across western Texas and an 
area of New Mexico. The discovery is three times larger than the Bakken 
oilfields of North Dakota and is worth around $900bn.

The enormous deposit, in the Midland Basin Wolfcamp shale area that includes 
the cities of Lubbock and Midland in Texas, is the largest continuous oilfield 
ever discovered by the USGS. The area also includes 16tn cubic feet of natural 
gas and 1.6bn barrel of natural gas liquids.

“The fact that this is the largest assessment of continuous oil we have ever 
done just goes to show that, even in areas that have produced billions of 
barrels of oil, there is still the potential to find billions more,” said 
Walter Guidroz, program coordinator for the USGS energy resources program.
 Midland Basin map. Photograph: US Geological Survey 
“Changes in technology and industry practices can have significant effects on 
what resources are technically recoverable, and that’s why we continue to 
perform resource assessments throughout the United States and the world.”

More than 3,000 horizontal oil wells have already been drilled in the Midland 
Basin Wolfcamp region. The geology of the area requires many firms to use 
hydraulic fracturing, or fracking, to remove oil and gas from the shale 
formations, which can be as much as a mile thick in some places.


A recent rush to open up the Permian Basin has helped push oil prices down, 
with this and other woes causing the US oil industry tolose $67bn last year 
<http://money.cnn.com/2016/04/26/investing/oil-companies-lost-67-billion-dollars/>
. President-elect Donald Trump has promised to open up new areas for oil, gas 
and coal as part of an “America first” energy policy that will involve the 
eradication of funding for clean energy.

According to a report released by the thinktank Oil Change International in 
September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/23/existing-coal-oil-and-gas-fields-will-blow-carbon-budget-study>
, all the world’s working coalmines and oil and gas fields contain enough 
carbon to push the world beyond the threshold for catastrophic climate change.

This means that opening up vast new fossil fuel reserves will almost certainly 
ensure that the planet warms by 2C more than the pre-industrial average, 
resulting in dangerous heatwaves, sea level rise, extreme weather events and 
displaced people.
 