
I’ve often fantasised about coming from somewhere cool: Brighton, say, or 
Liverpool, even Newcastle. Saying you’re fromHull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/hull> usually gets blank or pitying looks. 
Vice magazine last year called it a “glum port town falling apart at the 
seams”. Its post-war centre is, at first glance, admittedly soulless, the main 
roads leading to it remarkable only for graffiti and boarded-up shopfronts.

But my fantasy could become reality as Hull reinvents itself this year as UK 
City of Culture. The point of the designation goes way beyond putting on lots 
of cool arts events; the festivities have the potential to change the city, in 
concrete ways (literally – in a staggering amount of building and 
refurbishment) and in how it is seen locally and by the rest of the world.

With a blizzard of events, from an Anthony Minghella retrospective 
<https://www.hull2017.co.uk/whatson/events/anthony-minghella-retrospective/> 
(he studied here) to acontemporary theatre festival,  
<http://headsup.e52.co.uk/headsup/>the idea is to offer an arms-wide welcome, 
revealing Hull’s northern but distinct identity. “We are down to earth but a 
bit provocative and mischievous,” says director of marketing Phil Batty. “We 
speak in a different voice.” (We certainly do. Just listen to anyone greeting 
you: “Ur hellur.” Revel in the vowels if I ask for a “dry white wine”.)
 The Danbor Talka/Clash of Drums show at 2016’s Freedom Festival 
Among several 2017 slogans, I like “Everyone back to ours” and “You can sleep 
when it’s over”, which emphasise the warm welcome and year-long party spirit. 
And no one who has been to Hull’s annual Freedom Festival (first weekend in 
September, established in 2007 to celebrate the bicentenary of the abolition of 
the slave trade, led by Hull-born MP William Wilberforce) can doubt that the 
city throws a good party. It’s like a mini Edinburgh festival, except that 
almost everything is free. In 2016 we watched bands from all over the world 
playing in docks, underpasses and tents; caught plays, comedy and performance 
poetry; saw drumming with fireworks, street theatre and an amazing aerial 
display on a vertical stage. And, like going to Edinburgh, we still felt we’d 
missed three-quarters of it.

City culture chief Jon Pywell says Hull used to look inland, trying (and 
failing) to emulate bigger neighbours Leeds and Sheffield, but is now finding 
the confidence to be itself: a port city, with an intimate relationship with 
the sea (as celebrated by last year’sSea of Hull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/jul/09/sea-of-hull-by-spencer-tunick-in-pictures>
 art installation, with crowds of naked volunteers painted blue and green).
 Spencer Tunick’s Sea of Hull project takes over Scale Lane Bridge. 
Photograph: Andrew Yates/Reuters 
Hull’s subversive attitude shows in where it puts royalty: over toilets. The 
equestrian statue of King Billy on Market Place bestrides an art nouveau gents, 
and in Queen Victoria Square, the unamused empress herself is enthroned above 
public conveniences.

The monarch is now joined in the square by a giant, 75-metre-long propeller 
blade from an offshore wind turbine, erected in the early hours of last Sunday 
in a project that had been kept secret for months. “This is probably the 
biggest ever intervention in a public space,” said Nayan Kulkarni, the artist 
behind the project. It came as citizens were saying goodbye to the Made in Hull 
light and sound show – with soundtrack featuring, among others, the voice of 
Fine Young Cannibals lead singer Roland Gift, who lived in Hull as a teenager – 
that launched the city’s new cultural dawn and drew an estimated 230,000 
visitors.
 Art work ‘Blade’, created by workers at the Siemens wind turbine factory in 
Hull, being installed at Queen Victoria Square in Hull. Photograph: Danny 
Lawson/PA 
Also on this tarted up and newly pedestrianised square is more about Hull’s 
anti-royal past: the excavated remains ofBeverley Gate, famously closed to King 
Charles I by governor Sir John Hotham in 1642, sparking the English civil war. 
(A new RSC/Hull Truck comedy, The Hypocrite by Richard Bean, stars Mark Addy as 
Hotham, 24 February-18 March, then at the Swan, Stratford on Avon.)

The square is also the site of the Ferens art gallery 
<http://www.hcandl.co.uk/ferens> (free) now upgraded with facilities for major 
touring exhibitions. It reopened with its own open exhibition (local heroine 
Maureen Lipman was on the selection panel) and its permanent collection beefed 
up bya rare 1320 painting by Sienese master Pietro Lorenzetti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2013/jul/16/pietro-lorenzetti-christ-saint-paul-saint-peter>
.
 Made in Hull: The story the History of a City and its People: light and sound 
projection on to the walls of the Ferens gallery Photograph: Gary Calton for 
the Guardian 
South-east of here is the old town, always interesting, but now coming into 
its own. Young people are living here again – attracted by low prices for 
pretty Georgian houses inPrince Street and around, and taking advantage of low 
rents to open businesses. Its many characterful pubs attract fun-loving crowds 
by night, while by day families come for its excellent free museums (see below).

Pedestrianised Whitefriargate leads via Land of Green Ginger (yep that’s a 
street name) and the George Hotel with its “smallest window in the world” (a 
10-inch by one-inch glazed slit for a porter to keep watch) to Silver Street 
and Hull’s most famous pub,Ye Old White Harte <http://www.yeoldewhiteharte.com/>
. Built in 1550, it’s known for its “plotting parlour”, where Hotham supposedly 
laid his seditious plan. From here, Scale Lane leads to High Street, parallel 
to the river Hull, with alleyways called staiths running down to waterside 
wharves.

High Street is home to Hull’s museum quarter, an engaging quartet of hands-on 
venues:Wilberforce House 
<http://www.visithullandeastyorkshire.com/Hull-Wilberforce-House/details/?dms=3&venue=2175778>
 (all museums free) tells of slavery from 18th to 21st centuries; the
archaeology museum 
<http://www.visithullandeastyorkshire.com/Hull-Hull-East-Riding-Museum/details/?dms=3&venue=2175800>
has a lifesize woolly mammoth among exhibits; in theStreetlife Museum 
<http://www.visithullandeastyorkshire.com/Hull-Streetlife-Museum/details/?dms=3&venue=2175789>
, recreated street scenes have sounds and smells, and children can clamber over 
vintage trams and buses; and the city’s last sidewinder trawler, theArctic 
Corsair, gives a taste of the life of deep-sea fishermen.
 Inside the Streetlife Museum. Photograph: Alamy 
Scale Lane footbridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/jul/28/scale-lane-bridge-hull-review>
 is a venue as well as a crossing, with shrubs and plants, sheltered seating 
and a birdsong soundtrack. Pedestrians can ride along when it swings open to 
let shipping past. (Planned redevelopment of the east bank of the Hull never 
materialised, though, and the innovative bridge leads to a Premier Inn and 
little else.)

Remember Venn diagrams from school? Drypool Bridge, five minutes upriver, has 
been repainted with overlapping circles in memory of their inventor, John Venn, 
born nearby in 1834. And it was announced late last year that Holy Trinity, the 
impressive 14th-century parish church on Market Place, is to be made a Minster 
in a ceremony on 13 May.

South of Castle Street, the triangle bordered by the river Hull and the marina 
is less pretty but has a tangible feeling of progress:Humber Street, with its 
newly laid cobbles, is the city’s hottest destination – with a recording studio 
and a microbrewery as well as bars, clubs, restaurants and regular pop-ups. 
Contemporary art spaceHumber Street Gallery 
<https://www.hull2017.co.uk/discover/article/humber-street-gallery-shocking-sublime/>
 (opening 3 February) will add to the appeal, as will 109 new homes in the 
former Fruit Market.

Opposite popular aquarium The Deep <https://www.thedeep.co.uk/>, at the 
confluence of Hull’s two rivers, is theStage@TheDock 
<http://www.stageatthedock.co.uk/> amphitheatre, the only newly built venue for 
City of Culture year. It proved its worth as music and exhibition space in 
2016’s Freedom Festival, and is a good picnic spot.
 The Stage@TheDock amphitheatre. Photograph: Neil Holmes 
Hull Truck has more premieres and collaborations planned, but theatre lovers 
should also check outKardomah94 <http://www.kardomah94.com/>, in a former bank 
near the Guildhall, with a bistro and an intimate space for fringe productions, 
comedy, music, and art exhibitions. (Not everything is rosy, however: expansion 
and modernisation of the mainstream New Theatre is so behind schedule it won’t 
open until August, missing more than half of Hull’s year in the limelight.)

This year will also see the Humber Bridge turned in to a sound installation, 
the 2017 Turner Prize exhibition, Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars 
playing “live” for the first time (in a band including Spiders drummer and 
local lad Woody Woodmansey; the late Mick Ronson, who played the distinctive 
Ziggy riffs, was also from Hull) and myriad other events. By the end of it, 
everyone will be wishing they, too, had been born in this coolest of cities.

HULL: INSIDER GUIDE

Where to eat

Fish and seafood from the North Sea coast are excellent, and Hull stalwart 
Cerutti’s offers estuary views and a huge choice of fishy starters and mains 
(two courses from £19.95, 10 Nelson St, 01482 328501, ceruttis.co.uk). The newer
1884 Dock Street Kitchen also offers fine dining, but I prefer its recent 
addition, opened last year on the other side of the marina:1884 Wine and Tapas 
(tapas from £6, Freedom Quay, 01482 216306, 1884wineandtapasbar.co.uk) uses 
local fish, plus meat and game from named suppliers, in tasty tapas (above) 
from a regularly changing menu. The wine list is Spanish (except for champagne).

 Seafood at 1884 Wine and Tapas 
At the other end of the scale, the new Head of Steam pub on King Street has 
paired with street food companyKerbEdge to offer Hull speciality the patty – in 
a butty. Invented so those who couldn’t afford fish could have something to go 
with their chips, patties are just mash with herbs, battered and fried till 
crisp. Horrifying to clean-eaters, they’re great for soaking up pints. Hey – 
like with sleeping, you can eat salad when it’s over!

For lunchtimes, Kardomah94 (see above) does interesting salads, pizzas and 
sharing boards (pizza from £9.50, 94 Alfred Gelder St, 01482 317941, 
kardomah94.com).

Where to drink
 Adam, the landlord of Ye Olde Black Boy. Photograph: Gary Calton for the 
Observer 
The old town’s dozens of pubs range from Ye Olde Black Boy (below left, 150 
High Street), open since 1729, with narrow rooms and cramped corridors, to 
year-old shabby chicFurley & Co (18 Princes Dock Street). The Lion and Key (48 
High St), leader of the old town’s real ale resurgence, has thousands of beer 
mats pinned to the ceiling. Surveying the impressive range of craft beers on 
tap, I asked how often they change. “Oh, about every hour,” said the barmaid. 
Having its own microbrewery next door (the Cat Head) probably helps.
 Gin bar at the Minerva pub on Hull’s pier. Photograph: Liz Boulter for the 
Guardian 
The pierside Minerva (Nelson St, minerva-hull.co.uk) has been going since 
1829, and recently added a cute “Gin caravan” (above) to its real ale offering. 
And for a pre-show drink, theKardomah (see above) does great cocktails with 
terrible names such as gin and bear it, and rum away with me. For the odd 
non-alcoholic drink in this party city,Liquid Jade (on Facebook), opened in 
2015 on Whitefriargate by young entrepreneur Claire Buffey, is all about 
ethically sourced leaf teas, but also does own-blend coffee and homemade cakes.

Where to shop
 Hepworth Arcade/ Photograph: Alamy 
Hull has a great independent shops, but don’t expect handmade soap or artisan 
leather. From electronics and vinyl to fashion, shops here are more, well, 
practical. The Victorian glass-roofed Grade II-listed Hepworth Arcade in the 
old town, is home to hi-fi dealerFanthorpes where music lovers have worshipped 
since 1946, plus the even olderDinsdale’s joke shop, Beasley’s Hats and vinyl 
storeFunkywormhole, which grew out of a Leeds club night and offers early 
customers free coffee. Lovers of vintage fashion are spoilt for choice: 
micro-chainPoorboy Boutique has a branch in Prince’s Quay shopping centre as 
well as one on Newland Avenue to the north. In Hull’s other Victorian Arcade, 
Paragon, theMagpie’s Den lives up to its name. 

Where to sleep
 Kingston Theatre Hotel 
Hull has more than its share of chain hotels, so rates are competitive 
(doubles from £50).Holiday Inn Hull Marina, (online deals around £68 B&B for 
two) is in a great location for the old town. Family-runKingston Theatre Hotel 
(doubles from £62 B&B, kingstontheatrehotel.com) is in the former home of 
Victorian couturier Madame Clapham. Rooms are sleek and modern, but the food is 
retro: fruit juice and bacon and egg at breakfast, and dinners of, say, steak 
pie and trifle, are all served by charming motherly waitresses.

 