
A public art gallery in Hull has bought a masterpiece of European painting in 
one of the most important additions to Britain's art heritage in years.

The Sienese artist Pietro Lorenzetti 
<http://www.wga.hu/frames-e.html?/bio/l/lorenzet/pietro/biograph.html> painted 
Christ Between Saint Paul and Saint Peter, around 1320. Dante had just written
The Divine Comedy 
<http://www.hieropraxis.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/02/Paradiso_Canto_31.jpg>; 
it was a moment of bold innovation in European culture, when thegothic age of 
cathedrals was reaching its climax 
<http://humanitiesproject.files.wordpress.com/2011/05/siena_cathedral01.jpg>. 
Lorenzetti's painting is a revolutionary artwork in which we can spy the birth 
of modern ways of seeing.

This gold-decorated wooden panel is full of things that are astonishing to see 
in a painting that is 700 years old.Saint Paul 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/religion/religions/christianity/history/paul_1.shtml> 
holds a sword whose fancy red and black scabbard is painted with eye-fooling 
realism: it is not a flat sketch of a sword, as might be expected in medieval 
art, but a solid object that has been carefully recreated. Meanwhile, the faces 
of Christ and the two fathers of the church have a finely shaded fleshiness 
that makes them movingly alive.

All this realism was utterly new in Tuscany 700 years ago. That was why Dr 
Caroline Campbell of theNational Gallery <http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/> 
stepped in to slam an export ban on Lorenzetti's painting when it recently came 
on the market after being recognised as his work. "Lorenzetti was an artist 
ahead of his time", she says, his emotional dynamism "unparalleled in 
14th-century Italian art." This rare masterpiece that had long lurked in a 
British private collection could not be allowed to leave the country.

Enter the Ferens Art Gallery in Hull <http://www.hullcc.gov.uk/ferens>. At a 
time when councils are considering selling off works from their art collections 
to alleviatefinancial pressures 
<http://www.dailyecho.co.uk/news/10174804.print/)>, and when the quickest way 
for a regional gallery to attract attention is to stage an exhibition byDamien 
Hirst <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/damienhirst> or Grayson Perry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/grayson-perry>, the Ferens has gone 
back to the golden age of British art-collecting in the 19th century when 
cultured factory owners and merchants stuffed museums such asLiverpool's Walker 
Art Gallery <http://www.liverpoolmuseums.org.uk/walker/> with medieval 
masterpieces.

The Ferens has an endowment fund set up by its founder TR Ferens in 1928 
specifically to buy works of art. Its former director John Bradshaw also made a 
bequest to Hull and asked in his will for some of it to be used to buy a 
pre-1800 work of art. Bradshaw, who died in 2001 and was famous locally for 
giving lavish dinners at the gallery where he cooked the food, has got his wish.

The Ferens needed some help. Lorenzetti's painting is valued at £5m: that was 
knocked down to £1.6m through a private treaty sale. When the Hull gallery put 
up half of that, its offer was matched by the Art Fund and Heritage Lottery 
Fund to secure this purchase for a British public collection. "Even in the 
midst of funding pressures and cutbacks", saysArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Fund head Stephen Deuchar, "the 
Ferens and its supporters have pulled off a great coup."

Right now the painting is in the skylit restoration studio on the top floor of 
London's National Gallery, where it is being cared for by thechief art restorer 
Larry Keith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/jul/13/the-virgin-of-the-rocks-leonardo-restoration>
. It arrived there on a blazing heatwave afternoon when the natural light in 
this state-of-the-art workshop set off the reds, dark blues and mellow flesh 
tones of Lorenzetti's figures against their heavenly gold background. As Larry 
Keith and Caroline Campbell explained how tiny stellar dots stamped into the 
gold surface reveal the history of the painting – because the tools to make 
these patterns were handed down from studio to studio – Christ's eyes blazed 
with life. It was clear to everyone, as the experts got excited and their 
science gave way to sheer enthusiasm, that Hull has got hold of something 
special.
 