
Forget the bloody crime novels of Henning Mankell and Jo Nesbø and the bleak 
crime television of The Bridge and The Killing. The latest Scandinavian export 
is the Danish concept of “hygge”, and it will be all over bookshops come
Christmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas>.

Pronounced, approximately, hue-ga, hygge loosely translates as cosiness, but 
means more than that. It’s about a feeling of wellbeing, about enjoying life, 
whether through time spent with close friends or family, sitting by a fire with 
a hot chocolate, or putting on warm socks and dry clothes after a rainstorm. If 
that’s not clear, perhaps the flurry of books out this autumn exploring the 
concept will help clarify it: whether it’sThe Little Book of Hygge 
<https://www.penguin.co.uk/books/298804/the-little-book-of-hygge/> by the chief 
executive of Copenhagen’s Happiness Research Institute,Meik Wiking 
<https://vimeo.com/129033861>, How to Hygge 
<http://www.yesandyes.org/2015/11/how-to-hygge.html> or The Art of Hygge 
<http://www.summersdale.com/book/1/1210/the-art-of-hygge/>, all out in 
September, it could be the biggest trend in publishing this Christmas.

“Scand-wagon one might say,” said the Bookseller’s non-fiction expert Caroline 
Sanderson. “It’s so striking – I don’t think I’ve ever known quite such a 
marked trend. You could have a whole table in a bookshop covered with these.”

What freedom is to Americans, hygge is to Danes.
Meik Wiking, Copenhagen’s Happiness Research Institute 
Emily Robertson, who is publishing Wiking’s book at Penguin, describes the 
craze for hygge as the antithesis to the host of clean-eating books that have 
dominated bestseller lists for months. “Lifestyle publishing at the moment is 
all about deprivation and cutting things out, whether that’s food or exercise. 
Hygge is the complete opposite of that,” she said. “It’s about embracing 
things, enjoying cake, and chocolate, spending time with friends and family. 
It’s about the little things and luxuries which make life great, about enjoying 
the happy moments which we perhaps miss. It’s basically the antithesis to 
everything that’s been happening in lifestyle publishing so far.”

Wiking, whose forthcoming book recommends everything from candles (he points 
out that the word for spoilsport in Danish is lyselukker, which literally means 
“the one who puts out the candles”) to treating yourself with cake and cocoa, 
says hygge was originally a Norwegian word, and that it has equivalents in 
German and Dutch, ingemütlichkeit and gezelligheid. “But what is uniquely 
Danish is how much value we attribute to the word, and how often we use it,” he 
said. “It’s omnipresent in our language and we also see it as part of our 
national DNA. We’ve been talking about this at the institute - that what 
freedom is to Americans, hygge is to Danes.”

Wiking is wary of giving the word an exact translation. “It’s more than cosy 
and I’ve spent a book translating it. It’s the art of creating intimacy – cocoa 
by candlelight. But perhaps what hygge is really about is trying to achieve 
everyday happiness.”

Wiking believes that hygge could be the “missing ingredient” that leads to 
Denmark regularly topping world happiness rankings 
<http://www.visitdenmark.co.uk/en-gb/denmark/art/happiest-people-world>. “We 
did studies on why Denmark does well, and talked about Danes’ social security, 
equality, wealth and tolerance,” he said. “But the trouble with that 
explanation is that it doesn’t set Denmark apart from the other Nordic 
countries. Maybe – maybe – hygge is part of that missing piece.”

British writer Charlotte Abrahams’s Hygge 
<http://www.thebookseller.com/news/hygge-cosiness-concept-book-orion-322000> is 
also out in September, and sees the author exploring the history of the concept 
and its place in Danish culture, along with her efforts to bring hygge into her 
own life. “It’s very much a Brit looking at it from the outside,” she said. 
“I’ve always been deeply suspicious of all these lifestyle philosophies; they 
irritate me. But hygge isn’t like that – it’s a feeling, very rooted in 
spending time with your friends and family at home … It’s kind of linked in to 
mindfulness and happiness science, but in a lovely, gentle way. It has no rules 
– you don’t have to meditate, for example – and it does seem very achievable.”

The word, she says, is “vaguely connected to the English word hug: to cherish 
yourself, to make yourself snug. And I found the idea of a nation which has a 
concept about cherishing so deeply engrained in its culture very interesting.”

At Waterstones, nonfiction buyer Bea Carvalho believes the craze for hygge 
follows the success ofLars Mytting’s Norwegian Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/16/norwegian-wood-lars-mytting-man-made-things-trees-robert-penn-review>
, a guide to chopping and stacking wood the Norwegian way that she said has 
sold almost 100,000 copies since its publication last year, as well as the 
popular memoirThe Year of Living Danishly by Helen Russell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/05/the-year-of-living-danishly-helen-russell-denmark-happy>
, in which the journalist spent a year in Denmark trying to discover its recipe 
for happiness.

Abrahams’ Hygge, Carvalho predicted, “could fill the Norwegian Wood hole for 
this Christmas”, and she expects many of the hygge titles to sell strongly as 
Christmas presents. “There seems to be a real fascination with that way of life 
and it keeps on building,” she said. “It slots in really well to the whole 
mindfulness trend … There are loads [of hygge books] coming up. It’s having its 
moment.”

Wiking goes further. “The hygge empire is spreading faster than the Roman 
empire,” he said. “It’s a hygge revolution.”
 