
Daniel Blake, 59, is a skilled craftsman. He has assets, but not the kind that 
the market rates highly since they have little monetary value: qualities such 
as integrity, honesty and compassion. InKen Loach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/23/ken-loach-benefits-system-a-cruel-bureaucracy-cannes-win>
’s new film,I, Daniel Blake <https://www.theguardian.com/film/i--daniel-blake>, 
winner of the Palme d’Or atCannes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/may/23/ken-loach-i-daniel-blakes-shock-cannes-palme-d-or>
 earlier this year, Blake’s attributes carry little weight in a system designed 
to pitch one human being (the bureaucrat) against another (the citizen 
temporarily in need of state support) at a time of “necessary” austerity.

In a meticulously researched script written by Paul Laverty 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_Laverty>, Loach’s collaborator for 20 
years, Blake, a widower, has had a serious heart attack. What follows are his 
struggles with the benefits system and his growing friendship with a single 
parent, Katie, and her two children. After two years in a London hostel, Katie 
has been moved 300 miles to Newcastle because, allegedly, there is no housing 
in the capital – a city with 10,000 empty homes.

Katie has her benefits frozen, leaving her penniless, while Daniel, a man 
whose doctor says he is too ill to work, has to spend 35 hours a week applying 
for jobs he can’t take, on the orders of the jobcentre “work coach”. It is a 
surreal, dehumanised world in which empathy has little place and no allowance 
is made for the chaos of everyday life.

I watched the film with Alison Garnham, chief executive of Child Poverty 
Action Group <http://www.cpag.org.uk/content/alison-garnham> and Marissa, a 
single mother with an autistic daughter of three, who has been on benefits 
since leaving an abusive partner. Marissa was in tears for much of the film; 
humiliation revisited. Each one of us has heard identical testimonies to those 
on the screen many times: not fiction, but painfully true stories.

Fifty years ago, Ken Loach was the young director of Cathy Come Home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/may/20/legacy-cathy-come-home-fury-homelessness>
, a BBC1 Play for Today, filmed in documentary style and watched by 12 million. 
Cathy, her lorry driver husband, and two children, live happily in a flat. He 
has an accident and loses his job, so they move to lodgings, a caravan, a 
hostel. Cathy becomes a single parent and her children become homeless. Social 
workers finally take the children into care. The public were moved and enraged.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fi-daniel-blake-trailer-ken-loach-palme-dor-winner-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%2C%20Daniel%20Blake%3A%20the%20trailer%20for%20Ken%20Loach's%20Palme%20d'Or-winner%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fi-daniel-blake-trailer-ken-loach-palme-dor-winner-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%2C%20Daniel%20Blake%3A%20the%20trailer%20for%20Ken%20Loach%27s%20Palme%20d%27Or-winner%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fi-daniel-blake-trailer-ken-loach-palme-dor-winner-video&media=>
I, Daniel Blake: the trailer for Ken Loach’s Palme d’Or-winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/jun/15/i-daniel-blake-trailer-ken-loach-palme-dor-winner-video>
It was a time of job security, reciprocity and solidarity; the working class 
received accolades, rather than insults, as the source of much of the talent 
that propelled the swinging 60s. In 1965, sociologists Brian Abel-Smith and
Peter Townsend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2009/jun/09/obituary-peter-townsend> 
published an unexpected bestseller,The Poor and the Poorest. One historian 
commented: “The poor family and the poor working family were about to be reborn 
as a political issue.” The year ofCathy Come Home also saw the launches of the 
campaigning housing charity Shelter and the Child Poverty Action Group.

The difference between now and then? A greater understanding that poverty is 
systemic, not down to character failure, as many politicians imply. A factory 
closing, a spell of illness and life unravels when income is modest, a theme 
often explored by Loach, who is now 80. His work, including 19 feature films, 
plays and documentaries, has at times been banned, censored and derided – as 
well as feted by international prize juries. However, more recently, his 
ability to capture the demolition of the soul of decent people, as the social 
contract between citizen and government is ripped apart by the rapacity of 
neoliberalism, has hit a wider target.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fi-daniel-blake-ken-loach-director-film-movie-benefits-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F278cca98722ab16fc89b222127cf9afe7e10db32%2F0_46_3180_1909%2F3180.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%2C%20Daniel%20Blake%3A%20Ken%20Loach%20and%20the%20scandal%20of%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20benefits%20system&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fi-daniel-blake-ken-loach-director-film-movie-benefits-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%2C%20Daniel%20Blake%3A%20Ken%20Loach%20and%20the%20scandal%20of%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20benefits%20system&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fi-daniel-blake-ken-loach-director-film-movie-benefits-system%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F278cca98722ab16fc89b222127cf9afe7e10db32%2F0_46_3180_1909%2F3180.jpg>
 ‘An ability to capture the demolition of the soul of decent people’: the 
director Ken Loach. Photograph: Antonio Olmos for the Observer 
In 2012, the poorest 10% of Britons, many in work, spent 47% of their income 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/dec/23/christmas-food-handouts-families-poverty>
 on debt repayments. A single person like Daniel, onjobseeker’s allowance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/17/uk-unemployment-claimant-count-falls-after-brexit>
, is eligible for £73.10 a week in a system that gives childcare tax breaks to 
couples on £300,000. TheInstitute for Fiscal Studies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/19/middle-income-families-poverty-ifs-report>
 says government policy is both increasing and reshaping poverty, dragging in 
even those on moderate incomes. This is a political choice, not the outcome of 
a feckless sub-stratum of society. The facts ought to speak for themselves. But 
such is the toxicity of the shirkers-versus-strivers message, delivered by all 
the leading political parties, that facts are no longer believed. That’s why we 
need the visceral emotion of Loach.

His work is frequently dismissed as “didactic”, shorthand for leftwing, biased 
propaganda. Yet, the stream of films and media that casually endorse the 
avaricious and the talentless rich, the exploitative and the violent are viewed 
as entertainment. But they, too, in their own way, are didactic. They send a 
message that greed is good; the individual comes first.

Loach’s films are often about the ordinary man and woman, eventually pushed to 
take direct action because they have nothing left to lose but their 
self-respect. DesignerAgnès B 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2006/feb/19/shopping.fashion> rightly 
says: “There’s Balzac, Dickens, Zola and Loach.” Each is a master at turning 
the abstract concepts of inequality and social justice into lives that matter. 
But how much do we care now?

I, Daniel Blake <http://www.bbc.co.uk/bbcfilms/film/i_daniel_blake> is 
released in cinemas on 21 October

Jack Monroe: ‘It needs to be shown in the House of Commons’

Food writer, journalist and poverty campaigner
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fi-daniel-blake-ken-loach-director-film-movie-benefits-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faac9b7d9df95f743b0478409e30bd5badbe43089%2F0_791_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%2C%20Daniel%20Blake%3A%20Ken%20Loach%20and%20the%20scandal%20of%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20benefits%20system&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fi-daniel-blake-ken-loach-director-film-movie-benefits-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%2C%20Daniel%20Blake%3A%20Ken%20Loach%20and%20the%20scandal%20of%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20benefits%20system&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fi-daniel-blake-ken-loach-director-film-movie-benefits-system%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faac9b7d9df95f743b0478409e30bd5badbe43089%2F0_791_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
 Photograph: Graham Turner for the Guardian 
It was hard to sit and watch that film as a piece of entertainment when it 
felt more like a documentary on my life. I was contacted ages ago by the film’s 
researchers and I told them to feel free to use whatever they wantedfrom my blog
 <https://cookingonabootstrap.com/>. Although my experiences are certainly not 
unique, there were a lot of scenes in the film where the similarities with my 
life were uncanny.

Like the single mum character, Katie Morgan, I had to drop out of my Open 
University course when I was living on benefits because life was too chaotic 
and I couldn’t concentrate on it. But there was also this feeling of what’s the 
point of studying when you don’t feel you’ve got a future? The scene where 
they’re using tea lights and a flower pot to take the chill off the room and 
sticking bubble wrap on the windows to keep the cold out also hit home. But the 
moment I found most devastating was when Katie’s little boy says, “Aren’t you 
having any dinner?” And she says, “I’m not hungry”, as that was a conversation 
I had with my son on many nights.

People used to tell me that maybe I was just unlucky, but to see the narrative 
played out on screen like that shows you that there is a logic to the way these 
events unfold and that people can get trapped in a downward spiral.

Watching the film is like being asked to revisit some of the darkest moments 
of my life, condensed into 100 minutes. I’ve been incredibly lucky and 
successful – I’m working as a journalist now and writing my third book – but 
three years down the line I still can’t open my own front door if I’m not 
expecting visitors and I can barely face opening my post. What some people 
don’t seem to understand is that it really breaks your spirit, it grinds you 
down and once you’ve hit rock bottom, it lives in you like a darkness and 
doesn’t go away.

I don’t feel the film was over the top at all. If anything, I think they were 
a bit kind to the DWP. Obviously there are decent people who work there; it’s 
just that they’re so constrained by red tape and automatic responses. As the 
film shows, as soon as anybody tries to step outside of the regime to be 
helpful, they’re penalised for it.

It makes me want to go and find a big wall and project this film on to it so 
as many people as possible see it. It needs to be shown in the House of Commons 
and I’m going to start a petition to get it shown on the BBC.

Mark Littlewood: ‘It’s a libertarian rant against the welfare state’

Director general of the Institute of Economic Affairs
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fi-daniel-blake-ken-loach-director-film-movie-benefits-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe10f13472dfc222f05dd3a5304fbef16548e92c9%2F1118_149_1331_798%2F1331.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%2C%20Daniel%20Blake%3A%20Ken%20Loach%20and%20the%20scandal%20of%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20benefits%20system&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fi-daniel-blake-ken-loach-director-film-movie-benefits-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%2C%20Daniel%20Blake%3A%20Ken%20Loach%20and%20the%20scandal%20of%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20benefits%20system&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fi-daniel-blake-ken-loach-director-film-movie-benefits-system%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe10f13472dfc222f05dd3a5304fbef16548e92c9%2F1118_149_1331_798%2F1331.jpg>
 Photograph: Linda Nylind for the Guardian 
As a film it was much what I expected. True to form, Loach starts with a 
fairly depressing premise and it gets more depressing from there – you know how 
it’s going to end right from the start. But that’s not to detract from it as a 
powerful narrative. And I think its political analysis is rather more subtle 
than I was expecting. In fact, there’s only one scene where someone starts 
shouting about “goddamn Tory cuts”. The rest of it is actually about 
bureaucratic failure. It’s basically Joseph Heller’sCatch-22 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/30/catch-22-joseph-heller-reading-group-jokes>
 meetsTerry Gilliam’s Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/21/brazil-gilliam-fantasy> in 
contemporary Newcastle.

To my surprise, I’m pretty sympathetic to the narrative, which seems to be 
saying that the mass-bureaucratic welfare state is a colossal misuse of 
resources. That it does not get the money to where it is needed and is policed 
by people who are obsessed about their own status and what the rules are but 
not actually concerned about poverty. Although he’s telling it at a micro 
level, my macroeconomic analysis of it is: Oh my God, that’s the way we spend 
£240bn a year on poverty relief? What a total shambles!

In Daniel’s written statement at the end, he’s almost channelling Pat McGoohan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/jan/14/television2> from The Prisoner
: I will not be stamped, filed, indexed, briefed, debriefed or numbered, my 
life is my own. So I think it is not a traditional predictable socialist rant, 
but quite an interesting analysis of the colossal failures of state bureaucracy 
and how that dehumanises both the providers of that service and the people on 
the receiving end.

This is in stark contrast to the voluntary social networks, which in the film 
are rather strong. The people involved in the food bank are very supportive. 
His old workmates and the couple of scallywags next door keep offering to help. 
If only they had more power and money, and the paper-pushing bureaucrats had 
less, one suspects that both Daniel and Katie would have had better prospects 
in their darkest hours. So there you go, I’ve just interpreted a Ken Loach 
movie as a right-wing, free-market-capitalist, libertarian rant against the
welfare state 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/09/britain-welfare-state-pride-shame-labour>
.

Obviously the film is a specific critique about the recent changes in the 
welfare system, I get that, but I think Loach could have made an almost 
identical movie 20 years ago, prior toIain Duncan Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/19/what-explains-iain-duncan-smiths-decision-to-resign>
’s reforms. And he specifically doesn’t suggest that it was about a lack of 
funds. It is unambiguously about how those funds are dispersed and utilised, 
and this is done in a horrifically inefficient, bureaucratic, lunatic, 
dehumanising, hopeless, helpless fashion. I daresay Loach wouldn’t be delighted 
with me recommendingI, Daniel Blake as one of the best free-market libertarian 
critiques of our bloated welfare system, but I think that’s a perfectly 
legitimate interpretation.

Gavin Turk: ‘It makes you think about how civilised we are’

Artist and co-founder of children’s art charity The House of Fairy Tales
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fi-daniel-blake-ken-loach-director-film-movie-benefits-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa699b5821c5b06f65086710200add45076f183cc%2F0_88_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%2C%20Daniel%20Blake%3A%20Ken%20Loach%20and%20the%20scandal%20of%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20benefits%20system&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fi-daniel-blake-ken-loach-director-film-movie-benefits-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%2C%20Daniel%20Blake%3A%20Ken%20Loach%20and%20the%20scandal%20of%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20benefits%20system&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fi-daniel-blake-ken-loach-director-film-movie-benefits-system%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa699b5821c5b06f65086710200add45076f183cc%2F0_88_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Photograph: LNP/REX Shutterstock 
I thought the film was very moving. It was good at showing how difficult life 
can be when you don’t have any income, and how not having money is really 
debilitating, to the point where it makes you sick. It’s interesting to see the 
film against the backdrop of thisneoliberal society 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/15/neoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot>
, where money is seen as the thing to strive for and build your ambitions 
around. The film seems to suggest that those hopes and ambitions which you 
can’t buy, which don’t relate to money, are not lauded or appreciated enough in 
our society.

For anyone who’s ever signed on – as many artists have done – it conveyed the 
weird awkwardness of job centres and the culture around them. I spent a few 
months on benefits just after college, doing the whole jobseeker thing and 
making myself go to interviews for jobs I knew I wouldn’t be able to take. 
Watching this film really brought me back to that time.

Daniel was quite good at pointing out the ridiculousness of it all. When I was 
in that situation I just nodded and went along with things. The scene where 
he’s forced to attend a CV-writing tutorial was very funny. He makes a joke and 
ends up being cast as the naughty schoolboy, when all he’s trying to do is 
humanise the situation. The film is full of people trying to humanise their 
environments and being punished for it.

Ken Loach <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ken-loach> has taken a simple and 
straightforward story and pushed it to quite a sophisticated level. The film 
makes you sit up and think about how we survive, how civilised we are, and how 
we civilise ourselves. It had me in tears at moments. There was a lot of 
sniffing around me in the screening room. It’s a tough film and it might spin 
people out a bit, but I think it’s definitely an important one to see.

Daniel Mays: ‘I’ve not cried this much during a film in a long time’

Actor, best known for roles in Vera Drake and Made in Dagenham
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fi-daniel-blake-ken-loach-director-film-movie-benefits-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10547239c3cbf47477f479521be39ff32ebb3b09%2F0_89_2834_1701%2F2834.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%2C%20Daniel%20Blake%3A%20Ken%20Loach%20and%20the%20scandal%20of%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20benefits%20system&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fi-daniel-blake-ken-loach-director-film-movie-benefits-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%2C%20Daniel%20Blake%3A%20Ken%20Loach%20and%20the%20scandal%20of%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20benefits%20system&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fi-daniel-blake-ken-loach-director-film-movie-benefits-system%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10547239c3cbf47477f479521be39ff32ebb3b09%2F0_89_2834_1701%2F2834.jpg>
 Photograph: Dave Willis 
I think this film is up there with Ken Loach’s best. It’s powerful and raw, 
and of all his work I don’t know if I’ve watched something with such an 
emotional punch. It’s a searingly honest and brutal portrayal of ordinary 
people living on the breadline. I really admire how un-showy it is: it’s very 
simplistic in its storytelling and I think that’s the film’s power. I think no 
other film-maker would want to make a film about these characters. You’d pass 
Daniel Blake in the street and not notice him, and yet Ken Loach has turned the 
camera round and moved me to tears with it, and made me angry.

It’s about a man who is widowed and pretty much goes to war against the state, 
and the unwavering level of red tape he has to go through for his jobseeker’s 
allowance. The characters’ descent into desperation just to make ends meet is 
heartbreaking. I thought the relationship between the two central characters 
was beautifully realised: it was completely truthful and the performances were 
pitch perfect. I don’t think I’ve cried this much for a film in a long time.

You can sense the overwhelming research that has gone into it: all the 
form-filling in the jobcentre and that hypocrisy is brilliantly realised. It’s 
a shocking and important film, because this is the state that a lot of people 
in the country are in. With everything that’s gone on with Brexit, a lot of 
that was a protest vote. The world of this film is connected to that – it’s a 
film about austerity. It wears you down as a viewer: you feel like you’re on 
that journey with Daniel, and you feel an overwhelming frustration about his 
plight. There’s a beautiful line in it that says, “When you lose your 
self-respect, what have you got?”, and I think that’s really what the film is 
about – identity. And about how no matter who you are or where you come from or 
how much you earn, that you need to have recognition and a place within this 
world.

There seems to be a lack of films that want to address difficult subjects like 
this.Shane Meadows <https://www.theguardian.com/film/shane-meadows> has taken 
on the baton from the likes of Ken Loach andMike Leigh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mikeleigh>, but there’s definitely room for 
more. I don’t think I’ve ever felt as politicised as I am at the moment; I feel 
desperately frustrated and unhappy that we voted out. We should never flinch 
from asking difficult questions in culture, and it would give us an increased 
identity as a UK film industry as well. The power of film can really highlight 
these predicaments and drive the message home.

Marissa, 36: ‘I’m like Daniel. I’m ill. I have no family support. And I’m 
isolated’

Mother of an autistic three-year-old, living in a one-bedroom London council 
flat. After a struggle, she received a diagnosis of her daughter’s autism and 
now receives £400 a week including disability living allowance.

So many of the scenes in the film have been part of my life. I was married, 
employed in a good job. Then the relationship became difficult, I had no money. 
I was offered escort work, which I would never do. Just as in the film, I was 
late for my first appointment at the Jobcentre Plus. I was in a terrible tizzy. 
They saw how distressed I was and showed some sympathy and said I should wait. 
So I waited four hours. I was lucky my daughter was a baby.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fi-daniel-blake-ken-loach-director-film-movie-benefits-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f5b441d1530d78e8e2fe5e3cd89f14c0012dfbe%2F0_234_5400_3240%2F5400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%2C%20Daniel%20Blake%3A%20Ken%20Loach%20and%20the%20scandal%20of%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20benefits%20system&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fi-daniel-blake-ken-loach-director-film-movie-benefits-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%2C%20Daniel%20Blake%3A%20Ken%20Loach%20and%20the%20scandal%20of%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20benefits%20system&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fi-daniel-blake-ken-loach-director-film-movie-benefits-system%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f5b441d1530d78e8e2fe5e3cd89f14c0012dfbe%2F0_234_5400_3240%2F5400.jpg>
 Dave Johns in I, Daniel Blake. Photograph: Joss Barratt/Entone Group 
I was in a hostel in one room for four months at first. They tried to put me 
in private accommodation but it was filthy, damp and had rats. Then, they 
offered a six-month tenancy, but I need security for my daughter, who hates 
change. Now, I’ve a got a five-year tenancy. I like the area. But there is a 
stigma for being on benefits. I get scrutinised and asked, “Why don’t you work?”

I’ve lost four friends who asked why was I living on taxpayers’ money. I have 
a bad heart and back. I worked as a property manager for 10 years in 
Kensington, but that means long hours and I can’t afford the childcare and my 
daughter needs intensive support.

As a property manager I used to think people on benefits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2013/jan/08/uk-benefit-welfare-spending>
 weren’t trying hard enough. Then I began to see people who were sick and had 
disabilities. I’d try to persuadelandlords to take people on benefits as tenants
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/jan/21/landlords-turn-away-housing-benefit-claimants>
. I’d say: “Your rent is concrete, this is government money. A private tenant 
could lose their job.” But landlords weren’t interested.

After seeing the film, I woke up thinking, I’m just like Daniel. I’m ill, I 
have no family support, and I’m isolated. When Lily starts her new specialist 
school in September, we will have to travel three hours a day by bus. It’s only 
for a year so I don’t want to move. Until she is five, I will have to go to the 
jobcentre every six months to see if I am work ready. It’s humiliating and 
pointless.

Alison Garnham: ‘It’s so refreshing to hear the views of claimants’

Chief executive, Child Poverty <https://www.theguardian.com/society/poverty> 
Action Group
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fi-daniel-blake-ken-loach-director-film-movie-benefits-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f2d14760b6b6e9dc6c76a3642fd6a0ac6078f8e%2F0_139_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%2C%20Daniel%20Blake%3A%20Ken%20Loach%20and%20the%20scandal%20of%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20benefits%20system&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fi-daniel-blake-ken-loach-director-film-movie-benefits-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%2C%20Daniel%20Blake%3A%20Ken%20Loach%20and%20the%20scandal%20of%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20benefits%20system&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fi-daniel-blake-ken-loach-director-film-movie-benefits-system%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f2d14760b6b6e9dc6c76a3642fd6a0ac6078f8e%2F0_139_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
Some critics are bound to say the film is very didactic, too black and white, 
but the most important aspect for me is that it’s talking about something that 
is true. That’s why it moves the audiences who have seen it so far.

It’s true that people’s employment and support allowance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/01/equalities-watchdog-criticises-planned-cuts-to-work-support-allowance>
 (ESA) is refused because theirwork capability assessment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/24/work-capability-assessment-linked-relapses-claimaints-severe-mental-health-problems>
 takes no account of what’s really wrong with them. It’s true that if a person 
appeals, he or she has to wait for the person who made the decision to 
reconsider before an appeal can be lodged. It’s true thatclaimants are 
sanctioned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/may/14/more-jobseekers-allowance-claimants-subject-benefit-sanctions>
 forpiffling reasons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/mar/28/jobcentre-scorecard-areas-stopping-benefits>
. People under stress really are dealing with an unhelpful bureaucrat in a 
remote call centre who can’t take decisions. Successive governments have tried 
to reduce footfall to jobcentres, which in plain English means there are fewer 
and fewer people there to help.

Daniel worked on a building site and has never used a computer, yet he’s 
expected to go online. People are entitled to hardship payments but we’ve met 
some infood banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/apr/22/food-bank-users-uk-low-paid-workers-poverty>
 who don’t know they are eligible.

The government has changed the way it calculates benefits and has frozen 
others, which means that as living standards rise, the income of the poor will 
be on a downward escalator. We know from the work of the London School of 
Economics that as a result of political choices a lot of money has been taken 
from the poorest half of the population and given to the richest half. We also 
know if you take action on child poverty it goes down.

In the 70s and 80s there was a strong artistic response to issues such as 
racism, inequality and poverty. It’s pretty stilted now, so it’s refreshing to 
have a piece of art from the perspective of claimants when they are usually 
treated with such negativity. I do believe films like this can make a 
difference. Today, almost everybody knows somebody affected by the benefits 
system in one way or another. It’s becoming less “People like them” and more 
“People like us”.

Melanie McDonagh: ‘It’s a true take on the bureaucratic mindset’

Columnist and leader writer for the London Evening Standard
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fi-daniel-blake-ken-loach-director-film-movie-benefits-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12963b6924aa32806eee4a0e2b29d70deba0335c%2F0_0_6360_3817%2F6360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%2C%20Daniel%20Blake%3A%20Ken%20Loach%20and%20the%20scandal%20of%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20benefits%20system&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fi-daniel-blake-ken-loach-director-film-movie-benefits-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%2C%20Daniel%20Blake%3A%20Ken%20Loach%20and%20the%20scandal%20of%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20benefits%20system&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fi-daniel-blake-ken-loach-director-film-movie-benefits-system%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12963b6924aa32806eee4a0e2b29d70deba0335c%2F0_0_6360_3817%2F6360.jpg>
 Photograph: Daniel Hambury/Stella Pictures 
It was the fish that gave me hope. When poor Daniel Blake’s possessions were 
being carted off for sale (whoops, spoiler) to save him from starvation after 
he fell foul of the benefits system, the secondhand trader spotted Daniel’s 
handmade fish mobile in the window. “I’ll give you a few quid for them,” he 
said. “No!” said Daniel. “They’re not for sale.” (Sentimental value you see; 
not everything has a cash value.) This was the point at which I thought things 
might change for poor DB. He’s discovered that something he likes doing – 
woodwork; he’s a carpenter, after all – has monetary value; he has a saleable 
skill. He could flog his fish to the secondhand shop, or maybe sell them on the 
street, the way his neighbour does stolen trainers, maybe diversifying into 
Noah’s Arks. And perhaps he could use a bit of child labour, courtesy of the 
displaced London children he befriends. But nope; the moment passes, just like 
it does when one of the men he gave his CV to offers him a job. Might it have 
been possible for him to say that, sorry, he can’t do heavy lifting, but he can 
do a bit of woodwork, or stuff that doesn’t involve hard labour? He doesn’t, 
even though he’s just finished a nice bookshelf for his London friend. For 
Daniel, it’s a building site or bust.

And that’s one of the dispiriting things about this movie: the sense that 
things can’t change up north, that benefit claimants can’t be helped to find 
work they can do, not just given recompense for the work they can’t. There’s a 
very funny exchange at the outset between Daniel and a bovine, authoritarian 
woman from the DWP, who has a fixed set of questions he must answer. He wants 
to tell her that he’s got a dodgy heart which means he’s had to give up work on 
buildings; she wants to get him to tell her whether he can lift his arm. It’s a 
true take on the bureaucratic mindset, which fails to distinguish ends from 
means and fetishises the internet, but the object of this charade is actually a 
reasonable one, which is to identify what disability claimants can do, not just 
what they can’t.

By the way, it’s not just jobless single mothers like Katie who are priced out 
of central London these days; it’s happening to the middle classes too.

Agnès B: ‘After seeing the film, I felt I was losing a new family’

Fashion designer and film patron
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fi-daniel-blake-ken-loach-director-film-movie-benefits-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F536892891f97ba0959769de29cc77baffd99baf3%2F0_1096_2176_1305%2F2176.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%2C%20Daniel%20Blake%3A%20Ken%20Loach%20and%20the%20scandal%20of%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20benefits%20system&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fi-daniel-blake-ken-loach-director-film-movie-benefits-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%2C%20Daniel%20Blake%3A%20Ken%20Loach%20and%20the%20scandal%20of%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20benefits%20system&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fi-daniel-blake-ken-loach-director-film-movie-benefits-system%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F536892891f97ba0959769de29cc77baffd99baf3%2F0_1096_2176_1305%2F2176.jpg>
 Photograph: Kristina Nikishina/Getty Images for SPIMF 
Ken Loach is someone whose work I’ve loved since Family Life [1971], a 
beautiful movie I saw when I was very young. He’s a great artist and a great 
man. He loves people, and you can see that in this movie, because it’s about 
forming relationships, making a new family through life’s hardships. When I 
came out of the film I felt like I was losing a new family, because you enter 
the story and fall in love with these people. Cinema is magic for that.

It’s an important film – there are so many stories about couples and other 
boring things in France now, but this film is political, it’s realistic, it’s 
touching, it has to be seen. And it could be anywhere: it could be in Paris, 
because in France it’s the same. You wait for hours to have some help, and 
there are many who are unemployed. Some people only have one meal a day, and 
there have been reports of people eating dog food because they’re so hungry.

Because of the attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/feb/20/return-to-paris-tourism-after-november-terror-attacks>
 we had 1 million fewer tourists this summer in Paris, so it’s difficult here 
now. We are in quite hard times, but I think humanity has always had hard 
times. And people are strong.

I, Daniel Blake makes you think that, in these times, we have to share: money, 
energy, water. I try to do my best to share what I earn, I manufacture in 
France as much as I can, because I think if rich people pay taxes and do things 
normally we could share the money much better.

I saw the film in Cannes and many people were crying at the end of it. I was 
so happy when it got the Palme d’Or. It was the best film and really deserved 
it: the scenes were beautiful and simple, and the writing was great.

I met Loach and his lovely wife after the screening and I told him: “There’s 
Balzac, Dickens, Zola and Loach.”

Like them, his work is about people, and about how hard life can be. There 
aren’t many who talk about things like that, social things. Maybe it’s not 
commercial, I don’t know. But I think that it’s important to use your language 
to talk about that.
 