
Why are vegans so irritating? Veganism is a laudable lifestyle choice, but 
there is something about it that seems to get on people’s nerves. Just ask the 
town of Aargau, in Switzerland, which recently denied citizenship to a 
foreign-born vegan resident because she was being too annoying. In Switzerland, 
local residents get a say in applications for naturalisation andthe townsfolk 
decided the woman’s very vocal veganism was incompatible with Swiss values 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2017/01/12/health/switzerland-citizenship-vegan-trnd/> 
such as “cowbells … pig racing, eating meat, circus animals, mouse-catching 
[and] giving out milk at school”. Don’t let anyone tell you the Swiss don’t 
know how to have a good time.

It’s not just Switzerland; vegans seem to be a global irritant. Take the new 
£5 note furore. When the polymer note was introduced last year,vegans were not 
happy that it contained small amounts of tallow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/02/5-animal-fat-bank-note-british-vegetarians-being-stupid-says-inventor>
 anda petition was sent to the Bank of England 
<https://www.change.org/p/bank-of-england-remove-tallow-from-bank-notes> asking 
for the animal fat to be removed. The Australian inventor of the polymer notes
responded by saying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/02/5-animal-fat-bank-note-british-vegetarians-being-stupid-says-inventor>
: “It’s stupid. It’s absolutely stupid.” There was a general sense that the 
vegans were at it again – getting outraged and causing trouble.

Related: This is what a vegan looks like… 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/sep/11/why-so-many-people-are-converting-to-veganism>

Veganism has a lengthy history. Followers of the ancient Indian religion of 
Jainism have been big fans for a long time. But trends don’t really become a 
legitimate “thing” until white people claim them, so veganism-the-brand wasn’t 
officially born until 1944. This was kind of an eventful year, what with Paris 
being liberated from the Nazis and the Battle of the Bulge. Amid the turmoil of 
the second world war,Donald Watson, an English woodworker, called a meeting  
<https://www.vegansociety.com/about-us/history>with some fellow non-dairy 
vegetarians to form plans for eventual dietary world domination. It was decided 
that “non-dairy vegetarian” wasn’t a terribly catchy name if they wanted their 
lifestyle to spread and that some new nomenclature was needed. They mulled over 
various options, including “dairyban”, “vitan” and “benevore”, until finally 
someone said something along the lines of “Veganism, my dear Watson”, and they 
all agreed on that.

Today, around half a million people in Britain consider themselves vegan. But 
they also get a lot of flak for it.Veganism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/veganism> has become the butt of many 
a joke (“How do you know someone is a vegan? They’ll tell you”) and is 
considered a socially acceptable target for mockery.

A major reason people are often hostile to vegans is because of a perceived 
holier-than-thou factor. A 2011 research paper in the journal of Social 
Psychological and Personality Science sums it up in the title: Do Gooder 
Derogation: Disparaging Morally Motivated Minorities to Defuse Anticipated 
Reproach <http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/1948550611415695>. The 
study found that the mainstream feels judged by moral minorities and this 
causes backlash. “Do gooder derogation” also factors into antagonism towards 
teetotallers, cyclists andmillennials who can fit a year’s worth of their 
rubbish into a jar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/22/zero-waste-millennial-bloggers-trash-greenhouse-gas-emissions>
.

Vegans also have a Peta problem. The animal rights group 
<http://www.peta.org.uk> has been one of the loudest proponents of veganism 
over the years and it has done the movement no favours. Peta has a long history 
of appalling advertising, which for some serves to confirm the idea that animal 
activists care more about animals than humans. It hascompared cows to rape 
victims 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/peta-ad-rape_us_581befcfe4b0aac624836a29> 
andfactory farming to the Holocaust 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2003/US/Northeast/02/28/peta.holocaust/>. It is also 
fond ofdepicting women as pieces of meat 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/copyranter/the-12-absolute-worst-peta-ads-of-all-time?utm_term=.trREP8KRq#.uaBVDjPqM>
 and misogyny runs rife through its marketing. It appears incapable of creating 
an advert that doesn’t involve a naked woman;its latest campaign 
<http://modernfarmer.com/2017/01/alicia-silverstone-naked-telling-wool-clothing-bad-believe/>
 features Alicia Silverstone baring her buttocks in a meadow while coquettishly 
clutching a lamb’s face. The headline reads “I’d rather go naked than wear 
wool.”
 Alicia Silverstone bears all for Peta’s latest ad. Photograph: Peta 
Personally, I would rather swallow knitting needles than eat vegan cheese but, 
to be clear, I’m not here to berate veganism. I am never going to give up pizza 
with proper cheese but I am a vegetarian and I think that cutting down on our 
consumption of animal products is one of the easiest ways to support the 
wellbeing of the planet. Livestock accounts for more than 14% of global 
greenhouse gas emissions, for example; widespread adoption of a vegan diet 
could cut this considerably.

There are numerous compelling health, ethical and environmental reasons for 
moving towards a vegan diet and more people are paying attention. The stigmas 
around vegan diets are also slowly being dismantled and it may not be long 
before the days of vegan-mockery are over. The idea that veganism is 
unmasculine, for example, has largely been debunked. A2015 study in the journal 
Appetite <http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0195666315300982> 
found participants did not associate vegetarianism or veganism with lower 
levels of masculinity. And John Joseph, an Ironman athlete and punk singer, 
recently wroteMeat is for Pussies 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/d/Books/Meat-Pussies-Guide-Dudes-Want-Kick-Names/0062320327>
, a book that challenges the idea that eating bacon somehow makes you a bastion 
of masculinity.

More people are also trialling veganism through concepts such as Mark 
Bittman’s VB6 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/05/09/mark-bittman-vegan-before-6-vb6_n_3224415.html>
, where you eat only vegan foods before 6pm. There is alsoVeganuary 
<https://veganuary.com/>, which encourages people to go vegan for January. 
Launched in 2014, a record50,000 people signed up Veganuary this year 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-38506418>. No cheese pairs really well with no 
wine, so if you’re doingdry January 
<http://www.alcoholconcern.org.uk/dry-january>, you may want to consider 
combining the two. Nothing like a Dryveguary to cheer you up.

If you are doing Veganuary, it has also become a lot easier to find something 
to eat. Pret a Manger, for example, introduced new vegan options earlier this 
month. Vegans may long have been mocked for taking the high road, but they have 
finally arrived on the high street.
 