
A Kipling poem <http://www.kiplingsociety.co.uk/poems_if.htm> hangs above my 
desk. I was still staring at it at 3 o’clock this morning, wide awake as the 
reactionaries relentlessly obsessed in the white noise of the internet. “If you 
can keep your head when all about you / Are losing theirs and blaming it on 
you, / If you can trust yourself when all men doubt you, / But make allowance 
for their doubting too …”

If I became chancellor, I’d swap that red box for a green one | Molly Scott 
Cato
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/18/budget-2015-chancellor-red-box-greens>
Contrary to what appears to be popular belief, I am not very organised, nor 
particularly good at “media”. Anyone who pointed out the sicked-up shrimp in my 
hair on BBC1’sQuestion Time <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b044mhbd> will 
know that. Yet if I could have predicted even a tenth of the reaction to my 
exercising my democratic right to vote for whoever the hell I like, I might not 
have chosen my birthday to do it.

It was my 27th birthday, and I had left the Labour party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/17/jack-monroe-joins-green-party>
. In fact, I had quietly left some weeks beforehand, and run away to look for 
the living wage, the social housing, the repurposing of abandoned buildings, 
free education and the NHS. I had left the Labour party to find the values that 
I thought that it once stood for, and I found them, in the Greens.

Like greeting old friends, I embraced the importance placed on a national 
health service, on public transport, on sustainable energy, on fair pay for 
fair work. Here you were, all the time. Oh, how I’ve missed you. I couldn’t see 
you for a moment for all the Ukip drawbridges andLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> tougher-on-welfares and Tory 
making-works-pays, but there you were all along.

Jack Monroe and electoral Labour pains | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/20/jack-monroe-and-electoral-labour-pains>
My politics have not changed. I have been campaigning for the living wage for 
as long as I have been campaigning, and it was theGreens at their 2013 
conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/sep/13/greens-food-poverty-inequality-leader>
 who made a commitment to it. I have been increasingly uncomfortable with the 
“drawbridges” rhetoric on immigration of the far right, and was horrified to 
see similar suggestions on leaflets under Labour party mastheads. I am deeply 
grateful to the Labour party for its commitment to thefood bank debate in 
December 2013 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/democracylive/house-of-commons-25431723>, 
but that petition was also widely supported and shared by Green party members 
and activists.

For a long time now I have found myself defending my membership of the Labour 
party while wondering what values of mine it defended any more. I didn’t leave 
the Labour party. It left me, and many others besides. Yet we, the “defectors”, 
are lambasted as traitors, since it’s easier to launch personal attacks than 
political arguments, easier to insult and scaremonger than to reflect on why so 
many core and loyal voters are edging away uncomfortably. “Vote Green and 
you’ll get Tories!” they shriek at me. I voted Labour last year. I got Tories. 
There are no guarantees in a first-past-the-post system that we get the 
government that represents us.

Jack Monroe joins Green party
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/17/jack-monroe-joins-green-party>
The joy of living in a free and democratic country is that you can work out 
what your fundamental ethics and values are and vote for someone who you feel 
represents them. Oh for proportional representation: perhaps politics would be 
less brutally tribal. Perhaps politicians, at all levels, would do better to 
focus on their policies and shout loudly about those.

Forget what I’m doing; my little ballot-paper cross means as much as the next 
person’s. The only person whose vote you should care about is your own. Because 
if you don’t stand for something, you’ll fall for anything – and many a glossy 
leaflet shoved through your front door over the next seven weeks will be 
relying on exactly that.
 