
Actor Richard Wilson has told how he originally turned down the role of Victor 
Meldrew in BBC1’s One Foot in the Grave – with the part almost going toLes 
Dawson <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/les-dawson> instead.


Wilson said he thought he was too young to play the role of the cantankerous 
Meldrew, before going on to star in five series of the hit sitcom in the early 
1990s, returning for a final run in 2000.

Dawson, who died in 1993, was the second choice of writer David Renwick after 
Wilson turned down the initial scripts.

How we made One Foot in the Grave
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/aug/25/how-we-made-one-foot-in-the-grave>
“I was in my early 50s and Victor was 60. I turned it down,” Wilson explains 
in the new issue of Radio Times. “I think Les Dawson was being considered. A 
very funny man – but I don’t know if he could have played Victor.”

Renwick said in a documentary two years ago 
<http://www.chortle.co.uk/news/2014/12/24/21546/les_dawson_was_almost_victor_meldrew>
 that there was resistance in some parts of the BBC to casting Wilson because 
“at the time he was regarded primarily as a supporting actor”.

“[Les] would have been my second choice,’ said Renwick. “It would have been a 
different character; he would have taken it in a different direction. But he 
had the lugubriousness and the attitude which would have worked.”

Eventually Wilson was persuaded to take the part by the show’s producer, Susan 
Belbin, and he will resurrect the role at the Edinburgh festival fringe this 
year, despite the fact he was killed off in theBBC1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc1> finale.

Wilson, now 80, will recreate the script for a 1993 episode called The Trial, 
which sees Victor waiting in the house on a rainy day, on call for jury duty. 
Half an hour with Victor will be followed by half an hour with Wilson himself, 
answering questions from the audience.

The actor promised fans that the catchphrase “I don’t believe it!” has not 
mellowed with age. “I think Victor is around 80 now,” he said. “But I am 
playing him at roughly 74.

“He has not changed one bit. In fact, it’s quite hard to get back to my 
normal, affable, lovable self after being him, even for half an hour.”
 