
When Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> walked onto the stage 
during BET’s annual Black Girls Rock award show earlier this month, I winced – 
hard. The Black Girls Rock organization presents one evening every year to 
exclusively honor black girls and women, not to facilitate white female 
presidential candidates seeking to campaign for votes under the guise of 
ally-ship.

Because frankly, if her ally-ship were credible to begin with, someone in her 
black girl magic squad surely would have let her know that she should sit this 
one out. It also made me wonder, though, beyond pondering the seemingly 
infinite right of entry into any space at any time provided by whiteness: what 
is it with Hillary Clinton and black women?

Bill Clinton's crime bill destroyed lives, and there's no point denying it | 
Thomas Frank
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/15/bill-clinton-crime-bill-hillary-black-lives-thomas-frank>
I get it. As Kirsten West Savali 
<http://www.theroot.com/articles/culture/2016/02/black_feminists_don_t_owe_hillary_clinton_their_support.html>
, my friend and fellow journalist, pointed out in conversation: “Proximity to 
power and privilege feels like liberation, or at least advancement [for some 
black women].” In this context, it means access to that beautifully 
uncomplicated world of unshucked, pearl-filled oysters that awaits every white 
man or woman who is willing to fight for it, or to at least game the system.

In my all-white regional high school in rural New Hampshire, there were the 
rich, preppy kids in the front hall and the smokers, druggies and poor kids in 
the back hall. I was unequivocal about my central aim and allegiance: the most 
popular kids of all. My white adoptive parents were artists; we were poor and I 
was black. In the popular thoroughbreds, I saw a way out.

And although I endured their micro-aggression racism on a fairly regular basis 
– the unsolicited hair touching, the axiomatic standard of white beauty, the 
litany of “colorblind” comments: “We don’t really think of you as black”; 
“You’re so pretty even though you are black” – I saw an open seat on their 
privilege bus and I took it, even if it was all the way in the back. To be 
fair, they were not bad kids. They just wielded the most power.

I was not concerned with the arty theater kids (even though I worked with a 
regional company during summers), or the readers and intellectuals (despite my 
love of books and conversation), not even the one black kid from inner-city New 
York who, as I recall, attended our school for a couple of brief stretches 
after spending summers with a local family through a not-for-profit 
organization. All of whom are now probably voting for Bernie Sanders.

I was ambitious. And though I do regret the betrayal of the boy from New York 
City, I also knew even at 15 years old that any form of solidarity with him 
would compromise the social capital I had earned through my investment with the 
wealthy white kids.

That investment got me to college, and out of my rural town. I likely would 
not have taken the idea of college seriously if it hadn’t been the focused goal 
of my friends, who were all applying to Ivy League schools. I’m grateful for 
that.

That’s why, despite my many reservations about whether the Clintons are 
actually good for black Americans, I do understand why so many support 
Hillary’s candidacy, no shortage of whom are high-profile figures – from Kerry 
Washington to Shonda Rhimes and Representative Sheila Jackson Lee of Texas, who 
has called Clinton “a sister” 
<http://thinkprogress.org/politics/2016/03/03/3754701/hillary-clinton-women-of-color/>
.

This may shock you: Hillary Clinton is fundamentally honest | Jill Abramson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/28/hillary-clinton-honest-transparency-jill-abramson>
And from Clinton’s perspective, as black women had the highest voter turnout 
rate in thepast two presidential election cycles 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/black-women-vow-to-be-a-powerful-voting-force-again-this-year/2016/01/10/f0c290fc-b324-11e5-a842-0feb51d1d124_story.html>
, and older black women overwhelmingly support her, it stands to reason that 
she would be judicious in her efforts to attract young black women as potential 
supporters.

But I have never gone in for the whole Clintons-and-black-folk solidarity 
yarn. Dating back to Bill Clinton’s nomination and subsequent rejection of 
black law professor Lani Guinier for assistant attorney general in charge of 
the Justice Department’s civil rights division in 1993, to hispublic 
excoriation of Sister Souljah 
<http://www.c-span.org/video/?c4460582/sister-souljah-moment>, to his corny-ass 
sax playing on the Arsenio Hall Show and hismore recent exchange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/08/bill-clinton-black-lives-matter-protesters-defending-record>
 with activists from Black Lives Matter, Bill Clinton took themisinterpreted 
sobriquet of “first black president” 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/notes/2015/08/toni-morrison-wasnt-giving-bill-clinton-a-compliment/402517/>
 and ran like hell with it in whichever direction he bloody well wanted.

And that’s before we even broach the topic of his crime bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/15/bill-clinton-crime-bill-hillary-black-lives-thomas-frank>
.

Hillary Clinton, on the other hand, has in some ways reflected a model 
candidate in terms of her appeal to black women. She appeared on the popular
BuzzFeed podcast 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/adamdavis/listen-to-hillary-clintons-interview-with-buzzfeed#.rijD0kG4K>
 Another Round with Heben Nigatu and Tracey Clayton, and she visited the 
predominantly black Medgar Evers College in Brooklyn, where she was celebrated 
by young black women and joined by New York City’s first lady, Chirlane McCray.

But she has also been frighteningly tone deaf regarding race, with the Black 
Girls Rock appearance among the examples – and this month’s “CP time” joke with 
New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2016/04/on-de-blasio-and-clintons-cp-time-joke.html>
 among the more egregious.

So while I understand the black women who might choose to support Hillary 
Clinton, and I hope their alliance ultimately frees them, I don’t have much 
faith in the strength of her coattails.
 