
The holiday season in New York City means invitations from colleagues and 
friends to parties at their newly renovated brownstones or apartments they’ve 
just bought in one of any number of rapidly gentrifying neighborhoods of 
Brooklyn. The invitations are great, and the parties are lovely – but their 
home ownership never fails to ignite a fresh new sense of angst for those of us 
in our fourth decade of life who still don’t own a home and probably never will.

My husband and I do fine – we can (for now) afford to rent an apartment in one 
of the more appealing Brooklyn neighborhoods, wherethe average rent rose by 77% 
between 2000 and 2012 
<http://gothamist.com/2015/06/11/brooklyn_rent_obscene_forever.php>. But we 
fall into both of the criteria that tend to keep home ownershipout of reach 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/politics/articles/2015-12-22/de-blasio-tested-by-new-york-s-vexing-affordable-housing-crisis>
 for middle-income New Yorkers: we come from families who are unable to help 
financially in any way, much less with a down payment on a New York City 
apartment. And also, my son and I are black, which makes us, at least 
partially, a black family.

Study after study indicates that home ownership for black families in America 
remains out of reach 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2014/07/black_homeownership_how_the_recession_turned_owners_into_renters_and_obliterated.html>
, because largely, black families don’t have legacies of wealth, but rather 
legacies of struggle – cultural integrity and vigor that is rarely reflected in 
bank accounts or respected in an economy that thrives on systemic racism.

Combine that with the fact that, while the income gap between blacks and 
whites has persisted without much change over the past 50 years (black women 
make 64 cents <http://www.aauw.org/2014/09/18/gender-pay-gap/> to each dollar 
white men are paid), the wealth gap ismore egregious 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2015/12/04/top-20-billionaires-worth-as-much-as-half-of-america.html>
 than ever. As long as wealth, almost always tied to race, is what buys a home 
where I live, what can I possibly hope to pass on to my son?

And if we are talking about wealth, I’ve never had or been part of any. My 
parents did not maintain a consistent or reliable income when my siblings and I 
were growing up – and even though as white, college-educated artists and 
intellectuals who live in an 18th-century Dutch Colonial farmhouse in rural New 
Hampshire, they don’t read as poor, we were poor. There was government cheese 
involved in my youth. We had robust vegetable gardens in the summers, but in 
the winters we had Steak-umms, mashed potatoes for days and Campbell’s tomato 
soup. And we were never taught how to manage or save money.

That meant that, when it came time to go to college, there was no money from 
my parents. The private college where I ultimately earned my undergraduate 
degree provided me with a full academic scholarship for tuition, which at the 
time was about $28,000 per year. This did not account for books or living 
expenses, and there was still an annual expected parental contribution of 
$5,000. I took out student loans for the latter, and worked several jobs for 
the former.

I graduated with approximately $15,000 in student loan debt, on which I was 
unable to to make consistent payments when I began my career as a journalist in 
New York. I had to apply for deferment or forbearance numerous times when I was 
starting out, and with the steady increase of interest rates, I still owe 
$17,000 over 20 years later.

This story is a familiar one – one often told about millennials who entered 
the job market during the recent downturn – but none of it was news to poorer 
people or to black people of any generation. I don’t want the same for my son, 
and it’s harder to accrue resources if none are passed on from prior 
generations and if your monthly housing funds go toward rent rather than paying 
off a mortgage (or making something closer to being your own).

My husband had some of that. Pragmatic and frugal, my husband has always been 
a hard worker, a smart spender and a good saver. His parents were not rich but 
did well enough to pay for all four years of his college education. He intended 
to send his own children to college one day. He also intended to buy a home.
But after a couple of different apartment moves, a wedding, the birth of a 
child, the cost of living in New York City and unconscionable circumstances 
surrounding the death of his father, his financial status shifted. And with it, 
we’ve become part of the approximately70% of New York City renters 
<http://www.cheatsheet.com/culture/10-cities-where-young-people-can-not-afford-to-buy-a-home.html/?a=viewall>
 who can’t afford to buy a home there,far higher 
<http://www.census.gov/housing/hvs/files/currenthvspress.pdf> than numbers 
nationally.

Much of this is due to ongoing, systemic racism. But much is also thanks to 
the one-percenters, whose real-estate spending power have changed the game 
entirely. But what does it mean for the last vestiges of New York’s middle 
class, of whom I am a part, and black New York, of which I am also a part? If 
the city turns into the next Dubai, I will never forgive money.
 