
A few weeks ago, I was expecting to enjoy the summer in the communal garden of 
my new home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/27/haggle-maisonette-won-hollow-victory-vendor-offer-estate-agent>
, but after weeks of the legal process grinding on, my dreams were shattered by 
something lurking out there: Japanese knotweed.

This is an invasive and destructive plant well known for damaging buildings, 
tarmac and drains. Looks-wise, think bamboo. In the summertime it grows like 
billy-o – 7ft up and clumps of it at least as wide. While it dies down in 
winter, it returns each year thanks to creeping underground stems. Digging it 
up is usually a thankless task; chemicals are favoured but can take years to 
kill it and cost thousands of pounds.

I had asked my solicitor to find out if there were any issues around knotweed 
after seeing online that it was an important question in the conveyancing 
process. On reflection, I should have asked this question before making an 
offer as the presence of knotweed is hugely significant.

I didn’t check the garden or surrounding properties for it when viewing. But 
even if I had known what it looked like, I doubt I would have seen it anyway, 
as apparently it is lurking underground in the communal back garden. While the 
survey I commissioned found no evidence of the plant, it also said that the 
easily accessible garden and grounds were not inspected. That surprised my 
solicitor and me, especially as I had opted for a homebuyer’s report for £150, 
bolted on to the lender’s free valuation. The survey did recommend that my 
solicitor ask the seller about any previous growth and treatment.


So the knotweed only emerged in mid-June when the management company finally 
responded to the question my solicitor raised. I was told that for around 10 
years there had been a treatment programme in place with apparently no signs of 
regrowth in the past year. But I wasn’t prepared to take the management 
company’s word for it. As far as I had come and as much as I wanted the place, 
I needed to investigate matters more. Cue phone calls to specialists who 
enlightened and concerned me in equal measure.

Perhaps I took the coward’s route, especially as there had been no recent 
regrowth, but the risks were too high

My main concerns centred on possible resale issues. After all, if the knotweed 
scared me, I am sure it could scare someone else in my position. A search 
online confirmed what it looked like and why it mattered. Pictures and stories 
of it sprouting through bricks and causing structural damage made me even more 
worried, as did word from those I knew. I really didn’t fancy living in a place 
that could be badly affected structurally. The thought of paying out for 
ongoing treatment was similarly unappealing.

What ensued was a fairly bitter battle of who would pay for the specialist 
surveyor I wanted to call in. The vendor refused to pay, claiming no knowledge 
of it; the estate agent’s attitude was the same. I certainly wasn’t going to on 
principle. I thought it was shocking that it was revealed at such a late stage, 
especially as I had invested a lot of money in financial adviser, surveyor and 
solicitor fees. And that’s disregarding the emotional investment and the hope 
dangled in front of my face of finally being a homeowner.


Eventually, after the management company also refused to pay, I withdrew my 
offer. Perhaps I took the coward’s route by withdrawing, especially as there 
had apparently been no recent regrowth, but for me the risks were just too high.

Investing £20,000 of hard-earned cash and borrowing nigh on £120,000 to live 
in a place I might struggle to sell was too much of a gamble. And that is 
assuming the lender would have continued to offer me the mortgage anyway. 
Better to lose a little than a lot. I read a telling piece of advice online – a 
question really: “If I had known then, pre-offer, what I know now, post-offer, 
would I have offered? If the answer is no, pull out.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Ffirst-home-found-japanese-knotweed-pull-out-purchase%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79766957f550e9c27482e345995506325f581e04%2F0_316_2667_1600%2F2667.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%20thought%20I'd%20found%20my%20first%20home%20%E2%80%93%20instead%20I%20found%20Japanese%20knotweed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Ffirst-home-found-japanese-knotweed-pull-out-purchase%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%20thought%20I%27d%20found%20my%20first%20home%20%E2%80%93%20instead%20I%20found%20Japanese%20knotweed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Ffirst-home-found-japanese-knotweed-pull-out-purchase%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79766957f550e9c27482e345995506325f581e04%2F0_316_2667_1600%2F2667.jpg>
 ‘I really didn’t fancy living in a place that could be badly affected 
structurally.’ Photograph: PR 
The whole experience made me feel bitter – towards the management company for 
apparently not telling their lessees about knotweed, to the vendor for 
asserting the property had categorically not been affected by it, and to the 
surveyor for not bothering to look for any signs. I felt I had been deceived 
and had no recourse. Some system.

But a week or two on, I’m optimistic about my new search. I will take stock 
and drill down the questions to ask and at what point. I will now be asking all 
the questions on the property information form that the seller completes 
pre-offer. After all, neighbour disputes, knotweed and boundary line issues can 
be deal breakers.

While I’ve spent a lot, I’ve learned a lot too. I’ll aim to keep my cool and 
professionalism, recognising as I do that buying a house is just another 
business deal. I’m keen to find a place that represents better value and am now 
prepared to roll up my sleeves and consider a doer-upper. Also, I’m going to 
spread my search wider, as long as getting to work in Southampton is doable.


A system that sees homebuyers lose £270m​ a year on doomed purchases urgently 
needs a kick into the 21st century

I now face a summer of Rightmove some £800 poorer. Meanwhile, my surveyor is 
£150 richer and my solicitor around £650. Luckily, my IFA, who I coughed up 
£300 to, is happy to rearrange another mortgage at no extra cost. There really 
needs to be some system of financial redress for when things go wrong – both I 
and the vendor have lost out.

In the budget the government talked about improving the homebuying process – 
and about time too. A system that sees homebuyers lose £270m a year on doomed 
purchases urgently needs a kick into the 21st century.

Obviously I would like to see a system where solicitors are only paid upon 
completion, but that said, why should they work for free? Crucially, we need 
full disclosure of all property details on the advert or certainly pre-offer. 
This will enable informed decision-making and help reduce house sales falling 
through, saving money for those whose lives are massively affected. Why I had 
to wait until such a late date to find out this vital information is beyond me.


I would also like to see some service-level agreements put in place to 
expedite matters. Perhaps enabling a discussion between vendors and buyers 
could help. Often, I found not only myself in the dark, but the estate agent 
and solicitor were also unaware of exactly what was happening. Being drip-fed 
information about any progress made was annoying and counter-productive. When 
the knotweed rose its ugly head, I took it upon myself to call the management 
company and the specialist contractor, which shone a little light on 
proceedings.
 