
It rained for 48 hours straight in New York this week and, stuck inside with 
two kids and no childcare, we watchedthe movie Paddington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/27/paddington-review-michael-bond-film-adaptation>
 approximately 108 times. There is nothing I can’t tell you about this film, 
from the fact that the first exterior shot of Paddington station is, clearly, 
Marylebone, to the insanity of its timeline. (Briefly: the film is set in 
present-day London, but Paddington’s aunt and uncle were discovered in Peru by 
an Edwardian explorer, whose 10-year-old daughter grows up to be Paddington’s 
arch-enemy. By rights, she should be about 117, but is instead played by Nicole 
Kidman as a sexy evil lady of not even 50.)

Why does no one have mobile phones? Why does the Trellick Tower 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trellick_Tower> loom so large in the landscape? 
Why do I want Hugh Bonneville to adopt me and let me live either in his attic 
in Windsor Gardens, or anywhere in Downton Abbey? Mrs Brown is played by Sally 
Hawkins, who is my age, and Bonneville is 13 years older, but why do I still 
identify with the children in these movies and never the parents?

At A-level, we were made to read King Lear on a continuous loop for two years 
until the two funniest lines became: “out, vile jelly!” and “Give me an egg, 
nuncle, and I’ll give thee two crowns.” I can say with some confidence that the 
two funniest lines inPaddington <https://www.theguardian.com/film/paddington> 
are, “Your call is moderately important to us” and “It’s more a set of 
guidelines than a binding ethos”, although when Julie Walters says to Kidman, 
“Oh, shut your cake hole,” I laugh out loud every time.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F08%2Fnicole-kidman-paddington-film-interview-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F8%2F1418017250120%2FNicole-Kidman-017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicole%20Kidman%20on%20Paddington%3A%20'The%20idea%20of%20tolerance%20is%20a%20beautiful%20thing%20to%20put%20out'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F08%2Fnicole-kidman-paddington-film-interview-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicole%20Kidman%20on%20Paddington%3A%20%27The%20idea%20of%20tolerance%20is%20a%20beautiful%20thing%20to%20put%20out%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F08%2Fnicole-kidman-paddington-film-interview-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F8%2F1418017250120%2FNicole-Kidman-017.jpg>
Nicole Kidman on Paddington: ‘The idea of tolerance is a beautiful thing to put 
out’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2014/dec/08/nicole-kidman-paddington-film-interview-video>
This may be a sign of nervous exhaustion. Doris Lessing, in the kind of 
statement novelists make and that is taken by non-novelists as proof that they 
ought to get out more, once said she believed she might stare at a wall for 
years and never exhaust its possibilities. Now I understand what she was 
saying, for I feel the same way about Paddington.

Yesterday my dad came by for an hour and watched the first half of the film 
with us. “That’s Marylebone, not Paddington,” he said, and it felt like the 
start of a new shared religion.

A novel approach to fashion 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fpaddington-bear-childrens-film-religious-experience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7901f11d746a700dfe161a94880a73ab67254f31%2F0_169_5054_3032%2F5054.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%E2%80%99ve%20seen%20the%20light%20%E2%80%93%20Paddington%20Bear%20as%20the%20one%20true%20way%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fpaddington-bear-childrens-film-religious-experience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%E2%80%99ve%20seen%20the%20light%20%E2%80%93%20Paddington%20Bear%20as%20the%20one%20true%20way%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fpaddington-bear-childrens-film-religious-experience%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7901f11d746a700dfe161a94880a73ab67254f31%2F0_169_5054_3032%2F5054.jpg>
 Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie: excellent, but ‘mildly annoying’. Photograph: David 
Levenson/Getty Images 
In the New York Times this week the writer Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie voiced her 
ambivalence about appearing in the current ad campaign for Boots No 7 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/28/fashion/chimamanda-ngozi-adichie-boots-no7-makeup.html?rref=collection%2Ftimestopic%2FAdichie%2C%20Chimamanda%20Ngozi&action=click&contentCollection=timestopics&region=stream&module=stream_unit&version=latest&contentPlacement=1&pgtype=collection>
, and talked about fashion in a way that reminded me there is almost nothing 
you can say on this subject that doesn’t damn you in someone else’s eyes.

Even Adichie, who is excellent, was mildly annoying. “I very quickly realised 
that if you want to be seen as a serious writer, you can’t possibly look like a 
person who looks in the mirror.” (Really? Still?) She made the case that 
fashion, the provenance of women, is belittled in a way that sport, the 
provenance of men, is not, which is I think true, although as a point, it is 
overshadowed by the fact that what happens to women who fail to meet standards 
imposed by the fashion industry is not analogous to what happens to men who 
don’t like sport.

Anyway, it was fun to see the novelist-as-model and she was honest about why 
she did it. “I thought it might be fun, and then they will give me free makeup. 
And I’m always up for free things.”

Stains: massive 


I’m sensitive on the subject of fashion this week. Looking up from the TV, I 
glanced in a mirror and saw I was actually listing to one side. This is what 
happens when the babysitter goes on holiday: hair unwashed for three days, 
unspecified stains – probably yoghurt from this morning, but it could be 
macaroni cheese from three days ago – on my jogging bottoms, and my heart 
sinking at the thought of a meeting next week, for which I will at the very 
least have to get in the shower. As it carried on raining, I pushed the double 
buggy up and down the lobby of my building until the mail woman looked at me 
and said: “It must be hard.”

“Is it the stains?” I said. She looked horrified. “No, no, you look great,” 
she said, and backed away slowly as if retreating from a grizzly bear.
 