
My friend Ian Potts, who has died aged 78, was both an accomplished 
watercolour painter and a brilliant art school lecturer and administrator. From 
1963 until he retired in 1995, Ian was the linchpin of the fine art department 
atBrighton School of Art 
<http://arts.brighton.ac.uk/collections/design-archives/archives/brighton-school-of-art>
, where he was responsible for assembling a talented staff team that included 
Antony Gormley,Dennis Creffield 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/arts/yourpaintings/artists/dennis-creffield-9030>, 
Brendan Neiland and Madeleine Strindberg.

I first met Ian in 1982 when organising the exhibition Landscape Paintings and 
Stone Sculpture atMoira Kelly Fine Art <http://moirakellyfineart.yolasite.com> 
in London. Ian had just completed an impressive series of black-and-white ink 
and watercolour drawings of the stone quarries at Carrara, in Tuscany, Italy, 
which were included in the exhibition. They remain among his strongest works.

Throughout his working life Ian combined his painting with his work as a 
college lecturer. His watercolours were shown regularly at the Royal Academy 
summer show, resulting in 1998 in a commission from the Duke of Edinburgh's 
office to do a painting of Windsor Castle.

Ian was born into a mining family in Birtley, County Durham, the only child of 
Noble and his wife Annie. His artistic talent was spotted at Chester-le-Street 
Modern school and at 17 he went to Sunderland School of Art. From there he won 
a scholarship to theRoyal Academy Schools 
<https://www.royalacademy.org.uk/the-ra-schools>, and in 1958 won the silver 
medal for painting. A travel award then enabled him to attend theBritish School 
at Athens <http://www.bsa.ac.uk>. This was the beginning of Ian's travels with 
his paintbrush. Trips to Italy, Egypt, France and Spain followed.

At Brighton School of Art, Ian was course leader and deputy head of fine art. 
He was a popular tutor, known to his students – who included the Turner Prize 
winner Rachel Whiteread – as Uncle Ian. A skilled poker player, Ian held his 
own in games against the head of department,Gwyther Irwin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2008/oct/29/art>, who reputedly had 
once earned his living playing poker.
 Ian Potts was a brilliant lecturer and administrator at Brighton School of Art
Ian married Helen Bewick, a fellow student at Sunderland, in 1958, and the 
couple moved toBrighton <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/brighton> before 
starting a family. A love of France and good food – Ian was a great cook – led 
them to buy a house near La Rochelle in 1988. There they had many happy 
holidays, with Ian becoming a much loved member of the village community, 
regularly arriving from England with his son, Nigel, and friends by motorbike.

He is survived by Helen, their two daughters, Clare and Anna, Nigel, and three 
grandchildren, Rory, Maddy and Elena.
 