
The pioneering anthropologist Ian Cunnison, who has died aged 90, undertook 
field research in the last years of colonialAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>. He developed a particular affinity 
with Sudan after Edward Evans-Pritchard, a professor at Oxford University, 
persuaded him to work in the north of the country in the period before 
independence arrived in 1956.

The project was supported by the Sudanese government and eventually resulted 
in Ian's outstanding book Baggara Arabs (1966), in which he traced, in 
meticulous detail, the seasonal migration of cattle nomads based in South 
Kordofan into the lands of the Dinka people of Bahr al-Ghazal. From 1952 to 
1954 Ian was with the Humr tribe, far from any expatriate comforts. He was 
interested in, and recorded, everything: Arabic dialects, giraffe hunting, 
cattle branding, drumming calls, the informal influence of women and the 
shifting power structures of tribe and family in the broader context of the 
passing of a colonial superstructure.

From 1955 Ian taught in the department at Manchester University founded by 
another Evans-Pritchard protege, Max Gluckman. There he met his future wife, 
Sheila Smith, a sociologist. In 1959, the couple went toSudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/sudan>, where Ian became the first professor 
of social anthropology at the University of Khartoum.

He taught himself Portuguese in order to translate the two-volume history of 
the Kingdom of Kazembe by ACP Gamitto, first published in 1854 and a major 
source for central African studies. Ian's version appeared in 1960; six years 
earlier had come his translation from the French of Marcel Mauss's essay The 
Gift: Forms and Functions of Exchange in Archaic Societies. He also edited 
Sudan Notes and Records, which he transformed from a vehicle with random 
jottings by British colonial officials to a respected academic journal.

Ian was born in Milngavie, north-west of Glasgow, and his father taught 
economics at Glasgow University. From Glasgow academy he went to Cambridge 
University, where his studies in French with archaeology and anthropology were 
interrupted by war service in North Africa and Italy. After graduating, in 1947 
he joined the Institute of SocialAnthropology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/anthropology> in Oxford to do a DPhil 
based on fieldwork in the Luapula Valley in Northern Rhodesia (now Zambia), 
with support from the Rhodes-Livingstone Institute (1948-51). He applied wide 
interests to his research, integrating archaeology and history into the study 
of a changing society.

Then followed his time in Sudan, which came to an end when he and Sheila 
returned to Britain, and he set about building up the department of sociology 
and social anthropology at Hull University. His work there as teacher, 
administrator and research supervisor emphasised his commitment to the 
integration of different disciplines, and he held the chair of social 
anthropology at Hull until his retirement in 1989.

The university developed a special link with Sudan. Many of the first 
generation of Sudanese anthropologists made their way to Hull to undertake 
research or to call on the godfather of Sudanese anthropology. They in 
particular enjoyed the hospitality for which Ian and Sheila were noted.

Ian was modest and reserved, but generous with his scholarship. He was a keen 
fly-fisherman all his life and spent much time in the Scottish mountains, first 
as a climber and then as a hill walker.

He is survived by Sheila, two daughters, Judith and Belinda, and two 
grandchildren.

â€¢ Ian George Cunnison, anthropologist, born 13 February 1923; died 16 June 2013
 