
For Roy Hodgson and England there were no excuses this time. Throughout the 
group stage they complained opponents were sitting extremely deep, determined 
not to concede space in behind, blunting the strengths of England’s quick 
attackers.Iceland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/iceland> were widely 
expected to pose a similar challenge, having defended in huge numbers in 
previous matches.

England humiliated as Iceland knock them out of Euro 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/england-iceland-euro-2016-match-report>
But, by the standards of Euro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016>, where smaller sides parking 
the bus has been almost universal, Iceland started with a high defensive line. 
These were the type of opponents England wanted and yet they still contrived to 
fail.

It took only three minutes before Iceland’s defence was breached with 
considerable ease. Daniel Sturridge drifted inside from the right and lofted a 
ball over the Icelandic defence, Sterling sprinted in behind, and the Iceland 
goalkeeper, Hannes Halldorsson, toppled him with a clumsy half-hearted 
challenge which suggested he simply wasn’t accustomed to this situation, having 
spent the group stage coming for crosses.

After Wayne Rooney had converted the subsequent penalty, this game appeared 
perfectly set for England to show their counter-attacking ability as Iceland 
pushed forward. Instead an immediate defensive mistake meantEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> never forced Iceland to chase 
the game.

England had scouted Iceland thoroughly, sending no fewer than five of the 
backroom staff to watch their 2-1 victory over Austria in the final group game. 
The first point on the subsequent report must have been Aron Gunnarsson’s 
incredible long throw, which created Jon Bodvarsson’s opener in that game, yet 
England completely switched off as he hurled the ball into the box for 
Iceland’s equaliser here.

Roy Hodgson quits as England manager following shock defeat to Iceland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/roy-hodgson-facing-end-england-manager-iceland-euro-2016>
It was an almost identical goal: a flat delivery from the right, a near-post 
flick-on, and this time Ragnar Sigurdsson – also outstanding at the back – 
provided the finish. The main culprit was Kyle Walker, and there was a 
similarity to the equaliser England conceded in their opening group game 
against Russia – then, it was Danny Rose outjumped by Vasili Berezutski, 
another centre-back up for a set-piece. The Tottenham full-back duo of Walker 
and Danny Rose have impressed with their dynamic attacking, but inside their 
own penalty box they remain unconvincing.

Would Iceland sit deeper having equalised? Not a chance. They continued to 
hold a high defensive line and, whereas other sides might have concentrated on 
guarding against counter-attacks, Iceland pushed a surprising number of 
midfielders into attack. The full-backs joined in whenever possible and 
Iceland’s winner arrived after an excellent switch of play to the right-back, 
Birkir Saevarsson.

Joe Hart’s inability to keep out Kolbeinn Sigthorsson’s tame shot was the 
obvious error but England had not protected the zone on the edge of the box 
either, allowing Iceland to play the type of quick combination lacking at the 
other end. So frequently have England been exposed in that area at major 
tournaments and, having barely been tested in open play during the group phase, 
they had conveniently forgotten those pre-tournament worries about defensive 
inadequacies.

Iceland’s toppling of England at Euro 2016 is a triumph for the little guys | 
Amy Lawrence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/27/iceland-england-euro-2016-triumph>
At 2-1 down England started positively. The passing tempo remained high, they 
played some excellent diagonal balls into the left-back zone, from where 
Iceland had conceded two of their three goals in the group stage. There was, it 
seemed, a plan.

Iceland still refused to retreat. After an hour Jamie Vardy was summoned and 
soon raced on to a chipped pass in behind, forcing the outstanding Ragnar 
Sigurdsson into perhaps the tackle of the tournament – at full-stretch, at full 
speed, against England’s quickest attacker. That alone was proof Iceland were 
not parking the bus.

England 1-2 Iceland: Euro 2016 player ratings for last-16 knockout game
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/england-1-2-iceland-euro-2016-player-ratings-for-last-16-knockout-game>
The final 15 minutes produced England’s worst football of the tournament: they 
panicked in midfield, miscontrolled short passes and overhit set pieces. Plan A 
went out of the window and the only obvious Plan B was introducing a fourth 
striker, with Marcus Rashford going down the left. His positive, carefree 
attitude underlined the nerves among his more experienced team-mates, who 
appeared too scared to take risks.

That weakness, rather than any tactical issues, was England’s most obvious 
problem.
 