
The paradox of the “slow movement” is that it’s positively dynamic these days. 
Its philosophy, which encompasses everything from slow travel to slow food and 
now slow television (in Norway you can watch real-time knitting), was born out 
of anger in the 1980s when ItalianCarlo Petrini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2007/jun/17/food.lifeandhealth> 
objected to McDonald’s opening on the Spanish Steps in Rome. The movement’s aim 
– as outlined in Carl Honoré’s 2004 bookIn Praise of Slow 
<http://www.carlhonore.com/books/in-praise-of-slowness/> – is to encourage 
people to calm down the pace of life.


So what does that mean when applied to a town? The coastal town of Djúpivogur, 
in east Iceland, has just been granted internationalCittaslow 
<http://www.cittaslow.org.uk/> (Slow Town) status, and is making a quiet bid 
for some international love by offering to show visitors Iceland in slow motion.

I edge my way towards Djupivogur at a suitably modest pace, first staying at 
the Egilsstadir Guesthouse, a cosy spa hotel on the shores of Lake Logurinn. 
It’s a must for foodies. Even WH Auden – who wrote the 
not-altogether-complimentaryLetters from Iceland (in which he complained about 
dried fish and sleeping in a wet tent) – praised the food here. Part of the 
ethos of the slow city is to reconnect distinctive regions with their food, 
their nature, and their craft producers to form a bulwark against homogenised, 
globalised culture.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F20%2Feast-iceland-tour-djupivogur-slow-movement-travel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9733d7a83dfc6fdd0706f5c32d2f591ac6581ca0%2F490_92_5024_3015%2F5024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iceland's%20slo-mo%20capital%3A%20on%20a%20tour%20of%20Dj%C3%BApivogur%20and%20beyond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F20%2Feast-iceland-tour-djupivogur-slow-movement-travel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iceland%27s%20slo-mo%20capital%3A%20on%20a%20tour%20of%20Dj%C3%BApivogur%20and%20beyond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F20%2Feast-iceland-tour-djupivogur-slow-movement-travel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9733d7a83dfc6fdd0706f5c32d2f591ac6581ca0%2F490_92_5024_3015%2F5024.jpg>
 The Stone Eggs of Merry Bay in Djupivogur represent 34 bird species found in 
the area. Photograph: Alamy 
From this summer you’ll be able to fly direct from Gatwick to Egilsstadir with 
Discover the World <https://www.discover-the-world.co.uk/>, and it takes only 
30 minutes to drive on to Stöðvarfjörður, where a brilliant community arts 
centre in an abandoned fish processing factory is taking shape. It seems, given 
the circumstances, like indecent haste. Before the road was built in the 1970s 
it used to take seven hours – a reminder of how remote this area is.

Part of the ethos of the slow city is to reconnect distinctive regions with 
their nature and their craft producers

The snow and the black sand of the volcanic beaches provide a highly 
Instagrammable monochrome look – though if you’re there in the summer, the 
green mountains will reflect off the water. It’s as if the natural world is 
amplified. No wonder many Icelanders have such a strong innate connection to 
their environment.

The challenge for them now is that visitors don’t quite get it. Recently, the 
same group of foreign students had to be rescued from traversing the 
treacherous Highlands during winter not just once, but three times. A couple on 
a camping trip in the east were spotted tearing up the moss that forms over 
hundreds of years to make a comfy mattress under their tent. To stem these 
outrages to the landscape, the tourist board has come up withIceland Academy 
<http://inspired.visiticeland.com/academy>, a good-natured online guide to 
cultural, eco and safety behaviour in the Icelandic wilds. (It also includes a 
guide to entering a public geothermal spring which will save on awkward 
moments.)

Reyðarfjörður is a town at the base of the largest fjord that cuts into this 
southeast part of the coast. It was once the site of whaling stations, and a 
critical strategic military base for the allies during the second world war 
(there’s a very good museum on the conflict). These days it’s becoming 
increasingly populated by film companies who find the backdrop an excellent 
stand-in for Arctic Norway. There is, however, a studied (and endearing) 
indifference to celebrity. I’m told Dennis Quaid, who stars in the second 
series ofFortitude <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/fortitude>, trots 
around entirely unbothered by requests for selfies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F20%2Feast-iceland-tour-djupivogur-slow-movement-travel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa773ccf2740e18c8bfb86d3bbbcac0c4971d71c6%2F184_0_5704_3424%2F5704.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iceland's%20slo-mo%20capital%3A%20on%20a%20tour%20of%20Dj%C3%BApivogur%20and%20beyond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F20%2Feast-iceland-tour-djupivogur-slow-movement-travel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iceland%27s%20slo-mo%20capital%3A%20on%20a%20tour%20of%20Dj%C3%BApivogur%20and%20beyond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F20%2Feast-iceland-tour-djupivogur-slow-movement-travel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa773ccf2740e18c8bfb86d3bbbcac0c4971d71c6%2F184_0_5704_3424%2F5704.jpg>
 Native Icelandic ponies, which you can ride in the summer months. Photograph: 
Norbert Eisele-Hein/Corbis 
By contrast, artists and makers are important here and in abundance. When I 
finally reach Djúpivogur, home of slow, Coca-Cola and petrol signs are banned 
but the workshops of local artists and craftspeople (who seem numerous in a 
population of 400) are extravagantly signposted. Even the mini-mart contains a 
showroom forArfleifð <http://www.arfleifd.is/about>, a tiny handcrafted fashion 
and apparel brand using traditional materials: fish leather, horn, wool and 
horse hair. From the small town hotel to the clapboard houses, uniqueness is 
prized and celebrated here.

From the small town hotel to the clapboard houses, uniqueness is prized and 
celebrated here

The local rock museum – and that’s as in rock collected from the surrounding 
basalt lava deposits, not rock’n’roll – is particularly unique. An arresting 
public art installation,Eggin í gleðivík 
<http://beiceland.is/the-eggs-of-merry-bay> (the Eggs of Merry Bay) by 
Icelandic artist Sigurður Guðmundsson, uses 34 large-scale egg replicas placed 
around the bay to represent 34 bird species.

At the Wilderness Centre <http://www.wilderness.is/> on the edge of Iceland’s 
Highlands, Denni Karlsson, a filmmaker, and his wife Arna, a historian, have 
built a dormitory that gives you a glimpse of how 19th-century Highlanders 
(albeit with great taste levels and bathrooms) would have lived. Essentially 
you get to “sleep in a museum”. Downstairs a new cultural and art exhibition 
opens this June.

There’s also a fine herd of Icelandic horses, and from June you can join epic 
rides including a midnight amble during a summer’s sunny night. This gives 
ample opportunity to try out the unique Icelandic gait calledthe tölt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2005/oct/15/iceland.guardiansaturdaytravelsection>
. I hear it feels like flying.

I know the feeling. Who says slow travel is slow paced? In four days I 
probably packed in more in than I would in a city break. I just didn’t feel so 
raddled by the end.

Essentials

For information about east Iceland visit east.is <http://www.east.is/>. The 
Iceland Academy is atinspiredbyiceland.com <http://www.inspiredbyiceland.com/>. 
Return flights to Keflavík (for Reykjavik) from Heathrow withicelandair.co.uk 
<http://www.icelandair.co.uk/> start at £151. A double room at the Berunes 
Hostel is £85 (berunes.is <http://berunes.is/>) and at Egilsstadir Guesthouse 
£109 (lakehotel.is <http://lakehotel.is/>). A bed at the Wilderness Centre dorm 
room is £38 (wilderness.is <http://www.wilderness.is/>). Tours of East Iceland, 
such as a slow-travel jeep tour, start at £123 (tinna-adventure.is 
<http://www.tinna-adventure.is/>)
 