
You might think that the Eighth Amendment, which forbids “cruel and unusual” 
punishments, clearly prohibits death penalty regimes like those currently in 
effect in Oklahoma:unqualified and inexperienced personnel 
<http://www.newrepublic.com/article/121845/lethal-injection-has-become-testing-ground-toxic-drugs>
 trying experimental drug regimes that havea substantial likelihood of 
inflicting serious pain before death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/14/end-the-use-of-paralytic-drugs-when-executing-prisoners>
. But, if you know anything about the Roberts Court, you won’t be surprised to 
discover that they disagree. In a 5-4 decision written by Justice Samuel Alito 
(appropriately, as he’s the current justice with the very worst record on civil 
liberties) the US supreme court gave the green light to Oklahoma’s method of 
death <http://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/14pdf/14-7955_aplc.pdf>.

Late last year, Oklahoma horrifically botched its execution of Clayton Lockett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/13/botched-oklahoma-execution-clayton-lockett-bloody-mess>
, effectively torturing him for 40 minutes before he died (and blocking him 
from view from observers midway through). Its system for lethal injection 
relies on a three-drug cocktail,the formula invented (entirely arbitrarily) by 
the Sooner State itself in 1977 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/explainer/2006/05/lethal_injections_101.html>
: two of the drugs stop the heart but, as Justice Sonia Sotomayor explained in 
her dissent to the majority ruling, “they do so in a torturous manner, causing 
burning, searing pain.” The first drug, then, is supposed to be a barbiturate 
that renders the condemned prisoner unable to feel pain (although, since the 
second drug is generally a paralytic, it’s not really possible to tell if it 
works). Oklahoma, however, has been unable to obtain any of its usual drugs for 
the first step of the process, and has thusresorted to an alternative that 
carries the substantial risk of producing death by torture 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2015/01/SCOTUS-midazolam-lethal-injection-oklahoma/384801/>
.

Nonetheless, to a bare majority of the court, Oklahoma’s system is good enough 
for the Eighth Amendment, based on a series of scientifically weak defenses 
offered for the protocol by a single witness and the argument that the 
condemned prisoners themselves are required to offer the state a less risky 
method for their own executions. The state can, under Alito’s reasoning, 
torture people to death as long as it cannot procure the drugs needed for a 
safer, less torturous method.

Justice Sonia Sotomayor’s dissent methodically dismantles Alito’s logic – and 
her closely reasoned opinion makes a telling contrast tothe witless yelling at 
clouds in Justice Antonin Scalia’s dissents last week 
<http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/2015/06/on-scalias-showoff-dissents>. 
First, she demonstrated that the state’s defense of its new system in the lower 
courts was extremely weak and didn’t merit the extreme deference given to it by 
the Supreme Court. The witnesses called by the defense used actual scholarship 
to show that the risk of death-by-torture was substantial; the only expert 
witness called by the state, conversely, “cited no scholarly research in 
support of his opinion” and instead “appeared to rely primarily on two sources: 
the Web site www.drugs.com, and a ‘Material Safety Data Sheet’ produced by a 
midazolam manufacturer”. As Sotomayor carefully demonstrated, “the Court 
disregard[ed] an objectively intolerable risk of severe pain” and relied 
instead on the kind of research done by an undergraduate student who starts 
papers on the morning that they are due.

Even worse is Alito’s conclusion that death by torture does not violate the 
Eighth Amendment unless defendants can identify a safer method, which Sotomayor 
correctly describes as “indefensible”. Even assuming for the sake of argument 
that the US constitution permits the death penalty in the abstract, it does not 
guarantee that states will be able to perform executions in every circumstance. 
If medical personnel and drug companies – making free choices – decline to 
participate in the machinery of death, this does not mean that the Eighth 
Amendment ceases to apply. As Sotomayor explained:

But a method of execution that is “barbarous,” or “involve[s] torture or a 
lingering death,” does not become less so just because it is the only method 
currently available to a State. If all available means of conducting an 
execution constitute cruel and unusual punishment, then conducting the 
execution will constitute cruel and usual punishment. Nothing compels a State 
to perform an execution. It does not get a constitutional free pass simply 
because it desires to deliver the ultimate penalty; its ends do not justify any 
and all means.

Her argument is unanswerable. Boiling people in oil or killing the on the rack 
would not suddenly stop being cruel and unusual punishment if they were the 
only methods available. It is true that the condemned prisoners in the cases 
considered by the court committed genuinely heinous crimes – one broke an 
infant’s back with his bare hands; another raped an killed an 11-month-old 
girl, as Alito was sure to mention in his opinion. Fortunately, even if 
Oklahoma could not execute these prisoners a remedy exists that is good enough 
for most American states and every other liberal democracy in the world: 
imprisonment.

The other dissenting opinion, written by Justice Stephen Breyer and joined by 
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, took a broader view and concluded that “it is 
highly likely that the death penalty violates the Eighth Amendment.” With the 
exception of an opinion filed by Justices Harry Blackmun and John Paul Stevens 
written just before their respective retirements, Breyer and Ginsburg are the 
first continuing justices to suggest that the death penalty is categorically 
unconstitutional since Justices William Brennan and Thurgood Marshall retired 
during the first Bush administration.

Breyer wrote that the death penalty likely violates the Eighth Amendment, 
because it is unreliable and the execution of innocent people cannot (unlike 
the imprisonment of the innocent) be remedied; he cited, among others,Carlos 
DeLuna <http://cup.columbia.edu/book/the-wrong-carlos/9780231167222> and 
Cameron Todd Willingham 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2009/09/07/trial-by-fire>, two almost 
certainly innocent people recently executed by Texas’s trainwreck of a criminal 
justice system. Breyer also noted that the system is arbitrary: as Justice 
Potter Stewart said in 1972, it is “cruel and unusual in the same way that 
being struck by lightning is cruel and unusual” because a small number of 
people (who are disproportionately poor and disproportionately people of color) 
are singled out for execution, often for crimes no worse than those who are 
spared even by the same state. The inefficiency of the system causes the 
condemned the anguish of extended stays on death row, Breyer noted, and it’s 
increasingly unusual because it is increasingly rarely used in the United 
States.

Not surprisingly, Justice Breyer’s dissent inspired a rancorous concurrence 
from Scalia, who took the highly unusual step of reading his opinion from the 
bench. (It is rare for justices to read concurring opinions, as opposed to 
opinions of the court or dissents.) In one of the stale zingers that have 
increasingly consumed Scalia’s writing, he asserts that “Justice Breyer does 
not just reject the death penalty, he rejects the Enlightenment.” This is 
particularly unfortunate phrase forsomeone who has asserted that the 
Constitution does not forbid executing innocent people 
<http://thinkprogress.org/politics/2009/08/17/56525/scalia-actual-innocence/> – 
which some might say was a key feature of the Enlightenment.

In the short term, neither Breyer’s nor Sotomayor’s opinions will not change 
the law: a court that essentially winks at torturous killings by the state 
certainly isn’t about to rule the death penaltyper se unconstitutional. But it 
may turn out to be a very important sign of things to come: the most centrist 
Democratic nominee on the court has now reached the conclusion that the death 
penalty is unconstitutional, which may shift how other moderate liberal 
justices view the Eighth Amendment. This court will not rule the death penalty 
unconstitutional – but the next court with a Democratic nominee as the median 
vote might.
 