
Napoleon would have approved of George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne>. “I know he’s a good 
general,” the French emperor once said. “But is he lucky?”

The answer to that question, according to the Institute for Fiscal Studies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/26/autumn-statement-ifs-warns-on-tax-rises-spending-cuts-george-osborne>
, is yes. The chancellor got lucky when the Office for Budget Responsibility
raised its forecasts for tax revenue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/25/obr-george-osborne-tax-credits-tax-revenue-autumn-statement>
 and cut its predictions for interest payments on the national debt. That gave 
Osborne some much-needed wiggle room to delay welfare cuts, choke back on 
austerity and spend a bit more on infrastructure.

The question posed by the UK’s leading experts on the public finances is 
whether Osborne will stay lucky. The chancellor has certainly solved some 
pressing problems, but he has done so either by pushing pain into the future 
(as with tax credits) or by pushing the pain on to somebody else (as with local 
government).

Labour needs to get stuck in on education | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/08/labour-needs-to-get-stuck-in-on-education>
As the IFS also noted, Osborne is at the mercy of events. The big number 
bandied about on Wednesday was the extra £27bn of receipts the OBR has put at 
the chancellor’s disposal. But that is £27bn over five years: the annual 
increases are small and would quickly be wiped out in the event that the 
economy under-performs.

This would not have to involve Britain plunging back into recession, although 
history would suggest a downturn is due some time in the next five years. It 
would merely involve a year or two of growth at 1.5% rather than the 2.4% and 
2.5% the OBR has pencilled in for the next couple of years.

Paul Johnson, the director of the IFS, says this would be a problem for the 
chancellor. “He has set himself a completely inflexible fiscal target – to have 
a surplus in 2019-20. This is not like the friendly, flexible target of the 
last parliament which allowed him to accept a bigger deficit when growth and 
tax revenues disappointed. This is fixed, four years out.”
Borrowing forecasts 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/11/borrowing-zip/giv-32650h8LP1Vq2OhPQ/>
Johnson says that if the OBR has got its projections wrong, Osborne will face 
a simple choice: abandon the target, cut spending or raise taxes. The IFS 
director thinks the likeliest outcome would be that the chancellor raises taxes 
– and the IFS analysis of the autumn statement and spending review shows why.

The extra money found by the OBR has not meant the end of austerity for the 
public sector. Unprotected departments that are not inside the government’s 
ringfence are still facing cumulative real-terms cuts of 18% over the course of 
this parliament. The changes to local government finance are, as Johnson noted, 
genuinely radical, but will involve winners and losers. The poorest councils 
have most to fear from reforms that will allow them to keep what they raise 
from business rates.

Even those parts of the state that have been spared the axe are still finding 
the going tough, with the settlement for the NHS a case in point. Over the next 
five years, the health service will see spending rise by 3% in total, which is 
equivalent to its average annual increase over the past 50 years. Between 2000 
and 2008 – a period when Labour was seeking to raise NHS spending to the 
European average – the increase was 6% a year.

Before the spending review, the Treasury was looking to cut £21bn from the 
budgets of unprotected departments between 2015-16 and 2019-20, a 27% reduction 
on average. The savings were necessary because more than half of the budget 
earmarked for Whitehall was ringfenced. As well as health, preferential 
treatment was given to schools, international aid and defence.

The extra money Osborne announced in the spending review meant non-protected 
departments will now have to find £16bn – an 18% cut. That comes on top of 
bigger cuts in the last parliament. As a result, the budgets for the justice 
and business departments will both be more than 40% smaller in real terms in 
2019-20 than they were in 2010-11. Further cuts look difficult to achieve.
Public sector net borrowing 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/11/budget_eyeline_web_psbr/giv-32650zFO6DgZ7yTb1/>
Much was made of Osborne’s U-turn over tax credits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/25/george-osborne-u-turn-scrap-tax-credit-cuts-autumn-statement>
 but, as the IFS pointed out, the aim of saving £12bn from the welfare budget 
remains unchanged. All that has happened is that the pain has been delayed from 
this year to a later date, until tax credits are subsumed into the new 
universal credit.

Indeed, the already substantial losses in store for those on the lowest 
incomes will be slightly greater as a result of the less generous regime for 
housing benefit that Osborne announced in the autumn statement. A household in 
the two poorest deciles will lose 6.5% to 8% of their income as a result of all 
the changes to the tax system announced since the May election.

When the government first announced universal credit, it said the idea was to 
make working families on benefits better off while benefits to non-working 
families would be made less generous in order to improve work incentives.

Somewhere along the line, that formula has been ditched. The IFS said that on 
average both working and non-working households would be worse off as a result 
of universal credit. It estimates that 2.6 million families will be on average 
£1,600 a year worse off, while 1.9 million families will be better off. This 
will save the government £1.5bn a year. A further £2.2bn will be saved by 
cutting spending for non-working families.

What does that mean? It means that it would be pretty hard to turn the screw 
much tighter on Whitehall departments and welfare claimants in the event that 
the public finances do not live up to the rosy OBR expectations. The fact that 
the Treasury has started pushing back against the IFS analysis of the winners 
and losers from universal credit speaks volumes.


Autumn statement: IFS warns on tax rises and spending cuts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/26/autumn-statement-ifs-warns-on-tax-rises-spending-cuts-george-osborne>
It is, of course, possible that the OBR has got its judgment right, or that 
things might turn out even better. Over the course of repeated economic cycles, 
the public finances have tended to disappoint during recessions and outperform 
during booms. The last two chancellors to have put Britain’s public finances 
back in the black – Nigel Lawson in the late 1980s and Gordon Brown in the late 
1990s – both benefited from this tendency.

But the pattern has been broken since the turn of the millennium. In his later 
years at the Treasury, Brown found that tax receipts never quite matched his 
expectations. Similarly, Osborne’s failure to meet his deficit reduction target 
since 2010 has been due to growth being less tax-rich than forecast.

Johnson says growth will either be higher or lower than the OBR is predicting. 
“The forecasts will change again. That much I am sure of. I just don’t know 
which way they will change.” The IFS director says Osborne has a 50-50 chance 
of staying lucky.

If the chancellor ceases to be blessed by good fortune, Osborne’s first line 
of defence would be to reduce the size of the surplus from £10bn closer to 
zero. But it would not take that much of a growth undershoot to wipe out the 
surplus altogether. In those circumstances, the search would be on for some 
stealth taxes to raise.
 