
The tears of a comic clown are a cliche. Yet a new study in the British 
Journal of Psychiatry (BJP) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jan/16/successful-comedians-display-symptoms-psychosis-study-says>
 provides hard evidence for them.

Compared with non-creative people, comics scored significantly higher 
<http://bjp.rcpsych.org/content/early/2014/01/02/bjp.bp.113.134569.abstract?sid=4151251e-f0a2-45cf-a427-64688ea8f8a4>
 on four psychotic personality traits, especially introvertive anhedonia (an 
inability to feel pleasure, including an avoidance of intimacy). The 
researchers point to similarities in what it takes to be funny and the mindsets 
of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Both require thinking outside the box 
with manic speed, and making up original connections. Actors also scored 
significantly higher on three out of the four traits but not on the depressive 
tendencies of introvertive andhedonia.

This is what I found in the late 1980s, interviewing comedians for the TV 
programmeRoom 113 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oliver_James_%28psychologist%29>
. Robbie Coltrane had been thumped about by his dad until the day he was big 
enough to thump him back. Stephen Fry's intellect and personality had been 
severely belittled by his father. Ruby Wax had a mother who was so badly 
affected by hysteria and obsessive compulsive disorder that it nearly drove Wax 
mad. At the age of five Julie Walters came upon her father sitting dead in his 
armchair. Only Ben Elton had nothing extreme to report.

What is significant about the BJP study is that it suggests a link between a 
specific personality trait and a specific profession. What is completely 
lacking from the analysis of the results is their wider meaning, and that the 
precise way we are reflects how we have been cared for in childhood. We know 
that children'sfantasy narratives reflect the specific care they receive 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-9507.00147/abstract>: the 
physically abused make up different stories from the sexually abused, who are 
different from the neglected. This connects closely with adult symptoms.

There are now a whole host of studies linking specific childhood adversities 
to adult psychiatric symptoms 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Development-Person-Minnesota-Adaptation/dp/1606232495/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1389826960&sr=8-1&keywords=SROUFE+ALAN>
. In particular, as a result of the under-reported and important work of 
psychologists such asRichard Bentall and John Read of Liverpool University 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Models-Madness-Psychological-Schizophrenia-International/dp/1583919066>
, we know that specific kinds of childhood maltreatment are related to specific 
adult psychotic symptoms. Bentall, for example, shows that sexual abuse 
correlates with auditory hallucinations, whereas erratic and emotionally 
neglectful care is associated with paranoia.

It is no longer defensible to deem particular personality traits or mental 
illnesses as genetically caused brain disorders. Emotional distress results 
from bad things being done to people. If comics are psychotic or depressive, it 
is because of the specific kind of maltreatment they suffered as children.

Fourteen years on, the Human Genome Project <http://www.genome.gov/10001772> 
has been unable to identify specific genes, or clusters thereof, which explain 
the variance in populations in regard to schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, 
intelligence or any other component of human psychology. For example, amajor 
report <http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ S0890856713005182> 
was published at the end of 2013 titled No Genetic Influences for Child 
Behaviour Problems from DNA Analysis. This received no media coverage at all.

What did get a lot of coverage at around the same time was Prof Robert 
Plomin's claim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/dec/11/genetics-variation-exam-results1>
 that specific genes have been identified that explain significant amounts of 
the difference between siblings in their GCSE exam performances. This was, 
quite simply, without scientific foundation: no such specific genes have been 
found explaining significant amounts of the variance. There is a study of twins 
suggesting it, but not one of specific genes.

The new BJP study should be a rallying call for research bodies to pour some of
the Â£8bn that has been spent studying genes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/apr/17/human-genome-genetics-twin-studies>
, into exploring how childhood care moulds our uniqueness. It is time to 
prioritise helping parents to meet the needs of their small children to help 
their future mental health.
 