
I thought I saw my first killer clown this week, coming toward me down a side 
street I was crossing. In my experience it is unwise to make eye contact with 
clowns, killer or otherwise, so I looked straight ahead and carried on.

Knife-wielding 'killer clown' pursues Durham schoolchildren
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/07/knife-wielding-killer-clown-pursues-durham-schoolchildren>
But I had second thoughts. I figured it might be my only killer clown sighting 
of the whole craze. So I ducked into a corner shop, bought a paper, and doubled 
back.

When we finally crossed paths, I could see that he was wearing a white mask – 
hollow-eyed, blank; an idealised skull, perhaps – with his hoodie pulled up 
over his head. He was flanked by two unmasked mates, as if he was being 
escorted to his destination. It’s unlikely he was on his way to rob a betting 
shop, or tend goal in an ice hockey match – in either case, you wouldn’t wear 
the mask on the way. The disguise was clearly meant to conceal something. But 
what?

That’s when I realised: it was probably his clown makeup. Wearing a mask in 
broad daylight may seem a trifle provocative, but who would dare go out dressed 
as a clown in the current climate? Imagine if you had to wear clown gear as a 
condition of your employment – that you were, let’s say, a clown. Would you 
feel safe taking the bus to your next children’s party? Might you not think, 
“This old Jason-from-Friday the 13th <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0758746/> 
mask ought to get me there and back in one piece”?

Noeleen Breem, AKA Clown Silly Tilly, chair of Clowns International, told the 
Guardian that this was a genuine worry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/11/professional-clowns-killer-clown-sightings-damaging-livelihood>
. “We are concerned about the impact on our reputation, the suggestion that 
clowns are something to be feared,” she said.
 People dressed as clowns are terrorising towns in the US. 
Warning: Contains strong language. 
The tendency so far has been to blame the killer clowns themselves for the 
misconception. But whatever their motives, I don’t get the sense they’re trying 
to ruin things for the clowns who specialise in balloon animals.

Surely the “craze” – which began in the US – is down to a public overreaction 
to fancy dress. The18 killer clown sightings 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-wales-37606220> (actual clown-facilitated 
fatalities: zero) reported to Gwent police alone may sound a lot, but for all 
we know that could be the average for the first half of October. I certainly 
don’t keep track of how many people I spot dressed as Wally fromWhere’s Wally? 
<http://findwally.co.uk/> in a given month, although I’m aware of seasonal 
fluctuations.

VAT with the vampire

If I ever did meet a killer clown, I think my primary worry would be the 
potential for social awkwardness. What is my role in the encounter? Am I 
obliged to run? What if I don’t? Do we just stand there?

Something similar happened to me a few years ago when I found myself buying 
petrol from a vampire at Cullompton services on the M5. I was alone in the 
shop, and didn’t understand why a member of the undead had been posted behind 
the till. I couldn’t think of anything to say about his parchment-pale skin, 
sunken eyes, yellow fangs or the blood running from both corners of his mouth, 
so I decided not to mention his affliction at all. He asked me if I needed a 
VAT receipt, and I said no.

The customer who walked in as I left handled the situation much better.

“You’re looking well,” he said.

“I had a late one last night,” said the vampire.

A little Dorrit? No thanks

Perhaps I should have made more of an effort (it was, I later realised, the 
week before Halloween), but I resented the obligation to play along. It’s like 
going to an event populated by actors pretending to be Dickens characters, who 
will talk only about things that happened in Little Dorrit.

I always long to ask them where the fire assembly point is, but I know nothing 
will induce them to drop the act. If you want to see me run, come at me dressed 
asMrs Meagles <http://www.bbc.co.uk/littledorrit/characterandcast/>.
 