
Labour has held the Cumbrian parliamentary seat of Copeland continuously for 
more than 80 years. Yet the Conservativesare odds-on with the bookies 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/election_2010/england/8615733.stm> to 
win the byelection that is due there in early 2017 followingJamie Reed’s 
resignation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/21/corbyn-critic-jamie-reed-quits-labour-mp-byelection-copeland>
. The odds reflect a wider scepticism at Westminster about Labour, as well as a 
feeling that a Tory win may bring on an early general election.

There are, though, good reasons to be doubtful about almost every aspect of 
this. True, the Labour majority in Copeland in 2015 of less than 3,000 looks 
vulnerable at a time when the national polls give the Tories double-digit leads 
and theLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> national share is 
as low as 25%.

Corbyn critic quits as Labour MP, triggering tight byelection race
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/21/corbyn-critic-jamie-reed-quits-labour-mp-byelection-copeland>
Yet Labour has a decent record of holding its seats in byelections since 2015. 
And Copeland, like west Cumbria as a whole, is very much its own place.

Providing it chooses a candidate in the Reed template – which means a 
pro-nuclear local candidate backed by the GMB union – and also that it fights 
the contest hard, then a seat dominated by theSellafield plant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/05/sellafield-nuclear-plant-riddled-safety-flaws-according-bbc-panorama>
 may prove a tough nut for the Tories to crack. Copeland may be made of more 
dogged Labour stuff than London-based pundits who have never been to Cleator 
Moor or Egremont may assume. Providing Ukip does not withdraw to give the 
Tories a clear run, my money would still be on Labour at this stage.

But Copeland and other recent byelections have rekindled a wider debate about 
UK party politics and election strategies. The matter in question is whether 
the parties of the left of centre, loosely defined, should be more open to 
electoral and political cooperation of various kinds in order to prevent the 
Tories re-establishing a rightwing English-based post-Brexit hegemony over 
British politics for the foreseeable future.

For the reasons just stated, Copeland may not be a particularly good test bed 
for this “progressive alliance” thinking. Although theLiberal Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats> and the Greens ran 
candidates against Reed in 2010 and 2015, their voters are likely to be 
anti-nuclear. So there is little prospect of them backing a Labour candidate 
whose central pitch is likely to be the defence of Sellafield and the thousands 
of relatively well-paid jobs it generates. For the same reason, Labour has no 
incentive to court these voters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fprogressive-alliance-labour-tories%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd5df351b2e8f6976bb1a66371f721af97daa21c%2F0_243_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=If%20you%20think%20a%20progressive%20alliance%20will%20save%20us%2C%20better%20think%20again%20%7C%20Martin%20Kettle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fprogressive-alliance-labour-tories%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=If%20you%20think%20a%20progressive%20alliance%20will%20save%20us%2C%20better%20think%20again%20%7C%20Martin%20Kettle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fprogressive-alliance-labour-tories%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd5df351b2e8f6976bb1a66371f721af97daa21c%2F0_243_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 ‘Copeland, a seat dominated by the Sellafield plant, may prove a tough nut for 
the Tories to crack.’ Photograph: Owen Humphreys/PA 
Nevertheless, the progressive alliance option is undoubtedly a growing debate. 
At its core are three propositions. The first is that the majority of people in 
the UK do not vote Conservative, so the non-Tory parties need to cooperate 
more. The second is that Labour’s historic late 20th-century dominance over the 
UK’s non-Tory party politics is in decline, so these forces need to cooperate 
if they are not to be endlessly eclipsed by the Tories. The third is that 
Britain needs a new 21st-century, post-industrial progressive agenda that takes 
more account of factors including inequality, localism and climate change.

No one who writes professionally for the Guardian can dismiss any part of 
this. More than 100 years ago, this paper’s owner and editor CP Scott often 
wrote in favour of cooperation between the Liberals and the newly emerging 
Labour party, warning that failure to do so would mean “the Conservative dog 
running away with the bone”. The Guardian has editorially been broadly in 
favour of devolution, electoral reform and political alliances for most of the 
last century – and last time I looked it still was.

Yet no one who tries to think objectively about modern politics can close 
their mind to the many problems. One of the most heretical for some readers is 
that supporting or opposing the Tories may not in fact be the defining divide 
of British politics. Those who define themselves on the left need to be open to 
the thought that Labour may in fact provide an equally important divide. There 
are also, whisper it who dares, progressive Tories as well as reactionary ones. 
It ought not to be a thought crime to consider thatRuth Davidson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ruth-davidson> or David Willetts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidwilletts> are more sympathetic 
political figures than some in the Labour party.

A second problem is that the left is in a political pickle in many developed 
countries today precisely because it doesn’t have the answers to today’s 
problems, not because the political systems make it difficult to get its 
apparently virtuous answers across. The problems themselves are fairly easily 
stated: climate change, obesity, over-mighty financial services, declining real 
wages, widening inequality, ageing population, democratic failings. The answers 
are much harder. No party has them.

Who will win the Copeland byelection?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/23/who-will-win-the-copeland-byelection>
A third and crucial problem is that active cooperation between parties 
eventually has to come down to nuts and bolts. Here the going gets tougher. If 
it involves electoral pacts, how extensive should they be? What is the policy 
towards the Scottish and Welsh nationalists – are they part of the alliance 
too? Supposing that an anti-Tory alliance won a general election: who would get 
to be in government, and are all MPs from the different tribes bound to support 
that government on all major votes?

We are getting ahead of ourselves here. But it is important to know where the 
progressive alliance proposal is intended to lead. Even at this embryonic 
stage, when an alliance is still mainly an idea not a reality, the truth is 
that the two major potential cooperators, Labour and the Liberal Democrats, 
more frequently despise one another. Nothing would make them cooperate in the 
southern Tory seat where I live, for instance, even though the sitting MP is 
eminently beatable if it happened. Nor can it be taken for granted, as Copeland 
reminds us, that everyone who wants the Tories out shares the Greens’ hostility 
to nuclear power or cars.

Making alliances is difficult. It means being pragmatic and tolerant. Many on 
the left are neither. In the end, with the massive exception of Brexit, the 
great unknown in British politics in 2017 is still whether the Labour party has 
a viable future as a party of government, not what comes afterwards.
 