
Oswald Grübel, the chief executive of UBS, was on flimsy ground when he said 
the $2bn (£1.3bn) loss fromthe rogue trading scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/sep/17/kweku-adoboli-ubs-fraud-charges>
 would not affect "the fundamental strength of our firm".

It is true that the hit from the Kweku Adoboli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/kweku-adoboli> affair will not inflict 
unbearable financial damage on the bank's finances – after the last disasters, 
Swiss regulators and politicians ensured that big Swiss banks are among the 
best capitalised in the world – but a bank's fundamental strength is about much 
more than its capital base. Reputation matters just as much, and UBS's is about 
as low as it is possible to go in the field of investment banking.

To give a flavour of the scale of reputational damage, imagine a British 
parallel. What if Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS) were to suffer such a blow in 
its investment bank? RBS's management might try to maintain the idea that one 
incident, and one employee, should not jeopardise a whole division, but 
everybody would know the game was up. It would be a disaster too far. The cries 
to give up on trading, and get back to basic banking, would be overwhelming.

So it will be with UBS, which was taken to the cleaners in the US sub-prime 
mortgage disaster and was only allowed to attempt to rehabilitate its 
investment bank on the understanding that it was drinking in the last-chance 
saloon. Any failure to control risk would not be tolerated. The danger of 
contaminating the wealth management business – a far more important activity, 
both forUBS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ubs> and for Switzerland – 
would be too great.

Swiss regulators could take matters into their own hands by ordering Grübel to 
get rid of the investment bank, or at least the part that engages in trading, 
as opposed to advising corporate clients on mergers and acquisitions. Even if 
they don't, simple market forces should do the job. If UBS's more successful 
traders are to be hit in the pocket by the $2bn loss when bonus season arrives, 
as they should be (them's the rules these days), they are prime targets for 
poaching by rivals.
 