
The International Monetary Fund has cut its growth outlook for the eurozone on 
the back of the Brexit vote, warning that a new climate of uncertainty across 
the single currency bloc will dent confidence, fan financial market volatility 
and spill over into other economies.

The Fund used a regular healthcheck on the eurozone to warn it would suffer an 
economic slowdown and more political uncertainty as a result of last month’s 
referendum result. It is the latest body to warn that fresh cracks could emerge 
in the region as it grapples with the fallout of the UK’s decision to depart 
the EU.

GDP in the eurozone is now expected to grow 1.6% this year and just 1.4% in 
2017, a slowdown from a 1.7% expansion last year, “mainly due to the negative 
impact of the UK referendum”, the IMF said. That compares withIMF forecasts 
before the June vote of 1.7% growth for the eurozone 
<http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2016/update/01/> this year and next. 
The IMF hadrepeatedly warned before the referendum of dire economic 
consequences from Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/13/imf-warns-stock-market-crash-house-price-fall-eu-referendum-brexit>
, much to the anger of leave campaigners.

In its latest comments, the Washington-based fund highlighted the UK’s 
importance as a trading partner for the eurozone as the destination for 13% of 
euro area exports. “The markdowns for the euro area reflect likely weaker 
investor confidence on account of heightened uncertainty, greater financial 
market volatility, and lower import demand from the UK.

Why IMF global financial stability report should be taken with pinch of salt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/22/imf-global-financial-stability-report-unbalanced-false-alarms>
“Given the euro area’s substantial weight in world trade, this slowdown would 
have spillovers to many other economies, including emerging markets but the 
impact is expected to be limited.

“Looking ahead, the risks to the outlook remain firmly on the downside and are 
mainly political. Uncertainty will persist as long as the UK’s new status 
vis-à-vis the EU is not clear. The recommendation in the staff report that 
collective actions should be taken to improve the governance of the economic 
union and make it more cohesive remains valid, and has now taken on greater 
urgency.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fimf-cuts-growth-predictions-for-eurozone-over-post-brexit-confusion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd297e796786f82f1235c98d602dc91aad3433b75%2F0_0_720_313%2F720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=IMF%20cuts%20growth%20predictions%20for%20eurozone%20over%20post-Brexit%20confusion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fimf-cuts-growth-predictions-for-eurozone-over-post-brexit-confusion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=IMF%20cuts%20growth%20predictions%20for%20eurozone%20over%20post-Brexit%20confusion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fimf-cuts-growth-predictions-for-eurozone-over-post-brexit-confusion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd297e796786f82f1235c98d602dc91aad3433b75%2F0_0_720_313%2F720.jpg>
 Old and new IMF forecasts for the eurozone. Illustration: IMF 
The UK’s vote to leave the EU heaps fresh pressure on the eurozone project 
less than a year afterdebt-ridden Greece came close to tumbling out of the 
currency union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/13/athens-and-eurozone-agree-bailout-deal-for-greece>
. Grexit was narrowly avoided but the IMF warns prolonged low growth and 
inflation have left the euro area increasingly vulnerable to shocks. The bloc 
will also remain prone to recurrent crises of confidence unless political 
leaders pull together, it says.

Earlier on Friday, a leading credit ratings agency also warned of political 
shockwaves from Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/jul/08/pound-steadies-as-markets-await-key-us-jobs-report-business-live?page=with:block-577f6f33e4b04ae4a10b9abd#block-577f6f33e4b04ae4a10b9abd>
. Moody’s said the UK’s vote could even topple the whole EU project. “In the 
long run, the potential strengthening of nationalistic and protectionist 
movements could have a detrimental effect on the EU, even threatening its 
existence,” it said, in an update to financial markets.

Even before the referendum, the IMF was warning about political tensions in 
the region and itsmanaging director Christine Lagarde had flagged up risks from 
economic nationalism and inequality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/17/imf-chief-christine-lagarde-urges-britain-to-stay-in-europe>
. That theme was reprised in the Fund’s “article 4” annual report into the 
19-nation eurozone, written just before the UK’s 23 June referendum. The report 
was published on Friday alongside a supplementary note with the lower growth 
outlook written after the referendum.

The IMF’s experts wrote: “Growing political divisions and skepticism have put 
the euro area at a critical juncture. The usual approach of muddling through 
appears increasingly untenable, raising the risks of stagnation and further 
fragmentation.” Downside risks to the eurozone’s growth prospects had 
increased, amid “growing political divisions and euroscepticism”, the IMF said. 
Medium-term prospects remained weak, with high public and private debt and slow 
progress in structural reforms weighing on growth.

IMF says Brexit would trigger UK recession
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/18/imf-says-brexit-would-trigger-uk-recession-eu-referendum>
With interest rates in the eurozone already at record lows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/10/european-central-bank-cuts-interest-rates-zero-mario-draghi>
, the European Central Bank pumping in electronic money and government finances 
stretched, the IMF warned there was “very little policy space to cope with 
adverse shocks”. It urged more “collective actions” from governments to 
strengthen the currency union. Those included “completing the banking union”, 
in other words unifying financial regulation across the eurozone at a time when
Italy is considering using government money to bail out its vulnerable banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/10/battle-prop-up-italy-banks-eu-brexit-grexit-bad-loans>
.

Governments should also expand centralised sources of investment and 
prioritise structural reforms that could bolster near-term demand in eurozone 
economies. On the upside, lower oil prices, a broadly neutral fiscal stance, 
and accommodative monetary policy were all supporting domestic demand in the 
eurozone, the IMF said. However, inflation and inflation expectations remained 
very low, and the ECB should stand ready to do more if the inflation outlook 
deteriorates further.

It also highlighted risks beyond the UK’s Brexit vote. “Further spillovers 
from the UK post-referendum situation, the refugee surge, or a heightening of 
security concerns could contribute to greater uncertainty, hurting growth and 
hindering progress on policies and reforms,” it said. “Other risks include 
banking and financial sector weaknesses in some countries.”
 