
Related: Britain will be fastest growing G7 economy this year, says IMF 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/04/britain-fastest-growing-g7-economy-imf-international-monetary-fund-brexit-vote>

Everybody makes duff forecasts. Everybody gets it wrong from time to time. 
Only the inveterate fence sitters are spared having egg on their face.

The International Monetary Fund certainly knows what it is like to make a 
mistake. In the run-up to the EU referendum, the IMF made a series of 
interventions warning voters of the dire consequences that would follow a vote 
to leave.

At first, the IMF stuck to long-term forecasts, saying investment and trade 
would eventually be weaker if the UK divorced from the other 27 members of the 
EU. But as the referendum neared and the vote was on a knife-edge, the warnings 
became more lurid. The UKwould immediately start sliding into recession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/18/imf-says-brexit-would-trigger-uk-recession-eu-referendum>
.House prices would crumble. Shares would crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/13/imf-warns-stock-market-crash-house-price-fall-eu-referendum-brexit>
.

So what do you do if your forecasts turn out to be a little wide of the mark? 
Either you put your hands up and admit you were wrong. Or you brazen it out. 
You say that it is too early to say. You say that eventually you will come 
right.

No prizes for guessing which option the IMF has taken. Its half-yearly world 
economic outlook (WEO) report says the UK will do fine in 2016 but is going to 
find the going a lot tougher in 2017.

This is a perfectly respectable view, and one held by a host of academic, 
business and City economists. Had the IMF stuck to this sort of assessment 
throughout the referendum campaign, it would have saved itself embarrassment 
now. As it is, it will get some stick from those who thought the 
Washington-based fund had overstepped the mark in its support for the remain 
camp.

Sadly, the furore over the IMF’s Brexit predictions may well overshadow the 
more interesting aspects of the WEO. It is true, for example, that the vote for 
Brexit was the result of almost a decade of flatlining average incomes since 
the financial crisis, which has bred hostility towards elites, globalisation 
and immigrants.

Maurice Obstfeld, the IMF’s economic counsellor, rightly noted: “Similar 
tensions afflict the US political scene, where anti-immigrant and anti-trade 
rhetoric have been prominent from the start of the current presidential 
election round. Across the world, protectionist trade measures have been on the 
rise.”

All this is quite true. The IMF identifies “political discord and inward 
looking policies” as one of the two big risks to its prediction that global 
growth will increase slightly from 3.1% to 3.4% next year; the others being 
stagnation in advanced economies.

These two factors are, of course, interlinked. If western economies continue 
to struggle, protectionist pressures are going to rise. They will also make it 
more likely that the other risks identified by the IMF – a sharper slowdown in 
China and financial trouble in the emerging markets – will crystallise.

The solution, the IMF says, is a three-pronged approach rather than the 
continued reliance on central banks, with their ultra-low interest rates and 
money creation schemes. Governments have to loosen fiscal policy (cut taxes and 
increase spending) where there is scope to do so, and reallocate spending 
towards growth-enhancing sectors where there is not.

Finally, there have to be measures aimed at supporting those harmed by 
economic change, whether as the result of globalisation or technological 
overhaul, such as stronger welfare nets and more progressive income tax regimes.

One explanation for the IMF’s hyperbolic warnings about the immediate impact 
of the Brexit vote is that it thought the expected remain vote would mean they 
would never have to be justified. Now that it has, the IMF is terrified because 
it sees the UK referendum as symptomatic of something deeply dysfunctional 
about the global economy it has helped to shape in the past four decades. Which 
indeed it is.
 