
The International Monetary Fund has added to concerns about the health of the 
global economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/13/oil-and-us-share-prices-tumble-over-fears-for-global-economy>
 by cutting its growth forecasts for the next two years and warning that 
recovery from the financial crisis could be derailed altogether if key 
challenges are mishandled.

The Washington-based body said world output would be 0.2 points lower in 2016 
and 2017 compared with forecastsmade just three months ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/06/imf-warns-stagnation-threat-g7-economies>
 – and that the risks to its predictions were to the downside.


Global economic turmoil to dominate Davos discussions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/17/global-economic-turmoil-dominate-davos>
In an update to its World Economic Outlook 
<http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2016/update/01/index.htm>, the IMF 
said growth was put at 3.4% this year and 3.6% in 2017. It said central banks 
should continue to boost growth and that finance ministries should bolster 
investment spending where possible. It also warned that a “tide of refugees” 
was putting the EU under strain and that action was needed to ensure that 
migrants could find jobs.

The IMF said: “Risks to the global outlook remain tilted to the downside and 
relate to ongoing adjustments in the global economy: a generalised slowdown in 
emerging market economies, China’s rebalancing, lower commodity prices, and the 
gradual exit from extraordinarily accommodative monetary conditions in the 
United States. If these key challenges are not successfully managed, global 
growth could be derailed.”

It added that the downward revisions largely reflected a more pessimistic view 
of the prospects for some countries in the emerging world since October.
Brazil’s recession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/12/brazil-carnival-economic-crisis-recession>
 was proving to be deeper and more protracted than previously estimated, while 
the forecasts for Russian and Saudi Arabian growth have also been cut.

Brazil, Russia and Saudi Arabia have been badly affected by the falling oil 
price, which has crashed further since the IMF updated the WEO. The forecasts 
assume an oil price of almost $42 a barrel in 2016, substantially higher than 
Monday’s level of about $28.
oil price 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/01/brent_crude/giv-271678fCdJMFgcGSZ/>
The IMF also shaved 0.2 points off its growth estimates for the US in 2016 and 
2017, noting that the economy was seen as marking time rather than gaining 
momentum. Output in the world’s biggest economy is expected to expand by 2.5%, 
rising to 2.6% in both of the following two years.

European growth is expected to be 1.7% in 2016, an upward revision of 0.1 
percentage points on October, with no change to the 1.7% pencilled in for 2017. 
The IMF has left its forecasts for the UK – of 2.2% in 2016 and 2017 – 
unchanged.

The Fund has also retained its October forecasts for the Chinese economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/chinese-economy>, which it expects to 
slow from growth of 6.9% in 2015 to 6.3% in 2016 and 6% in 2017.

“With the projected pickup in growth being once again weaker than previously 
expected and the balance of risks remaining tilted to the downside, raising 
actual and potential output through a mix of demand support and structural 
reforms is even more urgent,” the IMF said.


The Guardian view on the global economy: China sends a shiver through Davos | 
Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/19/the-guardian-view-on-the-global-economy-china-sends-a-shiver-through-davos>
“In advanced economies, where inflation rates are still well below central 
banks’ targets, accommodative monetary policy remains essential. Where 
conditions allow, near-term fiscal policy should be more supportive of the 
recovery, especially through investments that would augment future productive 
capital.” It added that where governments did need to reduce big budget 
deficits, action should be “growth friendly and equitable”.

The Fund said inflation had moved sideways in most countries, but noted that 
the renewed declines in commodity prices and a glut of cheap manufactured goods 
meant further downward pressure on the cost of living was now in prospect.

“In Europe, where the tide of refugees is presenting major challenges to the 
absorptive capacity of European Union labour markets and testing political 
systems, policy actions to support the integration of migrants into the labour 
force are critical to allay concerns about social exclusion and long-term 
fiscal costs, and unlock the potential long-term economic benefits of the 
refugee inflow.”

 