
Last week I watched members of the art-going public sitting at small desks 
sorting pieces of rice into tiny piles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/video/2014/may/12/marina-abramovic-method-video>
, for hours on end.

While it felt like punishment dished out at a high school detention, it was 
oddly mesmerising and strangely satisfying to see people marking off each 
little pile on paper, as they would a prison calendar. We were at theMarina 
Abramović installation, 512 Hours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/jun/11/marina-abramovic-review-512-hours-serpentine-gallery>
, at the Serpentine Gallery in London, and this was all in the spirit of 
slowing down, reconnecting and being immersed in art.

Everyone involved was a willing participant in a piece that’s ostensibly about 
finding calm in a connected world. Sure, I could have a stab at this while home 
alone by switching my phone off and counting the grains from my half-used pack 
of SunRice. But would I really do it without Abramović’s prompting? I enjoy 
being part of something creative, conceived by an inquisitive mind, because I 
know I can’t create such work myself. I like being included in the art-making.

Abramović seems aware that there’s been a shift in the way we consume art 
–observing isn’t enough; the public are increasingly itching to be involved. 
Much like we take incessant selfies and constantly announce what we’re doing on 
social media, as if to confirm we exist to an audience that’s not really 
listening. We want to be in on things. Abramović knows this and manipulates us 
beautifully.

It’s a different approach to her previous installation, The Artist Is Present 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2012/jul/06/marina-abramovic-video-review>
, at the Museum of Modern Art in New York in 2010. In that work, she sat daily 
for the duration of the exhibition, staring at a succession of members of the 
public sitting opposite her. But she was The Artist. To be in her presence was 
a luxury. It felt strangely powerful. She was giving something to others. And 
we were lucky to be included.

Now, increasingly, it’s all about us.

And I’m starting to think that us regular folk might not be up to the job. Are 
we really clever or interesting enough to be driving the narrative? I’m not 
sure I am. I like how art makes me feel like an outsider in someone else’s 
conversation, how it pushes me to think beyond myself and my own ideas. Is it 
healthy to be made to feel like we’re now special enough to be included in 
everything?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fjul%2F30%2Fimmersive-art-do-audiences-deserve-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F30%2F1406683184400%2F574554d4-8fc0-470b-b56c-f9fac8f5a4aa-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Immersive%20art%3A%20have%20audiences%20earned%20their%20place%20in%20the%20show%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fjul%2F30%2Fimmersive-art-do-audiences-deserve-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Immersive%20art%3A%20have%20audiences%20earned%20their%20place%20in%20the%20show%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fjul%2F30%2Fimmersive-art-do-audiences-deserve-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F30%2F1406683184400%2F574554d4-8fc0-470b-b56c-f9fac8f5a4aa-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Punchdrunk’s The Drowned Man, at Temple Studios. Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
The rise in immersive theatre that tailors the individual experience also 
indicates this trend is growing. As a return visitor toPunchdrunk theatre’s The 
Drowned Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/audioslideshow/2014/apr/15/the-drowned-man-punchdrunk-felix-barrett-temple-studios-audio-slideshow>
, (where audience members follow the storyline and actors of their choosing), 
the freedom of choice left me gagging for more. I went back multiple times to 
pursue my own adventures. Each was an unforgettable experience.

However, I saw many members of the public attempting to maximise their 
experience still further: people shadowing the cast a little too closely, or 
getting up in their faces, while the actors tried valiantly to ignore them and 
get on with the job.

What is it about humans, at this particular time in history, that makes us 
think we’re special enough to be part of art without having done any of the 
work to develop the emotional, intellectual or craft level that artists have 
strived to achieve? Perhaps inviting the audience in isn’t always for the best. 
Even though I like being included, I’m just not sure I’ve done the hard yards 
to deserve it.
 