
Forget yer mists and yer mellow fruitfulness. Chuck out yer close-bosomed 
friendship with the maturing sun. If autumn’s on the way, it must beThe Great 
British Bake Off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-great-british-bake-off> 
(returning tonight for its seventh sinfully delicious series),Strictly Come 
Dancing <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/strictly-come-dancing> 
(embarking on its 14th sashay across the floor on 3 September) andThe X Factor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-x-factor> (the 13th season of 
which starts on Saturday).

Bake Off is PC? Show me a reality show that isn’t contrived | Gaby Hinsliff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/08/great-british-bake-off-politically-correct-reality-show-contrived-muslim-woman-lemon-drizzle>
The X Factor is ailing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/06/surely-finally-this-is-the-end-for-the-x-factor>
. Viewing figures have been declining, and last year not even its final (8.4m 
viewers, down 2 million on 2014’s audience) made it into the top 40 most 
watched shows of 2015. By contrast, all 10 GBBOs and 12 of Strictly’s shows 
made the list – Bake Off taking first place, with 15 million gently salivating 
viewers.

It’s hard to imagine any kind of reversal of fortune taking place this year. 
At the moment the buzz is all around the return of Mel, Sue, Mary and Paul, and 
the drip-fedlist of Strictly’s new competitors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/23/strictly-come-dancing-2016-full-lineup-team-gb-greg-rutherford>
. You would have to suspect that Simon Cowell’s offering will fall on stonier 
ground than ever.

The public mood has changed. The year has been a brutal one so far. The first 
half was dominated by the deaths, in quick succession, of many loved and 
admired figures, fromDavid Bowie <https://www.theguardian.com/music/davidbowie> 
in January toCaroline Aherne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/04/sarah-morgan-caroline-aherne-tribute-comedy>
 last month, with Prince, Alan Rickman, Terry Wogan, Victoria Wood and many 
equally unexpected others in between. The collective grief occasioned by such 
losses is different from personal bereavement, of course. But it is real.

Then came the brutalising summer of Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>. At least 48% of the 
population, plus an unspecified proportion of the remainder who found 
themselves suffering regrexits, were left reeling by the result and found 
themselves staring into the abyss, from which Nigel Farage’s delighted face 
leered back.

All of this plays out against a backdrop of increasing global misery and 
rising domestic tension and disarray. Trolls run riot on Twitter and other 
social media platforms unconstrained by the forums’ owners, which makes for an 
audience whose gladiatorial appetite – on which the combative setup of X Factor 
depends – is more than sated. Who wants to turn from Theresa May,Labour’s 
internecine warfare <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labourleadership>, 
Trump, Turkey, Syria and all the rest and see the sob stories, cold commercial 
calculations and bullying-by-any-other-name on which Cowell’s behemoth depends?

Surely, finally, this is the end for The X Factor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/06/surely-finally-this-is-the-end-for-the-x-factor>
Who can bear to watch tears being extracted by emotional manipulation when 
there are so many already flowing freely elsewhere? Who wants to watch people 
laying their lives bare so that others can Auto-Tune and profit from them, when 
the headlines are full of the little guys getting beaten down every day?

The need now is for comfort watching. Which means telly with low stakes and 
with that long-unfashionable commodity, kindness, at its heart.

Both of these are baked into GBBO and Strictly Come Dancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/strictly-come-dancing>. Baking and 
dancing are real things, real skills; but they are not important. Nobody ever 
died from lack of choux or paso doble. Even the most anxiety-ridden viewer can 
cope with the level of jeopardy on display here.

Meanwhile, X Factor runs at fever pitch. It’s make or break! A lot of the 
contestants seem sincerely to believe that this is a once-in-a-lifetime chance 
– and given the lack of opportunities most of our lives hold, they may be 
entirely correct. X Factor holds out the promise of recording contracts and 
stellar careers (although few winners actually achieve these. Will Young, who 
won its forerunner, Pop Idol, is taking part in this year’s Strictly, and will 
probably do at least as nicely out of it as he did out of Pop Idol –and with 
much less emotional trauma).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fbake-off-terror-brexit-trump-x-factor-television%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27972af152bcef7e6fb2c7aac9f7df2a6de43280%2F84_6_1136_1420%2F1136.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20a%20year%20like%20this%2C%20we%C2%A0need%20Bake%20Off%E2%80%99s%20sugary%20embrace%20%7C%20Lucy%20Mangan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fbake-off-terror-brexit-trump-x-factor-television%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20a%20year%20like%20this%2C%20we%C2%A0need%20Bake%20Off%E2%80%99s%20sugary%20embrace%20%7C%20Lucy%20Mangan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fbake-off-terror-brexit-trump-x-factor-television%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27972af152bcef7e6fb2c7aac9f7df2a6de43280%2F84_6_1136_1420%2F1136.jpg>
 ‘Paul the prison officer was given, uniquely, a special commendation for his 
bread lion, to acknowledge its magnificence.’ Photograph: BBC 
Bake Off and Strictly, by contrast, channel a more Corinthian spirit. Any 
career upswing for Strictly’s competitors is fully subsumed in the week-to-week 
challenge of learning the dance and not letting your partner down. GBBO has 
prize money but it is barely mentioned (most viewers probably don’t even 
realise it has any).

Its essence was best exemplified in the episode when Paul the prison officer 
was given, uniquely, a special commendation for his bread lion to acknowledge 
its magnificence, even though – for technical, baguette-based reasons – he 
couldn’t be made star baker that week. So shines a good deed in a weary world. 
I could cry big, yeasty tears again just thinking of it.

The kindness and gentleness of the two formats is balm to the watching soul. 
Their contestants aren’t vulnerable, as many of X Factor’s are. The dancers are 
professionals or celebrities, well able to bear the judges’ verdicts; and 
though GBBO’s bakers are amateurs, they are doughty enough to handle the 
disappointment if it all goes profiteroles-up.

Mel and Sue are there for moral support and bad puns if anyone’s bottom goes 
soggy. The experts are honest, constructive and, er, genuinely expert. This is 
all rare and restorative stuff.

Kind, gentle programmes fly in the face of the dominant cultural mode of 
address – which is to hector aggressively until you get your way, whether 
you’re enacting policy in parliament or asserting your position on the
attractiveness of the Olympics’ latest female gold medallist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/22/sport-is-supposed-to-be-about-fun-not-body-image>
, 140 characters at a time. Such shows become increasingly valuable at times of 
increasing strife.

As well as providing an hour of escapism, they can function as a little 
reminder that – let your bread lions roar it to the heavens – it doesn’t always 
have to be this way.
 