
Teens. What are teens? Where do teens come from? Which memorial to genocide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/09/holocaust-selfies-solemn-sites-tourist-traps>
 will they take selfies at next? Why don’t theycare about the Rapture 
<https://www.raptureready.com/faq/faq123.html>? Where do they learn so many ways
to get high <http://time.com/75596/teens-getting-high-with-burts-bees/>?

What will teens be obsessed with next, I wonder? Here’s the other thing I 
wonder about: why are adults so obsessed with teens? Why not old folks, or the 
perimenopausal?

Teensploitation, one of my favourite film and television genres that peaked in 
the 2000s, speaks to a pre-GFC variant of this obsession quite plainly: Cruel 
Intentions, The OC, Gossip Girl, The Craft, even Buffy the Vampire slayer – 
they’re packed with salacious depictions of teens taking drugs, committing 
crimes, practising witchcraft and, in one memorable scene from the particularly 
brazen Jawbreaker, picking up and havingsex with Marilyn Manson 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WA0KYKMidto>.

There are some common themes in this teen-centric media. You may also 
recognise them as some of our most cherished cultural neuroses: self-discovery, 
reckless or passionate love and sexuality, fun, rejection of authority. Being a 
teen is about being, or becoming, your true self. Unlike other life stages, 
like childhood, which is about dependence; or parenthood, whose deep concern is 
responsibility, the tropes of adolescence are decidedly egocentric.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fnov%2F20%2Fin-defence-of-teens-theyre-not-just-small-adults-with-zits-and-bad-taste%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F20%2F1416444416778%2Fb1069554-a4bf-45a3-8905-138fb7acb978-1020x462.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20defence%20of%20teens%3A%20they're%20not%20just%20small%20adults%20with%20zits%20and%20bad%20taste%20%7C%20Eleanor%20Robertson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fnov%2F20%2Fin-defence-of-teens-theyre-not-just-small-adults-with-zits-and-bad-taste%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20defence%20of%20teens%3A%20they%27re%20not%20just%20small%20adults%20with%20zits%20and%20bad%20taste%20%7C%20Eleanor%20Robertson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fnov%2F20%2Fin-defence-of-teens-theyre-not-just-small-adults-with-zits-and-bad-taste%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F20%2F1416444416778%2Fb1069554-a4bf-45a3-8905-138fb7acb978-1020x462.jpeg>
 ‘The tropes of adolescence are decidedly egocentric.’ Photograph: Wikipedia 
Given the amount of emphasis we place on self-oriented pursuits, it’s 
unsurprising that we’ve graduated from Teensploitation to the pursuit of the 
“Uber Teen”. Young adult fiction like The Hunger Games, while less hedonistic 
than the Teensploitation flicks I watched while growing up, it is still 
concerned with self-discovery, independence, and triumph over oppressive 
authority. Of course, adults have gone nuts for it. Now we’re in the odd 
position where adults, defending themselves againstcharges of immaturity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/sep/19/young-adult-fiction-speaks-to-all>
 for being into teen media, are being sledged by other adults for being huge 
bipedal babies.

This new genre of pop culture criticism 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/books/2014/06/against_ya_adults_should_be_embarrassed_to_read_children_s_books.html>
 will probably become a defining cultural curio of our time. We’ll look back on 
2014 and think, “Oh right, that was when adults spent an entire 12-18 months 
bickering over teen media and not doing anything about global warming for the 
25th year in a row”.

Actual teens are the element that remains absent from these debates. Many 
adults seem to think they’re too busy “hanging 10” and shouting “fuck the 
police” at their school canteen lady to participate in conversations about 
themselves, but since the Teens Surfing Online accord of 2010, they have been 
permitted to access and even use the internet.

Tavi Gevinson and Lorde, two highly successful modern teens, touch on this 
broad theme of adult-teen engagement in anamazing interview 
<http://www.rookiemag.com/2014/01/lorde-interview/> on Gevinson’s magazine site 
Rookie:

Gevinson: That’s good. I want to start out by saying that what I want to do 
with this is … I’m in a unique position in interviewing you because we’re the 
same age–

Lorde: Holla.

And I feel like everything I read about you is like grown men writing—

Oh my god, that tweet you made where you were like, “She laces her Converse…” 
I was like, “This is so accurate!” There’s a definite viewpoint of the think 
piece by an adult writing about kids.

It’s true! The end is always like, “She does [this childlike thing] but she 
also does [this adultlike thing]. Whoa!”

Mine is “She squeals…” 

As you can see here, the teens are onto us. How must it feel, as a teen, to 
have hordes of adults passionately defending their God-given right to read 
Young Adult fiction? We probably could’ve asked them if we weren’t so busy 
investigating in exactly what ways theteenage brain works badl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/sep/05/teenage-brain-behaviour-prefrontal-cortex>
y and should probably be banned.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fnov%2F20%2Fin-defence-of-teens-theyre-not-just-small-adults-with-zits-and-bad-taste%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F20%2F1416444509876%2Fd8c9d317-9b06-4f96-b040-16316d13c252-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20defence%20of%20teens%3A%20they're%20not%20just%20small%20adults%20with%20zits%20and%20bad%20taste%20%7C%20Eleanor%20Robertson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fnov%2F20%2Fin-defence-of-teens-theyre-not-just-small-adults-with-zits-and-bad-taste%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20defence%20of%20teens%3A%20they%27re%20not%20just%20small%20adults%20with%20zits%20and%20bad%20taste%20%7C%20Eleanor%20Robertson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fnov%2F20%2Fin-defence-of-teens-theyre-not-just-small-adults-with-zits-and-bad-taste%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F20%2F1416444509876%2Fd8c9d317-9b06-4f96-b040-16316d13c252-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘The sociopolitical consequences of grownups liking teen media does seem like 
a very boring thing to worry about.’ Lorde in Hong Kong, 2014. Photograph: 
Vincent Yu/AP 
Although not quite as bad as being a little girl who likes My Little Pony in a 
world that for some reasontolerates the existence of Bronies 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-10-06/my-little-pony-attract-male-fans-known-as-bronies/5794106>
, it must be a bit weird that there aren’t many cultural products specifically 
for teens any more. Then again, maybe the teens don’t care. The sociopolitical 
consequences of grownups reading Harry Potter does seem like a very boring 
thing to worry about.

And maybe that’s the point: lots of adults tend to relate to teens as though 
they’re small adults with pimples and bad taste, who are wrong all the time. 
But they’re not. They are learning, and becoming, in a way that adults are not. 
The uniqueness of this experience is something that grown-ups have trouble 
dealing with, and we vacillate between treating teens like infants and treating 
them like criminals.

We appropriate and indulge in memories and themes of adolescence that matter 
to us, but react to accounts by and for teens with shock and disapproval. It’s 
not for adults to try and understand teens better, necessarily. Rather, we 
should render unto teens what is theirs, and go do our damn taxes.
 