
On Monday, Four Corners aired the shocking results of an investigation by 
Animals Australia <http://www.animalsaustralia.org/about/> into the sport of 
greyhound racing. The episode,Making a Killing 
<http://www.abc.net.au/4corners/stories/2015/02/16/4178920.htm>, features 
disturbing footage of a practice called live baiting, in which owners train 
their dogs by having them chase and maul small animals like rabbits, possums 
and piglets.

It’s an animal cruelty scandal of grand proportions. Live baiting is illegal 
in every state and territory in Australia 
<http://kb.rspca.org.au/Is-the-use-of-live-baits-and-lures-in-greyhound-racing-illegal_241.html>
, and 22 people alleged to have participated have been suspended by the 
greyhound racing industry’s regulator. Viewers were fierce in their 
condemnation.

This isn’t the first time Four Corners has reported on animal cruelty. In 
2011, their episode about live cattle export,A Bloody Business 
<http://www.abc.net.au/4corners/content/2011/s3228880.htm>, showed similarly 
gruesome footage of Australian cows being slaughtered in Indonesian abattoirs. 
As with Monday’s exposure of the greyhound racing industry, that investigation 
built on work by Animals Australia.

The two episodes share a similar format. The broadcast was built on footage of 
cattle being slaughtered in a way viewers would identify as inhumane. Those 
images – taken to be wrong in and of themselves – sparked such an intense 
outcry that the government suspended live exports for six months. Last year, 
several cattle farming operationsmounted a class action case against the 
Commonwealth 
<http://www.smh.com.au/national/government-sued-over-live-export-ban-20141027-11cl1r.html>
 over the validity of the ban.

As consumers in highly developed Western countries, we aren’t often confronted 
with graphic images of animals suffering, like those shown in Four Corners’ 
reports. Our relationship with “non-pet” animals is often quite abstract – we 
buy milk, meat and eggs from the supermarket, or put bets down on dogs and 
horses before they thunder around the track.


How animal products are produced – racing included – is totally divorced from 
the way we consume them; you don’t see dogs being bred and trained before you 
take a punt at the TAB, for instance. Thus, unsanitised depictions of abuse 
have become a valuable resource for animal rights activists. The footage in 
Four Corners’ greyhound report was provided byAnimal Liberation Queensland 
<http://alq.org.au/content/investigations-animal-liberation-queensland-and-animals-australia-expose-barbaric-training>
, whose website header features a still from the same reel.

As an activist tactic, stomach-turning images seem to work as you’d expect. 
The public, and especially those higher up the socioeconomic ladder, are easily 
offended by acts of killing and violence that they have priced themselves out 
of having to witness. There’s a clamour for something, anything to be done; 
politicians are forced to respond, consumer campaigns are born and often we all 
forget about it a few weeks later.

This sort of gruesome footage rarely receives a platform as large as Four 
Corners. It’s worth asking why that is.

While Animals Australia is a moderate organisation that intentionally 
distances itself 
<http://www.animalsaustralia.org/about/animals-australia-agenda.php#toc2> from 
more extreme animal rights groups, Animal Liberation Queenslandoutlines its 
vision as <http://alq.org.au/about-us>:

A world where all nonhuman animals live free from abuse, exploitation, and 
suffering. Speciesist attitudes are rejected by society and veganism is 
accepted as the norm.

Whether you accept or reject this vision isn’t really the point: Animal 
Liberation Queensland has a clear agenda, and its investigations are conducted 
in the service of that agenda. Animal Liberation Queensland is currentlyrunning 
a campaign against greyhound racing <http://alq.org.au/greyhound-racing>. Their 
position on the issue is:

ALQ is opposed to the use of greyhounds in racing because of significant 
animal welfare issues. [...] ALQ supports a ban on greyhound racing in 
Australia.

Their page about the Four Corners report 
<http://alq.org.au/content/abc-four-corners-reveal-gruesome-underbelly-greyhound-racing>
 is phrased as though the ABC is merely airing the results of ALQ’s own 
investigation:

On Monday night ABC Four Corners will air the results of ground-breaking 
investigations conducted by Animal Liberation Queensland and Animals Australia, 
into the greyhound racing industry.

ALQ aren’t journalists; their foremost concern is the success of their own 
campaigns. Animals Australia has its own petition againstlive baiting 
<http://www.animalsaustralia.org/take_action/petitions/live-baiting>. 

This should immediately raise questions: Did ALQ offer up their footage to 
Four Corners with no conditions? How were they involved in the production 
process? After the outrage that followed the cattle export broadcasts, perhaps 
the ABC should have foreshadowed these questions, but the broadcast on Monday 
didn’t address the group’s relationship with the ABC. I’ve contacted Four 
Corners for a response.

Most viewers had strong and entirely appropriate reactions to the program’s 
depiction of animal abuse – now the subject oftwo investigations by the 
Victorian government 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-02-17/greyhound-live-baiting-victorian-government-two-investigations/6124754>
. But it’s difficult to assess the value of reporting like this outside a more 
comprehensive discussion of our relationship with animals and the industries 
that use them.


For instance, Four Corners’ coverage of live exports didn’t ultimately halt 
exports 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-01-22/first-live-cattle-ship-to-indonesia-for-2015/6034124>
 to Indonesia, but during the freeze on trading the Department of Agriculture’s 
research body estimated around 375,000 head of cattle were stranded. One 
Coalition senatorclaimed 
<http://www.smh.com.au/environment/animals/export-ban-risks-starvation-on-an-unprecedented-scale-20110614-1g1d5.html>
 that would constitute an animal welfare disaster in and of itself. Was that 
assertion ever tested rigorously in the public sphere, as the potential outcome 
of policy drawn up on the hop? Never mind: many in the animal welfare movement 
argue that it’snot possible for live export to be conducted humanely 
<http://theconversation.com/the-live-export-of-animals-will-always-be-a-bloody-business-10547>
, full stop.

Back to Monday’s report, Greyhound authorities have issued statements 
condemning live baiting, and listing the measures they will use to prevent it. 
It’s likely that they will end up accepting more regulation, but the practice 
is already illegal: how much more can be done to prevent the status quo from 
reasserting itself? Already the authorities are painting the scandal as a stain 
on the industry, rather than a systemic problem, with the CEO of Greyhound 
Racing Victoriaissuing an internal memo 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-02-16/live-baiting-expose-to-rock-greyhound-industry/6109878>
 encouraging people to, “Be angry at those within the sport that are doing the 
wrong thing and undermining the values for which we stand.”

If the ABC is going to work with groups like Animal Liberation Queensland, 
they have a duty to frame their reports in a more nuanced way than: “Torturing 
piglets, yes or no?” Obviously the practice is reprehensible; that’s why 
activists use it to provoke short-term outrage and advance their political 
goals.

Where else should the ethical discussion go? Despite mentioning that many dogs 
suffer and die each yeareven when the sport is conducted within the rules 
<http://www.animalsaustralia.org/issues/greyhound-racing.php>, there were no 
questions raised about whether greyhound racing should be legal in the first 
place, or if it’s acceptable to harm animals in the service of entertainment. 
Grisly coverage of live baiting doesn’t mesh well with reasonable debate, but 
isn’t starting those conversations squarely within Four Corners’ remit?


What constitutes animal cruelty, and how we should treat animals in general, 
is a highly contested issue that doesn’t have many easy solutions. Live baiting 
is one of few animal ethics questions that has a clear-cut answer: yes, it’s 
wrong; yes, it should be illegal; and yes, anyone still doing it should be 
exposed and punished. We don’t really need to watch 45 minutes of Animal 
Liberation footage on the national broadcaster to know this. Does that serve 
the ABC’s viewers, the public debate, or the goals of activists?


Some of that time could have been better spent on discussion oriented toward a 
more long-term vision of animal welfare in Australia. Investigative journalism 
is meant to raise challenging questions, and alarm bells should ring when its 
goals and techniques overlap so neatly with activist campaigns intended to 
shock and convert.
 