
There’s been a lot of talk over the past couple of weeks about politicians 
needing to listen to the electorate. In reality, this has mostly meant that 
politicians need to listen to the concerns of white people – especially white 
working class males – as they were the ones who most voted for Donald Trump, 
and whom Bill Shorten and Malcolm Turnbull are now fighting for votes over the 
issue of 457 visas.

While I am not about to start playing a violin for the white male, 
working-class men are undoubtedly the ones who have suffered the greatest 
upheaval from our changing economy.

I grew up in country South Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/south-australia>, and while for me 
manual labour, or working in a factory, was never on the cards, I was certainly 
in the minority among my male classmates. For many, an apprenticeship or work 
on the family farm was the aim, and above all a full-time job was expected.

For young men, the situation is now not only greatly different to the one that 
greeted me when I finished high school in 1988, but it is also different from 
that experienced by those who turned 18 before the global financial crisis.

Christian Porter: Australia has no jobs shortage as care sector is booming
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/18/christian-porter-australia-has-no-jobs-shortage-and-care-sector-is-booming>
When I was in year 12, the situation for men was pretty good. In South 
Australia at that time, about 43% of all those employed were in the “blokey” 
industries of agriculture, manufacturing, construction, electricity, wholesale 
trade, and transport and warehousing; now this is just 30%.

And it is not because the other industries have grown faster (although they 
have) – the actual work in the traditionally male areas has shrunk.

In 1988, in South Australia, about 265,000 people were employed in those six 
male-dominated industries; now there are just 245,000 people so employed. By 
contrast, employment in other industries has grown in the state from 356,000 to 
563,000.

And the issue isn’t just limited to that long time frame. 

In the past five years, the number of people employed in South Australia in 
the “blokey” industries has fallen by 12%, while it has risen by 10% in the 
other sectors.

The picture is replicated around the nation – but South Australia, with its 
very rust-belt economy, is at the epicentre of the change.

Consider that when I left school, 63% of adult men in South Australia worked 
full-time; now this has dropped to 49%. It is not as though the slack has been 
taken up by women – in 1988, 25% of adult women in South Australia worked 
full-time, now this is just 26%.

Again, even in the past decade the shift has been astonishing. Since October 
2008, the percentage of men in South Australia working full-time has fallen 
from 57% – a decline equivalent to about 57,000 full-time jobs – while in the 
same period there has been virtually no change for women.

So it’s not surprising that when Shorten talks of protecting “Australia jobs”, 
he is very much talking about men – and jobs in industries such as carpentruy 
and construction welding.

But while undoubtedly such workers are the victims of the shift to a services 
economy, increased open trade and the massive rise in automation, that doesn’t 
mean listening to and acting on their concerns should allow politicians to be 
uncaring of the lives of others.

Shorten needs to thread the needle of being alert to the concerns of such 
workers, while also not giving succour to the racists looking to follow the 
Brexit/Trump narrative of blaming the plight of the working class on foreigners 
and migrants – whether temporary or permanent.

The problem with 457 visas is that while skilled migrant labour is undoubtedly 
necessary for some occupations in certain regions – especially rural areas – 
and also leads to great benefits for our community, there are numerous problems 
with the program.

Revealed: the systemic exploitation of migrant workers in Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/29/revealed-the-systemic-exploitation-of-migrant-workers-in-australia>
The requirement to advertise locally is absurd – an unpaid advert on Facebook 
will suffice – and unquestionably there is rorting going on. The Fair Work 
Commission suggestedlast year 
<http://www.smh.com.au/national/one-in-five-migrant-workers-on-457-visas-could-be-underpaid-or-incorrectly-employed-20150529-ghcmxr.html>
 that about 20% of workers on 457 visas were underpaid or employed in jobs they 
were not meant to be doing.

That is a massive failure of a government program – were it a program 
involving a union, the government and conservative media would be screaming for 
another royal commission!

And yet it is very difficult to talk of 457 visas without the calls of 
xenophobia to come hurling down – especially when politicians turn their talk 
from worker exploitation to blaming the other side for being the one that 
brought in more foreign workers.

It mimics the issue of asylum seekers, where vilification of people smugglers 
takes no time at all to turn into attacking asylum seekers themselves.

And as the Trump and Brexit victories have shown, we need to be extremely 
mindful of racist and xenophobic rhetoric – not because of the result of those 
elections, butthe hate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/hate-crime-spike-us-donald-trump-president>
such talk can unleash 
<http://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/hate-on-the-rise-after-trumps-election>
.

What is allowed to be accepted political discourse needs to be watched very 
carefully.

Australia is paying for Malcolm Fraser's immigration mistakes, says Peter 
Dutton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/18/australia-paying-for-immigration-mistakes-made-by-malcolm-fraser-says-peter-dutton>
Already here we have seen an enormous slippage into barely disguised racism. 

This week, the minister for immigration, Peter Dutton, suggested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/18/australia-paying-for-immigration-mistakes-made-by-malcolm-fraser-says-peter-dutton?CMP=Share_AndroidApp_Tweet>
 in an interview with Andrew Bolt that Australia’s migration program of the 
1970s under Malcolm Fraser, under which refugees arrived from places such as 
Lebanon, was a mistake linked with foreign fighters travelling to the Middle 
East.

That is an astonishing stance for an immigration minister to take, given the 
foundation of this country as a multicultural society – one that should have 
been immediately condemned by the prime minister.

As Henry Sherrell, a research officer at Development Policy Centre at the 
Australian National University,has pointed out 
<https://henrysherrell.wordpress.com/2016/11/18/a-contrast-in-styles-malcolm-turnbull-and-peter-dutton/>
, Dutton’s position is in sharp contrast to that of Malcolm Turnbull, who just 
last year said “multicultural Australia is a remarkable achievement and we 
should treasure it and hold it dear”.

There is nothing wrong with arguing against worker exploitation and for the 
cause of Australian workers. But now, perhaps more than at any time in recent 
memory, it is vital that all sides of politics are wary that their rhetoric 
does not fan the flames of racism and hatred.
 