
A regional solution for refugees. That was the liberal sweetener in the 
“expert panel” report of 2012, a document that endorsed the deterrent of 
offshore processing. Duly fortified against her left flank (one of the 
“experts” was Paris Aristotle, a well-respected “refugee advocate”), then prime 
minister Julia Gillard declared 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/gillard-backs-experts-asylum-seeker-report-20120813-24417.html>
 her government would “move urgently to restart offshore processing on Manus 
Island and Nauru”.

Last week, the Papua New Guinea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/papua-new-guinea> police opened fire with 
automatic weapons on university students marching against corruption. That 
shocking manifestation of overt authoritarianism by Australia’s key partner in 
offshore detention provides a glimpse of what refugee politics has meant for 
the region four years down the track.

In July 2013, PNG’s prime minister, Peter O’Neill, stood next to Kevin Rudd 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2013-07-19/manus-island-detention-centre-to-be-expanded-under-rudd27s-asy/4830778>
 in Brisbane as the Australian government announced its so-called PNG Solution. 
Henceforth, Rudd explained, asylum seekers would not only be processed on Manus 
Island, they would also (if assessed as refugees) be settled in PNG.

Australian election 2016: Bill Shorten accuses NBN chief of 'shameful breach' 
– politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/jun/15/australian-election-2016-bill-shorten-accused-of-endangering-constitutional-recognition-politics-live>
According to the PNG supreme court, the deal was, right from the start, 
entirely unconstitutional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/26/papua-new-guinea-court-rules-detention-asylum-seekers-manus-unconstitutional>
. Nowhere else in the world, said PNG MP Belden Namah 
<http://news.pngfacts.com/2016/05/namah-calls-on-immediate-closure-of.html#ixzz4BPMJ9kn3>
, would a politician have “amended the constitution to accommodate another 
foreign country’s domestic policy interest.”

But, of course, few other countries in the world (other than Nauru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nauru>, of which more later) relate to 
Australia in the way that PNG does. PNG was once an Australian colony – “one of 
the last places in the world where white settler colonialism was advocated as 
colonial policy,” as John Connell explains in his Papua New Guinea: The 
Struggle for Development.

Self-government came in 1973 and independence in 1975. The relative lateness 
of the process left PNG with particularly acute versions of the ills endemic in 
post-colonial societies, including widespread poverty, economic 
underdevelopment, weak civil institutions and an ongoing dependence on the 
former colonial power.

The “PNG Solution” was made possible by those problems, even as it worsens 
them.

In its report for 2015, Human Rights Watch lists 
<https://www.hrw.org/world-report/2015/country-chapters/papua-new-guinea> the 
financial inducements offered by the Australian government to make the Manus 
Island deal happen.

“Australia remains [PNG]’s most important international partner,” it explains, 
“providing an estimated US$460m in development assistance for 2013-2014. 
Australia provided an additional $556.7m this financial year to support the 
Manus Island detention center.”

Jason Sharman has warned that Canberra has privileged the ... detention centre 
over the fight against corruption

But O’Neill also possessed his own reasons for signing up.

In 2011, the PNG supreme court ordered him to stand down in favour of Michael 
Somare, an order with which he simply refused to comply. The agreement with 
Australia, the regional power, thus provided him with international legitimacy. 
By promising to deliver refugee resettlement (a plan that was, right from the 
outset, unpopular in PNG, O’Neill made himself indispensible to Canberra, on 
the basis of the “he-might-be-a-son-of-a-bitch-but-he’s-our-son-of-a-bitch” 
principle so beloved of US presidents).

There was no secret about what that meant. A few days after shaking Rudd’s 
hand, O’Neillboasted 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/oneill-brags-of-closer-grip-on-aid-after-refugee-deal-20130722-2qevs.html>
 that he’d achieved what he called “a realignment” of Australian aid in PNG.

Since then, Professor Jason Sharman, a money laundering expert at Griffith 
University, hasrepeatedly warned 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/news/dateline/story/dirty-money-how-corrupt-png-cash-reaching-australia>
 that Canberra has privileged the maintenance of the detention centre over the 
fight against corruption.

“The government sends signals,” he told the Guardian, “often reflecting media 
attention, as to what it wants investigated. Various people have flagged PNG 
corruption proceeds in Australia as a problem, not least elements of the PNG 
government and law enforcement as well as the AFP and Austrac, but the 
Australian government under both Labor and the Coalition has chosen not to 
investigate, and recently Manus has been a big reason for inaction.”

That’s the backdrop to the recent student protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/08/papua-new-guinea-police-shoot-at-students-during-march>
.

Two years ago, anti-corruption police issued a warrant to arrest the prime 
minister over a million-dollar fraud involving the company Paraka Lawyers. 
O’Neill responded by disbanding the corruption taskforce and installing his own 
handpicked police chief.

The student demonstration was part of an anti-corruption campaign, seeking to 
force O’Neill to comply with basic democratic principles.

But the vicious brutality of the PNG police has a context, too – and, again, 
the links to Australia are telling.

The Manus Island deal entailed a contingent of Australian Federal Police 
officers training the Royal PNG Constabulary (RPNGC). In late 2015,an AFP 
whistleblower 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-11-24/australian-government-accused-of-ignoring-png-human-rights-abuse/6967754>
 told the ABC that the Australian government was turning a blind eye to the 
corruption and police involvement in extra-judicial killings, for fear that the 
detention centre might be closed.

“The RPNGC were essentially murdering people, raping people, burning villages 
down,” he said. He’d seen local police commit horrific crimes, he explained, 
but his reports had been ignored by his superiors.

“What we soon noticed was that anything that painted the government of PNG 
with corruption, or the RPNGC with their brutality, murder and rape was being 
sanitised,” he said. The AFP said it had reviewed reports from the officer and 
hadn’t found any matters requiring further action.

It’s not simply that successive Australian governments, keen to keep the Manus 
deal alive, do not want to antagonise the PNG government. It’s worse than that.

In the final analysis, the Australian facility on Manus Island relies on 
coercion to keep asylum seekers detained. That’s why, ever since it opened, it 
has built a relationship with the most notorious of the PNG police units.

In 2013, for instance, Rory Callinan reported 
<http://www.theage.com.au/victoria/australia-funds-lethal-brute-squad-20130803-2r6g1.html#ixzz4BPyQ8i5K>
:

Papua New Guinea’s most thuggish paramilitary police unit – allegedly 
responsible for rapes, murders and other serious human rights abuses – is being 
discreetly funded by the Australian Immigration Department to secure the Manus 
Island asylum seeker detention centre. The ‘Mobile Squad’ officers, who just 
last month beat a local man to death on the island, are receiving a special 
living-away allowance of about $100 a day from funding provided by the 
department.

In February 2014, when detainees began to protest, the Mobile Squad played an 
important role in quelling the demonstration.As Human Rights Watch explains 
<https://www.hrw.org/world-report/2015/country-chapters/papua-new-guinea>:

During the incident, many detainees sustained injuries and one detainee was 
beaten to death. Police allegedly entered firing their guns when violence broke 
out inside the facility.

This is not an anomaly. Rather, it’s an illustration of how an Australian 
program that’s only possible because of the weaknesses of a post-colonial 
society continues to exacerbate those weaknesses.

Think, for instance, of the secrecy endemic in the refugee policy. On Tuesday, 
Mathias Cormann boasted thatbarring journalists from the detention centres was 
a necessary element of the program’s success 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/14/keeping-journalists-out-of-detention-centres-helps-stop-asylum-boats-mathias-cormann-bill-shorten-election>
. What effect does that have on a country like PNG where,as Freedom House says 
<https://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-press/2015/papua-new-guinea>, press 
freedom has been eroding in recent years?

Or what about the rule of the law? After the supreme court ruled the detention 
centre to be illegal, O’Neill agreed that it should be closed – a welcome 
adherence to the separation of powers by a politician with a dubious record of 
obeying such rulings. But, as Daniel Flittonrecently wrote 
<http://www.smh.com.au/world/png-explainer-the-student-uprising-on-australias-doorstep-20160609-gpf0z3.html>
, “the Turnbull government looks to have persuaded PNG to keep the camp open 
until after the Australian election”.

In other words, in the context of the struggle taking place between students 
risking their lives to uphold democratic principles and a regime willing to 
flout the courts, the Turnbull government has … “persuaded” PNG to delay 
implementation of a supreme court ruling.

After the shootings in Port Moresby, the detainees on Manus Island penned an 
open letter to pro-democracy activists.

They said. <http://www.refugeeaction.org.au/?p=5129> 

We are very aware of the corruption issues in PNG. Billions of dollars have 
been given to the PNG government by Australia to run the Manus detention 
centre. That money has not been used for the people of Manus or PNG, but has 
been used to deny our liberty and keep refugees illegally imprisoned. We have a 
common fight against corrupt government in PNG and Australia, and a common 
fight for freedom from tyranny.

But that commonality could be extended further, for the parallels between 
what’s happening in PNG and what’s happening in Nauru are striking.

In the same way as Rudd’s “PNG Solution” depended on (and then aggravated) the 
weaknesses of post-colonial PNG, John Howard’s “Pacific Solution” targeted 
Nauru as a former Australian colony, independent only since 1968.Nic Maclellan 
has written at length 
<https://overland.org.au/previous-issues/issue-212/feature-nic-maclellan/> of 
the damage the detention centre’s arrival wreaked on an already impoverished 
society. He writes:

An influx of Australian officials into government positions in Nauru has been 
accompanied by a neoliberal agenda of privatisation. This has shifted the 
burden for government failure onto the Nauruan community, even as hundreds of 
millions of dollars are splurged on Australian companies that manage the 
detention camps. Over more than a decade, these policies have transformed 
Nauru’s financial status, increasing its dependency on Australian aid.”

Today, Nauru is a dysfunctional, authoritarian state. Since 2013, the 
government removed key members of the judiciary and then banned them from 
re-entering the country. Last year, the criminal code was amended to make 
expressions of “political hatred” – a term so nebulous as to include almost 
anything to which the government objects – a crime punishable by seven years 
jail.

According to Stewart Firth from the ANU <http://presidential-power.com/?p=4907>
, “Justice Minister David Adeang … has seized the opportunity created by 
Australia’s dependence on his country to amass power and suppress dissent, 
secure in the knowledge that Canberra will offer little criticism.”

Again, though, one might go further. Canberra is not simply turning a blind 
eye: by prioritising the detention centre, it’s actively pushing Nauru away 
from democracy. Conscious of the Australian government’s hostility to 
journalists investigating its offshore camps, the Nauru regime now levels 
hugely expensive visas on journalists seeking to visit (a fee of US$5,000, 
non-refundable if the request’s denied – which it often is).

Cruelty to asylum seekers dressed up as compassion is the scandal that 
bedevils Australia | Antony Loewenstein
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/27/cruelty-to-asylum-seekers-dressed-up-as-compassion-is-the-scandal-that-bedevils-australia>
The policy’s obviously driven by Australian priorities but it has equally 
obvious consequences for domestic politics on the island. The same might be 
said of Nauru’s ban on Facebook: on the one hand, a sop to the Australian 
government (which loathes detainees communicating with activists); on the 
other, a way of inhibiting opposition activity within Nauru itself.

Because of the detention centres, the effects of Australian refugee policy are 
most evident on PNG and Nauru. But the ramifications are also visible in less 
dramatic form elsewhere.

As Phil Robertson from Human Rights Watch argues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/17/eroding-human-rights-in-australian-foreign-policy-one-asylum-seeker-at-a-time>
:

Australia is rarely pushing for rights-respecting solutions these days – and 
more than that, is too often part of the problem. Politicians trapped in the 
refugee policy dialogue in Canberra frequently fail to recognise that 
Australia’s boat push-back policies, and offshoring asylum seekers into abusive 
conditions of detention in Nauru and on Manus Island, are seen as a green-light 
by Asian governments to do the same …

By soliciting governments to help stop boats, Australia also ends up looking 
the other way on other rights abuses. By cooperating with Australia to take 
back boats of their nationals, both Sri Lanka and Vietnam know they could count 
on Australia not to publicly raise concerns about the rights abuses that drove 
those people into the boats in the first place.

Push backs by other countries are also met with silent acquiescence from 
Canberra. Australia said nothing when Thailand sent back 109 ethnic Uighurs in 
July to China to face torture in custody and long prison terms, and has kept 
silent as Beijing pursues its dissidents in Bangkok. China arrests and sends 
fleeing North Koreans back to the brutal regime of dictator Kim Jong-Un, and is 
met by deafening silence from down under.

Within Australia, debate about refugee policy generally focuses on the 
domestic political implications. But we’re going to be dealing for decades with 
the regional consequences of a “regional solution” developed by years of 
bipartisan policy – the connivance at horrific abuses throughout theAsia Pacific
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/asia-pacific> region.
 