
Stop shouting. Our purpose here is not to defend the schmoozing with big 
business, the crushed liberties, still less the loss of hundreds of thousands 
of Iraqi lives. Nor for that matter are we concerned with the record NHS 
funding and the three election victories to which the former prime minister's 
admirers point with justified pride. There are already too many whole books 
dedicated to pushing one view or another of the Blair record. What gets less 
attention is the curious and enduringfascination of Blair the character 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/today/hi/today/newsid_9614000/9614281.stm> – whether in 
real life, fiction or film. Michael Sheen's Tony Blair inThe Queen 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0436697/> (one of his three turns in the role) was 
the making of that blockbuster, and – like it or loathe it – the real man'sA 
Journey <http://www.tonyblairjourney.co.uk/> is a page-turning read in a way 
that few memoirs are. Its draw is less the events described, seismic as they 
are, but the hope of making sense of the chatty, charming and enraging 
chameleon that we all came to know so well, without ever quite understanding. 
Now the 80s Comic Strip team is reassembling to bring youThe Hunt for Tony Blair
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qZAZboz8reI>, which shows on Channel 4 
tonight. One of their number, Nigel Planer, who plays Peter Mandelson,told the 
BBC <http://news.bbc.co.uk/today/hi/today/newsid_9614000/9614281.stm> that 
Blair was Shakespearean in the Henry V sense that "huge stories can be hung on 
him". One ripping yarn wrapped around him was Robert Harris's The Ghost, a 
pacey thriller in which all manner of twists reveal the many mysteries of 
power. The greatest of the lot is exposed only at the end: namely, what it is 
that makes Tony tick.
 