
Receiving a literary prize in Berlin two days after Donald Trump’s election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/how-trump-won-us-election>, 
Zadie Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/books/zadiesmith> reflected ruefully 
that it is hard to find happiness in the face of immense political setbacks. 
“These are the darkest political times I have ever known,” Smith observed in 
her acceptance speech –republished this month 
<https://www.nybooks.com/articles/2016/12/22/on-optimism-and-despair/> in the 
New York Review of Books. As “President Trump rises in the west, a united 
Europe drops below the horizon”.

Does the left have a future? | John Harris
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/06/does-the-left-have-a-future> 
Much of the loudest talk Smith hears is of longing for the past, of present 
failure and future despair. The change has marked her own recent work, she 
admits. “My novels were once sunnier places and now the clouds have rolled in.”

These are grim and demoralising days for liberals and progressives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/20/lessons-liberals-brexit-trumpquake-demagogues-rules-electoral-politics>
 of every stripe. The miasma of historical failure keeps seeping under our 
doors like the fog at the beginning ofBleak House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/sep/23/charles-dickens-favourite-bleak-house>
.

The causes we believed in are foundering or have already foundered. People who 
once carried our hopes have increasingly embraced other causes. The parties and 
movements we identified with have lost or seem doomed to irrelevance. Defeat is 
becoming a habit. The victors are triumphant and mock us. The losers bicker and 
are resentful. The future may be darker still. We worry about the world our 
grandchildren will inherit.

How to respond? The first thing is to think rationally, while the second is to 
recognise that we have been here before. The history of dashed hopes is as long 
as human history itself. Our era has no monopoly of despair. So this is not the 
end but in all probability a hiatus, though of what length no one can say.

In spite of Brexit, most people in Britain still have fairly centrist views, 
understandable worries about their lives, and seek rational solutions to the 
nation’s problems. As this week’s events in thesupreme court  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/dec/08/brexit-article-50-supreme-court-hearing-day-four-live-updates>
and in parliament have shown, Brexit is unlikely to happen the way thatTheresa 
May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/theresa-may-calls-for-red-white-and-blue-brexit>
 or the Daily Mail want it to happen. Trump will not get his way on every 
front, and he will not be president for ever.

The history of dashed hopes is as long as human history itself. Our era has no 
monopoly of despair

Ours is not the first or the last generation to lose faith. The English 
Marxist historianChristopher Hill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/feb/26/guardianobituaries.obituaries> 
once wrote a book whose title and content seem expressively relevant again. The 
Experience of Defeat traced the way that the generation of John Milton and 
Thomas Hobbes absorbed the failure of the English republic of the 1650s and the 
restoration of the Stuart kings in 1660. Some kept going. Others gave up. Few 
forgot. Hobbes refined his ideas about chaos and authority. Milton wrote 
Paradise Lost.

Our generation should reflect on its own experience of defeat, too. But it is 
important not to exaggerate, because to do so is to lose touch with reality and 
the capacity to reason. The world faces real dangers fromnuclear weapons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/11/donald-trump-nuclear-weapons-foreign-policy-north-korea-iran-russia>
,global warming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/jun/23/97-global-warming-consensus-paper-surpasses-half-a-million-downloads>
 and fundamentalist terrorism. Yet most people living today lead longer, more 
rewarded and more secure lives than their parents or grandparents did.

Even in Europe and the developed world, where there are genuine problems of 
decline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/06/populist-right-trump-farage-le-pen-economic-crisis>
, which have helped to generate Brexit and Trump, this is not the end of days. 
We still, for the moment, have peace not war; most lives have a measure of 
material security that was unthinkable a century ago; the rule of law is a 
reality, and civic equality is respected. The good things about even Brexit 
Britain are still real, even though the inequality is outrageous and the 
direction of travel a historic disaster. Politics isn’t everything.

We should face the fact that there is no perfectability in human affairs, 
Smith insists in her lecture, so we have to have the strength to accept that 
things will often go wrong, often painfully, and occasionally amid mass horror.

“No land is free of it,” she says. “No people are without their bloodstain; no 
tribe entirely innocent.” Britain and America are two countries that struggle 
with denial about this. But as Hobbes saw four centuries ago, human history is 
recurrently unstable and dangerous. Absolute rectitude is an illusion, the rule 
of saints a pipe dream.

That’s surely a lesson that people who think of themselves as being on the 
left should have learned by now. Whether they have is hard to say. The answer 
to our problems is not to sweep everything aside and start again.

The left is as prone as the right to the nostalgia that Smith calls “a wistful 
form of time travel”, romanticising the revolutionaries of the past – however 
noble many of their ideals, heroic some of their deeds, or intoxicatingly 
exciting the times in which they lived. TheParis Commune 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/aug/01/paris-commune-1871> may 
have been the embodiment of the dictatorship of the proletariat, as Lenin 
excitably argued, but it was a slaughter in the end.

The story of the Russian revolution: from the archive, 16 March 1917
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/16/russian-revolution-uprising-archive-1917>
Next year, the centenary of the Russian revolution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/16/russian-revolution-uprising-archive-1917>
, of Lenin’s revolution, will be an interesting test of our capacity for 
historical and imaginative wisdom. The most important political lesson of my 
lifetime still feels to me to be thefall of the Soviet Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2014/jul/14/soviet-union-collapse-in-pictures>
. The society established in the wake of the 1917 revolution was, in the end, a 
disaster.

It fell for two reasons that no one on the left, even the gradualists and the 
Trotskyists who disowned it, can ignore. The first was that it didn’t work. The 
second was that people hated it. It would be hard to think of a more conclusive 
verdict. This can’t all just be brushed aside by wishingClement Attlee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/from-the-archive-blog/2013/apr/17/attlee-funeral-1967-thatcher>
 had been in charge of Russia rather than Stalin.

There is only incremental progress, Smith says, not apocalyptic advance. 
Increments mean a readiness to compromise in order to stay in the historical 
game, not flouncing off the field to watch and carp from the grandstand when 
bad stuff happens.

If history teaches us anything it is that we will never be perfect, that human 
nature will not change as much as some think, but that humans can nevertheless 
do things that make a difference and on which we can look with pride.

In any human activity, from politics to football, the experience of defeat 
dictates a need for both action and reflection. But reflection does not mean 
despair. It can mean inspiration and confidence too.

Smith ends her lecture with a rich metaphor about music, in which she says 
that human societies are like complex musical scores from which melodies and 
harmonies can be teased out. At the moment, she says, the human orchestra is 
playing “only the meanest and most banal melodies”. Listening this week in 
London to the pianistIgor Levit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/10/igor-levit-review-beethoven-wigmore-hall-london>
, a keyboard master and a man of the progressive left, playing Beethoven with 
fierce but controlled fire, it seemed obvious that there is plenty of good 
music still to be written and played.
 