
Voting no to independence is critical to the future of the health service in 
Scotland,Alistair Darling <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alistairdarling>
 has said, in a direct challenge to one of the yes campaign's most successful 
arguments with voters.

The leader of the pro-union Better Together campaign said new powers for the 
Scottish parliament, which would be set in train the day after a no vote, would 
result in a stronger, more secure health service. Those powers would enable 
Holyrood to raise extra money to spend on theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> as well as borrow more to build 
hospitals and facilities for the elderly.

Speaking on BBC Radio Scotland, Darling attacked what has been one of the main 
planks of the pro-independence campaign in recent weeks, that a yes vote is the 
only way the protect the NHS inScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> from Westminster's cuts and 
privatisation.

Referring to confidential papers passed to the BBC which suggest the NHS in 
Scotland is facing a funding gap of more than Â£400m and that sweeping cuts will 
be needed for health boards to break even, Darling said: "Today we learned that 
[Scottish National party leader and deputy]Alex Salmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alexsalmond> and Nicola Sturgeon have 
been deceiving us. I find that quite appalling.

"After all these scare stories [about privatisation] they've known that these 
cuts are coming along, but we weren't going to be told about it until after the 
polls had closed," he told the Good Morning Scotland show.

The papers were passed to the BBC by a senior NHS whistleblower, who said they 
had become frustrated by claims from the yes campaign that the greatest threat 
to the NHS came from the UK government.

Darling was speaking after the leaders of the UK's three main political parties
signed a pledge to give more powers to Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/sep/16/cameron-miliband-clegg-pledge-daily-record>
 if it rejects independence. The prime minister, David Cameron, his deputy, 
Nick Clegg, and the Labour leader, Ed Miliband, signed a letter that appeared 
on the front page of Tuesday's Daily Record newspaper. The letter also 
guaranteed the continuation of the Barnett funding formula.

Asked if it was possible to trust the pledge when Westminster priorities could 
change after the next general election, and in particular if Clegg could be 
believed after his U-turn on his university tuition fees pledge, Darling said 
the same arguments were made in 1997 around the formation of the Scottish 
parliament and had proved to be without foundation.

Speaking on the same programme, Salmond said it was "absolutely untrue" that 
there would be cuts to the NHS budget in Scotland, describing Darling's 
argument as "totally mythical, totally made up and meant to misrepresent the 
situation".

Asked directly about the cuts suggested in the leaked papers, Salmond insisted 
that the figures referred to efficiency savings that would be ploughed back 
into the health service.

"This paper makes the point that we've been making throughout the campaign. 
Unless we control the overall finances of the health service we'll be left with 
the invidious position that even increasing health service spending in real 
terms, we're faced with this appalling choice of having to increase taxation to 
fund the health service instead of making a real choice not to waste billions 
on nuclear weapons."

He said a yes vote would mean Scotland would control its own finances "to 
enable us to protect our health service not only in real terms but meet these 
funding pressures for the future".

Last week the Institute for Fiscal Studies published an analysis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/sep/11/scotland-nhs-not-better-independence-institute-fiscal-studies>
 which revealed that the Scottish government was planning to make cuts in 
health spending even though NHS budgets were rising in England. It showed 
planned cuts of 1.2% in Scotland in 2015-16, compared with an increase of 4.4% 
in England, despite overall public spending cuts of 13%.
 