
An independent unionist member of the Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> assembly has emerged as the 
political figure who can save the two-week-old power-sharing coalition in 
Belfast from collapse.

Claire Sugden, who represents East Londonderry in the Northern Irish 
parliament, said she has held talks with the first minister and Democratic 
Unionist leader,Arlene Foster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/07/arlene-foster-northern-ireland-assembly-election-dup-stormont>
, and the deputy first minister,Martin McGuinness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/martin-mcguinness>, of Sinn Féin, about 
the running of the justice ministry.

Arlene Foster hails DUP's performance in Northern Ireland assembly election
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/07/arlene-foster-northern-ireland-assembly-election-dup-stormont>
The role of heading the contentious department remains unfilled after the 
outgoing justice minister, David Ford, and his Alliance party said they would 
not be participating in the new devolved government.

Sinn Féin <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein> and the DUP have 
been left alone to govern after the Alliance, the Social Democratic and Labour 
party, and the Ulster Unionists moved to the opposition benches at Stormont.

Neither Sinn Féin nor the DUP are keen to take up the ministry for fear of 
being accused of bias towards one community in the administration of justice.

While no firm offer has been made to the independent member of the legislative 
assembly, Sugden said: “They simply asked me how I felt about things. If an 
offer is made I will consider it. I have no wish list. I will do what I think 
is the right thing for my constituents.”

If Sugden turned down any offer it would create a crisis for the power-sharing 
executive, with the Northern Ireland secretary,Theresa Villiers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresa-villiers>, saying it might 
trigger a fresh election.

Simon Hamilton, the DUP’s former finance minister at Stormont, has stated he 
is still confident the first and deputy first minister will find a justice 
minister by Wednesday.

“We are so confident that we have asked the business committee to convene the 
assembly next week and we will have an executive that will include a justice 
minister formed,” he said

On Thursday night the SDLP <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sdlp> took 
the surprise decision to join the Ulster Unionists in opposition. Both parties 
had served in the last five-party coalition at Stormont.

The SDLP leader, Colum Eastwood, said the plans the DUP and Sinn Féin had for 
the government were not acceptable.

“After a long two weeks, despite our best efforts, it has become clear that 
our ambition for a full programme for government will not be matched by the 
document currently constructed by the DUP and Sinn Féin.


“It is clear that the DUP and Sinn Féin are determined to put forward a 
framework that includes no action, that there is nothing they can be held 
accountable for or to,” Eastwood said.

The SDLP move is a radical move away from the mandatory coalition politics 
that followed the1998 Good Friday agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/1998/apr/12/northernireland1>. The historic 
peace accord eventually led to cross-community power-sharing with both 
unionists and nationalists governing on a mandatory basis, carving up 
ministries on a communal basis. This led to criticism that the Stormont 
parliament lacked any strong opposition to hold the power-sharing executive to 
account.

Both McGuinness and Foster said they were unconcerned by the SDLP’s move into 
opposition. The pair have also approached the Green party’s Stephen Agnew to 
consider the justice portfolio. Agnew has said taking up the post would be 
“problematic” for the Greens.

 