
Gloucester are juggling fitness and personnel issues ahead of Saturday's EDF 
Energy Cup final againstCardiff Blues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cardiffblues>, with the England centre Mike 
Tindall and the Scotland flanker Alastair Strokosch both struggling with 
injuries. The Cherry and Whites are bracing themselves for three fixtures in 
the space of eight days which will define their inconsistent season.

Strokosch, theoretically a contender for the Lions tour, is having 
neurological tests and is unlikely to play again this season after suffering 
recurring "stingers" in his arms and shoulders. A late call will be made on 
Tindall's injured knee ligaments but Dean Ryan, Gloucester's head coach, is 
confident that James Simpson-Daniel and Luke Narraway will be fit to face the 
Blues.

Ryan would dearly love to field Tindall as well. "We've never played in a 
final with him," the coach said. "He's hugely influential for us, a key 
decision-maker, and we'll give him as long as possible." However, he is acutely 
conscious thatGloucester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby> 
also need to win both their final two league games, next week against Worcester 
and Wasps, to qualify for the Premiership play-offs.

"If somebody breaks on Saturday because we're pushing them too quickly we're 
struggling for the whole week," Ryan admitted. "Next week is going to be very 
difficult for us. They shouldn't be playing midweek games, it's contrary to 
everything they set out to do with the EPS [Elite Players Squad] agreement. 
Anyone who ends up playing in all three games will deserve medals at the end of 
it."

Ryan also insisted the club would not officially confirm the growing list of 
player departures from Kingsholm – an increasingly open secret in several cases 
– until later this month. The Italian forward Carlos Nieto is among those 
saying farewell, Saracens having confirmed the 31-year-old prop will be playing 
for them next season.
 