
To explain Jimmy Savile's crimes as evil or wicked misses the mark. The 
important lesson is that he was deeply disturbed, as well as disturbing. Some 
of the psychology behind his abusive behaviour – which wasset out in more, 
shocking detail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jun/26/jimmy-savile-sexual-abuse-timeline>
 today – can be pieced together from its pattern. Many of the assaults were 
without warning. He would suddenly place his hand somewhere he should not, 
plant his mouth on unsuspecting lips. Frequently this was done in public 
places. The root of such intrusion isprojection 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Psychological_projection>.

It is a mechanism we all may use when we have an uncomfortable feeling to get 
rid of. We sometimes employ each other as emotional dustbins: you are feeling 
depressed or angry and without thinking about it, you do something to make 
someone else feel those things. To understand what Savile was feeling when he 
groped in public, hear how his victims felt – humiliated, powerless, 
frightened, finally angry. Those will have been the emotions he lived with and, 
more or less, urgently needed to extrude.

In many cases sexual arousal seems to have been almost incidental, with no 
attempt to achieve orgasm. There does not seem to have been a single instance 
of Savile displaying true affection, or a wish to give pleasure: in his life he 
had no sustained, loving relationships.

On the occasions when he achieved orgasm through penetration, or by compelling 
his victims to fellate him, they report him as having immediately lost interest 
once he had ejaculated. They might as well have been inanimate objects. This 
would be consistent with Savile having had a high degree of dissociation – 
feeling at one remove from events, a detachment. In accord with that, he must 
have had several different selves, enabling him to flit between roles, from 
charity worker to famous DJ to abuser, and quickly back to non-abuser.

He had what is known as the dark triad of personality characteristics 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dark_triad>: psychopathy, Machiavellianism and 
narcissism. These are common in famous or powerful people, and part of that mix 
is a strong likelihood of sexual promiscuity. Such people often are able to 
slide effortlessly between personas. They are usually impulsive stimulus 
seekers, easily attracted to substance abuse, risky sex and gambling. Savile 
must have had a fantastical inner life – grandiose, wild and desperate. While 
his main predilection was for girls and young women, he sometimes ranged from 
five to 75-year-olds of both sexes and, it seems,may have engaged in necrophilia
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jun/26/savile-bodies-sex-acts-corpses-glass-eyes-mortuary>
.

He created safe environments in which he could act at will. His experiments 
beyond young females may have been because the buzz from them had worn off 
through repetition and he sought more extreme kicks. Given that inflicting 
distress was his primary goal, the gender and age of a victim might not matter.

We do not know whether Savile was abused as a child. The only clear fact is 
that he had a very intense enmeshment with his mother, seeing all other women 
as mere vehicles for his distress, marriage unthinkable. We also know he had a 
semi-psychotic relationship with his mother after she died, perhaps believing 
that he could communicate with her.

Most probably the dissociated position from which he abused – a 
coldheartlessness – resulted from a lack of responsiveness from his mother in 
the early years. Studies suggest thatearly care which is not responsive to the 
child's needs, or overcontrolling, significantly increases the risk 
<http://journals.cambridge.org/action/displayAbstract?fromPage=online&aid=43511&fileId=S0954579497001478>
. Dissociation can also be caused byemotional abuse (being demeaned and harshly 
criticised), as well as the physical or sexual varieties 
<http://journals.cambridge.org/action/displayAbstract?fromPage=online&aid=8521562&fileId=S0033291711001826>
.

Man hands on misery to man. Since abuse, rather than genes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/feb/18/psychologist-robert-plomin-says-genes-crucial-education>
, is now clearly emerging asthe principal cause of both personality disorders 
and psychoses (like schizophrenia) 
<http://schizophreniabulletin.oxfordjournals.org/content/38/4/661.short>, it is 
all too possible that Savile drove some of his victims as crazy as him. It is 
horrible to contemplate the possibility that he may have spawned other abusers 
by his crimes.

The only way to have avoided a person of Savile's psychology would have been a 
society that puts the needs of every small child first. In that case, his 
relationship with his mother would be noticed and appropriate help provided.
 