
Strachan’s defensive headache

As the first side to take on Germany since their Argentina double-header – one 
of which wasslightly more important 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/13/germany-argentina-world-cup-final-2014-match-report>
 thanthe other 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/sep/04/germany-argentina-friendly-dusseldorf>
 – Gordon Strachan’s team could not have had a harder start to their European 
Championship qualification campaign. The first-choice left-back, Andrew 
Robertson, had to withdraw. With Christophe Berra also out injured, the 
27-year-old debutant Mark Reynolds has been called up. The Aberdeen centre-back 
will not start but if called upon he will not have faced forwards with such 
attacking dynamism before. Avoiding defeat would be a boon to Scotland but 
without their first-choice defence it could be a long evening in goal for Allan 
McGregor.Toby Moses

Germany v Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scotland>, Sunday 
7.45pm

Hello De Gea (goodbye Casillas)

To avoid handing their illegal haul of alcohol over to the police, Homer – 
playing the role of the beer baron – and Bart – his able assistant – take a 
detour through a cemetery. Gravestones are knocked over and the police are lost 
but Homer’s car comes home a wreck. “What happened to you, Homer?” asks Marge 
“And what have you done to the car? … I don’t think it had broken axles 
before.” An indignant Homer replies: “Before, before! You’re living in the 
past, Marge! Quit living in the past!” Vicente del Bosque would do well to heed 
this advice, especially when it comes to selecting his goalkeeper. If we 
learned anything from the World Cup, it is that Iker Casillas is well and truly 
past his best. It is time for Casillas to go and it is time he is replaced by 
David de Gea. After a rough start and despite playing behind a mediocre 
Manchester United defence, De Gea has blossomed into one of United’s most 
consistent players. Unlike the Real Madrid man, he commands his box, he reacts 
with the speed and alertness required of a keeper at this level and he has time 
on his side.Spain <https://www.theguardian.com/football/spain> are at the start 
of a new cycle and they should begin that journey with De Gea in goal.Ian 
McCourt

Spain v Macedonia, Monday 7.45pm 

Conte has much to prove

Italy are coming off the back of a World Cup campaign only slightly less 
disappointing than England’s, while Norway are ready to embark on a new era,
removing the shackles of the “Egil Olsen paradigm” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/sep/02/per-mathias-hogmo-norway>
. The defeat to England will not help Norwegian confidence – while the Italians 
at least have a highly successful coach taking over. Antonio Conte won three 
consecutive league titles with Juventus, but could not help the Old Lady to 
regain their footing in the Champions League – so he has yet to prove that he 
can thrive in a more cut-throat, competitive environment than the 
much-diminished Serie A. Getting out of a group containing Azerbaijan, 
Bulgaria, Croatia and Malta should not be too tricky – second place is enough 
to make it to the expanded Euro 2016 – but the challenge for Conte isn’t 
qualification, it’s preparing the squad to put in a sustained challenge in two 
years’ time.TM

Norway v Italy <https://www.theguardian.com/football/italy>, Tuesday 7.45pm

Doyle provides O’Neill with a striking conundrum

When Robbie Brady’s scuffed corner landed at the foot of Alex Pearce, who 
subsequently poked the ball past Ali al-Habsi in the Oman net, Martin O’Neill 
could breathe a sigh of relief. The friendly had been won and for the first 
time since his first game in charge, his side had managed to break the one-goal 
barrier. Republic of Ireland’s opening effort on Wednesday night also came via 
a set piece from Brady but it was Kevin Doyle who added the finishing touch 
that time with a well-taken header. That goal, as well as his return to the 
Premier League with Crystal Palace, will surely boost Doyle’s confidence and 
provides O’Neill with a striking conundrum for the game againstGeorgia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/georgia>. Robbie Keane will start, no 
doubt, but who does the manager pair him with should he opt for a two-pronged 
approach up front. Does he go for the hard-working and fleet-of-foot Shane Long 
who gets in good positions but often fails to capitalise on them? Or does he 
opt for the slower, more experienced and better finishing of Doyle? The choice 
is yours, Martin.IMC

Georgia v Republic of Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/republicofireland>, Sunday 5pm 

Time to move on from Gerrard and Lampard

Has an England qualification campaign ever begun with such apathy? After the 
listless World Cup showing, and the promotion of fan-favouriteWayne Rooney 
<http://www.footytube.com/news/guardian/wayne-rooney-thanks-for-the-goals-but-not-for-the-waning-influence-L33794?ref=hp_trendian>
 to the captaincy, Roy Hodgson’s squad have a lot of work to do to turn around 
the feelings of a nation. Even topping this group won’t do much to convince the 
naysayers – so it is probably no bad thing they get away from the hostile 
Wembley crowd. Switzerland will be their main competitors for top spot and a 
win against the team ranked ninth in the world would be a big boost to their 
fragile confidence. It’s been over a decade since someone other than Frank 
Lampard or Steven Gerrard was able to stake a claim to be England’s main man in 
midfield – so the time is ripe for Jack Wilshere and Jordan Henderson to show 
that there’s life after the golden generation. Both play for teams that favour 
a slick passing game, prioritising possession and quick counterattacks to break 
down the opposition. If they can build a rapport and transfer club form on to 
the international stage England might finally have a central midfield 
partnership capable of challenging the top teams.TM

Switzerland v England <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england>, Monday 
7.45pm

Wales’ and Bale’s best chance to reach a tournament

The expansion of the European Championship to 24 teams may render the 
qualification process an exercise in keeping boredom at bay for the continent’s 
elite but for the perennial also-rans, optimism is rife. Most of the home 
nations fall into that category, not least Wales, who kick off their 
qualification campaign on Andorra’s 3G pitch. Inevitably, thoughts turn to 
Gareth Bale, the world’s most expensive footballer, who will not get a better 
chance to play at a major international tournament, but Chris Coleman’s squad 
is punctuated with talent. Aaron Ramsey is among the standout players in the 
Premier League when fit, while Joe Allen, Ben Davies and Ashley Williams, whose 
Swansea side are riding high at present, also feature and Sam Vokes, although 
currently injured, will be available for most of the campaign. Coleman knows 
the importance of getting off to a winning start – informing Carlo Ancelotti in 
no uncertain terms that Bale will face Andorra, regardless of the Real 
manager’s concerns over the artificial surface – in what the Wales manager 
hopes will be the start of a campaign that culminates in overdue liberation 
from the spectre ofPaul Bodin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2012/feb/15/forgotten-story-17-november-1993>
, which has haunted the valleys since 1993.Gerard Meagher

Andorra v Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales>, Tuesday 7.45pm

Now is a good time for the Czechs to play Holland

You could probably take all the money you have squirrelled away, bet it on 
Holland winning Group A in the Euro 2016 qualifiers and not lose one moment of 
sleep as you wait for your prediction to reach fruition. The race for second in 
that group is far muddier however, as Turkey,Czech Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/czechrepublic> and Iceland all vie for a 
summer jaunt in France. The Czechs kick off qualification at home to Holland 
and while that may sound like an exercise in futility but there is some hope 
for Pavel Vrba’s side. There will be no Klaas-Jan Huntelaar, no Ron Vlaar, no 
Rafael van der Vaart, no Jordy Clasie and, very likely, no Arjen Robben. Kevin 
Strootman is still on the physio’s table and given that Robin van Persie is 
reported to be struggling with an injury, there could well be no sign of him 
either. Those are some key players to be missing but as if those disruptions 
were not enough, Holland are also going to be playing under a new manager who 
is going to change the side’s tactics – “I had a discussion with the important 
players and we’ve decided to go back to 4-3-3 [from 5-3-2],” said Guus Hiddink. 
The Czechs were poor in their defeat to the US on Wednesday – they were 
wasteful in front of goal and the headline on the Czech daily Sport described 
the loss as a “Wake-up call”, adding that the side needed “faster running, 
ideas and more precise passing” – but they still have enough quality in their 
ranks to earn a point (or more) against the depleted Dutch. Either result would 
be an early and welcome shot in the arm for their hopes of finishing second.IMC

Czech Republic v Holland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/holland>, 
Tuesday 7.45pm

Two teams thankful of a neutral venue

Will the knee hold out? Is he worth £16m for one season? Manchester United 
fans will get a first chance to take a gander at theirwindow-breaking transfer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/sep/02/radamel-falcao-manchester-united-can-have-great-season>
 if they are willing to stay up until the early hours. Lining up alongside 
James Rodríguez, Colombia’s Radamel Falcao should be fit and raring to go after 
a full pre-season, which included awinning goal against Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/03/arsenal-monaco-friendly-match-report>
, and ready to show what his country were missing at the World Cup.Brazil 
squeezed past their fellow South Americans in the quarter-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/04/brazil-colombia-world-cup-quarter-final-match-report>
, but with Neymar breaking his back and missing the rest of the tournament 
after a dangerous challenge from Juan Zúñiga, and Thiago Silva picking up the 
suspension-inducing yellow card, there are some who will say this was the game 
that cost them the tournament. That seems slightly ludicrous given the spanking
Germany handed out in the semi-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/08/germany-brazil-world-cup-semi-final-match-report>
, but that scoreline would be unimaginable with Silva and Neymar both in the 
team. At least neither theSeleção, nor Zúñiga, will need to face an irate 
Brazilian crowd – with the Floridian support sure to be much more forgiving of 
this summer’s misdemeanours.TM

Brazil v Colombia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/colombia>, Saturday 2am

Chance for Denmark to gain some revenge

“If you lose a big fight,” said Muhammad Ali, “it will worry you all your 
life. It will plague you – until you get your revenge.” Denmark’s World Cup 
qualifier against Armenia in Copenhagen last year may not have been a big fight 
but it will most certainly plague them. The Armenians arrived having lost their 
previous four games but scored twice either side of half-time to leave the 
Danes humiliated. The manager, Morten Olsen, would later describe the match 
(among other ill-advised things) as “the worst evening in my football life”. 
The Danes made up for the defeat somewhat with a 1-0 win inArmenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/armenia> three months later but the home 
team will almost certainly enter into this game with revenge still on their 
mind. Olsen’s side looked good in the first half of their friendly against 
Turkey – the defence kept the opposition at bay and the midfield controlled the 
game and created plenty of opportunities. However, a raft of half-time 
substitutions disrupted their flow and a very late and very good strike from 
Ozan Tufan meant they left without a win. But should Denmark play as they did 
in those opening 45 minutes against Turkey, they will have to worry no more.IMC

Denmark v Armenia, Sunday 5pm 

The Rock gets a chance to roll into Euro 2016

After nearly 100 years of football on the tiny island, Gibraltar finally play 
their first competitive fixture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/sep/02/gibraltar-poland-international>
. Scott Wiseman, the Preston defender, is probably the most familiar name now 
that the team is shorn of their only star, Danny Higginbotham, following his 
retirement. Higginbotham’s uncle, Allen Bula, has managed the team since 2010 
and said after their friendly victory against Malta that he believes his side 
has a chance of reaching the Euros in France. “We know that the Germans are the 
favourites,” said Bula. “But, after the Germans, every other team is going to 
start nicking points off one another. So, if we can get a good run in the first 
half of the qualifiers, I genuinely think we can make it to the play-offs.” To 
do that they will need to finish third in a group which also contains Scotland 
and Ireland. With a population just 5% the size of Glasgow – 30,000 – that 
would be some achievement.TM

Gibraltar v Poland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/poland>, Sunday 7.45pm
 