
As expected, the Reserve Bank of Australia kept the interest rate on hold at 
1.5% this week, but the latestbuilding approval 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/Lookup/8731.0Main+Features1Sep%202016?OpenDocument>
 figures out on Wednesday highlight the difficulty for the central bank and for 
government of balancing an economy growing at starkly different speeds.

The RBA’s decision to keep the cash rate at 1.5% was not a shock. The market 
factored in next to no chance of a cut and, since the decision, it has become 
even more confident that there will not be another rate cut:

But the problem for the RBA is that while the overall economic numbers are not 
fantastic – employment growth, for example, is pretty limp – the picture across 
the nation is very diverse.

The latest building approval figures highlight this perfectly. 

While the overall number of building approvals fell in September, this was due 
to a fall in the number of non-housing dwellings – apartments, flats, etc. The 
approval of these is always pretty lumpy due to a more complex approval process 
than for houses. In seasonally adjusted terms, there was a 16% drop in 
non-house approvals, but house approvals actually rose 2%.

Even when we look at the trend growth, it is clear that while the national 
figures show improvement, they’re certainly not going gangbusters like they 
were through most of 2014 and 2015:

The national picture hides the very different situations in each state. New 
South Wales (primarily Sydney) has seen strong growth in the past year. 
Victoria has also seen an increase in residential building approvals in the 
past year, although it has begun to slide a bit.

But the rest of the country? Going backwards, and backwards fast: 

And when we include the Australian Capital Territory in the mix (which has 
seen a 95% increase in building approvals over the past year), the 
south-eastern part of the continent is far outpacing the rest:

In September, in NSW, Victoria and the ACT, there were 13,702 dwelling unit 
approvals (both houses and non-houses) compared with just 6,746 in the rest of 
the country. That is the largest disparity across those two sections of the 
country since the Australian Bureau of Statistics began collating the data in 
1983.

Similarly, the gap in the annual growth of approvals in NSW, Victoria and the 
ACT combined compared with the rest of the country is greater than it has ever 
been – far greater than it was in the few years before the GFC, when the talk 
was of the “two-speed economy” due to the mining boom in Western Australia and 
Queensland:

It makes for a tough life for the RBA, which gets to set one cash rate for the 
entire country, especially when you look at what is generating the big growth 
in buildings.

In Sydney it is not houses, but apartments that are booming:

The RBA has already expressed some concern over the growing number of 
apartments in Sydney (and Melbourne and Brisbane), and on Tuesdayit again noted 
<http://www.rba.gov.au/media-releases/2016/mr-16-27.html> that “considerable 
supply of apartments is scheduled to come on stream over the next couple of 
years, particularly in the eastern capital cities”.

Cutting interest rates would only serve to have that stream flow faster – 
something the RBA might not be disposed to do, given its concerns about a 
possible glut of apartments

In Victoria, the surge of apartment building does appear to have halted, but 
remains at an historically high level:

Whereas in WA, both the approval for apartments and houses is on a two-year 
slide:

And WA also shows how the housing market can lag behind other parts of the 
economy – for the value of residential building kept rising in 2014 while the 
value of non-residential buildings began to fall:

At the start of 2013 the value of both residential and non-residential 
building approvals was almost the same. Now residential approvals are almost 
back to that level, while the value of non-residential building is about 30% 
lower.

But there may be cause for some cheer out west. This week the RBA also 
released its latestindex of commodity prices 
<http://www.rba.gov.au/statistics/frequency/commodity-prices/2016/icp-1016.html>
. In October, the value of the bulk commodity index – which includes iron ore, 
metallurgical coal and thermal coal prices – rose 15%, the fourth-biggest 
monthly jump in the index’s history:

Whether the increase in prices for coal and iron ore will be high enough and 
sustained will determine if it leads to more non-residential building work in 
the mining sector.

And for those in the west, they will hope so. Because for now, with things the 
way they are, the RBA will likely keep the cash rate at 1.5%, and those outside 
NSW and Victoria will have to look elsewhere for something to spur their 
economies.
 