
How low can they go? There wasn’t much fat left to trim, but savings rates are 
now being hacked back even further following the interest rate cut – and some 
banks and building societies are penalising savers by cutting their rates by 
more than the base rate reduction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>
. Worryingly, some institutions have also been quietly withdrawing their 
regular savings accounts, which offer decent payouts, from sale.

Those chopping some of their rates by more than the 0.25% cut announced nine 
days ago includeFirst Direct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/08/savers-suffer-first-direct-cuts-rates-further-bank-of-england>
 andTesco Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/10/tesco-latest-bank-cut-interest-rates-boe-base-rate>
 – although many of the big players have yet to declare their hands. Several 
providers have pulled accounts for new customers and relaunched them with much 
lower rates. Guardian Money is aware of at least one bank that has slashed some 
of its savings rates for new customers by more than 1%.

But if you look hard there are still a few half-decent deals – and with rates 
so low it’s worth checking if you could get a better deal from a player that is 
a little more off the radar, such as one of the UK’s “affinity” friendly 
societies (specialising in a particular profession) or acredit union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/mar/16/savings-credit-unions-debt-crisis>
. Provided you meet the criteria you may find that one of these will offer you 
a higher rate than you could get on the open market.

Related: Interest rate cut: good news for mortgages, bad news for savers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/30/interest-rate-cut-good-news-mortgages-bad-news-savers>

While many banks and building societies were quick to pass on the Bank of 
England <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> rate cut 
to borrowers, reviews of savings rates tend to take longer – and the 
announcements, when they come, are sometimes quietly slipped out.

First Direct, owned by HSBC, revealed it is cutting the rate on its cash Isa 
by 0.4% – from 1.3% to 0.9%. This will take effect from 18 October, which is 
also when the headline rate on the bank’s BonusSavings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/savings> Account falls from 0.75% to 0.4%. 
Other accounts will have smaller reductions: the e-Savings rate will slip from 
0.4% to 0.25%.

Tesco Bank is cutting some of its savings rates by up to 0.35% from 8 
November. Its Instant Access Savings Account rate falls from 0.6% to 0.25%, 
while the Internet Saver rate will drop from 0.75% to 0.4%. The bank’s Instant 
Access Cash Isa rate will fall from 0.75% to 0.5%.

One of the most striking announcements came from United Bank UK (UBL UK), 
which just a couple of months ago was topping the best-buy tables in some 
categories; this week it slashed rates for new customers by up to a whopping 
1.2%. On Tuesday it announced much lower rates for its fixed-rate savings bonds 
and fixed-rate cash Isas. On Monday it was offering a seven-year fixed-rate 
bond paying 2%, but someone signing up the following day would only get 0.8%. 
It’s a similar story with many of its other fixed-rate products: the five-year 
fixed-rate bond was cut from 1.7% to 0.6%, while the three-year version dropped 
from 1.5% to 0.4%, and the six-month version plummeted from 0.65% to 0.15%. The 
bank’s five-year fixed-rate cash Isa tumbled from 1.4% to just 0.5%. UBL UK was 
formed in 2001 from the merger of the UK branches of two Pakistani banks.
 ‘It’s shocking that some banks are slashing rates well above and beyond the 
base rate cut of 0.25%.’ Photograph: Joe Giddens/PA 
Also cutting rates this week was West Bromwich building society. Its Base Rate 
Tracker, Direct Tracker Saver and Oak Savings Account have all had their rates 
cut from 0.25% to just 0.05%.

One worrying trend is the disappearance of several decent-paying regular 
savings accounts. These tend to offer some of the best interest rates and can 
be particularly good for those saving for something specific.Kent Reliance had 
a one-year regular savings account paying 4%, but pulled it from sale on 
Wednesday. Likewise,Leeds building society has just withdrawn its Regular Saver 
(Issue 3) paying 3.05%.

Rachel Springall at financial data provider Moneyfacts says: “It’s shocking 
that some banks are slashing rates well above and beyond the base rate cut of 
0.25%, and it leaves savers who are hoping for a decent return to face a brick 
wall of disappointment.” She adds: “The only standard savings accounts that 
were paying decent rates, such as regular savers and longer-term fixed deals, 
have suffered from huge cuts or have been brutally taken away from savers. The 
best buys are under increasing pressure from an onslaught of savers rushing to 
get a good deal – so much so that even the challenger banks are forced to pull 
deals.”

Some firms have pledged not to hit existing savers by more than the quarter 
point cut, includingSantander and Nationwide building society.

It may be worth considering a specialist company that caters for certain 
professions: the police, teachers, nurses

So what are your options? There are still some good regular savings accounts 
on offer:First Direct’s pays 6% fixed for 12 months, though you have to hold 
the bank’s 1st Account. Similarly,Nationwide’s Flexclusive Regular Saver, 
available to its main current account customers, pays 5%. And there are current 
accounts paying 5%: Nationwide’s FlexDirect andTSB’s Classic Plus.

It may also be worth considering one of the specialist financial services 
companies that cater for certain professions – the police, teachers, nurses – 
and, often, members of their family too. For example, Police Mutual has just 
launched a cash Isa paying 1.5% per year for a fixed period of 15 months. That 
might not sound amazing, but it’s more than you would get from the current 
top-paying two-year, fixed-rate Isa available on the open market, which would 
give you 1.4%. This offer is open to serving and retired police officers, 
specials and staff, and extended family members including spouses, parents, 
grandparents, children, stepchildren, grandchildren, in-laws, siblings, nieces 
and nephews. “Combined, this equates to one in 13 of the UK population,” says a 
spokeswoman.

Meanwhile, some credit unions have savings accounts paying as much as 3%. To 
join a credit union you must meet the “common bond” criteria. This might be 
that you live or work in a certain area, belong to a particular organisation or 
work for a certain employer. To find ones you can join, go to
Findyourcreditunion.co.uk <http://findyourcreditunion.co.uk/home>

The best deals if you need a mortgage

Most banks and building societies have passed on this month’s interest rate 
cut to mortgage customers, but many people could save a lot more than 0.25% by 
remortgaging,writes Rupert Jones.

Nationwide announced this week that it is cutting most of its new fixed-rate 
home loan deals by up to 0.2%. The reductions mean that its new two-year fixed 
rates now start at 1.49% with a £999 fee, or 1.89% with no fee. Its three-year 
fixes start at 1.79% with a £999 fee, or 2.09% with no fee. Its five-year fixes 
start at 2.14% with a £999 fee, or 2.34% with no fee.

But there are even cheaper rates out there. HSBC has a two-year fixed rate on 
offer at just 0.99%, though the minimum deposit/equity requirement is 35%, and 
there is a chunky £1,499 product fee to pay. The rate is 1.74% if you don’t 
want to pay a fee (and requires a 40%-plus deposit/equity).Leeds building 
society’s five-year fixed-rate deals, meanwhile, start at 2.04%, though to get 
that rate the maximum loan is 65% of the property’s value and there is a £999 
product fee.

It is far from clear whether we’ll see other lenders announcing cheaper deals. 
If you are on your lender’s standard variable rate, however, now is the time to 
see if you can get a better product.

Jeremy Duncombe, director of Legal & General Mortgage Club, says fixed rates 
have been dropping for several years, and adds: “Customers shouldn’t be 
complacent about low rates being around forever.” He says anyone on a variable 
rate should shop around. “Instead of a 0.25% cut in rate, they could be 
benefiting from a significantly lower rate by remortgaging. For a 75% 
loan-to-value, for example, Leeds andAccord have two-year fixes at 1.5% and 
1.54% respectively, and five-year fixed rates at 2.15% and 2.29%.”

Alistair Hargreaves at John Charcol says the base rate has little impact on 
mortgage rates – more important are swap rates and the Libor. He adds: “It 
takes six to nine weeks for the remortgage process, and if better rates come 
out while you are doing that you can switch to a new lender or new rate with 
the same lender before you complete.”

Borrowers’ gain is savers’ pain – literally, in the case of Tesco Bank. It has 
decided to cut its standard variable mortgage rate by 0.35%, taking it to 
3.89%. It is also reducing rates on two savings accounts by 0.35% (see above).
 