
Some of the big investment funds popular with Isa investors lost around 5% or 
more of their value in the days immediately after the Brexit vote – but there 
have also been winners at funds which are predominantly invested abroad.

A fund with most of its money in India, Hong Kong and Taiwan – the £8.8bn 
Stewart Investors Asia Pacific Leaders fund – has jumped just over 10% in value 
in the first week of trading following Brexit. Many of its biggest investments, 
such as Taiwan Semiconductors, have barely moved during the crisis affecting 
Britain. Meanwhile Terry Smith’s Fundsmith Equity fund climbed 8%, as its 
largely US-focused portfolio benefited from the fall in sterling.

But savers with money in Artemis Income, a £5.9bn fund, lost 2.9% of their 
cash. Its second-biggest investment is Lloyds Bank, which plummeted in price 
from 72p a share before the referendum result to 51p afterwards. It has since 
stumbled back to around 55p, but like other UK banks it remains substantially 
below its pre-Brexit high.

Many small investors are embracing volatility rather than running away from it

Fund managers are massively split over the impact that Brexit will have in the 
future. In the more sanguine corner is Neil Woodford, whose Income fund is up 
0.4% since the result emerged. “My view is the economic path for the UK 
economy, and indeed for the global economy, will be uninterrupted, broadly, 
over the long term by what has happened,” he says. “I think with the benefit of 
a bit of time and a bit of distance, people will take a more measured view of 
what’s really happening in the world economy. Our view is this doesn’t really 
change anything fundamental.

“It’s not as if we’ve got this rosy view of the outlook at all,” he adds. 
“We’ve been cautious for a long time. What happens next for the world economy 
is that growth continues to slow … that has to be a headwind for corporate 
profits. Commodity prices, I think, will remain weak. I don’t expect a 
recession here in the UK. It may seem a bit controversial, because a lot of 
people are forecasting recession. This is not just a narrow UK-centric thing. 
This is profoundly important for the whole of Europe, and for the eurozone 
project, and the EU project.

“I believe the centralising influence from Brussels, the sort of ever-closer 
union it advocates, is going to be in retreat now across Europe.”

Smith is also relaxed about the impact of Brexit. “The average Fundsmith 
portfolio company was founded in 1912. They have survived two world wars, the 
great depression and the financial crisis of 2008-09, so we are confident that 
Brexit will not lead to their demise, as the performance post-Brexit tends to 
demonstrate.”

But plenty of other managers are predicting a recession and further falls in 
sterling.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Finvestment-funds-winners-losers-brexit-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a7a1130af3af1990f1095bdee7c58825c800968%2F3_24_1065_639%2F1065.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Investment%20funds%3A%20the%20winners%20and%20the%20losers%20after%20Brexit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Finvestment-funds-winners-losers-brexit-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Investment%20funds%3A%20the%20winners%20and%20the%20losers%20after%20Brexit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Finvestment-funds-winners-losers-brexit-eu-referendum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a7a1130af3af1990f1095bdee7c58825c800968%2F3_24_1065_639%2F1065.jpg>
 Photograph: Guardian 
Prudential, which manages £150bn, says: “We should all plan for a ‘hard’ 
Brexit scenario.” Investment director Andy Brown believes the referendum result 
“changes the investment climate significantly. While the UK will continue to 
operate within the EU, as the government brokers an exit deal, there are 
considerable uncertainties regarding business investment and consumer 
confidence. This is likely to bring further sterling vulnerability … while 
economic growth could fall sharply to between 0% and 1% during the period of 
renegotiation. The global economy remains fragile, and a global recession could 
be sparked by any number of more immediate factors. Prolonged and pronounced 
market stress could have adverse wealth effects, impact confidence and result 
in tighter financial conditions globally.

“Market stress could also result in a substantive and disorderly reversal of 
capital flows from emerging markets, putting pressure on more vulnerable 
economies. Heavily indebted emerging markets could face a wave of 
corporate/financial defaults. Similarly, a hard landing in China, especially if 
accompanied by moves to aggressively weaken the renminbi, could result in 
deflationary pressures in advanced economies at a point when they have less 
policy space to deal with the issue.”

There is some evidence that small investors went “bargain hunting” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/27/small-investors-go-on-a-bargain-hunt-after-brexit-share-slump>
 for stocks that were hit hardest immediately after the result became apparent. 
Russ Mould, investment director at broker AJ Bell, says many small investors 
are “embracing volatility rather than running away from it”, with buy orders 
for banks and housebuilders far exceeding sells.

Fund advisers say it’s too early to say the panic is over. “It would be 
premature to call the bottom of the market – prices are still adjusting to the 
post-Brexit world,” says Laith Khalaf, senior analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown.

“It would be foolhardy to rule out further price swings. The bounce in the 
Footsie does show there are buyers out there who are swooping in when prices 
fall sufficiently, but markets neither go up or down in a straight line, and 
things may yet have to get worse before they get better.

“Valuations on the UK stock market look in the middle of their historical 
range, which suggests it’s a reasonable time to put money in the market if you 
are a long-term investor. But given the current volatility, you need to be 
willing to stomach further price falls if you are dipping a toe in.”
 