
Given how interest rates dominate the economic debate in Australia, last 
week’s GDP figures were one of the rare cases of major economic news having 
next to no impact on interest rates. And yet perhaps theReserve Bank of 
Australia <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/reserve-bank-of-australia>
 should react, given the national accounts point to a weakening in the housing 
market in all states except New South Wales.

One reason the latest GDP figures won’t affect interest rates is timing. Last 
Tuesday, theRBA board <http://www.rba.gov.au/media-releases/2016/mr-16-30.html> 
met and decided to keep the cash rate on hold at its record low of 1.5%.The 
next day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/dec/08/the-day-the-australian-economy-ran-out-of-luck-if-only-temporarily>
 the GDP figures for the September quarter were released showing in seasonally 
adjusted terms the economy had gone backwards.

The RBA board does not meet in January, so the next time they meet will be 7 
February, at which point the September GDP numbers will be referring to a 
period some four months previous. The December quarter GDP figures will also be 
only three weeks away from being released.

House prices have fallen but don't expect a housing affordability bonanza | 
Greg Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/jun/23/house-prices-have-fallen-but-dont-expect-a-housing-affordability-bonanza>
But while the likelihood is the RBA board will wait at least until March 
before acting, the September figures would certainly have piqued its interest, 
especially given they almost certainly render the RBA’s growth projection as 
too optimistic.

In its latest statement on monetary policy 
<http://www.rba.gov.au/publications/smp/2016/nov/tables.html> the RBA estimated 
GDP growth in 2016 would be with 2.5% to 3.5%. But to achieve even 2.5% annual 
growth, the December quarter would need to grow by around 1.3% – the biggest 
quarterly growth for nearly a decade.

And one contributor to the September quarter fall in GDP was a decline in the 
construction of private dwellings. While much of the blame was placed on the 
weather, and the erratic nature of the quarterly seasonally adjusted measure, 
the impact such dwelling construction is having on annual GDP growth looks to 
have peaked:

Now that peak would be fine, but there doesn’t seem to be much else replacing 
it – especially as the growth in household consumption is also falling.

But the problem for the RBA remains that its tool of cutting interest rates is 
very imprecise.

It is now five years since the RBA began cutting rates in November 2011. In 
that time there has been a veritable surge in the housing investment that has 
helped fuel economic growth.

But that boom has been very much on the east coast, and especially 
Sydney-centric.

Last week’s GDP figures showed that in the past five years private dwelling 
investment in NSW has grown by 60% compared to just 12% in the rest of the 
nation:

While the ACT has had a very strong surge in construction in the past year, 
NSW in the past five years has for the most part outpaced everywhere else.

So strong has been the growth of dwelling investment in NSW that while in 
total NSW accounts for just under a third of all such investment in Australia, 
it has accounted for 61% of the growth in that investment in the past five 
years:

And while the past five years has seen dwelling investment in NSW outpace the 
rest of the nation, it has for the most part at least been in sync. But over 
the past 12 months, NSW has split with the rest of the nation:

The difficulty for the RBA however is that in the September quarter, when 
Australia’s economy went backwards, it was cutting interest rates – first in 
May, which preceded the quarter and then again in August. And yet as the latest
housing finance data 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/Lookup/5609.0Main+Features1October%202016?OpenDocument>
 released late last week shows, the number people borrowing to buy a home is 
going backwards:

The number of owner occupiers taking out housing loans has now been going 
backwards for 12 months.

But what has taken over is investor finance. After a three year massive surge 
of investor driven housing finance, new rules to limit such loans saw a sharp 
drop from the middle of last year. But since the start of this year, investors 
are back and borrowing at such a rate that they may soon again overtake 
owner-occupiers:

But it was the surge of investors entering the housing market that led to the 
boom in house prices – something the RBA would not wish to see repeated, and it 
would halt it seeking to cut rates again for fear of sparking another price 
boom.

Here however the RBA is currently being helped by the banks themselves. Due to 
some rise in funding costs and a need to adhere to the rules on limiting 
investor lending, banks have begun to raise the rates forinvestor housing loans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/05/nab-and-westpac-increase-rates-on-investor-home-loans>
 independently of the RBA.

Housing affordability, inequality, and our flatlining household incomes | Greg 
Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/jul/21/housing-affordability-inequality-and-our-flatlining-household-incomes>
This might actually give the RBA room to cut rates further if it believes the 
lower rates will predominantly go to owner-occupiers.

But the issue for the RBA will remain – can it justify cutting rates to assist 
Western Australia, Tasmania, South Australia, and parts of Queensland, when the 
biggest housing market in the land in Sydney is already going gangbusters?
 