
The most surprising thing about forthcoming fake partner service Invisible 
Girlfriend <http://invisiblegirlfriend.com/> is that it doesn’t already exist. 
Oh, wait, yes it does. There’s alreadyFake Girlfriend 
<http://fakegirlfriend.co/>, Phoney Girlfriend 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.baller.phoney_girlfriend&hl=en>
,Fake Internet Girlfriend <http://www.fakeinternetgirlfriend.com/>, Namoro Fake 
<http://www.namorofake.us> and this guide 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2013/08/how-to-create-a-fake-girlfriend-on-instagram-in-8-easy-steps/278599/>
 to creating a fake girlfriend on Instagram using nail polish and trick 
photography.

There’s even a WikiHow article 
<http://www.wikihow.com/Create-a-Fake-Boyfriend-or-Girlfriend> on how to create 
your own fake partner. This surprises me, because faking a girlfriend or 
boyfriend isn’t that hard. As someone who once pretended to be a friend’s 
girlfriend so his parents wouldn’t harass him about being single at a wedding, 
let me tell you: it’s easy. Just walk up to whichever of your friends has the 
most absurd sense of humour and say the words, “Will you pretend to be my 
girlfriend?”

When you look at it like that, the existence of Invisible Girlfriend raises 
some obvious questions. How is this company planning to make money? The service 
is a dubious idea from a layman’s perspective, and anyone with even a cursory 
knowledge of startup theory could point to specific aspects of its business and 
tell you exactly why and how they’re not going to work.

This is what’s funny about Invisible Girlfriend: it displays utter disregard 
for the received wisdom of how to build a startup. We may look back on this 
point in the future and be able to pinpoint the exact moment startups became so 
hubristic that they stopped following even their own rules. And there are a lot 
of rules to not follow, becausestartup theory 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lean_startup> is an enormous industry that churns 
out millions of dollars’ worth of books, conferences and mentoring programs, 
which mostly contain the kind of information you can access by doing a 
Certificate III in Business down at the innovative learning hub of your local 
TAFE.

One of the most important concepts, and the one that Invisible Girlfriend 
seems to be having trouble with, is product/market fit. This is startup jargon 
for a very simple principle: don’t invest time and money in something that 
you’re not sure people are going to buy. It’s sort of the entrepreneur’s 
version of Kill Your Darlings, in that it’s easy to become so enthralled by 
your own genius moneymaking idea that you become blind to its failings. Such 
as, for instance, the inconvenient fact that there probably aren’t very many 
people who will pay money every month for a fake girlfriend service.

That Invisible Girlfriend has been incubating for so long without any of its 
founders realising it’s doomed points to troubling structural failings in 
startup culture. Harebrained schemes like this are supposed to die the morning 
after you get drunk enough to think they’re a good idea. They’re not supposed 
to win prizes at startup events, or receiveglowing coverage in Business Insider 
<http://www.businessinsider.com.au/invisible-girlfriend-app-2013-11>.

Consider how many people had to think “Hmm, yeah, that’s a great idea” for 
Invisible Girlfriend to be where it is now, and you get a sense of the scale of 
the problem. Every one of those people had the opportunity to shoot it down, or 
ask the founders whether they plan to live in a tent or a shack after its 
collapse, or direct them to read an analysis of the Dot Com bubble from which 
they might learn some important lessons.

Unless, of course, Invisible Girlfriend is a prototype product from the real 
company, Invisible Startup, which sells fake businesses to people who are sick 
of friends and colleagues badgering them to build a startup. Okay, that’s my 
terrible entrepreneurial idea – call me, venture capitalists!
 