
In 1944 the Office of Strategic Services published its Simple Sabotage Field 
Manual – a guide designed to teach ordinary citizens how to subvert government 
services in occupied countries. It instructed readers in the art of “indirect 
methods” of sabotage. They did not need shovels, picks or dynamite to cause 
damage but could instead use “purposeful stupidity” to disrupt organisations 
and corporations through “faulty decisions”. The CIA, which grew out of the 
OSS, recently declassified the guide and in doing so it inadvertently revealed 
that the Simple Sabotage Field Manual is apparently a key text on the business 
studies curriculum, where it is published under the title “How To Get Ahead in 
Sports Administration”.

It contains such timeless advice as: 1) “Insist on doing everything through 
‘channels’. Never permit short cuts to be taken in order to expedite 
decisions.” 2) “Make ‘speeches’. Talk as frequently as possible and at great 
length.” 3) “When possible, refer all matters to committees, for ‘further study 
and consideration’. Attempt to make the committee as large as possible.” 
4) “Advocate ‘caution’ and urge your fellow conferees to be ‘reasonable’ and 
avoid haste.” 5) “Refer back to matters decided upon at the last meeting and 
attempt to reopen the question of the advisability of that decision.” And 
6) “Bring up irrelevant issues as frequently as possible.”

Wada president claims Rio Olympics not tainted despite drug test flaws
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/28/wada-president-rio-olympics-drug-test-flaws>
To Lausanne, then, and the headquarters of the International Olympic 
Committee. On Thursday the World Anti-Doping Agencypublished a report on the 
anti-doping programme at the 2016 Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/27/wada-serious-failings-rio-2016-olympics-anti-doping>
, written by a team of independent observers working in Rio this summer. It 
catalogued, in comprehensive detail, “a number of serious failings” in the 
anti-doping programme, which was so under‑resourced, badly designed and poorly 
administered that it was strained “close to the breaking point” and would have 
“almost certainly collapsed” if it had not been for the “initiative, tenacity 
and professionalism” of the men and women working on the ground during the 
Games.

On Friday morning, less than 24 hours later, the IOC released a statement 
<https://www.olympic.org/news/ioc-welcomes-io-report-on-rio-2016-anti-doping-programme>
 welcoming that same report which, it says, “shows that it was a successful 
Olympic Games with a successful anti‑doping programme”. And it is true, within 
the report’s 55 pages, it does say that there were some “impressive advances” 
in certain areas of the anti-doping programme at Rio. Shut one eye, skim the 
first paragraphs, then skip the rest and you might reasonably conclude, as the 
IOC’s medical and scientific director, Dr Richard Budgett, apparently has, that 
“the integrity of the programme was ensured despite some challenges the 
Organising Committee had to overcome”.

Surprisingly, however, the IOC’s press department seems to have been the only 
media body who decided that the headline takeaway from the report was that 
everything is tickety-boo. The rest of the world’s press were rather more 
preoccupied with other little details, like the fact that more than a third of 
athletes competing in Rio were not subjected to drugs testing before the Games 
in 2016 and that, of those, 1,913 were competing in one of the 10 “high-risk 
sports”. Or that there was no out-of-competition testing for some events, 
limited in-competition testing in others and no in-competition blood testing in 
a third group, including weightlifting.

Taken altogether, the report reads like something Joseph Heller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/josephheller> might have cooked up if he had 
set out to write a satirical novel about institutional incompetence in the 
Olympics instead of the air force. There was insufficient training for the 
staff, a shortage of IT equipment and an utterly chaotic schedule. There were 
neither hotels for the control officers, meal tickets for the chaperones or 
reliable transport for those working at night to get away once they had 
finished. The upshot was that there were days when 50% of the planned tests 
could not go ahead and at the end of the Games 500 fewer tests were conducted 
than had been intended.

Wada reveals up to 50% of drug tests at 2016 Olympic Games had to be aborted
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/27/wada-serious-failings-rio-2016-olympics-anti-doping>
“These various logistical issues,” the report notes, “were foreseeable and 
entirely avoidable”. It seems the two things it would have taken to fix them 
were time and money, resources which were, unfortunately, in desperately short 
supply – because the IOC had only seven years to get ready for Rio and the 
Olympics generate (according to reports 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2012/07/25/sport/olympics-london-2012-google-apple>) 
only $6bn every four years.

The IOC keeps only a fraction of that and has many other costs to meet such as 
the $156m it has set aside to build anew luxury HQ in Lausanne 
<http://www.swissinfo.ch/eng/olympic-spirit_lausanne-gives-green-light-to-new-ioc-headquarters/41799974>
 which, at the current level of funding, is much more than the combined sum it 
will spend on Wada in the next decade.

There is one more thing it would have taken too: the will to act, from both 
Wada’s head staff and the IOC. And, if one goes by their fine words, this at 
least is one thing they do not lack. Only the other day Wada announced that it 
was going to take therecommendations made at a recent reform summit 
<https://www.wada-ama.org/en/media/news/2016-10/wada-statement-regarding-renewed-nado-anti-doping-reform-proposals>
 “to the foundation board meeting; at which the process towards a ‘roadmap’ for 
the anti-doping system will be drawn up”. And only last June the IOC president, 
Thomas Bach, promised he would convene an ‘Extraordinary World Conference on 
Doping’ in 2017.

There will be long and frequent speeches, large committees will be formed to 
conduct further study and consideration and, so far as it comes, change will 
proceed cautiously, with everything done through the proper channels.
 