
The Iranian foreign minister personally requested that Egypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> attend last weekend’s key Syria talks 
– a move that has sparked concerns that Cairo is being wooed away from its 
traditional pro-western stance in the region.

Talks convened by the US secretary of state, John Kerry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/15/syria-talks-hosted-by-john-kerry-end-without-agreement-on-next-move>
, in the Swiss city of Lausanne last Saturday evening failed to agree on a 
common strategy with Russia to end the conflict in Syria, now in its sixth year.

The Guardian has seen emails indicating that the Iranian foreign minister, 
Mohammad Javad Zarif, asked Kerry for Cairo’s team to attend the Lausanne 
talks. When the US secretary of state proposed six-nation talks to “see if a 
new reasonableness can manifest itself” inSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>, Zarif replied: “Why not Egypt too?”

Iran agreed to attend the talks only once it had secured places for the 
foreign ministers of Egypt and Iraq at the discussions. Both countries back the 
pro-Assad stance ofIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> but Egypt is 
seen as significant because it is the most populous Sunni Arab nation in the 
Middle East.

Iran was also keen not to be outnumbered by an anti-Assad coalition – 
comprising Turkey, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United States – at the Lausanne 
talks.

The lobbying for Egyptian officials to attend the talks began a few days 
before Egypt shocked its financial backer Saudi Arabia by voting with the 
Russians on a UN security council resolution on Syria which stripped out French 
demands for an end to airstrikes on Aleppo and military overflights.

At the UN, the Saudi envoy described Egypt’s decision as “painful”, adding 
that “stances by Senegal and Malaysia were much closer to the agreed Arab 
decision” than that adopted by the Arab League member Egypt. Two days later an 
Egyptian oil ministry official said that Egypt had been informed by Saudi 
Arabia that it had suspended oil aid – estimated at 700,000 tonnes of petroleum 
products every month.

It was the first public dispute between Egypt and Saudi Arabia since Egypt’s 
president, Abdel Fatah al-Sisi, ousted the Muslim Brotherhood’s Mohamed Morsi 
in 2013. Since then, Saudi Arabia has sent billions of dollars to Egypt, which 
have helped keep its faltering economy afloat.


The rivalry between Saudi Arabia and Iran, in which both compete for the 
hearts and minds of the Arab street, sees them regularly seek to curb each 
other’s influence and standing in the Middle East.


In Egypt, one of the cultural hubs of the Arab world and home to more than a 
quarter of its people, Tehran sees a counterweight to Saudi hostility in the 
high-stakes diplomacy over the future shape of Syria.

It is clear that in the short term both sides are engaging in no-holds-barred 
diplomacy over the Syrian imbroglio.


In an effort to bring the big players in the region together, Kerry emailed 
Zarif on 4 October, after the lastnationwide ceasefire between the US and 
Russia had broken down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/23/aleppo-residents-syria-russia-airstrikes>
, resulting in thebombardment of the Syrian city of Aleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/12/ground-down-by-savagery-the-agony-of-aleppo>
.


Kerry said he had discussed with the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, 
having “a very small meeting of key stakeholders on Syria. He is very much for 
it. So am I. This is not a negotiation but a consultation.


“The purpose is to explore the political solution and see if a new 
reasonableness can manifest itself and to discuss how we can change this 
dynamic – if possible.”


The US secretary of state added that “the participants would be Russia, Iran, 
Turkey, Qatar, KSA [Saudi Arabia] and the US. Could you be in Lausanne on 
Saturday 15th afternoon to take part?”


In response Zarif said he would try to attend, noting that he had to be back 
in Tehran the following day to receive African foreign ministers. He added: 
“Why not Egypt too?”


After days of wrangling, Iran’s deputy foreign minister for Middle Eastern 
affairs told journalists that “big news will be released soon”. Hours later it 
was announced that what was billed as a small Syria contact group meeting in 
Lausanne would now include Egypt and Iraq to bolster Iran.


Sadegh Ghorbani, a journalist at Fars – the “semi-official” news agency of the 
government of Iran,tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/GhorbaniSadegh/status/787008643128492032> that it was 
“interesting how Sisi’s Egypt [is] gradually shifting from US-Saudi axis 
towards Russia-Iran. Tehran-Cairo relations revival maybe q[uestion] of when 
not if.”


The two countries have had not had full diplomatic relations since 1980, when 
Egypt offered Shah Mohammed Reza Pahlavi refuge following the revolution in 
Iran. However, Egypt and Iran have drawn closer over support for the Assad 
regime in Syria and in welcomingRussian military cooperation 
<http://www.presstv.ir/Detail/2016/10/17/489423/Egypt-Russia-Military-Drills-Terrorism>
.


Some argue that Egypt’s moves are purely tactical. HA Hellyer, a fellow at the 
Atlantic Council and London’s Royal United Services Institute, said: “Egypt has 
its own perspective on Syria which happens to converge with the Iranian one. 
Cairo wants a viable Syrian state and is worried about Islamist groups. With 
regard to extremists, that is a valid concern. On the other hand, Egypt has 
often flirted with the Russians, seemingly to show the west that Egypt has 
options.


“The Saudis made a strategic decision long ago. Egypt is too big to fail. 
Riyadh does not want chaos unfolding in the region and will do whatever it 
takes to keep Egypt’s economy afloat. Egypt has 90 million people [and 
relations] are not to be toyed with.”


When contacted a US State Department official, speaking on condition of 
anonymity, said there would be no comment “on private diplomatic 
communications”, adding that “the US relationship with Egypt is based on a 
number of priorities, including our common interest in defeating terrorism and 
resolving the conflict in Syria”.


• This article was amended on 25 October 2016. An earlier version said Egypt 
had voted with Russia to block a draft French UN security council resolution on 
Syria which had demanded an end to airstrikes on Aleppo and military 
overflights. Egypt voted for that resolution, which was vetoed by Russia, and 
also for a Russian resolution which stripped out those demands. An earlier 
version also said Saudi Arabia had suspended its oil aid to Egypt the next day; 
that has been amended to say that two days later an Egyptian oil ministry 
official said that Egypt had been informed by Saudi Arabia that oil aid had 
been suspended.
 