
No sooner was the Brexit <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> 
out of the bag than Sinn Féin’s Martin McGuinness, deputy first minister for 
Northern Ireland, declared the need fora poll on Irish reunification 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/11/sinn-fein-irish-reunification-vote-brexit-eu-referendum>
. Northern Ireland voted decisively to remain in the EU. By McGuinness’s logic, 
this means that the “British government hasforfeited any mandate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/24/eu-referendum-britain-different-country>
 to represent the economic or political interests of the people”.

Opportunistic? Of course. Disingenuous? Maybe. The Good Friday agreement, 
which created peace in the north, allows the secretary of state to call a 
border poll when there’s clear indication that public opinion has swung towards 
a united Ireland. Currently, there’s no such indication – the people ofNorthern 
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> voted against leaving 
the EU, which is markedly different from voting to leave the UK.

It’s time to redouble efforts to create cross-community understanding

A border poll at this juncture would be dangerous. Think the build-up to 
Brexit was polarising and scary? Add a few centuries of colonial history, a 
partition, 30 years of sectarianism and violence, a fragile peace of less than 
two decades, a severe terror threat, a quarter tonne ofsemtex 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semtex>, a wee dash of Brexit-induced 
socio-economic insecurity, and the frustration caused by one’s English 
compatriots voting to pull the rug out from under a painstakingly crafted peace 
process, then tell me about polarising and scary.

So it is probably best that we chill on the reunification rhetoric for the 
minute. That said, I do think the aftermath of Brexit has the potential to 
strengthen Northern Ireland’s connection to the Irish Republic. If and when 
that happens, we’ll talk border polls.

But first things first: at this delicate juncture, the priority has to be 
safeguarding the peace process. One of the greatest challenges is the likely 
reinstitution of a physical border between north and south. The border checks 
of the Troubles were, for many, militarised sites of fear and oppression, and 
the free passage from north to south that citizens and travellers now enjoy is 
an auspicious sign of the peace process working.

The psychological impact of border checks on those who lived through the 
Troubles, on those who are finally learning to live with a new geography, 
cannot be overstated. For the 25% of people in the north who, according to the
2011 census <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demography_of_Northern_Ireland>, 
consider themselves to be Irish only, a newly reinforced border is a 
provocation and an injury.

Theresa Villiers, the Northern Ireland secretary and a Brexiter, claimed 
during campaigning that the common travel agreement (CTA) between Ireland and 
the UK would prevent border checks from becoming necessary. However, apolicy 
paper 
<https://www.academia.edu/26337674/Policy_Paper_Brexit_Ireland_and_Northern_Ireland>
 published by academics at Newcastle and Durham universities is blunt in its 
refutation of the post-Brexit power of the CTA: there is “virtually no 
possibility” that the border will continue operating as it is. As it explains, 
“the UK-Ireland border would represent an external border to the EU as a whole. 
There are no other ‘external’ EU borders that do not come with border controls.”

It is perhaps best, then, that we come to terms with the discomfiting idea 
that Ireland will, in a sense, be partitioned a second time. And, yes, this 
could unsettle the peace. All parties: the UK, NorthernIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>, the Republic and the EU, need to 
do everything in their power to ensure that the border they create is one that 
fits the contours of our past and our present.

Given the likelihood of strengthened partition, why do I think that, in the 
long term, Brexit could mean stronger ties between Northern Ireland and the 
Republic? First, as is well documented, Northern Ireland has a post-Brexit 
advantage over other areas of the UK in one important sense. The Good Friday 
agreement allows the people of Northern Ireland to hold a British passport, an 
Irish passport, or both. On Friday,Google reported a surge in Northern Irish 
searches <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-eu-referendum-36628949> related 
to Irish passport applications.

Dual citizenship means, of course, that the Northern Irish, as opposed to 
other UK citizens, will be able to travel, live and work freely inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. But, more, when the dust 
settles, Ireland will likely have a strong comparative advantage in attracting 
companies that want an English-speaking workforce and access to the world’s 
biggest common market. There may well be more jobs for the Northern Irish down 
south than in Belfast or London. More northerners with Irish passports living 
and working in the Republic can’t help but reorient the region in terms of 
belonging and identification.

Next, the decisive remain vote in the north was achieved in spite of low 
turnout in nationalist areas, indicating a strong unionist desire to remain 
part of Europe. Obviously, for the 40% of Northern Irish who consider 
themselves “British only”, this desire plays a soft second fiddle to their 
national identity. But for the 20% who consider themselves “Northern Irish 
only” European music might sound increasingly sweet as the economic and 
practical repercussions of Brexit materialise.

Northern Ireland’s substantial economic growth since the Good Friday agreement 
isheavily indebted to EU funding and initiatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/21/northern-ireland-fear-brexit-conflict-good-friday-agreement-eu>
: there will be economic fallout, many will feel betrayed by the UK, and that 
could seismically shift the political landscape of the north.

Now is not the moment for nationalists to pursue measures that might 
destabilise the peace process. Rather, it’s time to redouble efforts to create 
cross-community understanding, stability and a strong Northern Irish identity. 
As the shock waves of Brexit dissipate, Northern Ireland will soon find which 
side of the border its bread is buttered.
 