
The Irish government has decided to appeal against the European commission’s 
ruling thatApple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> was given a 
sweetheart tax deal and should hand Dublin €13bn (£11bn) in fiscal payments.

Apple tax: European commissioner defends €13bn ruling
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/02/apple-tax-ruling-eu-margethe-vestager-13bn-euro-state-aid>
The cabinet decision still needs to be endorsed by parliament next Wednesday 
but a group of independents in the ruling coalition who were concerned about 
the appeal have already been won over.

“A motion will come before the Dáil [parliament] on Wednesday seeking an 
endorsement of that [cabinet] decision,” a government spokesman said.

The tax deal has proved divisive, with the leftwing Sinn Féin party 
highlighting some voter concerns that the government is in effect turning down 
a windfall payment that would fund the struggling national health service for a 
year.

But it also plays into wider debates taking place in Britain and elsewhere 
about whether large corporations are avoiding their tax responsibilities. The 
counter-argument is that EC bureaucrats are in danger of chasing away 
multinationals that bring significant numbers of jobs to countries.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Firish-government-appeal-against-apple-13bn-tax-bill-european-commission%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdbf02b4b836eb764907a7eb46fcac9b765fdfd3%2F685_0_2018_2523%2F2018.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Irish%20government%20to%20appeal%20against%20Apple's%20%E2%82%AC13bn%20tax%20bill&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Firish-government-appeal-against-apple-13bn-tax-bill-european-commission%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Irish%20government%20to%20appeal%20against%20Apple%27s%20%E2%82%AC13bn%20tax%20bill&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Firish-government-appeal-against-apple-13bn-tax-bill-european-commission%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdbf02b4b836eb764907a7eb46fcac9b765fdfd3%2F685_0_2018_2523%2F2018.jpg>
 Apple boss Tim Cook. Photograph: Niall Carson/PA 
Ireland’s finance minister, Michael Noonan, said Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> had overstepped the mark in 
attempting to dictate tax laws and impose current laws on a tax deal with Apple 
that had been struck 25 years ago.

“I believe that there are some very important principles at stake in this case 
and that a robust legal challenge before the courts is essential to defend 
Ireland’s interests,” he said. “How could any investor come to Europe if their 
business was subject to retrospective taxes two decades later?”

Earlier in the week Tim Cook, the chief executive of Apple, described the EC’s 
decision as maddening and political 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/01/political-crap-tim-cook-apple-tax-ruling>
. Cook wasconfident that it could be overturned on appeal.

“It’s disappointing, it’s clear that this comes from a political place, it has 
no basis in fact or in law, and unfortunately it’s one of those things we have 
to work through,” he said.

Cook called on Irish ministers to join the case against Brussels, saying it 
would undermine the other foreign investment inIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>, which is a major source of jobs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Firish-government-appeal-against-apple-13bn-tax-bill-european-commission%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62a01a10398406e3645f148faa55e2735f1324e4%2F817_0_1867_2333%2F1867.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Irish%20government%20to%20appeal%20against%20Apple's%20%E2%82%AC13bn%20tax%20bill&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Firish-government-appeal-against-apple-13bn-tax-bill-european-commission%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Irish%20government%20to%20appeal%20against%20Apple%27s%20%E2%82%AC13bn%20tax%20bill&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Firish-government-appeal-against-apple-13bn-tax-bill-european-commission%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62a01a10398406e3645f148faa55e2735f1324e4%2F817_0_1867_2333%2F1867.jpg>
 Michael Noonan. Photograph: Cathal McNaughton/Reuters 
Noonan has repeatedly condemned the EC, which started investigating Apple’s 
tax arrangements in Ireland two years ago.

But Margrethe Vestager, the EC competition commissioner, has said it was wrong 
for Apple to have paid the equivalent of 1% corporation tax on its European 
profits in 2003 and that this was down to 0.0005% by 2014.

Apple disputes these figures but Vestager has made her case clear: “Member 
states cannot give tax benefits to selected companies - this is illegal under 
Euopean Union state aid rules.

“The commission’s investigation concluded that Ireland granted illegal tax 
benefits to Apple which enabled it to pay substantially less tax than other 
businesses over many years.”

The US government has waded in on behalf of Apple, arguing that the EC is 
trying to become the world’s tax police officer 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-37179785>.
 