
Ireland’s finance minister has acknowledged a torrid year for the country’s 
much-criticised corporate tax regime with a robust defence of Apple’s taxation 
deals with the Irish state.


Michael Noonan said while delivering the budget on Tuesday that Ireland’s 
12.5% rate for companies “will not be changed”. His comments will have been 
welcomed in Ireland’s second city, Cork. It is home to Apple’s main plant in 
Europe and, in a visit to the city last week, its citizens were equally 
supportive of the state’s dealings with the tech giant in a relationship that 
goes back over 40 years.

Set on the northern outskirts of Cork, beside the working class housing estate 
of Holyhill, Apple’s European headquarters is heavily guarded with employees 
under strict instructions not to talk to any media at its main entrance. 
However, public backing for the 12.5% rate is not difficult to find outside the
Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> site.

Tony Fitzgerald, who has lived on the Holyhill estate for 40 years, said that 
the majority of people in the city look favourably on the hi-tech giant’s 
presence. Global criticism of Apple grew in August after the European 
commission ruled that the companyowed Ireland €13bn (£11.85bn) in back taxes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/30/apple-pay-back-taxes-eu-ruling-ireland-state-aid>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fapple-ireland-corporate-tax-finance-minister-michael-noonan-european-commission%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdcf5b2b38314304a68dc3a9000e824fb1382e69%2F0_287_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Irish%20finance%20minister%20stands%20firm%20on%20Apple%20tax%20deal%20in%20budget%20speech&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fapple-ireland-corporate-tax-finance-minister-michael-noonan-european-commission%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Irish%20finance%20minister%20stands%20firm%20on%20Apple%20tax%20deal%20in%20budget%20speech&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fapple-ireland-corporate-tax-finance-minister-michael-noonan-european-commission%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdcf5b2b38314304a68dc3a9000e824fb1382e69%2F0_287_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Michael Noonan, Ireland’s finance minister, said in his budget speech that the 
country’s 12.5% corporate tax rate would not change. Photograph: Brian 
Lawless/PA 
Fitzgerald, a Cork city councillor for Ireland’s main opposition party, Fianna 
Fail, recently travelled to Apple’s headquarters in Cupertino, California. He 
was part of a cross-party delegation from Cork council that attended an 
international IT conference as the guest of Apple.

While there Fitzgerald and other councillors pressed Apple’s chief executive, 
Tim Cook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/tim-cook>, if the company was 
still committed to Cork four decades after its founder, Steve Jobs, came to 
open the plant.

“Tim Cook was adamant about Apple’s ongoing commitment to Cork, which of 
course was what we wanted to hear. What struck me most about being shown around 
Apple’s HQ was the amount of people from Cork working there. It demonstrated to 
me the strong bonds between our city and Apple that have been built over 40 
years.”

Fitzgerald said there were “massive spin-off benefits” for Holyhill and 
neighbouring areas from Apple’s presence.

“Apple has helped the development of the north side of Cork, including 
infrastructure. The presence of so many workers has resulted in the building of 
new road links and even a regular new bus service that runs every 10 minutes.

“As well as funding apprentice and training programmes, the company has put 
computers into local schools and colleges.

“Regardless of what has been said in the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> and [of] its ruling, the people of this 
area want Apple to stay here,” he added.

Among those who travelled to Apple’s base in the United States was Conor 
Healy, the head of Cork’s chamber of commerce.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fapple-ireland-corporate-tax-finance-minister-michael-noonan-european-commission%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58f028cfca3d19b9aa0a6739dca2f26494242bb2%2F0_15_2465_1479%2F2465.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Irish%20finance%20minister%20stands%20firm%20on%20Apple%20tax%20deal%20in%20budget%20speech&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fapple-ireland-corporate-tax-finance-minister-michael-noonan-european-commission%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Irish%20finance%20minister%20stands%20firm%20on%20Apple%20tax%20deal%20in%20budget%20speech&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fapple-ireland-corporate-tax-finance-minister-michael-noonan-european-commission%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58f028cfca3d19b9aa0a6739dca2f26494242bb2%2F0_15_2465_1479%2F2465.jpg>
 Tim Cook, the Apple chief executive, on a visit to Cork in 2015. Photograph: 
Niall Carson/PA 
“Tim Cook never talked to us once about the EU ruling. Our visit was a 
pre-planned event before the EU’s decision, but it was never raised when we 
there. He simply repeated Apple’s commitment to Cork,” he said.

Asked about concerns over the perceived unfairness of some of Apple’s tax 
arrangements inIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>, Healy said 
that the low corporation taxation regime was “absolutely non-negotiable”.

He added: “There are thousands upon thousands of jobs dependent on Apple and 
other foreign direct investment companies being based here in Cork. The 12.5% 
rate is a fiscal policy. No Irish government should change that.

“The Apple workforce will soon be at 6,000 and since 2009 they have invested 
€100m in the plant at Holyhill. Their presence, like other multinationals, has 
created a business ecosystem in Cork that is leading to the creation of more 
startups in the city.

“The message here in Cork is that no one wants that to change. They are a key 
part of Cork’s economy.”
 