
Are you up the duff? Do you speak emoji? If so, good news: in June, the UK’s 
fastest growing language 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/newsbeat/article/32793732/uks-fastest-growing-language-is-emoji>
 is to launch apregnant woman icon 
<http://blog.thebump.com/2015/08/24/emoji-update-pregnant-woman/>, making it 
even easier to tell loved ones about life-changing news in a thoroughly 
impersonal manner. But while the view from our iPhones will be more 
pregnancy-inclusive than ever in 2016, the outlook in maternity fashion remains 
complicated.

As anyone pregnant will tell you, finding decent maternity wear is a 
challenge. Specialist brands are expensive and often veer towards theKate 
Middleton engagement-shoot look 
<http://www.firstclassfashionista.com/wp-content/gallery/prince-william-and-kate-middleton-engaged-photos/prince-william-and-kate-middleton-engaged-photos.jpg>
, a wrap dress too far for many. High street ranges tend to be limited, hidden 
away or only available online (Topshop’s maternity selection in London’s Oxford 
Circus branch is a notable exception). Meanwhile, designer fashion rarely 
bothers with maternity dressing at all – viewing pregnancy with the same 
disdain it reserves for carbs,opaque black tights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/oct/19/fashion-black-tights-women-fashtag>
 and fat ankles.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fmaternity-wear-fashion-designed-to-last%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8ca947bc67dbcc7ef47dbaa324fd1b7b56c9f6a%2F0_0_3903_2342%2F3903.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20'maternity%20wear'%20becoming%20a%20thing%20of%20the%20past%20in%20fashion%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fmaternity-wear-fashion-designed-to-last%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20%27maternity%20wear%27%20becoming%20a%20thing%20of%20the%20past%20in%20fashion%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fmaternity-wear-fashion-designed-to-last%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8ca947bc67dbcc7ef47dbaa324fd1b7b56c9f6a%2F0_0_3903_2342%2F3903.jpg>
 Lily satin-twill tank, £245, Hatch Photograph: Handout 
The weird state of pregnancy fashion echoes a similarly odd attitude towards 
pregnancy in general, according to Edwina Gieve, founder of British labelClary 
and Peg <http://www.claryandpeg.co.uk/>: “When I was researching maternity 
fashion, my grandmother told me there was no such thing as maternity wear when 
she was pregnant in the 1930s and 1940s. She just stayed at home in a house 
coat. Women were hidden away and confined – that’s where we are coming from.” 
As well as a perceived lack of glamour, many brands are reluctant to give 
headspace to maternity ranges, knowing that most women won’t spend much on 
clothes they will only wear briefly.

With that in mind, the latest trend in maternity wear makes a lot of sense: 
savvy brands are creating “investment” pieces designed to live long beyond 
pregnancy – and be worn by people who are not pregnant at all.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fmaternity-wear-fashion-designed-to-last%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F471a79e742253bf61adc5b661ca45a783d5dc88f%2F0_0_640_630%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20'maternity%20wear'%20becoming%20a%20thing%20of%20the%20past%20in%20fashion%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fmaternity-wear-fashion-designed-to-last%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20%27maternity%20wear%27%20becoming%20a%20thing%20of%20the%20past%20in%20fashion%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fmaternity-wear-fashion-designed-to-last%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F471a79e742253bf61adc5b661ca45a783d5dc88f%2F0_0_640_630%2F640.jpg>
 Blogger Courtney Adamo wearing Clary and Peg. Photograph: Handout 
One of the most influential ranges in the subtle maternity movement is Hatch, 
a US brand that has recentlylaunched in the UK through Net a Porter 
<http://www.net-a-porter.com/Shop/Designers/Hatch/All?pn=1&npp=60&image_view=product&dScroll=0>
. Its founder and CEO Ariane Goldman says she was “shocked by what was out 
there” while pregnant five years ago. “I felt ostracised from fashion and from 
any opportunity to look and feel good. I ended up shopping vintage or buying 
oversized dresses two sizes up from Acne, which was a good alternative but I 
couldn’t wear those pieces afterwards.”

Her solution was to create a brand specialising in voluminous shapes that 
could be worn during and after pregnancy. Prices are far higher than high 
street (in the “contemporary” range of £100 to £300), but Goldman talks of 
expensive fabrics and subtle details, making the idea of spending more on 
something you love and can wear for years sound tempting. The trousers have 
ruching or elastic that sits beneath the belly for pregnant women and high on 
the waist for those who are not. At the moment, says Goldman, only 55% of her 
customers are pregnant: “The rest are women who really appreciate the 
silhouette.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fmaternity-wear-fashion-designed-to-last%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42cea430281ef744c0ff5605df9855cdf36eeee9%2F0_0_3903_2342%2F3903.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20'maternity%20wear'%20becoming%20a%20thing%20of%20the%20past%20in%20fashion%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fmaternity-wear-fashion-designed-to-last%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20%27maternity%20wear%27%20becoming%20a%20thing%20of%20the%20past%20in%20fashion%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fmaternity-wear-fashion-designed-to-last%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42cea430281ef744c0ff5605df9855cdf36eeee9%2F0_0_3903_2342%2F3903.jpg>
 Hatch maternity wear Photograph: Handout 
On Net a Porter, pregnancy is only mentioned very subtly in Hatch’s brand 
description (“chic, billowy silhouettes – ideal for women on the go and 
expectant or post-pregnancy moms 
<http://www.net-a-porter.com/Shop/Designers/Hatch/All?pn=1&npp=60&image_view=product&dScroll=0>
”). Net a Porter buyer Sybil Wilmot Smith believes the brand is uniquely 
inclusive. “We shoot each look on a pregnant and non-pregnant model and stock 
is flying out. If someone is clever enough to design pieces that still fit, and 
still have appeal when you’re no longer pregnant then it’s win win. With 
investment pieces, a woman is inevitably going to be happy to spend a little 
more if she know the piece is versatile.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fmaternity-wear-fashion-designed-to-last%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf59e008d24285ebe13df66cbf32c41115b0a253%2F0_0_640_627%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20'maternity%20wear'%20becoming%20a%20thing%20of%20the%20past%20in%20fashion%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fmaternity-wear-fashion-designed-to-last%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20%27maternity%20wear%27%20becoming%20a%20thing%20of%20the%20past%20in%20fashion%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fmaternity-wear-fashion-designed-to-last%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf59e008d24285ebe13df66cbf32c41115b0a253%2F0_0_640_627%2F640.jpg>
 Edwina Elek in her Clary and Peg jumpsuit. Photograph: Handout 
Similarly, Clary and Peg recently tweaked its strapline from “vintage inspired 
maternity wear” to “vintage inspired womenswear that is maternity friendly”, a 
subtle shift that reflects Gieve’s belief that clothes should be appealing 
“regardless of whether women are pregnant or not. We realised we were creating 
a bit of a battle for ourselves with the word maternity. Now we sample clothes 
on pregnant and non-pregnant friends to ensure they could be worn with or 
without a bump.” Fittingly, some of the label’s biggest sales spikes have been 
precipitated by non-pregnant bloggers, such asCourtney Adamo, 
<https://www.instagram.com/courtneyadamo/?hl=en> pictured above, who have worn 
the label and posted the evidence on Instagram.

Clearly, making the subtle pregnancy chic look work beyond the third trimester 
is easier if you are a voluminousRick Owens tunic 
<https://s-media-cache-ak0.pinimg.com/236x/4b/92/16/4b92161fb101e25a3679389777d74b5b.jpg>
 orvintage smock dress 
<https://s-media-cache-ak0.pinimg.com/736x/63/0e/c3/630ec3857ecc97a0b6ab5e22fb2b6057.jpg>
 kind of person – rather than a dedicated follower of bodycon. But with some 
clever shopping (waistless dresses, longline jumpers and loose kimono-style 
outerwear all work;Cos <http://www.cosstores.com/us/> is a reliable source of 
similar shapes at a lower price point), this new approach might just offer a 
solution to dressing in pregnancy – with no need to shout the m-word, unless 
you want to.
 