
Like many people who want to make their savings work for them, Louise Dungate 
has become increasingly frustrated by low interest rates. Undaunted by the 
prospect of taking a risk, the knitwear designer from Balham in south-west 
London decided to dip her toe in the stock market in an attempt to get a better 
return.

Despite the unsettled financial climate, the decision has proved profitable 
for the 29-year-old following her first investment 18 months ago. “Prior to 
that I’d had money in cash Isas,” she says. “As I’m self-employed I don’t have 
a regular salary, and need to make my money work as hard as it can.”

Dungate made her first investment in a self-invested personal pension (Sipp). 
More recently, she opened a stocks-and-shares Isa. “My Sipp now includes 
investments with Unilever and Lloyds. In the past 18 months I’ve seen the value 
of my portfolio rise by 4.74%,” she says.

Turning to the stock market could be a more attractive proposition for savers 
at present, with rates on cash at rock bottom. Ongoing low inflation, weaker 
economic data, global uncertainties and the weakness in the oil price mean 
there is little pressure on the Bank of England to raise interest rates any 
time soon.

Already, tens of millions of people have exposure to the market through their 
pension pot or Isa, but it’s been a turbulent start to the year. “It’s the 
worst start on record, in fact,” says Jason Hollands from adviser Tilney 
Bestinvest. “Markets have reacted to poor economic data from China. The FTSE 
100 has been hit hard.”

But while the FTSE may have plunged, one of the upsides of lower share prices 
is that dividend yields have leapt up on many of these shares.

“The current yield on shares has increased significantly over the past nine 
months, with the yield of the FTSE 100 index now at a very attractive 4.25% per 
year,” says Patrick Connolly from adviser Chase de Vere. “The yields on some 
well-known individual shares look even more enticing, with HSBC at 7.6%, BP at 
8.3%, Shell at 9% and Glencore at 14.4%.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Fis-volatile-stock-market-best-alternative-risible-savings-rates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc801302305d9f9eba69f17367c96a1d3a37271d2%2F0_150_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20a%20volatile%20stock%20market%20still%20the%20best%20alternative%20to%20risible%20savings%20rates%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Fis-volatile-stock-market-best-alternative-risible-savings-rates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20a%20volatile%20stock%20market%20still%20the%20best%20alternative%20to%20risible%20savings%20rates%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Fis-volatile-stock-market-best-alternative-risible-savings-rates%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc801302305d9f9eba69f17367c96a1d3a37271d2%2F0_150_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Self-employed Lousie Dungate wants to make her money work as hard as it can, 
and in her view the potential returns on the stock market are enough to off-set 
the risks. Photograph: Richard Saker for the Observer 
When you invest in shares, income is distributed in the form of dividends. 
These payments are usually made half-yearly as a reward for holding the 
company’s shares. As a shareholder you can either take the cash or use the 
money to buy more shares in the company. Reinvesting dividends can dramatically 
boost returns over the long term – provided the shares go up.

With yields looking good – Shell, for example, has committed to paying a 
dividend for the next three years – savers may be wondering about investing 
their money. The problem is, while the possibility of high yields is appealing, 
this doesn’t tell the full story.

“Income yields show the level of dividends paid as a proportion of the share 
price,” says Connolly. “The reason why many shares have attractive-looking 
yields is because their share prices have fallen, rather than because companies 
have been increasing their dividend payouts. It isn’t a good position for an 
existing investor to have a high yield on their shares if this is the result of 
them having already suffered a big capital loss.”

Many companies, and particularly in sectors such as oil and commodities, he 
says, are under pressure. “It would be no surprise to see some companies 
cutting the level of dividends they pay. This could, in turn, lead to further 
falls in their share price.”

Damien Fahy from finance website MoneytotheMasses, says: “Would-be investors 
shouldn’t just focus on the current yield of a share. They also need to focus 
on the likelihood that the dividend will be maintained – and indeed increased – 
year on year. Shell may have committed to paying a dividend for three years, 
but elsewhere there has been a swathe of companies cutting dividend payments.”

For Dungate the hope to getting a higher return on her money is worth the 
risk. “I appreciate that investing in the stock market is risky, but I’m 
willing to take this risk in the hope of getting a higher return. I’m not 
investing everything I have, and am prepared for the ups and downs.”

Should you take the risk?

While rising stock market yields may make shares more attractive than other 
asset classes – such as fixed interest, property and cash – you need to be 
aware of the risks involved.

“Unlike a cash savings account, investing in the stock market risks losing 
money,” says Justin Modray from finance site Candid Money. “It’s all very well 
enjoying a healthy dividend payout, but this may be little consolation if stock 
market falls mean you’ve lost 10% of your original investment.”

If you are simply fed up with the low rates on cash savings but would endure 
sleepless nights worrying about the prospect of losing money, the stock market 
is not for you. “It is better to put up with poor cash returns and sleep 
peacefully knowing your money is safe,” Modray says.

The UK markets are reasonable value and a long way off all-time highs – so 
provide profit opportunity
Danny Cox, Hargreaves Lansdown 
This is a view shared by Danny Cox from adviser Hargreaves Lansdown: “While 
the yields may currently be attractive, those uncomfortable with capital risk 
should stay in cash.”

Invest for the long term

That said, if you are happy with the idea of taking on some risk this could be 
the time to take the plunge.

“Right now the average variable rate cash Isa is yielding just 0.85%,” Cox 
says. “This makes the yields on stock markets look very attractive. Equally, 
investors who brace themselves for the ups and downs will look back at this as 
being a decent entry point. The UK markets are reasonable value, and a long way 
off their all-time highs – so provide long-term profit opportunity.”

The key is to only invest money that you can afford to leave there for at 
least five or 10 years – to smooth out any bumps in the market.

“The volatility of the markets may be off-putting for first-time investors, 
but the increased investment risk does mean that over the long term there is 
the potential you could achieve greater than you would from a savings account,” 
says Fahy. “According to theBarclays Equity Gilt Study 
<https://wealth.barclays.com/en_gb/smartinvestor/better-investor/investing-lessons-from-114-years-of-data.html>
 equities have produced an average return of around 5.5% a year over the past 
50 years. However, in that time there have been big market falls as well as 
rallies.”

HOW TO GET STARTED

If you are investing in the stock market for the first time, you need to tread 
carefully. Decide what you want to achieve, how long you are planning to invest 
for, and how much risk you are prepared to take. Do your homework or take 
advice – visit unbiased.co.uk, a website that helps you search for local 
financial advisers.

■ Investment funds Investing <https://www.theguardian.com/business/investing> 
in individual sharesafter researching a company carries a high risk. Reduce 
this by investing in a range of shares through investment funds.

■ Equity income funds For those looking to invest in companies with healthy 
dividends. Equity income funds typically invest in a spread of FTSE 100 
companies. Top picks from Tilney Bestinvest’s Jason Hollands include Standard 
Life UK Equity Income Unconstrained, Ardevora UK Income, and the smaller 
company-biased Unicorn UK Income fund.

■ Shop via a platform Good for first-time investors, DIY investment platforms 
resemble an online supermarket from which you can select from a range of 
investments provided by different companies, but which are purchased and held 
in one place. These allow you to mix and match funds from a range of managers, 
plus you can access a wealth of research, information, tips and tools. Remember 
to look at the service offered as well as any administration charges, dealing 
fees and any other extra costs. Platforms include Hargreaves Lansdown, 
Bestinvest, and The Share Centre.

■ Costs Obviously these vary, and the cheapest option will depend on the types 
of investment you want, and how big your portfolio is. If you invest in funds 
expect to pay between 1% and 2% in charges. If you want someone else to run a 
portfolio of trackers for you – and do the asset allocation –Nutmeg 
<http://www.nutmeg.com/home-v3> is an option. With annual fees of between 0.3% 
and 1% it may be a good option for novice investors.

■ Use your Isa If you’ve not used your Isa allowance it is worth popping your 
funds or shares inside this tax-efficient wrapper.

■ Drip-feed your money Reduce the risk of market timing by investing regular 
premiums on a monthly basis rather than putting in a lump sum. That way if the 
market falls you simply buy at a cheaper price the following month. You may be 
able to invest from as little as £25 a month.
 