
Britain may have endured the tightest of EU referendum campaigns, but 
historical polling suggests it may not be the most Eurosceptic state in the EU.

A survey of 10,000 Europeans across 10 countries by Pew Research earlier this 
year <http://www.pewglobal.org/topics/europe/> found that a majority of people 
felt unfavourably towards the union in Greece (71%) and France (61%). Spain 
also had a higher proportion of unfavourable people (49%) than the UK (48%) did.
Polls 1 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/jun/2016-06-22T14:35:05/embed.html>
Change the question, though, and you get a different answer. Eurobarometer, a 
survey of every member state in the EU, asks each year whether the public think 
being in the EU is good or bad for their country.

The Danish state broadcaster, DR, compiled 40 years of these surveys and it is 
well worth taking the time to look athow different countries’ views have changed
 <https://www.dr.dk/nyheder/udland/brexit/europe-has-grown-more-eurosceptic>. 

The Nordic states, for example, have gone from begrudging the union to being 
much more positive about its effect than the majority of other countries. 
Crisis-hit countries such as Italy, Cyprus and Greece were all once much more 
positive about the EU than they are now. However, the key thing here is that 
not one member state – including Britain – had more EU detractors than 
supporters.


EU poll 2 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/jun/2016-06-22T14:44:39/embed.html>
In fact, according to this study, positive attitudes about the EU’s effect 
have actually been rising in most member states after they hit a low in the 
middle of 2011. This is not necessarily contradictory. You can hate the colour 
and the size of your bicycle but still feel that it is better than having to 
walk everywhere.

However, another poll by Ipsos Mori, also this spring, seems to suggest that 
Britain’s referendum is beinglooked upon with envy 
<https://www.ipsos-mori.com/researchpublications/researcharchive/3731/Half-of-people-in-nine-European-countries-believe-UK-will-vote-to-leave-the-EU.aspx>
 by other countries.

It showed a majority in Italy and France said they would like a vote on their 
membership of the EU. In the six other countries Mori polled, more people were 
in favour of a referendum than not, including in Germany, Spain, Belgium and 
Sweden.

Euro 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/jun/2016-06-22T14:44:08/embed.html>
Asked how they would vote if a hypothetical referendum were to take place, 48% 
in Italy said they would vote to leave.


Despite the rise of Eurosceptic parties such as Syriza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/25/greece-election-vote-austerity-leftwing-syriza-eu>
 in Greece and theTrue Finns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/19/timo-soini-far-right-finns-party-finland-government>
 in Finland, there are no referendums imminent anywhere else in Europe. 
Nevertheless, if diplomats in Brussels wake up to news that Britain has become 
the first member state voting to leave the EU, this data suggests that might be 
the first of a series of headaches.

Leftwing Eurosceptics are wrong to use Greece as a reason to leave the EU | 
Hugo Dixon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/04/leftwing-eurosceptics-wrong-greece-brexit-eu-syriza>
Methodology: data comes from the Pew Global Attitudes Survey. Polls quoted in 
the chart were a mixture of telephone and face-to-face interviews with samples 
of at least 999 in each case. The surveys were conducted by TNS BRMB on behalf 
of the Pew Research Center between early April and mid-May. The specific 
methodology used in each country is availablehere 
<http://www.pewglobal.org/international-survey-methodology/?year_select=2016>. 

Eurobarometer: The figures used in the chart come from Eurobarometer 84 
<http://ec.europa.eu/COMMFrontOffice/PublicOpinion/index.cfm/Survey/getSurveyDetail/instruments/STANDARD/surveyKy/2098>
, which was a survey conducted by the TNS opinion and social consortium on the 
request of the European commission. Fieldwork took place between 7 and 17 
November, and 27,681 people were interviewed across all 28 EU member states. 
Samples were over 1,000 in every country except Malta, Cyprus and Luxembourg 
where they were over 500.

Ipsos Mori: The study is based on interviews with 11,030 (between 500 and 
1,005 per country) adults aged 16-64 in Australia, Belgium, Canada, France, 
Germany, Great Britain, Hungary, India, Italy, Poland, South Africa, Spain, 
Sweden and the United States. Data are weighted to age, gender, region, and 
household income based on recent census and/or population figures for each 
country. Interviews were conducted viaIpsos Global @dvisor 
<https://www.ipsos-mori.com/researchspecialisms/reputationresearch/whatwedo/Global-Advisor.aspx>
 Online Omnibus between 25 March and 8 April 2016.
 