
After months of trotting around with a broken handbag, I finally found 
somewhere to mend it. It was a basement shop called Clever with Leather in 
Brighton. The proprietor examined the piece and announced that “cheap yarn” was 
the problem. He stitched it beautifully and it’s now back in service.

Among his heavy-duty machinery for the punching, stitching and repairing of 
some of the toughest hides known to mankind I spotted a reddish leather 
embossed bag, such as a New World postman might have carried. It reminded me of 
the cavernous, buckled handbag my mum once had. This bag (along with her) was a 
constant reassuring presence at the school gates for the duration of primary 
school. From it she was always able to produce tissues, change for the bus and 
hair pins on the occasion of Wednesday night ballet class, like a 1970s Mary 
Poppins.

Skins are processed in makeshift tanneries with workers, including children, 
knee deep in toxic chemicals

There will be no such jumpers-for-goalposts memories for future generations. 
The leather handbag – once a coming-of-age gift that held almost as much 
significance as a wedding dress – has been swept up in fast fashion’s 
relentless pursuit of the microtrend. In the past 12 months 31% of Britons 
bought a handbag or manbag, making them our favourite accessory, with UK sales 
reaching £1.34bn last year.

To fans, leather is the ultimate heritage material in which the patina only 
becomes more interesting during its long life. That’s the trade off, if you 
like, for killing an animal (that and the fact that the skin is a byproduct of 
the meat, like the tallow – cow fat – used in cosmetics and toothpaste). But 
the leather handbag is no longer a bag for life. To luxury fashion houses, 
leather goods are the rocket fuel of their huge expansion over the past decade. 
To high street fashion brands they represent an unrivalled cash cow. To 
consumers they’re just another disposable fashion product. The fact that they 
are made from the skin of a beast is incidental.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fis-it-time-to-give-up-leather-animal-welfare-ethical-lucy-siegle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1b9d54a88d78354af93e17fefbb11046e2a5189%2F0_157_2784_1671%2F2784.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20it%20time%20to%20give%20up%20leather%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fis-it-time-to-give-up-leather-animal-welfare-ethical-lucy-siegle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20it%20time%20to%20give%20up%20leather%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fis-it-time-to-give-up-leather-animal-welfare-ethical-lucy-siegle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1b9d54a88d78354af93e17fefbb11046e2a5189%2F0_157_2784_1671%2F2784.jpg>
 Hell for leather: men struggle to control a cow at a cattle market in Dhaka, 
Bangladesh. Photograph: Getty Images 
A rising global middle class means more crazy-ass consumption of bags – and 
more cows. Presently around 290m cows are killed every year from a global herd 
approaching 1bn. Projections tell us that in order to keep us in wallets, 
handbags and shoes, the industry needs to slaughter 430m cows annually by 2025.

Leather is the material of the moment. Its grip extends throughout the 
wardrobe: from patchwork leggings (Chanel) to Kanye West’s joggers. The way to 
fashion credibility is apparently to pile on animal skins (the other current 
favourite is shearling), so you look like an extra fromThe Revenant.

And you can do this almost without censure in a way that wouldn’t wash if you 
were swaddled in fur. Despite a defiant surge in fur-wearing, it still remains 
a mainstream taboo. However luxe the setting, we’re more likely to interrogate 
the reality of a fur product and think of fluffy animals trapped in cages. When 
it comes to leather, honestly, who really thinks about cows?

Pop star Leona Lewis does. Since she came to fame via The X-Factor she has 
continually spoken up for animal rights. She now fronts a newPeta 
<http://www.peta.org.uk/> campaign video, Hell for Leather 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H8-IeuG4jLw>, which, unsurprisingly, is a grim 
watch. Filmmaker Manfred Karremann, a seasoned campaigner, tracks a pathetic 
caravan of cattle between India and Bangladesh as they are driven along dusty 
roads for hours and hours, abused and tortured with every mile. Finally the 
animals are skinned (in front of each other) in the back streets of Dhaka. The 
skins are processed in makeshift tanneries with workers, including children, 
knee deep in toxic chemicals.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fis-it-time-to-give-up-leather-animal-welfare-ethical-lucy-siegle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65814a62bca717745550cc33dec806f3210505c6%2F0_300_3338_4151%2F3338.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20it%20time%20to%20give%20up%20leather%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fis-it-time-to-give-up-leather-animal-welfare-ethical-lucy-siegle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20it%20time%20to%20give%20up%20leather%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fis-it-time-to-give-up-leather-animal-welfare-ethical-lucy-siegle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65814a62bca717745550cc33dec806f3210505c6%2F0_300_3338_4151%2F3338.jpg>
 It’s not leather: vegan brand Bourgeois Boheme. Photograph: Suki Dhanda for 
the Observer 
Jason Baker established the Indian branch of Peta in 1999. He claims this film 
represents the reality of leather production in much of the region, rather than 
a horrifying anomaly. He himself has seen these kind of conditions again and 
again. “But what still shocked me,” he says of this latest footage, “was that 
the Bangladesh leather industry doesn’t just mean cruel conditions for animals. 
We documented workers, including children, performing hazardous tasks such as 
soaking hides in toxic chemicals and using knives to cut the skins.”

If all ‘Italian leather’ actually was from Italy you wouldn’t be able to move 
for cows there

This research serves to highlight India’s particular paradox. Each year some 
34m bovines (including buffalo) are slaughtered, which makes it one of the 
engines of the global leather trade, attracting millions of dollars. But at the 
same time in 24 of 29 states cattle slaughter is illegal, as framed by the 
constitution. So how can a state such as Rajasthan, which has the only 
government cow department to look after freely roaming sacred cows, and one of 
the biggestgaushalas (shelters for stray cattle), also be home to hundreds of 
tanneries?

For centuries, low-caste Hindus (“untouchables”) have been left to deal with 
dead cows and beef has been widely (though clandestinely) consumed, with skins 
going to the mainly Muslim tannery owners. Sometimes slaughter is undercover, 
in “informal” slaughter houses. The system is fraught and suffers from a lack 
of transparency. The religious overtones of beef consumption are frequently 
played for political gain. Last September a man in Uttar Pradesh,Mohammad Akhlaq
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/30/hindu-mob-kills-muslim-man-eating-beef>
, was lynched for storing and eating beef, killed by a mob who mistook the 
mutton in his fridge for calf meat. And it’s a system that creates the 
situation exposed in Peta’s film – where an estimated 2m cattle a year are 
driven into Bangladesh for slaughter.

I know what you’re thinking: I would never buy anything made from leather 
produced in these hideous conditions. But in reality we buy leather goods 
without knowing where the hide originates or what conditions the animals were 
kept in. We’re comforted by “Italian leather” stamps, but this could mean that 
the leather was imported and finished in Italy. I’m fond of saying that if all 
the “Italian leather” merchandise was of true provenance you wouldn’t be able 
to move for cows in that country. They’d be drinking from the Trevi fountain.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fis-it-time-to-give-up-leather-animal-welfare-ethical-lucy-siegle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb1110ebcc7542cb4b45c753753a8fb10b757291%2F0_320_1916_2558%2F1916.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20it%20time%20to%20give%20up%20leather%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fis-it-time-to-give-up-leather-animal-welfare-ethical-lucy-siegle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20it%20time%20to%20give%20up%20leather%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fis-it-time-to-give-up-leather-animal-welfare-ethical-lucy-siegle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb1110ebcc7542cb4b45c753753a8fb10b757291%2F0_320_1916_2558%2F1916.jpg>
 On track: Kanye West takes the streets wearing his leather joggers Photograph: 
Bobby Bank/WireImage 
Skins are bought and traded across the world, from Ethiopia to Brazil, 
processed into the soft, buttery leather we associate with upscale 
European-made accessories. Nearly half of the global leather trade is carried 
out in developing countries – from Ethiopia to Cambodia and Vietnam – where, 
despite a backdrop of exploitation of animals and humans and the extraordinary 
level of pollution caused by unregulated tanneries and processors, the pressure 
is on to produce more.

Stella is a gamechanger. People are prepared to pay £1,500 for a bag, and it’s 
not made of leather

This shouldn’t just perturb vegans, but anyone with a passing regard for the 
planet. We know that raising livestock in increasing numbers is unsustainable, 
purely from crunching the numbers around greenhouse gas emissions. But in 2009 
a seminal Greenpeace report,Slaughtering the Amazon 
<http://www.greenpeace.org/international/en/publications/reports/slaughtering-the-amazon/>
, made a direct connection between leather and the environment. Researchers 
used satellite imagery to show how the Brazilian cattle industry (with around 
200m head of cattle) was responsible for 14% of the world’s annual 
deforestation. Moreover, associate products, including leather and tallow made 
in deforested rainforest, were finding their way into the supply chain of major 
brands.

This is where I’ll make a case for eco-pragmatism. It is unlikely that the 
world’s consumers (an ever-increasing demographic) will be immediately 
dissuaded from buying leather (and eating beef) altogether, so part of the 
solution is to make the product more sustainable – and to buy only pieces we 
can cherish and wear throughout our fashion lives, like our mothers did.

This is the stance of ethical fashion campaigner Livia Firth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/19/livia-firth-the-fashion-industry-is-so-messed-up-cannes>
 in her new eponymous collection for M&S, which includes two leather bags, a 
roomy handbag and a clutch. The bag carries its own “passport”, detailing the 
sustainability of the leather’s Brazilian supply chain. “I am completely wedded 
to the idea of using the same classic pieces for ever,” she explains. “If you 
use the same handbag every day, like I do, it has to be simple and it needs to 
be roomy without being huge.”

To produce the bags she spent time with rancheros on giant ranches in the 
state ofMato Grosso <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mato_Grosso>. “It might 
sound like an odd place for someone designing fashion, but for me it’s key to 
getting to grips with the supply chain. For 40 years the ranchers were told to 
settle the land by the government and to chop down as much rainforest as 
possible. Now they have us telling them to stop. But the thing I learned is 
that there is huge capacity for change, and that change works.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fis-it-time-to-give-up-leather-animal-welfare-ethical-lucy-siegle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09e7c4424c8752ea7086f264ec98a0ffad195fb9%2F0_372_5616_3371%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20it%20time%20to%20give%20up%20leather%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fis-it-time-to-give-up-leather-animal-welfare-ethical-lucy-siegle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20it%20time%20to%20give%20up%20leather%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fis-it-time-to-give-up-leather-animal-welfare-ethical-lucy-siegle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09e7c4424c8752ea7086f264ec98a0ffad195fb9%2F0_372_5616_3371%2F5616.jpg>
 Raw hide: a leather worker in a tannery in Dhaka poses with hundreds of skins. 
Photograph: KM Asad/ZUMA Press/Corbis 
I’m not the only one searching for a more ethical approach. On weekends 
throughout the spring in Dartington, south Devon, you’ll find people intently 
focused on hole-punching and riveting as they learn the ancient art of leather 
working. The weekend I visit,Leather School <http://www.leatherschool.co.uk/> 
has never been busier, as people from a wide range of professions decide that 
their way of taking control of this issue is to get their hands dirty.


The teacher, John Hagger – also known as Tanner Bates 
<http://tannerbates.co.uk>, the name of his leather brand and shop – is a 
third-generation leather worker who trained as a saddler in Walsall (the West 
Midlands is the home of equestrian saddlery). He admits he’s been asked to make 
pieces before out of synthetic materials, but couldn’t bring himself to do it. 
“There’s something about the material…” he says, showing me a piece of leather 
from a Devon cow tanned using the bark of an English oak tree at Baker’s, in 
east Devon, one of the last surviving British tanneries. His best-selling 
product is a an oak-bark tanned leather belt. “Look at the way it catches the 
light,” he says lovingly. “And the patina will change: you see this is now just 
at the start of its life. It’ll get better and better.”

I wonder about the poor cow, whose life has been ended so the belt’s can 
begin. It is not a subject this craftsman takes lightly. “I was very aware from 
the start, when I knew I wanted to be a leather worker, that this wasn’t just 
fabric I was working with. This was once the skin of a living animal. I wanted 
to know where this amazing material comes from and that wasn’t discussed at all 
during my training.” As part of his quest he has driven animals to the 
slaughter house – and slaughtered some himself. Some of his most beautiful 
pieces, large leather bags, are made from roadkill deer.

I find his approach to provenance enormously respectful of the animal. For me 
it’s the antithesis of the chaotic global supply chain. It feels like the 
humane way forward. Not everybody is convinced. “Simply put,” says Baker, 
“there is no such thing as humane leather. No matter where it comes from, 
leather is the product of a cruel industry. And with so many synthetic 
materials available today, there’s no need to wear leather at all.”

I’m not convinced it’s possible to bypass leather completely. Surely Leona 
Lewis must find it challenging, especially when so many of the luxury brands 
worn by pop stars on photoshoots are heavy on animal skins. “It’s really not 
difficult,” she says. “I see a lot of innovative designers and brands using 
beautiful fabrics that don’t involve animal skin – and that gives me hope.”

It’s true that there are quite a few fresh new brands staking their claim on 
“fabrics that don’t bleed”(a Peta phrase). Faustine Steinmetz, the LVMH prize 
finalist for 2015, has been persuaded to apply her considerable talent to vegan 
bags. “I saw animals being killed for fur in a video and I cried,” she says. 
“Leather and fur are the same thing… It’s really not sustainable to raise an 
animal for a bag, it’s crazy. I decided I had to stop wearing leather. But I 
think the decision has to come from the customer. If the customer doesn’t buy 
leather any more, things will change.”

Some longstanding UK vegan brands, such as Beyond Skin 
<http://www.beyondskin.co.uk/> and Bourgeois Boheme <https://www.bboheme.com/> 
for shoes, andMatt and Nat <http://mattandnat.com/> for bags, have developed 
and grown in confidence in their designs. Bourgeois Boheme’s look-book for the 
forthcoming season has a cool aesthetic and a lack of “vegan” gimmicks. You’d 
be hard pressed to discriminate between a chunky classic leather sandal and the 
Stella – their cotton-backed microfibre cruelty-free version made in Portugal.

Montreal-based accessory brand Matt & Nat began producing vegan leather bags 
for the fashion market 20 years ago. The UK was the brand’s first overseas 
conquest and remains the biggest market overseas. Co-founder Manny Kohli, who 
has just returned from a Berlin trade show selling their Fall 2016 collection, 
says they are the busiest they’ve ever been. “We’re really now starting to make 
a case that there’s just no need to kill animals.”

Most brands cite Stella McCartney <http://www.stellamccartney.com/gb>’s 
eponymous accessories collection as a game-changer. “Here you have a luxury 
brand where people are prepared to pay £1,500 for a bag, and it’s not made of 
leather,” marvels Kohli. And anyone who has ever held a Stella McCartney bag 
and had a good look at one can testify that they’re every bit as alluring in 
weight and softness as a top-grade leather; that they do appear to be as good 
as the real thing – better, if you factor in the environmental damage and loss 
of life they’ve displaced.

Synthetic leather really is on the up. Many patents have been registered for 
potentially groundbreaking materials. These are worlds away from the 
plasticised synthetics of a decade ago. Kohli is particularly excited by the 
biobased PU polyurethane leather that forms the new unstructured Loom 
collection for Matt & Nat. It’s soft and supple, yet built to last. Sounds a 
bit like leather, without the mayhem.
 