
Post- Citizens United, the political world is awash in cash and distinguishing 
between scandalous-but-legal and illegally scandalous attempts by the wealthy 
to influence public officials is becoming increasingly difficult. On Friday, 
the US supreme courtagreed to hear a case 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/courts_law/supreme-court-will-review-corruption-conviction-of-former-va-governor-robert-mcdonnell/2016/01/15/e281ede0-b3c8-11e5-a76a-0b5145e8679a_story.html>
 in which a former elected official, convicted of taking extravagant gifts to 
influence policy, now argues that because he failed to deliver on his promises 
to the person trying to corrupt him, he isn’t guilty of corruption.

The case in question is that of former Republican Virginia governor Bob 
McDonnell who in 2014 was convicted of 11 charges related to federal 
anti-corruption statutes. (His wife Maureen McDonnell was convicted of 8 in the 
same case). I don’t have a great deal of sympathy for McDonnell, whoaccepted 
large amounts of money from someone clearly seeking political influence 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/jurisprudence/2012/02/virginia_governor_bob_mcdonnell_will_sign_a_revised_ultrasound_law_that_is_as_bad_as_the_old_one_.html>
 while also enacting repugnant policies. But he has a decent chance of winning 
– and, should he prove successful, it’s fair to say that Americans concerned 
with the corrupting influence of money in politics should be even more 
concerned.

The McDonnells’ story started in a place many Americans will be familiar with: 
crushing debt. When he took office in 2010, McDonnell and his wife had 
accumulated $90,000 in credit card debt and owed another $2.5m in bank loans. A 
partial solution to their problems came in the form of a guardian angel named 
Jonnie Williams, who wanted various forms of government support for his 
attempts to market a supplement called Anatabloc. He became a political 
contributor to McDonnell, but also a major personal benefactor to the governor 
and his wife.

Starting with a dinner that included a $5,000 bottle of cognac and promises of 
an inaugural gown designed personally by Oscar de la Renta, Williams began to 
ply the McDonnells with an array of lavish gifts. According to Williams, at one 
point he agreed to loan Maureen McDonnell $65,000 to apply to debts and 
expenses for her daughter’s wedding, in exchange for the governor’s help with 
his nutritional supplement business. Later that month, Williams covered a more 
than $2,000 golf club tab for the governor, his sons and future son-in-law – 
one of many large gifts he would continue to bestow on the entire McDonnell 
family. Eventually, the value of Williams’ gifts added up to nearly $180,000.

Had McDonnell took direct action on behalf of Williams, there would be no 
serious question that he violated corruption statutes. What made the case 
tricky, as Slate’s Dahlia Lithwick put it 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/jurisprudence/2014/09/gov_bob_and_maureen_mcdonnell_convictions_legal_defense_was_full_of_lies.html>
, is that it was “never perfectly clear that the prosecutors found the quid to 
the pro quo.”

The prosecution presented convincing evidence that Maureen McDonnell had made 
promises to Williams in exchange for money, but less evidence that her husband 
had followed though on those promises. The prosecution argued that the 
McDonnells colluded to take the money from Williams in exchange for favors; 
McDonnell’s defense was that the governor did not collude with his wife, with 
whom he alleged he was estranged. The jury bought the prosecution’s version of 
events.

Admittedly, as a jaded resident of New York’s beautiful state capital, Albany, 
this scandal seems rather penny-ante. Where arethe multi-million dollar 
kickback schemes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/30/sheldon-silver-convicted-corruption-new-york-political-powerbroker>
? Where arethe no-work jobs for idiot sons 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/12/nyregion/dean-skelos-adam-skelos-guilty-corruption-trial.html?_r=0>
?

Still, the fact that McDonnell is not quite in Sheldon Silver or Dean Skelos’s 
class as a political criminal doesn’t mean that his behavior wasn’t illegal. A 
jury thought so, and the 4th Circuit Court of Appeals upheld his conviction 
unanimously. But theUS supreme court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/us-supreme-court> has agreed to consider three 
related issues in his case, all of which have ramifications that could affect 
future political corruption prosecutions.

The first argument McDonnell’s attorneys will be making is that the actions 
for which he was convicted were not actually covered by the laws under which he 
was convicted: thehonest services fraud ban 
<https://jenner.com/system/assets/publications/10293/original/CrimLit_Fall10_honest.pdf>
 andthe Hobbs Act 
<http://www.justice.gov/usam/usam-9-131000-hobbs-act-18-usc-1951>. McDonnell’s 
argument 
<http://www.scotusblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/mcdonnell-op-below.pdf> 
is that these laws cover only “exercising actual governmental power, 
threatening to exercise such power, or pressuring others to exercise such 
power” but, because the jury was not so instructed, his convictions should be 
thrown out. Given the facts of the case – that McDonnell didn’t even try to do 
anything that Williams wanted him to do – it would have been difficult to 
convict McDonnell under that definition of the statute.

But, if the court declines to define the laws more narrowly, McDonnell’s 
argument is that the laws themselves should be ruled unconstitutional.

The line of reasoning most likely to win would be that defining the statute as 
broadly as it was – that essentially convicting him of taking bribes he had no 
intention of honoring with action – makes the law itself unconstitutionally 
vague. And, convicting someone of a crime if the statute does not make clear 
which activities will be illegal does violate the due process clause of the 
Fifth Amendment.

That argument may well get him somewhere with the justices: in 2010, the 
disgraced Enron executive Jeffrey Skilling had his sentence reduced because the 
US supreme court unanimously concluded 
<https://www.law.cornell.edu/supct/html/08-1394.ZO.html> that the honest 
services statute was unconstitutionally vague as applied to any conduct except 
participating in bribery and kickback schemes. The court may well conclude that 
applying federal fraud statutes to cases where the “quid” is not met with a 
clear “pro quo” is unconstitutional – that taking gifts which the giver intends 
as an inducement to political action when the recipient has no intention of 
following through isn’t actually corruption.

A final approach for McDonnell could be to argue that the Hobbs Act is 
unconstitutional on federalism grounds or that, since the gift-giver was only 
intending to influence state policy, any actual crime would be a matter for the 
states to prosecute and not the federal government. Some conservatives have 
previously argued that the Hobbs Act exceeded the power of the federal 
government under the commerce clause, and, in a 1999 case 
<http://www.crimeandfederalism.com/2004/05/united_states_v.html>, the 5th 
Circuit Court of Appeals split 8-8 on the question.

McDonnell may not pursue the last argument with any vigor or attract attention 
from the court with it, since the liberal justices on the court are unlikely to 
side with him on it – though don’t rule out the possibility that the Roberts 
Court would use McDonnell’s case as a vehicle to put further limits on federal 
power.

Still, if McDonnell wins, the US supreme court will essentially have ruled 
that politicians can accept unlimited gifts – in the McDonnells’ case, they 
took cash, lavish outings, rides on his personal jet and all kinds of luxury 
goods – from donors and other people who seek to influence policy and, as long 
as they don’t follow through on changing policy, it’s perfectly legal to take 
the gifts.

Most Americans would define that as corrupt; the US supreme court, which has 
already allowed the wealthy to spend unlimited money to elect the politicians 
of their choosing without the barest of disclosures, may decide that it’s just 
business as usual.

 