

“Have you ever been faced by six penises?” the presenter asked. This turned 
out to be a first for the contestant on Channel 4’s new dating show, Naked 
Attraction, andprobably a novel experience for the show’s 1.4 million viewers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/26/channel-4-naked-attraction-big-brother-channel-4-bbc2>
.

Not since a clothes-free Keith Chegwin 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eSOZzRNzp8A&oref=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeSOZzRNzp8A&has_verified=1>
 donned a safari helmet and led a bunch of naturists through Channel 5’s Naked 
Jungle 16 years ago have viewers been givensuch a warts-and-all close-up of the 
human body 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/25/naked-attraction-the-apocalyptic-rise-of-nude-dating-shows>
.

Empowering or degrading depending on your point of view, the first episode 
featured two contestants who each chose from six potential dates, all of them 
naked. The programme’s independent producer,Studio Lambert  
<http://www.studiolambert.com/naked-attraction.html>– which also makes Channel 
4’sGogglebox <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/gogglebox> – said it was 
a “bold new experiment” in which “only their bodies give the clues to the 
personality and lifestyles”.

Not everyone agreed. Critics branded it “Blind Date in a brothel” or “Blind 
Date with knobs on”, and 160 people had complained toChannel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> or broadcasting regulator Ofcom by 
Friday. “The body is beautiful no matter what shape or size it is, and you 
shouldn’t judge someone on the basis of their body shape,” said sex therapist 
Charlotte Rose.

“It’s lovely to know that people have the confidence to appear naked on 
television, but if it all goes wrong there could be an incredible amount of 
damage for someone’s wellbeing. It’s horrible.”

But the programme’s presenter, Anna Richardson, said the show’s critics should 
“get a life”, describing the series as a TV equivalent of the dating app 
Tinder. “People are getting hysterical about objectification and yet we all go 
through our daily lives looking at people and making judgments. It is ludicrous 
to assume we don’t sit in judgment on everyone else. We do it every day,” she 
said.

“This idea that we are body-shaming or rejecting people due to the way they 
look – that is life, this is Tinder television. Our particular generation might 
not do it, but in terms of millennials, this is what they do.”

Richardson said it was surprisingly easy to persuade people to shed their 
clothes on TV. “People do it for all different reasons and say, this is 
actually rather liberating,” she added. “Sometimes it was for practical reasons 
– women saying they had tried every dating app and had been single for two 
years. Sometimes it was more complicated, like Matty [from episode one, who has 
a prosthetic leg] who said, when you’ve lost a leg, appearing naked is the 
least of your worries.

Set and match: the best and worst TV dating shows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/26/best-worst-tv-dating-shows-naked-attraction-blind-date>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fnaked-attraction-dating-show-nude-channel-4%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F909f933b5c25d15d500e649338df4d31761ce1d2%2F0_290_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20nude%20dating%20show%20Naked%20Attraction%20a%20public%20service%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fnaked-attraction-dating-show-nude-channel-4%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20nude%20dating%20show%20Naked%20Attraction%20a%20public%20service%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fnaked-attraction-dating-show-nude-channel-4%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F909f933b5c25d15d500e649338df4d31761ce1d2%2F0_290_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Anna Richardson, the presenter of Naked Attraction. Photograph: Naked 
Attraction C4 
“They weren’t encouraged to be nice about people, but one of the most 
heartening things was not a single person was judged negatively by anyone else 
in the show. What’s interesting was it’s not always the size-10 woman or the 
gym-buff boy who is picked.”

Rob Ross, who narrowly missed out on being picked in this week’s first 
episode, said that as a result of appearing naked on the show, he had “more 
confidence within my body, which was quite an achievement … it was really 
rewarding. She didn’t bother that I had a bit of weight on me.”

Gemma Askham, sex editor of Glamour magazine, said: “I don’t think being 
judged in any way – whether it’s your naked body or a close-up of your face on 
Tinder – will ever make you feel better about yourself.

“But that is the nature of finding a date or partner – it does involve 
judgment and selection. I guess the participants are trying to say, I don’t 
care if you judge me, I have the confidence to show myself for exactly who I am 
on TV, and even if you don’t pick me I’m still proud that I had the balls to do 
that.”

Askham said viewers were drawn to the show because we’re “desperately curious 
to see what other people’s bodies look like. It reminds us that there are lots 
of different body shapes that we could, and do, find attractive.”

Grin and bare it – how naked dating shows could strip us of shame | Flic 
Everett
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/27/bare-naked-attraction-dating-channel-4-sexual>
Richardson admitted she approached the programme with a “degree of 
trepidation. We knew it was going to cause a fuss. I am comfortable with 
nudity, but not gratuitous nudity. We talked long and hard about the point of 
the format. It’s a lighthearted entertainment show.”

Naked Attraction has another, more educational purpose, of sorts, including 
various facts about the human body (the average flaccid penis is 3.6 inches, 
82% of women prefer girth to length, that sort of thing). It helps to give a 
public-service veneer, albeit a thin one, to what might otherwise be regarded 
as titillation. However, for a show that featured 14 naked bodies, it was 
remarkably unsexy. “I found it more funny and biology-like than something 
sexy,” said Glamour’s Askham.

Editorial justification was also involved when it came to Naked Jungle, in 
which a group of naturists worked their way through an adventure gameshow, 
overseen by a naked Chegwin. Media lawyer Christopher Thirsk, who was then at 
Channel 5 and was involved in clearing the show for broadcast, said it was made 
clear that it was part of a season of programmes about naturism.

He remembers blanching when one executive intended to broadcast it 
pre-watershed. “I said, have you taken leave of your senses?” said Thirsk.

“There must be sufficient editorial justification for it to be justified and 
it was part of a very sensibly handled naturist weekend,” he added. “The 
naturists couldn’t wait to take their clothes off.”
 