
In 1912 Sir Arthur Conan Doyle took to rhyming verse in response to what he 
saw as unfair criticism, so it seems entirely appropriate that his modern-day 
adapterMark Gatiss <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/mark-gatiss> might do 
the same.

Conan Doyle was responding to a disparaging piece in a magazine called London 
Opinion 
<https://www.arthur-conan-doyle.com/index.php?title=To_An_Undiscerning_Critic>, 
Gatiss to a piece in the Guardian.

Related: To an undiscerning critic, from Mark Gatiss | Letter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/04/to-an-undiscerning-critic-from-mark-gatiss>

The Guardian article in question is one by Ralph Jones, under the headline: 
“Sherlock is slowly and perversely morphing into Bond. This cannot stand.” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/03/sherlock-slowly-perversely-morphing-into-james-bond-benedict-cumberbatch>

Jones expresses “grave concern” that the creators of the BBC’s contemporary 
Sherlock <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/sherlock>, which stars 
Benedict Cumberbatch, are taking the character to an action-hero realm which 
does not ring true or chime with the original stories. “He is a nerd, not an 
action figure; a scientist, not a spy,” writes Jones.

Gatiss responded with a poem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/04/to-an-undiscerning-critic-from-mark-gatiss>
 which he has titled To an Undiscerning Critic (With Apologies to AC Doyle).

Gatiss writes: “Here is a critic who says with low blow/ Sherlock’s no 
brain-box but become double-O./ Says the Baker St boy is no man of action -/ 
whilst ignoring the stories that could have put him in traction.”


He points out that there is evidence of Holmes boxing, in the stories The 
Adventure of the Solitary Cyclist, The Adventure of the Gloria Scott and The 
Sign of the Four.

In The Adventure of the Empty House, the story in which Holmes explains his 
supposed death in his struggle with Moriarty at the Reichenbach Falls, the 
detective’s proficiency in a martial art is revealed – “the misspelled wrestle 
Doyle called baritsu”, writes Gatiss.

Baritsu is a misspelling of bartitsu which was a self-defence method invented 
by the British engineer Edward William Barton-Wright and in the news when Conan 
Doyle was writing his story.

“In hurling Moriarty over the torrent/ did Sherlock find violence strange and 
abhorrent?” asks Gatiss.


He concludes: “There’s no need to invoke in yarns that still thrill,/ Her 
Majesty’s Secret Servant with licence to kill/ From Rathbone through Brett to 
Cumberbatch dandy/ With his fists Mr Holmes has always been handy.”

Gatiss’s letter-poem to the Guardian is reminiscent of Conan Doyle’s 1912 
response to the critic Arthur Guiterman who complained, in verse, that Holmes 
should not say negative things about fictional detectives when Conan Doyle 
himself owed so much to them.


Conan Doyle’s To an Undiscerning Critic missive was ruder than the one from 
Gatiss, opening with the lines: “Sure there are times when one cries with 
acidity,/ ‘Where are the limits of human stupidity?’”

The Guardian’s letters desk said it did not normally publish poetry or 
doggerel, but given it was Gatiss this could be the inaugural.
 