
In April, a new era for shared ownership begins, with the government relaxing 
the rules on eligibility and opening it to anyone with a household income of 
less than £80,000, or £90,000 if you are buying in London. The change will mean 
175,000 more people across the country will be able to buy.

For some, shared ownership is a bonanza: buyers only have to stump up 25%-75% 
of the price of a property, pay only a small deposit, and are charged a 
subsidised rent on the portion of the home they don’t own. When they are in 
better shape financially they can “staircase” up to full ownership.

In high-price areas such as London it is the only chance for many wanting to 
escape private rentals and have a place to call their own. But at current 
prices, even shared ownership is out of reach for people on average incomes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F26%2Fshared-ownership-first-step-property-ladder-slippery-slope-affordable-pitfalls%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3915d8a4d63e8eaa43bf4a6f46a97bfd777fc753%2F0_217_2500_1499%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20shared%20ownership%20a%20vital%20first%20step%20on%20the%20property%20ladder%2C%20or%20a%20slippery%20slope%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F26%2Fshared-ownership-first-step-property-ladder-slippery-slope-affordable-pitfalls%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20shared%20ownership%20a%20vital%20first%20step%20on%20the%20property%20ladder%2C%20or%20a%20slippery%20slope%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F26%2Fshared-ownership-first-step-property-ladder-slippery-slope-affordable-pitfalls%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3915d8a4d63e8eaa43bf4a6f46a97bfd777fc753%2F0_217_2500_1499%2F2500.jpg>
 Central London: A 25% share inthis £625,000 two-bed flat 
<https://www.sharetobuy.com/sharedownershippropertydetails?id=23295> costs 
£1,978 a month. Photograph: Andrew Goodeve 
For example, a housing association on the First Steps website is offering a 
30% share ina two-bed flat in Hackney, east London 
<https://www.sharetobuy.com/firststeps/sharedownershippropertydetails?id=19615>
, where the full price is £768,000 and the buyer must be able to pay £2,423 a 
month in mortgage, rent and service charge – or half the take-home pay of 
someone on a £90,000-a-year salary. But it says something about the frenzied 
nature of the market that they’ve all been snapped up. Others are far more 
affordable. For example, Wyre Forest Community Housing has three-bed homes 
where a 50% share will cost just £772 a month.

Consumer group Which? says the advantages of shared ownership is that “it can 
enable you to get on to the property ladder more quickly than you might if you 
wanted to buy a home outright; it may be cheaper than renting; and you can sell 
a shared ownership property at any time and will benefit from any increase in 
value it’s seen since you bought.” But mortgage adviser Simon Tyler, of Tyler 
Mortgage Management, warns that a shared ownership mortgage usually comes with 
higher rates than mainstream home loans. Giles Peaker, a housing solicitor at 
Anthony Gold solicitors, also has some reservations. “Despite owning 25% or 50% 
of the property, buyers have responsibility for 100% of the service charges,” 
he explains. “These can be variable and have to be paid on top of rent and 
mortgage. Repairs are often a big issue.”

Unlike full owners of leasehold properties who are unhappy with the firm 
running their block, shared owners cannot exercise the “right to manage” their 
building – it will always be run by the housing association. Another downside 
is that you could potentially lose your property if you fall behind on rent 
payments. “Although repossessions are rare, the owner would lose everything, 
including their deposit,” says Peaker.
 Kidderminster: A 50% share in this £180,000 three-bed house 
<https://www.sharetobuy.com/sharedownershippropertydetails?id=15500> is £772 a 
month. 
Potential problems could also arise further down the line. In some cases, even 
if you own 100% the housing association will have first refusal to buy or will 
want to find a vetted purchaser. If you want to let it out, you may not be able 
to do so without permission.

“The restriction on subletting has had a particular impact,” says Lisa Gibbs 
of Simpson Millar Solicitors. “During the recession, when values were stagnant 
or fell, shared ownership owners were unable to sell, but may have needed to 
move for a new job. “However, the prohibition against subletting would have 
meant that the owners would have been in breach of the lease if they had found 
a tenant.”

Mick Smith* bought a shared ownership flat in east London in 2010. High house 
prices meant it was the only way he could get on the property ladder. He bought 
a 40% share of a £190,000 flat in Wisteria Apartments in Hackney in conjunction 
with housing association Family Mosaic. He acknowledges that the flats have 
shot up in price, so on paper he has done well. But he adds: “I love my home 
but I wish I hadn’t bought it. Often promises are not kept and issues not dealt 
with adequately.”

Family Mosaic said it met with residents at Wisteria Apartments in November 
2014 to address concerns around heating, drainage and service charges, and that 
works have been completed.

Another buyer with mixed feelings is Ruth Wheatley, a 31-year-old PR 
executive. Again, on paper she has made big gains, but her gripe is the 
interest rate on the mortgage. She bought a 40% share of a £200,000 one-bed 
apartment in Hackney for £88,000 in 2010.

“It was quite hard to find a mortgage. Lenders don’t like shared ownership, 
and like new build – as my flat was – even less. I am with Leeds building 
society, paying a terrible rate of 6% – I was stung due to lack of choice. 
Saying that, shared ownership has been amazing. But high prices mean it’s much 
harder for other people to do the same thing.”

How to find shared ownership properties
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F26%2Fshared-ownership-first-step-property-ladder-slippery-slope-affordable-pitfalls%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc369a9667a878264c422aa593ba224d8418f99b3%2F0_799_2999_1798%2F2999.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20shared%20ownership%20a%20vital%20first%20step%20on%20the%20property%20ladder%2C%20or%20a%20slippery%20slope%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F26%2Fshared-ownership-first-step-property-ladder-slippery-slope-affordable-pitfalls%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20shared%20ownership%20a%20vital%20first%20step%20on%20the%20property%20ladder%2C%20or%20a%20slippery%20slope%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F26%2Fshared-ownership-first-step-property-ladder-slippery-slope-affordable-pitfalls%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc369a9667a878264c422aa593ba224d8418f99b3%2F0_799_2999_1798%2F2999.jpg>
 Outer London: A 45% share inthis £250,000 one-bed flat 
<https://www.sharetobuy.com/sharedownershippropertydetails?id=22384> costs £917 
a month. 
Sharetobuy.com <https://www.sharetobuy.com/> hosts most shared ownership 
properties, allowing you to search for ones in your area.First Steps 
<https://www.sharetobuy.com/firststeps> is the official intermediate housing 
programme from the mayor of London, helping low and modest income Londoners to 
buy or rent at a price they can afford. You can also register at individual 
housing associations, although eligibility restrictions apply: many housing 
associations outside London have a £60,000 income limit, and may require you to 
have local connections. You will also have to prove you are unable to purchase 
a suitable home to meet your housing needs on the open market, and that you do 
not already own a home.

*Mick Smith is not his real name
 