
It’s quite an ask of the Australian people to demand we be terrified of a 
woman in a chiffon orange blouse who can’t even bring herself to call her 
enemies “dinosaurs” while she argues “love is love” on the television. But the 
Turnbull government is so desperate for villains to distract the Australian 
people from its ongoing policy failures, internal ructions and dwindling 
popularity that the former nurse, grandmother and blouse-wearer Ged Kearney – 
appearing on this week’s Q&A in her role as the president of the Australian 
Council of Trade Unions – will have to do.

Attacking unions is a recurring trope of conservative politics, but any 
Australians who thought it would perhaps have been exhausted in this 
governmental cycle by Tony Abbott’s tilt at a TURC were forewarned more was to 
come on the night of Turnbull’s re-election. His infamous speech railed against 
the “mass ranks of the trade union movement” and twice denounced the 
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union. This tactic of demonising 
unions has been in heavy use by the government this week, making Kearney’s 
visibly non-demonic appearance on Q&A a contradiction of some inconvenience.

Abbott v Turnbull pits rightwingers against moderates – and threatens chaos | 
Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/21/abbott-v-turnbull-pits-rightwingers-against-moderates-and-threatens-chaos>
A failure of the invoked old shadows to inspire much fear is ongoing 
propaganda problem for the government in the new era of social media engagement 
and greater news transparency. Coalition union-bashing actually began as early 
as August, whenPeter Dutton tried to somehow blame the CFMEU 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/australia-news/2016/aug/05/peter-dutton-denounced-for-suggesting-import-of-asbestos-is-cfmeus-fault>
 for construction companies breaking the law by importing lethal and illegal 
asbestos products. This very publication revealed - and all too soon - it was, 
in fact, a CFMEU delegate on a Multiplex site who had discovered asbestos 
material and alerted authorities to its use.

On Tuesday, it was the prime minister himself reaching for the bash-o-meter, 
declaring“union thuggery” <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZMwLMumseik> was 
somehow the reason for Sydney and Melbourne’s unaffordable house prices.

This time, Michael Pascoe from Fairfax helpfully pointed out on Twitter that 
the majority of housing construction is non-union, and at least someone should 
have reminded the prime minister that it’s theover-supply of new builds 
currently under construction 
<http://www.domain.com.au/news/australia-to-have-too-many-homes-in-2017-bis-shrapnel-report-20160308-gnd9jh/>
 – undeterred, it seems, by labour costs – that’s our best chance of driving 
down property prices if they can sufficiently glut the market.
Michael Pascoe (@MichaelPascoe01) 
oh dear. Except for big unit blocks, housing construction pretty much 
non-union. But don't let facts get in the way of a desperate PM
https://t.co/CKZQyQk28W <https://t.co/CKZQyQk28W>
 <https://twitter.com/MichaelPascoe01/status/788500508759592960> October 18, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/MichaelPascoe01/status/788500508759592960> 
But why let facts spoil a fantasy of political convenience? Especially when 
the factors helping to inflate house prices – like negative gearing, capital 
gains tax discounts and foreign property speculation – are all things that the 
government could use its power to address, but doesn’t really wanna.

Perhaps to make the stretches of Turnbull’s s accusations more credible in 
comparison, Dutton was wheeled out again yesterday. Responding to a Dorothy 
Dixer on “dangerous non-citizens”, he delivered an anti-union rant so bizarre 
it could be described radical performance art. For those who just can’t bring 
themselves to watch the video,Dutton claims 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dTthh1GPKn8&feature=youtu.be> “young 
Australians” trying to buy property know apartments are “more expensive because 
they have seen building costs increase as a result the involvement of the 
unions and the bikies”.

Bikies? What next? Vampires? The pretext for the condemnations is the 
union-busting ABCC legislation but one wonders if the bill itself isn’t an 
excuse to devote parliamentary hours to smear Bill Shorten, publicly known to 
be an ex-union official, through these... tenuous associations.

Brisbane’s Courier-Mail reported 
<http://www.couriermail.com.au/news/opinion/question-time-its-all-fun-and-games-in-house-of-mirth-until-they-call-me-that/news-story/572fc1f640b15488e776d5572d21c091>
:

Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> was joined by 
Treasurer Scott Morrison, Mr Dutton, Mr Ciobo, an extremely strident Greg Hunt 
and the Minister for Small Business Michael McCormack to mention the CFMEU 29 
times during Question Time.

Which returns us to the problem of Kearney – among others – whose visible 
public status as as one of the country’s most powerful union officials is in 
laughable juxtaposition to “union thuggery” imagery the government is pushing.

Her contribution to Q&A <http://www.abc.net.au/tv/qanda/txt/s4537372.htm> is a 
case in point: her statements such as “I think big business needs to be held 
accountable”, “make sure those labour hire firms are actually licensed”, 
“heinous crimes are when somebody dies on site because safety hasn’t been 
attended to” and “it is appalling that the possibility that someone like Donald 
Trump with those hideous sexist views of his could possibly be President” are 
not the claims of a nefarious outsider. They’re values common to the 
overwhelming majority of Australian people.

Housing affordability crisis not down to unsustainable rising prices, says 
Morrison
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/19/housing-affordability-crisis-not-down-to-unsustainable-rising-prices-says-morrison>
It’s a contrast between fiction and reality that has not passed unnoticed to a 
broader audience. Witness Father Bob praising the CFMEU’s generosity towards 
charities, or the Huffington Post praising theAMWU’s adorable Twitter account 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com.au/2016/05/15/the-left-are-waging-a-social-media-meme-war-on-the-government/>
, an energetic community boycott of CUB products and comedian Dave Hughes 
working in childcare for a day to support an ongoing United Voice campaign for 
better pay. None of this works in the Coalition’s favour. The public result of 
this week’s shenanigans was only the hashtag #blameunions – mocking the 
government and trending for hours.

Failing to appreciate the new reality, assistance from old allies like Bill 
Leak assist only in making the anti-union claims look out of touch. Leak’s 
cartoon this week depicting a fat, white male rail worker asking his female 
partner to hit him over the head with a champagne bottle so he could access 
paid domestic violence leave predictably drew the ire of Rail, Tram and Bus 
Union – who are pressing for such leave and at whom it was targeted. It 
particularly irked Victorian secretary, Luba Grigorivich, who in person and in 
deed hardly conforms to Leak’s insistent stereotypes.

“People who think it’s OK to make jokes about domestic violence are drinking 
from the same ... well as those who think it’s OK to brag about grabbing women 
‘by the pussy’,” she has said.

One can’t help but conclude that the statements of Kearney and Grigorivich are 
far more representative of majority values in this country, than silly cartoons 
of “union thugs” - wherever they are offered - would prefer that we believe.

Van Badham is vice-president of the MEAA in Victoria. 
 