
Savings rates <https://www.theguardian.com/money/savings-rates> have plummeted 
to the lowest level in history at a time when banks and building societies are 
typically trying to attract savers’ cash.

Instead of raising rates during Isa season, providers have been slashing them. 
Today the average easy access cash Isa pays 1.05%, compared to 1.51% five years 
ago, according to financial analyst Moneyfacts. The average rate on an easy 
access savings account, meanwhile, has slumped to 0.61% compared to 0.85% five 
years ago. This is barely above the Bank of England base rate, which has stood 
at 0.5% since 2009.

Rachel Springnall from Moneyfacts says: “It’s clear that the funding for 
lending scheme decimated the savings market, and the effects still linger on, 
as many providers continue to cut rates. No one area of the market has been 
left unscathed: it is all types of variable or fixed-rate savers, as well as 
much-lovedIsas <https://www.theguardian.com/money/isas>, so it’s a very dire 
situation for savers.”

Experts partly blame the banks’ lack of appetite for savers’ cash on the 
introduction of the personal savings allowance next month. Andrew Hagger from 
MoneyComms says: “I don’t think we will see an Isa rate war this year, 
particularly with the introduction of this new allowance.”

From 6 April, people will have a tax-free allowance of £1,000 on the interest 
earned on their cash, falling to £500 for higher rate taxpayers. So you can 
earn this much interest before handing over a penny to the taxman, with 
estimates that the change will see 95% of people paying no tax at all on their 
savings.

“At an interest rate of 1.5%, a basic rate taxpayer would need more than 
£66,000 in the account before they exceed that limit,” Hagger says.
 