
So we decided to stop children drowning on the beaches by killing them in 
their beds. It’s hard to think of a more poetic metaphor for our utter lack of 
ideas thanspending several years dropping high explosives on to a desert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2015/dec/02/syria-airstrikes-mps-debate-vote-cameron-action-against-isis-live>
. Dropping something from a great height can never be precise – this is why 
Santa still parks up the sleigh. I have to admit that I was sort of disturbed 
by the palpable excitement in parliament, and couldn’t escape the feeling that 
our politicians like wars because they make them feel important.

The motion they voted on was a vague list of “necessary measures” and 
“requests for assistance”, with “specifically airstrikes” at the very bottom – 
as if someone had shouted it out of the front door as they were starting the 
car: “Oooh! Don’t forget eggs, milk – and airstrikes!!” One MP argued that IS 
need a lot of space to move and that airstrikes would limit their territory. 
The Paris shooters lived in one room with a mattress; we could bomb Syria to 
the average size of a London flat and they’d still find room to manoeuvre. 
BombingSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> will achieve nothing. 
Let’s at least take a swing at China and have these dull winter skies replaced 
with a curtain of incendiary light.

Frankie Boyle on Paris attacks: ‘This is the worst time for society to go on 
psychopathic autopilot’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/23/frankie-boyle-fallout-paris-psychopathic-autopilot>
What is Cameron’s problem with IS? Ordinary people who in their spare time 
have formed a huge multinational oil trade and a workforce of thousands willing 
to be paid in rice and fear –that’s the Big Society right there 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jan/05/tories-cameron-big-society-danny-kruger>
. Cameron called them “Women-raping, Muslim-murdering, medieval monsters” – he 
carefully avoided saying “child molesters” in case one of the backbench 
shouted: “Present!” This is before we get to the fact that he used the word 
“medieval” to justify a military expedition into the Middle East. Of course 
bombing will cause delight in Islamic State, where it will form the only 
entertainment. There’s no music, no dancing, and we’re spending a couple of 
million quid a night providing themise en scène for these sadists’ fantasy life.

Hilary Benn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/04/hilary-benn-of-the-tribe-but-his-own-man>
, the product of his father’s tempestuous affair with Lembit Opik, showed a 
fighting spirit that was direct proof of Johnny Cash’sA Boy Named Sue 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WOHPuY88Ry4>. I think it’s worth remembering 
that if you say something and Tories start cheering, then you have said 
something awful. Yes, Hilary, we bombed Hitler, but we were being attacked here 
by German planes that were leaving from Germany – not by a teenager in west 
London who had been assembling a Doodlebug in the garage.Benn’s whole speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2015/dec/03/hilary-benn-airstrikes-vote-speech-full-must-confront-isis-evil-video>
 was played in celebratory fashion the next night on Radio 4, feeding into my 
theory that George Orwell was so prescient about our society that he moved to 
Jura to deliberately encourage his TB.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fhilary-benn-airstrikes-vote-speech-full-must-confront-isis-evil-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hilary%20Benn%20speech%20in%20full%3A%20'We%20must%20now%20confront%20this%20evil'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fhilary-benn-airstrikes-vote-speech-full-must-confront-isis-evil-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hilary%20Benn%20speech%20in%20full%3A%20%27We%20must%20now%20confront%20this%20evil%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fhilary-benn-airstrikes-vote-speech-full-must-confront-isis-evil-video&media=>
Hilary Benn speech in full: ‘We must now confront this evil’. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2015/dec/03/hilary-benn-airstrikes-vote-speech-full-must-confront-isis-evil-video>
We learned little from the debate, except for the fact that the word caliphate 
sounds hilarious in a Northern Irish accent, and so do a bunch of other words. 
Perhaps we’ll soon be so used to the Middle East being in permanent conflict 
that retaking a Syrian Village from IS will become one of the tasks on The 
Apprentice. Perhaps destruction is simply easier than kindness. We find it 
easier to tell a stranger on WhatsApp we want to have sex with their face than 
hold hands with someone we might be falling in love with. It’s ridiculous 
really. Charles Manson orAnders Breivik murder people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/22/anders-breivik-massacre-one-of-us-anne-seierstad>
 to try to start a race war and it’s laughably insane, but when IS do it we 
decide to give them one.

Islamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> practise a brand of 
Islamic law so strict that apparently Raqqa only has two Irish Pubs. For some 
reason the BBC website keeps reporting opposing moderate rebel groups, but 
never names them. I know the names of all the 
cat-hybrid-vegetable-marine-biologist Octonauts, but the differences between 
the groups fighting Assad are deemed too complex for me. Moderate seems to be a 
very fluid term when it comes to offshoots of al-Qaida and whatnot, and 
moderate groups vary from outfits such as Nuclear Allahcaust, who despise the 
west, and more reasonable elements such as the Al-Jihadi Infidel Soul Harvest, 
who despise the east, because if you travel east for long enough, you reach the 
west.

I wonder if the Commons really understands or cares that they are making 
Britain a target. How affected will MPs be by terrorism? In their high-security 
lives, the only fear they have of an attack on a bus is that the waiters will 
be late for a drinks reception. I think we live in a country that sometimes 
forgets how effective the rule of law is, perhaps because our governments have 
often found it inconvenient. We invest a vast amount of money in intelligence 
and terrorists have to, by their nature, take risks: cross borders, move 
weapons. I think the most effective place for those guys to end up is not in a 
martyr video, but in a small but comfortable jail cell. Somewhere in Kent, 
perhaps. No paradise, no virgins, no meaning leant by us to their stupidity, no 
glory, no attention. Just a guard wishing them a bland good morning, and a 
regular change of towels. And if you think that’s insufficient punishment, give 
them a television that only gets terrestrial, and all our newspapers everyday.
 