
Islamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> is using increasing 
numbers of women to evade security measures and spearhead a wave of attacks 
across Europe and the Islamic world as it loses territory in the Middle East.

Previously, female members of Isis have been confined to support roles and 
kept away from the battlefield. However, this policy appears to have been 
reversed in the summer, as military pressure on its main strongholds in Iraq,
Syria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> and Libya intensified and 
substantial territory began to be lost. Researchers describe a “drastic 
U-turn”.​

Officials have repeatedly warned that Isis would launch attacks as it 
retreated from earlier gains 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/23/isis-could-refocus-energy-on-west-if-it-loses-ground-in-mosul-warns-minister-rory-stewart>
. Since August, a series of plots involving women have been uncovered by 
security authorities in Europe and north Africa.

The new tactic poses a challenge for security organisations which already have 
difficulty penetrating extremist networks and identifying potential attackers. 
“It’s a concern … There is constant evolution as the pressures on [Isis] 
increase, so we are not complacent​,” said one western European security 
official.

A plot in Paris in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/09/paris-women-arrested-had-planned-imminent-attack-gare-de-lyon-say-officials>
, involving four women aged between 19 and 39, received significant media 
coverage. The cell, organised by a known Isis militant in France, was the first 
to be entirely female. Two of the women had been listed as potential security 
risks by French intelligence agencies after attempting to reach Syria to join 
Isis. A third was recently married to a militant shot dead by police on the 
outskirts of Paris in June, after hestabbed two police officials to death at 
their home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/16/man-stabbed-french-police-couple-paris-isis>
.

“If at first it appeared that women were confined to family and domestic 
chores by the terrorist organisation, it must be noted that this view is now 
completely outdated,” François Molins, a French prosecutor, told reporters​ 
after the four were arrested.

​But a series of other plots around the world, which involve women playing 
“combat” roles, received less attention. In August, Isis was reported to have 
deployed at least one female suicide bomber in Libya, while last month 10 
alleged female attackers were arrested in Morocco. All were in their teens, had 
sworn allegiance to Isis, and were in possession of bomb-making material, 
​officials said.

Terrorists are focusing [recruitment] efforts on minors who are female. That 
is very worrying for all of us
Abdelhak Khiame, Morocco 
The women, believed to have been planning a series of suicide attacks, “got in 
touch with [Isis] elements via the internet and were brainwashed into 
committing destructive acts targeting … tourist sites in particular,” said 
Abdelhak Khiame, who leads Morocco’s Central Bureau of Judicial Investigations.

“This is the first time we have found a terrorist cell that was entirely 
composed of women. Terrorists are focusing [recruitment] efforts on minors who 
are female. That is very worrying for all of us. It’s an alarm bell,”Khiame said
 
<http://www.atlasinfo.fr/Maroc-la-cellule-terroriste-feminine-demantelee-lundi-projetait-de-commettre-un-attentat-suicide-le-7-octobre-Khiame_a75800.html>
.

Women have long played a role in Islamic militancy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/18/st-denis-female-suicide-bomber-is-not-the-first-and-will-not-be-the-last>
, and have​ been deployed in frontline positions​ before. Palestinian groups 
have used women suicide attackers. So, too, have organisations in central Asia 
and the Caucasus. However, senior commanders of al-Qaida, the extremist group 
responsible for the 9/11 attacks, has consistently made clear its opposition to 
women taking part in combat activities, insisting that they should support male 
“mujahideen” and the broader struggle, rather than physically take up arms 
themselves.

The ruling has not always been obeyed. Al-Qaida’s own affiliate in Iraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> deployed a female suicide bomber in 
2005 to attack a hotel in Amman, Jordan.​ The decision prompted much criticism 
within extremist circles.

Isis, which shares broad ideological objectives with al-Qaida but differs 
dramatically over strategy and tactics, initially restricted the many thousands 
of female volunteers it attracted from Europe and the Islamic world to support 
activities. “Thus far,Isis has stifled the role of women in the ‘caliphate’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/20/push-pull-lure-western-women-isis>
 by limiting them to the house, ensuring they raise the next generation of 
jihadi militants and provide for their husbands,” said Rachel Bryson, ​of the 
Centre on Religion and Geopolitics 
<http://tonyblairfaithfoundation.org/religion-geopolitics> in London.

There have been some ​exceptions: ​female “lone wolf” attackers who attacked 
without official sanction from the group, ​and one major affiliate – Boko Haram 
in west Africa – ​which has systematically used young women as suicide 
attackers.

Isis deploys child suicide bombers as Iraqi army advances
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/11/paranoid-isis-executes-scores-of-spies-in-face-of-iraqi-army-advance>
The recent change “would suggest the group is starting to heavily feel the 
pressure from the action taken against it,” Bryson said.

In recent months, Isis has lost significant ground in Libya, and its core 
territory in Iraq and Syria is now threatened.Offensives are now under way 
against ​the cities of​ Raqqa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/29/kurdish-forces-big-push-islamic-state-iraq-syria>
, ​the provincial centre in Syria ​seen as the headquarters of the group, and 
Mosul, the biggest single urban centre under Isis control and the seat of the 
“caliphate” declared by its leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, more than two years 
ago.

As important as the loss of territory is the diminishing population under Isis 
authority. Although some revenue is earned from oil and other resources, most 
funds are raised through “taxation” of individuals, communities and businesses.

Analysts are split over the impact of military defeat on Isis. Some believe 
the organisation will be able to continue to attract support because of its 
past record of victories, with volunteers taking the view that it needs help 
now more than ever. Other experts believe that the appeal of Isis will be 
seriously weakened.

Bryson said: “As [Isis] and others start to lose more ground, their pool of 
recruits will grow smaller, meaning that they’ll need more women to take up 
combat roles. Furthermore, Isis knows that the death of a woman evokes a larger 
response worldwide than that of a man, and for Isis’s PR machine increasing the 
group’s media platform is an attractive prospect.”
 