
Britain could save the lives of thousands of women and girls if it followed 
Germany’s lead in allowing refugees from the Yazidi community into the UK, 
according to a UN goodwill ambassador and survivor of sexual enslavement by 
Islamic State.

UK government faces calls to shelter Yazidi refugees persecuted by Isis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/26/uk-government-calls-shelter-yazidi-refugees-persecuted-isis>
Nadia Murad Basee Taha, who escaped Isis after she was held captive for almost 
three months in 2014, has welcomed the efforts of British MPs inlobbying the 
home secretary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/26/uk-government-calls-shelter-yazidi-refugees-persecuted-isis>
, Amber Rudd, to allow Yazidi refugees into the UK. The MPs want the 
resettlement programme that will admit20,000 vulnerable people fleeing conflict 
in Syria 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/publications/written-questions-answers-statements/written-statement/Commons/2016-04-21/HCWS687/>
 by 2020 to be extended to Yazidis.

“Those who have lost their lives, lost everything – this would be literally 
saving them and giving them a new life, if the UK were going to do that,” said 
Murad, who is calling on the international community to take action against the 
perpetrators of violence.

Murad was awarded the EU’s Sakharov human rights prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/oct/27/yazidi-women-who-escaped-isis-win-sakharov-prize-human-rights-nadia-murad-lamiya-aji-ashar>
 in October for her work campaigning for the rights of the Yazidi community.

In August 2014, Isis stormed the city of Sinjar in northern Iraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>, forcing thousands of Yazidis to flee. 
Hundreds of people were killed and more than 6,000 women and children kidnapped 
by the Islamist militants.


Last year, Germany opened its doors to more than 1,000 Yazidi women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/02/germany-opens-doors-yazidi-women-children-northern-iraq-enslaved-isis>
 and children who had managed to escaped Isis, offering physical and emotional 
care to treat the horrific abuses they experienced while in captivity. It is 
believed more than 3,400 are still held by Isis.

Murad, who now lives in Germany with one of her sisters – another still lives 
in a camp in Iraq – was abducted from the village of Kocho two years ago and 
sexually and physically abused by 12 fighters before managing to escape. Isis 
killed almost all the men in the village, including six of Murad’s nine 
brothers. Her mother was also killed.


Murad has no doubt that what happened to the Yazidis, a group persecuted for 
centuries, was genocide. AUN report 
<http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=54247#.WEfxxdd4X9I> published in 
June concurred. As well as the violence meted out to women, she points to the 
mass graves that have been found as evidence of targeted atrocities against the 
group by Isis. “Isis said in videos that they came to commit genocide against 
Yazidi people,” Murad said.

Speaking during the Trust Women conference <http://www.trustwomenconf.com/> in 
London last week, Murad called on the international community to bring the 
Islamist fighters to justice.

“I would like those who came to exterminate us, committed the crimes, to be 
held accountable for their crimes. Minorities should be protected, they should 
have the right to practice their faith,” she added. “We have to have justice.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fisis-survivor-says-uk-could-save-lives-yazidi-women-admitting-refugees-nadia-murad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F986d37425385bc2f2124f30d42bcbca672b7849f%2F0_0_2592_1719%2F2592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Isis%20survivor%20says%20UK%20could%20save%20lives%20of%20Yazidi%20women%20by%20admitting%20refugees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fisis-survivor-says-uk-could-save-lives-yazidi-women-admitting-refugees-nadia-murad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Isis%20survivor%20says%20UK%20could%20save%20lives%20of%20Yazidi%20women%20by%20admitting%20refugees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fisis-survivor-says-uk-could-save-lives-yazidi-women-admitting-refugees-nadia-murad%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F986d37425385bc2f2124f30d42bcbca672b7849f%2F0_0_2592_1719%2F2592.jpg>
 Yazidi women released by Islamic State militants wait for assistance in the 
Iraqi city of Kirkuk in January 2015. Photograph: Xinhua/Rex/Shutterstock 
While falling short of demanding the crimes against the Yazidis be referred to 
the international criminal court, Murad said some form of international hearing 
was needed as she and others in her community had little or no faith in the 
legal systems in Iraq and Kurdistan.

“It will be a true acknowledgement when those criminals are brought to face 
justice before an international court, where people see their criminality and 
their crimes.”

In December last year, Murad, who has also received the Council of Europe’s 
Václav Havel human rights prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/oct/10/iraqi-activist-nadia-murad-wins-human-rights-prize-for-yazidi-campaign>
 for her work,shared her story with the UN security council 
<http://webtv.un.org/watch/nadia-murad-basee-taha-isil-victim-on-trafficking-of-persons-in-situations-of-conflict-security-council-7585th-meeting/4665835954001>
. She urged member states to “liberate our territory” from Isis and establish a 
fund to compensate abuse survivors and enable the region to be rebuilt. Murad, 
who is expected to address the security council again this month, also called 
on member states to open their borders to Yazidi refugees.

“Every time I speak it’s difficult,” she said, “but also every time I say 
something that people have not heard. It’s also therapeutic for me. I believe 
in justice, I just hope this will [happen] in the short term.”

Does she want to return to Sinjar? “To come from a village to Europe, a life 
with so many people, there are big differences. But because they embrace us and 
they treat us with so much respect, I don’t feel that difference. And I love 
the German people and the country.”

But she added: “If we can restore our rights and bring justice to victims and 
against perpetrators … I would like to go back.”
 