
It is a familiar premise. Ten strangers holed up in a house, including in this 
case a part-time model, a comedian, a gay man and a former boxer. But on this 
occasion there will be no evictions or tearful debriefings with Davina McCall.

BBC2’s documentary Muslims Like Us  
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/proginfo/2016/50/muslims-like-us>has been 
described as the “MuslimBig Brother”, and in its own way it is as 
groundbreaking as the original BB concept which, for a few years, transfixed 
late-night television audiences.

Filmed over nine days, the two-part documentary will be broadcast next week. 
TheBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> describes it as a “social 
experiment” looking at the diversity of the Muslim experience in Britain.

The project has already sparked controversy through the inclusion of the 
Islamist boxer Abdul Haqq, formerly Anthony Small, who has expressed support 
for Islamic State in the past. But Muslim groups are lining up to support what 
they see as a much-needed portrayal of diversity on national television.

Fiyaz Mughal, founder of Tell Mama <http://tellmamauk.org/>, the charity that 
provides support to victims of anti-Muslim hate crimes, said: “We welcome a 
show which demonstrates the pluralism within Muslim communities and humanises 
them. In the current climate this is warmly welcomed.”

A spokesperson for the Muslim Council of Britain said it was looking forward 
to the airing of the programme, describing it as sharing a “safe space” for 
discussion and debate on topical issues of difference. “It will be an 
opportunity for the rest of the nation to have an inside view of the broad 
diversity of Muslims living in the UK, and that we are all different in our own 
way, with individual tastes and choices in lifestyle, but we can still share 
the same faith.”

Participants in the programme are seen in various scenarios, from a night out 
at karaoke to setting up a stall handing out leaflets onIslam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam> to passers-by in York. Meanwhile 
debates take place on everything from race and sexuality to who should do the 
washing up.

The programme-makers say their aim is to create a microcosm for the diverse 
cultures and opinions within the Muslim community.

“We wanted to tap into the conversations happening within the Muslim community 
and their struggle to define what it means to be a British Muslim,” said Mobeen 
Azhar, the series producer. “Many Muslims feel they are in the spotlight and 
have to justify themselves constantly. We explore the diversity within the 
community and issues such as race and sexuality, but in a very raw, human way.”

The programme was made by Love Productions, which itself is no stranger to 
controversy. It has become better known for the contentious sale of its biggest 
hit, the BBC’sGreat British Bake Off, to Channel 4. It was also behind Benefits 
Street, the 2014 Channel 4 documentary series about a street in Birmingham 
where 90% of the residents were said to claim state benefits. It resulted in 
hundreds of complaints to the police, Channel 4 and the media regulator Ofcom.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fmuslims-like-us-bbc-gives-big-brother-a-twist-out-go-evictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42ae7a1a5bfe7dd32a1bd8ef41218673035f8856%2F0_156_4234_2541%2F4234.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Islamist%2C%20gay%20man%2C%20teacher%3A%20TV%20housemates%20bid%20to%20show%20the%20diversity%20of%20British%20Muslims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fmuslims-like-us-bbc-gives-big-brother-a-twist-out-go-evictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Islamist%2C%20gay%20man%2C%20teacher%3A%20TV%20housemates%20bid%20to%20show%20the%20diversity%20of%20British%20Muslims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fmuslims-like-us-bbc-gives-big-brother-a-twist-out-go-evictions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42ae7a1a5bfe7dd32a1bd8ef41218673035f8856%2F0_156_4234_2541%2F4234.jpg>
 Abdul Haqq’s inclusion will prove contentious because of his Islamist views. 
Photograph: Gareth Gatrell/BBC/Love Productions 
The decision to include Haqq was not taken lightly, said Fatima Salaria, 
factual commissioning editor for the BBC. “We realised we had to represent this 
voice because it does exist within the Muslim community, and it would have been 
wrong to pretend it doesn’t or fail to address it.”

Viewers get a taste of things to come in the documentary’s opening scene when 
Haqq greets the first housemate, a 27-year-old teacher Mehreen Baig, politely 
before presenting her with a handout about why free mixing between the sexes is 
forbidden in Islam.

Baig said: “I entered the show to represent the middle girl, not too liberal, 
not too conservative. When people think of Muslim women, there’s a stereotype 
of us being repressed and submissive. Someone like me doesn’t come to mind – a 
normal girl, with a career who watchesX Factor and fasts at Ramadan.

“We are the majority, and unfortunately our voice is unheard. My presence in 
the show challenges that stereotype. I’m independent and educated, yet my life 
is very much moulded by my religious values. I’m proof that there can be, and 
is, a balance between both.”

I hope the programme shows we are a wide range of people with different views, 
struggles and experiences
Nabil Abdul Rashid 
Muslims Like Us is something of a gamble for the BBC. A report commissioned by 
the broadcaster this year was critical of the corporation’s concentration on 
Christianity at the expense of other religions.Muslims Like Us could be seen as 
a positive move towards representing other faiths but theBig Brother-style 
approach may garner more criticism than praise.

However, the programme does not shy away from looking at the real problems 
within Muslim society. Viewers will witness one contestant, 31-year-old 
engineer Ferhan Khan, nervously coming out as gay to the other housemates and 
another, Nabil Abdul Rashid, talking about his wife, who is of Pakistani 
origin, receiving racial abuse for being married to a black man.

Explaining his decision to appear in the documentary, Rashid said: “I took 
part because, as someone who complains about the lack of representation of 
practising Muslims in mass media, I feel if you want something done you should 
do it yourself, instead of sitting at home swearing at the TV.

“I hope the show humanises Muslims and shows we are a wide range of people 
with different views, struggles and experiences. The only thing I can say we 
all agree on is that we want to be allowed to live in peace.”

Muslims Like Us will air on BBC2 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc2> on 
Monday, 12 December, and Tuesday, 13 December, at 9pm

• This article was amended on 5 December 2016 to correct the surname and job 
title of Fatima Salaria

 