
It feels fitting that I first meet Issa Rae in a corridor: a long, empty, 
beige-carpeted limbo upstairs in a Los Angeles hotel. An early episode of her 
cult web series,The Misadventures of Awkward Black Girl 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Mia51fMAGJw&list=PL019D7AE1C3429770>, hinged 
on just such micro-anxieties – with Rae fretting over office etiquette as a 
vague acquaintance approaches her down a hallway. “I’ve already said hi to this 
woman,” she thinks. “What other interaction could we possibly have? What am I 
supposed to do with my face? Am I supposed to look at her the whole time? Do I 
act like the blank walls are interesting enough to stare at?”

To add to the awkwardness, Rae is half an hour late and the room turns out to 
be locked. The introduction is, well, awkward. Flustered apologies aside, 
though, Rae is no longer the awkward black girl, at least not in the same way. 
She’s now a TV star in waiting.Insecure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/07/insecure-review-hbo-issa-rae>
, her new HBO series, is one of the most anticipated of the year.

What’s more, she looks amazing. In contrast to her dressed-down screen 
persona, she’s wearing glasses, heels, full makeup and a black, embroidered 
designer dress. Her hair, dyed bright orange, is practically a work of 
sculpture. The awkwardness is still there, she admits, once we’re inside: “That 
will never go anywhere. It’s just a matter of finessing that within myself, 
trying to mask it.”

It’s no surprise that she’s a big fan of Larry David 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/larry-david>, the master of social 
excruciation. “He’s so unapologetically him,” she says, “even if it’s a 
terrible him. I love the fact he’s able to exploit those small, very specific 
situations and make them so relatable. It’s a big part of British comedy, too – 
to make you cringe as well as laugh. That’s hard to do.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fissa-rae-insecure-misadventures-of-awkward-black-girl-hbo-tv-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b2eab84c24b086ba2addef14027b3ef6ccf05a1%2F0_212_3147_1888%2F3147.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Issa%20Rae%3A%20from%20Awkward%20Black%20Girl%20to%20HBO%20star&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fissa-rae-insecure-misadventures-of-awkward-black-girl-hbo-tv-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Issa%20Rae%3A%20from%20Awkward%20Black%20Girl%20to%20HBO%20star&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fissa-rae-insecure-misadventures-of-awkward-black-girl-hbo-tv-comedy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b2eab84c24b086ba2addef14027b3ef6ccf05a1%2F0_212_3147_1888%2F3147.jpg>
 ‘Aaargh! I just want to get it out there’ … Issa Rae. Photograph: Pari 
Dukovic/HBO 
Insecure is not Awkward Black Girl but, with Rae as its creator and 
protagonist, it has similarities. Her character – Issa – is a smart but 
fallible woman trying to figure out why she hasn’t got it all figured out. 
She’s the sole black employee of a non-profit that “helps kids from the hood 
but didn’t hire anyone from the hood”. Her boyfriend is an underachieving couch 
potato. Her best friend Molly is a high-flying lawyer with her own dating 
troubles. Issa’s spontaneous decision to rap at an open-mic night about Molly’s 
“broken pussy” doesn’t help.


Rapping is something Rae’s characters often do – hilariously badly – usually 
into the bathroom mirror. Sample lyric: “Do you want your man or not? / Do you 
know your plans or not? / You gonna go back home or not? / You gonna claim your 
throne or not? / Is you Khaleesi … or … that other bitch … I don’t remember.” 
It’s a great comic device but, sadly, it’s not something Rae does in real life. 
“A lot of my ideas come in the bathroom, though,” she says.

The fact that most of Insecure’s characters are African-American should not be 
remarkable in 21st-century television, but it is. It’s also hugely refreshing. 
Insecure deals with everyday life – love, work, friendship, going out, messing 
up – and it reveals the subtle racial markers hidden within these interactions. 
When Issa takes the initiative at work, she discovers everyone else is talking 
about her behind her back. “They’re having secret white meetings and they’re 
sending secret white emails!” she complains. Raising it would make her look 
over-sensitive, though.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fissa-rae-insecure-misadventures-of-awkward-black-girl-hbo-tv-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3564e9ee28ef0def55edb2f7abc7969fe3ef6fc%2F0_155_3156_1894%2F3156.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Issa%20Rae%3A%20from%20Awkward%20Black%20Girl%20to%20HBO%20star&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fissa-rae-insecure-misadventures-of-awkward-black-girl-hbo-tv-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Issa%20Rae%3A%20from%20Awkward%20Black%20Girl%20to%20HBO%20star&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fissa-rae-insecure-misadventures-of-awkward-black-girl-hbo-tv-comedy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3564e9ee28ef0def55edb2f7abc7969fe3ef6fc%2F0_155_3156_1894%2F3156.jpg>
 We got y’all … Issa is the sole black employee of a non-profit that ‘helps 
kids from the hood but didn’t hire anyone from the hood’. Photograph: Anne 
Marie Fox/HBO 
Issa’s friend Molly, by contrast, is at ease in any situation. “White people 
looooove Molly,” Rae narrates, as Molly cracks up a boardroom of white 
executives. “Black people also looooove Molly,” she continues, as Molly slams 
down dominoes with the security guards. Later, Molly advises a new black intern 
to tone down her loud behaviour. “Girl, you know how these white people are,” 
she says. “If you wanna be successful here, you got to know when to switch it 
up a little bit.”


Race, I suggest, adds an extra layer of awkwardness to that Larry David social 
minefield. “Absolutely,” she replies. “I love that: social minefield.” She 
turns the words around in her head. “Good phrase.”


It’s a minefield for white people, too. They stumble over themselves trying to 
say the right thing in Issa’s company, when they’re not asking her to translate 
black slang, or being inadvertently patronising. For some white viewers, the 
show could be a gentle primer in How Not To Be Racist. “We’re all going through 
it,” says Rae. “It’s just that one side is at more of a disadvantage. And 
nothing will happen unless we address it. I don’t know the proper metaphor, but 
do you dig up mines? How do you deactivate mines?”

Rae has a similar minefield to negotiate – fail to acknowledge race issues and 
you’re accused of selling out to white audiences; focus on them too much and 
you’re no longer “relatable”. Larry David never had to think about “switching 
it up”. Rae must be constantly mindful of it, especially now she’s in the big 
league. Does it bother her? “Only when it confines you to a certain space. 
That’s when it’s irritating, almost insulting. It’s like, ‘You’re a black 
comedian so you’re great among the blacks, but this canon you’ll never touch.’ 
I’m more than black. Being black isn’t an insult, it’s a privilege, and 
something I’m proud of, but it’s when it’s used to diminish your talents or 
your accomplishments that it gets frustrating.”

At school in Dakar, she felt 'black'. At school in America, she felt 'too 
white'

Rae was always something of a misfit. Her mother is from Louisiana, her 
father, a doctor, from Senegal. She mainly grew up in south Los Angeles, 
punctuated by two years in Dakar, and flitted between predominantly white 
private schools, where she felt conspicuously “black”; and predominantly 
African-American state schools, where she was mocked for being “too white”. She 
later went to Stanford University in California, majoring in African and 
African-American studies, but also participating in drama and theatre, which 
led to her making her own lo-fi mockumentaries.

Awkward Black Girl, which began in 2011, was a response to “the mainstream 
media portrayal of what blackness is”. The transition from independent internet 
operator to part of mainstream media has brought new challenges. “I’m a very 
impatient, impulsive person,” she says. “I’m very used to like, ‘Oh, I have an 
idea, let me write it, post it real quick, it’s out there, the audience loves 
it or hates it.’ Insecure has been been a three-year journey from pitch to 
screen. I’ve been just like, ‘Aaargh! I want to get it out there!’”

Now Rae is part of a generation of black women who are broadening that narrow 
band of the media spectrum, just when it’s most needed. Her comedy reassures us 
that awkwardness, humiliation, bad judgment and saying dumb things you didn’t 
really mean to are qualities that unite us all. She’s levelling the minefield.

• Insecure is on Sky Atlantic, Tuesday, 10.45pm and on HBO 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/hbo> in the US, Sunday, 10.30pm.
 