
You’re not enjoying this season of The Walking Dead. You can’t be. It’s 
physically impossible, because it’s the most thankless six episodes of 
television I can recall seeing. And I can rememberEldorado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/oct/23/tony-jordan-interview-bbc-eldorado>
.


Viewers know how The Walking Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-walking-dead> works by now: it 
starts big, percolates, stalls until you start to tire, then builds, and 
finally explodes, and soon all is forgiven. This is the formula that, over six 
years, has turned a humble genre show about mulched zombie craniums into 
something my – and possibly your – mum watches.

But this feels different. It’s not that it is miserable now (always was). Or 
dull (often that too). It’s that it’sboth – both, a million times over; both, 
to the extent that it makes you strongly consider going down to the bottom of 
the garden for a cry in the weeds. It can be dull, or miserable, but not both – 
and definitely not for this long.

Previous seasons had long stretches of frowning and little in the way of 
action, yet relationships were always twisting, growing, fraying. You knew this 
was solely to maximise the agony of them being torn to shreds, but still. It 
was enough to keep you invested. Even at its worst, The Walking Dead was a 
compelling character study.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fthe-walking-dead-why-im-giving-up-on-the-zombie-apocalypse%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1462fd80bd3dd58809dd457753ba68906a00441%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It%20bites%3A%20why%20I'm%20giving%20up%20on%20The%20Walking%20Dead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fthe-walking-dead-why-im-giving-up-on-the-zombie-apocalypse%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%20bites%3A%20why%20I%27m%20giving%20up%20on%20The%20Walking%20Dead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fthe-walking-dead-why-im-giving-up-on-the-zombie-apocalypse%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1462fd80bd3dd58809dd457753ba68906a00441%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
 In the infamous premiere, some miserable and incredibly violent things 
happened, slowly and miserably. Photograph: Gene Page/AMC/AP 
This year? Things began with the infamous premiere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/26/the-walking-dead-ash-vs-evil-tv-peak-gore-horror-blood>
, in which some miserable and incredibly violent things happened, slowly and 
miserably. Then came an equally slow if refreshingly jovial episode about Carol 
eating some chocolate and meeting a man with a tiger. Then the one in which 
Daryl was subjected to assorted discomforts by Dwight – which impressively 
managed to pack 10 minutes of plot into a meritless 45. Next, a 
feature-lengther in which nothing of note happened: Rick sweated. Michonne 
skulked. Carl continued to ecstatically need a haircut. Negan said mean things 
in that funny way he does, then went home. Last week’s instalment, the 
soporific nadir if you like, was set at the Hilltop colony. Carl and Enid 
roller-skated, Maggie and Sasha hid in a cupboard – but not the cupboard you 
thought! – and there was actually an extended scene in which three characters 
prayed near some bread.
 Since then, nothing has happened apart from Carol meeting a man with a tiger. 
Photograph: Fox 
And what of this week? Well, someone peered at a fish, something about a 
bridge with sand zombies on it, some talk of the Saviours being bad, Tara made 
a friend, Eugene cried.Fin. Which part was meant to be entertaining? Which part 
of any of these episodes, in fact? I did my tax return during one of them, to 
break the tedium.

A large portion of the blame goes to Negan, who is simply not captivating 
enough as a villain; his brutality never sufficiently established to acceptably 
counterpoint his faux-chipper “hot-diggity-dog”isms. Yes, he did cave in a 
couple of heads, but who hasn’t? It’s the apocalypse.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fthe-walking-dead-why-im-giving-up-on-the-zombie-apocalypse%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9cf95d9f2092d7f4d1671a3f312bf15854492247%2F0_0_2124_1417%2F2124.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It%20bites%3A%20why%20I'm%20giving%20up%20on%20The%20Walking%20Dead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fthe-walking-dead-why-im-giving-up-on-the-zombie-apocalypse%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%20bites%3A%20why%20I%27m%20giving%20up%20on%20The%20Walking%20Dead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fthe-walking-dead-why-im-giving-up-on-the-zombie-apocalypse%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9cf95d9f2092d7f4d1671a3f312bf15854492247%2F0_0_2124_1417%2F2124.jpg>
 ‘Hot diggity dog’ … sure, Negan has caved in a couple of heads, but who 
hasn’t? It’s the apocalypse. Photograph: Gene Page/AMC 
Remember Terminus? They slaughtered people and ate them! That’s far worse. 
Negan is just a bully. Yet conversely, whenever he isn’t on screen, nothing 
happens. Daryl and Rick are mute. Carol’s with that tiger. Who else is there? I 
can’t even remember. I don’t care.

The ratings for this season have taken a huge hit, now at their lowest since 
the third series, so audiences are clearly tiring. This isn’t a slow-build. 
This is an endurance test – and it’s no fun at all.

When you’ve stuck with something for six years, it’s hard to give it up, 
particularly as you know what’s going on: yes, it’s working up to something. 
Yes, the mid-season finale will doubtless be spectacular. But is it worth it? 
Six episodes of misery for a few seconds of release? There comes a point when 
you have to stop. For me, as far as The Walking Dead goes, this is that point. 
It has one more chance.

If the next episode isn’t the most thrilling hour of television ever 
televised, that’s it. I don’t care how much I once loved it. It’s dumped. Damn 
you, Walking Dead, for letting it come to this.
 