
If you had told me, when The Beiderbecke Affair was first transmitted in 1985, 
that 18 years on I would be travelling to Barrow-in-Furness with six of the 
nation's finest jazz musicians for a one-night-stand in its honour, I would 
have believed you, because as a card-carrying, gritty northern surrealist, I'm 
only prepared to believe in the terminally bizarre.

Some shows disappear without trace, while others survive in the collective 
consciousness and nobody can explain why. The evidence is that the three 
Beiderbecke series, starring the peerless James Bolam and Barbara Flynn, have 
hung about in this way: indeed, The Affair has just been released on DVD in the 
US. Not that we need a huge tent in Hyde Park to accommodate the fans: a town 
hall annexe in the moonstruck outer limits of Leeds would probably do, with Big 
Al running the bar.

The fan letters down the years reveal an interesting phenomenon: the writers 
themselves inhabit a world that is second cousin to the Beiderbecke universe. 
Mark from York wrote to say that he sent spoons to people he admired, and had 
he ever sent me a spoon? I replied saying that I would certainly have 
remembered such a spoon. A lovely, hand-whittled wooden spoon arrived soon 
afterwards. Molly from Greenock wrote to say that she loved the music of Fats 
Waller but needed my permission to do so. I replied saying not only was it all 
right, it was compulsory. A couple from the Midlands wrote to say that they 
were exactly like Trevor and Jill in the series: he taught woodwork, she taught 
English and once a week they would read aloud from the Beiderbecke novels while 
getting smashed out of their heads on Frascati.

Mark Fisher, when he was shadow minister for the arts, confessed to us on a 
Channel ferry that he was in love with Barbara Flynn. "Get in line," I said. 
Daniel from Liverpool became so frustrated at not knowing what happened to the 
characters in their later years that he started writing his own sequel.

Finally - and these are only edited highlights, you understand - I had an 
email from Christopher Beiderbecke in Moline, Illinois, to say Bix was his 
great-uncle and please would I tell him what was going on?

But none of this explains Barrow-in-Furness. That was the fault of Jim from 
Birmingham, who called me in the mid-90s with an offer I couldn't refuse. Would 
I like to do a one-night-stand at Ronnie Scott's in Birmingham with Kenny 
Baker, who had recreated the Bix cornet sound for Frank Ricotti's Bafta-winning 
music score. A couple of days later Kenny called. "What's this gig about?"

"Well, you and the guys will play some tunes. You've been around the block a 
few times. You know lots of tunes."

"But what are you going to do?" 

(Pause) "Buggered if I know, Kenny. I expect I'll write a few stories and read 
them aloud."

And that's what I did. As I ex-plained to the audience on the night, they were 
proper stories, neatly typed and double-spaced, one side of the paper only. 
Some of them were autobiographical and some of them were true.

The show - called Beiderbecke and All That Jazz (not my title, but then it 
wasn't my idea in the first place) - refused to lie down. Eventually we settled 
at around half-a-dozen a year. The stories grew and developed, with more space 
for improvisation on the night. Kenny used to call them "Alan's patter", which 
threw me at first until I reflected that he'd once shared top billing in 
Blackpool with Eric and Ernie, the greatest patterers of our age.

When Kenny died, I think we assumed that would be the end, but a couple of 
gigs had already been booked, and went ahead with the mighty Scottish trumpet 
player Bruce Adams ("banned from playing within 100 miles of Jericho," to quote 
my patter), and so it continues.

Over the years we've played everywhere from the Edinburgh Jazz Festival to the 
Snape Maltings. The BBC recorded the show in Hull, the only time imaginary 
juggling with percussion backing (part of a student reminiscence called The 
Forty-Four Flying Fletchers) has ever been heard on Radio 3. On the long 
journeys to and fro, I pass the time imagining parallel shows involving some of 
my writer pals: Jimmy McGovern in Sing-along-a-Cracker or Andrew Davies in Moll 
Flanders - Live!.

There are two other recurring factors. Afterwards, audiences have one comment 
and one question. The comment is that, however surreal I thought the series 
were, their world is exactly like that - they teach in a school exactly like 
San Quentin High, or they know a copper exactly like the hapless Inspector 
Hobson or their Uncle is Big Al to the local community.

The recurring question is: will there ever be another series? The anwer is: I 
have no idea. These things are subject to focus groups, market research and 
imperceptible twitches in the front office.

For the record, I know exactly what's going on in Beiderbecke-land. Jill is 
the recently appointed head of San Quentin High, which has just finished bottom 
of every league table in the land. Trevor has retired and spends his days 
playing dominoes in the bowls pavilion with Big Al and Little Norm. Hobson has 
made a sideways career move out of the police force and is now a highly paid 
consultant in some byway of the New Labour Project. The heart of the matter is 
subversion. If the Scorsese gospel says we all have the capacity for violence, 
the Beiderbecke equivalent says we all have the capacity for deadpan daftness 
when confronted by men wearing suits.

The last words belong to Jill, Trevor and great-uncle Bix. In the Tapes, Jill 
says: "Beiderbecke? The first great white jazz musician. Drank himself to 
death. His playing sounded like bullets shot from a bell."

"How do you know that?" says Trevor. 

"You gave me a two-hour lecture about it in bed one night. In lieu of the 
cigarette."

"I didn't know you listened when I talked." 

Maybe that's the answer. I didn't realise people were listening when I wrote. 

Â© Alan Plater <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alanplater> Beiderbecke and 
All That Jazz will be at Forum 28, Barrow-in-Furness on March 2
 