
If there is one issue in British politics on which the Labour party has always 
spoken for the public, it is the National Health Service. Through bad times and 
good, the opinion polls have almost always putLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> ahead of the Tories on the NHS. 
No matter how hard David Cameron tried to boost his standing on this issue, and 
at times he tried very hard indeed, the best he ever managed was to dent 
Labour’s lead.

May more trusted than Corbyn on Britain's key issues, poll finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/22/theresa-may-more-trusted-than-jeremy-corbyn-britains-key-issues-poll>
Until now, that is. The post-referendum opinion survey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/22/theresa-may-more-trusted-than-jeremy-corbyn-britains-key-issues-poll>
 by the Britain Thinks market research company feels like a watershed. It 
sends the kind of message of doom to Labour that the ravens abandoning the 
Tower of London issupposed to presage 
<http://www.hrp.org.uk/tower-of-london/visit-us/top-things-to-see-and-do/the-ravens/#gs.CX6xOss>
 for the kingdom as a whole. What is the most important single priority in 
post-referendum Britain, asked the pollsters. The answer that came back was a 
well-funded and efficient NHS. And which party leader is most trusted to 
deliver that? Here’s the killer: Theresa May, by 38% to Jeremy Corbyn’s 30%.

Plenty of people have tried to make a case that Corbyn is more popular with 
the public than his critics think. I’ve tried to keep an open mind on that 
debate. It is true, for instance, that Labour has held its own in parliamentary 
byelections since Corbyn became leader, though it is also true that Labour 
incumbents have been blown away inlocal council byelections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/09/why-that-chart-demonstrating-jeremy-corbyns-election-success-is-misleading>
 in recent weeks. It is also true that the Tory lead over Labour, which shot up 
when May became prime minister, hasnow begun to shrink 
<https://yougov.co.uk/news/2016/09/07/voting-intention-conservative-lead-11-points/>
.

But there is no hiding from the fact that Corbyn’s own poll ratings have 
steadily lurched from just about OK a year ago to downright awful today. When 
Corbyn took over from Ed Miliband in September 2015, hissatisfaction rating 
<https://www.ipsos-mori.com/researchpublications/researcharchive/88/Political-Monitor-Satisfaction-Ratings-1997Present.aspx?view=wide>
 among voters in Mori’s poll series was -3. Today it is -31. Among Labour 
voters a year ago Corbyn was at +31. Todayhe is at +1 
<https://www.ipsos-mori.com/Assets/Docs/Polls/ipsos-mori-political-monitor-september-2016-tables.pdf>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fjeremy-corbyn-labour-leadership-second-coming-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jeremy%20Corbyn%3A%20the%20second%20coming%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fjeremy-corbyn-labour-leadership-second-coming-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jeremy%20Corbyn%3A%20the%20second%20coming%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fjeremy-corbyn-labour-leadership-second-coming-video&media=>
Jeremy Corbyn: the second coming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/sep/22/jeremy-corbyn-labour-leadership-second-coming-video>
When Labour members were asked in late June what the party’s chances of 
winning the next general election were, the score was “likely” 35% and 
“unlikely” 57%. This is a place from which it is very hard to return.

It is possible of course that all this will change if, as assumed, Corbyn is 
re-elected Labour leader on Saturday. But it would also be a surprise. One 
problem is that people have formed their view of Corbyn. They like him or they 
don’t. John Curtice, a political scientist who isright about most things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/22/jeremy-corbyn-not-unpopular-but-divisive>
 in these matters, says Corbyn is no longer an unpopular Labour leader 
but simply a divisive one. Over the weekend we will hear a lot about the 
section of the public that thinks Corbyn is great. But as Curtice says, 
that section is simply too small.

But Corbyn has two great problems, not just one. He isn’t popular enough, 
as his challenger Owen Smith kept saying. And, as Smith didn’t say enough, he 
is wrong about too many things. On Europe, Corbyn is halfhearted. On Syria he 
can see only western wickedness, not Syrian or Russian. On Nato he is evasive. 
On Ireland he is naive.

On economic policy he simply seems to favour nationalisation, and to think 
that the money tree will pay for everything. Why is May trusted more than 
Corbyn on the NHS? Because people don’t believe the money tree is the answer.

Assuming that it wants to turn all this around, what can Labour actually do 
about it? There will be lots of appeals for unity at the party conference over 
the next few days. They have started already in Corbyn’s interviews. Unity is 
good. It is better than disunity.

But unity has to mean more than simply demanding that those who disagree with 
Corbyn fall into line and say things they don’t believe and aren’t true. A man 
with Corbyn’s long years of not falling into line will struggle to make this 
sound credible.

Corbyn could certainly claim himself a bit of moral high ground by saying on 
Saturday that the venomous verbal and sometimes physical attacks on his critics 
do not speak for him. He could tell them to stop or face the consequences. He 
could also give himself some political elbow-room by calling off the dogs on 
the deselection of MPs. He could welcome a return to MPs electing the shadow 
cabinet.

Few politicians are less curious about the changes that have happened in 
Britain in his lifetime than Corbyn

Above all, he could invite his party to help him make a priority of finding an 
answer to the most difficult question facing the centre left in every developed 
country and certainly in Britain: how can political institutions shape 
globalisation in ways that ordinary people feel part of and confident about?

If he took that kind of open and conciliatory approach, Corbyn would be 
entitled to ask for something in return from those who oppose him. Magnanimity 
in politics is not seldom the truest wisdom, as Edmund Burkeonce observed 
<http://www.britannia.com/history/docs/eburke.html>. But the question is 
whether that is what Corbyn wants.

Few politicians are less curious about the changes that have happened in 
Britain in his lifetime than Corbyn. Few seem less ready to compromise. And 
anyway, so far the strategy has been the opposite – to intimidate, harass and 
bully critics out of their posts and even out of the party, not to bind them 
in. “I have realised in the past year that John McDonnell is the real leader of 
the Labour party, not Corbyn,” says one former shadow cabinet member. “And 
McDonnell’s strategy is simply to take over the party.”

Jeremy Corbyn is not unpopular – but he is divisive | John Curtice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/22/jeremy-corbyn-not-unpopular-but-divisive>
“If there is hope, it lies in the proles,” writes Winston Smith in 
George Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty-Four. “If there was hope it must lie in the 
proles because only there in those swarming disregarded masses, 85% of the 
population of Oceania, could the force to destroy the Party ever be generated. 
The Party could not be overthrown from within.”

Much of that is true of the Labour party’s perilous situation today. 
There will be no breakaways or splits this weekend or any time soon. 
Increasingly, in fact, it seems that only the verdict of the electorate in a 
general election can compel Labour to face up to its own peril – and there is 
no guarantee of even that.

That’s why so many Labour MPs, even some who face defeat, want an early 
election and to bring that moment on. If there is hope for Labour it lies 
with the voters. Only they can change the party. But until that happens, the 
voters will be the ones who pay the highest price for Labour’s chosen current 
paths of irrelevance and failure.
 