
How many tech companies are saddled with the problem of enjoying global fame 
but struggling with lacklustre performance? NotFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook>, which revealed in its 
results that it has nearly 1.5 billion users logging in each month around the 
world. Twitter, however, is an example where participation is lagging behind 
reputation.

The company built around text-message-length “tweets” announced in its own 
quarterly results last week that it has 304 million monthly active users 
(MAUs), who logged in at least once a month in the past quarter. That figure 
was up only 0.7% from the previous quarter, while the figure for MAUs in the US 
stayed stubbornly at 65 million.

Yet it is Twitter that is so often cited in news stories, TV coverage and even 
TV adverts, as established media businesses scramble to generate engagement 
with a tech-savvy mass of viewers, readers and listeners. Twitter is seen as 
the easy way to do that: anyone can join, anyone can contact anyone else who’s 
on it, and it’s free. You can “like” a company on Facebook, and write comments 
on its page, yet it’sTwitter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> 
that is generally treated as the immediate, switched-on source.

So why is Twitter struggling financially? Last week the two companies’ results 
showed their widely divergent fortunes. Facebook’s second-quarter revenue hit 
$4bn (£2.6bn), up 39% year-on-year, with operating income of $1.3bn, down 8%. 
Twitter, by contrast, had revenues of $502m – up 61% from last year – but an 
operating loss of $131m. Facebook is gigantic, growing fast and profitable. 
Twitter is smaller, growing faster, but loss-making.

What the results also showed is that most of Facebook’s growth is coming from 
mobile users and adverts. That is precisely the space that Twitter – born in 
2006 with the idea of taking the “status message” from the desktop to the 
mobile phone – should be dominating.

Just as concerning is the performance of privately held Snapchat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/snapchat>, popular with teens for its 
rapidly self-deleting photos and messages. It does not publish user numbers, 
but analysts estimate that it has more daily users than Twitter. It is also 
courting advertisers with increasing success – beginning with publishers on its 
“Discover” channel, which shows feeds from news organisations.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Ftwitter-isnt-flying-fast-global-engaged-influential%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F31%2F1438353151459%2F1d218980-5390-42d0-8dcf-43b86a09816e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It%E2%80%99s%20fast%2C%20global%2C%20engaged%20and%20influential%20%20%E2%80%93%20so%20why%20isn%E2%80%99t%20Twitter%20flying%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Ftwitter-isnt-flying-fast-global-engaged-influential%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%E2%80%99s%20fast%2C%20global%2C%20engaged%20and%20influential%20%20%E2%80%93%20so%20why%20isn%E2%80%99t%20Twitter%20flying%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Ftwitter-isnt-flying-fast-global-engaged-influential%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F31%2F1438353151459%2F1d218980-5390-42d0-8dcf-43b86a09816e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Social messaging service Snapchat, which is privately owned, is thought by 
some experts to have more users than Twitter. Photograph: Lionel 
Bonaventure/AFP/Getty Images 
For Rick Summer, an analyst at investment research firm Morningstar, the 
outlook for Twitter is not good; user growth trends, he says, “are not 
encouraging”. He adds: “Advertisers have many alternative outlets to reach a 
larger user base on a targeted and near-to-real-time basis, including Facebook, 
Instagram and Pinterest. We are concerned that Twitter may not represent a 
mass-market social media platform.”

He has cut his forecast for the shares’ longer term value from $36 to $27, 
compared with Twitter’s valuation of $45.10 in 2013 when it began trading on 
the New York Stock Exchange. Summer’s forecast for total users by 2019 has also 
been trimmed, from 739 million to just 491 million. Even though that is a 
compound growth rate of 12%, it is not the rocketing rise that people expect 
from internet companies.

Part of the problem, as Summer says, is that there are so many competing 
social networks. But some also perceive a loss of focus, which might be 
ascribed to the changes going on inside the boardroom. In June, Twitter’s chief 
executive Dick Costolo, appointed in October 2010 after the forced resignation 
of co-founder Evan Williams, stepped aside amid mounting pressure from Wall 
Street, investors and the rest of the board.

Meanwhile, in the past year around 450 people have left the company, according 
to a study by theFinancial Times <>. That constitutes about 12% of the firm, 
and includes senior figures. The loss of existing staff is always a worry in a 
San Francisco tech company: rivals will offer signing bonuses and options on 
stock that are likely to grow in value, rather than enduring Twitter’s 
stock-market rollercoaster.

Jack Dorsey <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/jack-dorsey>, another 
Twitter co-founder, took over as “interim CEO”, a job that resonates in Silicon 
Valley because it is the title that Steve Jobs held for a while after he 
returned to a wounded Apple in 1996. There he ejected the incumbent, shook the 
company back into shape and eventually took on the title of full CEO.

Investors, and 38-year-old Dorsey, would like a repeat. Like Jobs, Dorsey was 
Twitter’s founding chief executive, but was forced out by Williams in 2008. He 
returned as executive chairman in 2011, appointed by Costolo, and then took 
back the reins, so he is not taking over from a standing start. But the board 
has yet to give him the full-time role.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Ftwitter-isnt-flying-fast-global-engaged-influential%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F31%2F1438353226481%2F6adebed3-3f20-471d-9fdc-64ec364504eb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It%E2%80%99s%20fast%2C%20global%2C%20engaged%20and%20influential%20%20%E2%80%93%20so%20why%20isn%E2%80%99t%20Twitter%20flying%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Ftwitter-isnt-flying-fast-global-engaged-influential%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%E2%80%99s%20fast%2C%20global%2C%20engaged%20and%20influential%20%20%E2%80%93%20so%20why%20isn%E2%80%99t%20Twitter%20flying%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Ftwitter-isnt-flying-fast-global-engaged-influential%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F31%2F1438353226481%2F6adebed3-3f20-471d-9fdc-64ec364504eb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Jack Dorsey: founder and now saviour? Photograph: Mike Blake/Reuters 
Thus Dorsey’s appearance on the results conference call last week was in 
effect an audition for the job. “We need to do three things. One, we need to 
ensure a more disciplined execution. Two, we need to simplify our services to 
deliver Twitter’s value faster. And three, we need to better communicate our 
value,” he said briskly.

He also acknowledged that mismatch between fame and usage. “People all over 
the world know of the power of Twitter, but it’s not clear why they should 
harness it themselves. An answer to ‘why Twitter?’ must be articulated clearly 
and felt everywhere throughout the service.”

Wall Street liked his attitude, including an undertone of impatience which 
Costolo lacked. Although it is not obvious to people who are already signed up, 
joining Twitter is a confusing experience. The blank screen demands you create 
a username – with your first and second choice probably taken already – and 
then suggests people for you to “follow”. And then the questions flood in. What 
does “following” mean? Do you have to be a “friend” like on Facebook?How do you 
find people? What is the right number of people to follow? What is the right 
number to be followed by? Why are some people so rude? Fixing that first-time 
experience is crucial, because there are reckoned to be more than 600 million 
abandoned Twitter accounts.

Jan Dawson, who runs the tech research firm Jackdaw, thinks Dorsey has done a 
good job so far. “I think what [Wall Street analysts] are reacting to is the 
true state of Twitter, versus the overly rosy version Dick Costolo had been 
trying to sell the Street for the past few quarters.” But he notes that user 
growth still lags, and that “engagement” – how often people who have created an 
account use it – remains far lower than Facebook’s.

You should expect Twitter to show you what’s most meaningful in the world, to 
live it first, before anyone else
Jack Dorsey 
But Twitter’s advertising revenue is growing strongly, as shown by the 61% 
rise in quarterly revenue, and Dawson expects another good performance in the 
next quarter. Nonetheless, Summer thinks a deeper problem remains, underlined 
by Twitter surveys that show 95% awareness of the company among the public, but 
an adoption rate of just 30%. “The more likely conclusion is that users 
(correctly) perceive that Twitter provides little value to them.”

According to Dorsey last week, using Twitter should be “as easy as looking out 
of your window”. He added: “You should expect Twitter to show you what’s most 
meaningful in the world, to live it first, before anyone else and straight from 
the source. And you should expect Twitter to keep you informed and updated 
throughout your day.”

But as Anthony Noto, the chief financial officer, admitted on the earnings 
call: “The number one reason users don’t use Twitter is because they don’t 
understand why to use Twitter. They don’t understand the value.” if only 
resolving that problem was as straightforward as a 140-character tweet.
 