
The globalisation of labour and the rise of automation has led, according to 
the former chief economist of the World Bank, “a crisis in the global labour 
market”. But Professor Kaushik Basu, in Australia togive a lecture 
<https://business.monash.edu/cdes/events/public-lecture-challenges-for-the-global-economy>
 at the Monash Business School, argues that the push by Donald Trump and 
political parties in Australia towards greater protectionism is precisely the 
wrong path to take.

Instead, governments need to focus more on distributing profits to workers.

For Basu, professor of economics and the C. Marks Professor of International 
Studies at Cornell University and former chief economic advisor to the Indian 
government, the time since the GFC has seen “one crisis after another” leading 
to a long period of economic stagnation. But among the biggest challenges 
economists and politicians have to face is that the increase of technology has 
spurred the globalisation of labour in a way never before encountered.

According to Basu, the big change from previous technology increases has been 
the “sharp rise in technology that links workers in different places”. This 
means that wealthy nations are now able to access “cheap labour that was 
earlier tucked away in faraway places”.

Scott Morrison's mixed messages and his faith in a private sector that isn't 
investing | Greg Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/11/scott-morrisons-mixed-messages-and-his-faith-in-a-private-sector-that-isnt-investing>
Basu notes that there is no doubt that the ability to outsource workers has 
improved world GDP and the standard of living for people in developing 
countries and thus should be celebrated.

But the problem is the “bottom end of labour” in rich countries like 
Australia, USA and the UK is now in direct competition with “workers in poorer 
countries who for the reason of being in poorer countries command a much lower 
wage”.

Basu says that while poverty is improving in developing countries, this 
competition for labour “is causing inequality to get exacerbated” in wealthy 
countries.

He argues the crisis in the global labour market is “a slow crisis” as there 
is “never an event which makes news”, but that it is “feeding into a lot of 
economic and political problems and manifesting in different ways”.

And for Basu, one of the most stark ways it is manifested is the declining 
share of national income going to workers.

This decline is something that has occurred across most developed nations 
since the mid-1970s, but the drop in Australia is among the most marked.

In 1975 two thirds of our GDP was in the form of wages; in 2014 it was just 
53%:

Not surprisingly such a shift has also seen real wages flatten, even while 
labour productivity improves:

For Basu, this highlights that the winners from globalised labour are not just 
the worker in the poor nations, but the “profit makers” in the wealthy ones.

He argues the solution to the dilemma of outsourcing and the replacement of 
work by automated processes is to not think of it as a “labour versus labour 
problem – workers in rich countries and workers in poor countries.” Instead he 
argues, “we have to face up to the fact that this is also a wage versus profit 
problem – with an increase in the share of profits, and a decrease in the share 
of wages.”

One of the problems with thinking of it as a labour versus labour problem is 
the solution quickly becomes one of protectionism. But for Basu, this would 
just be a case rich nations economically cutting off their nose to spite their 
face.

The problem is that outsourcing has actually been very good for economic 
growth in wealthy nations. The open economy in the USA of the 1980s and 1990s, 
he argues, allowed its economy to be much more flexible and thus able to best 
use its resources and could “surge ahead” while Japan which was largely 
protectionist, “slowed down”.

He argues that were the USA under Trump, or Australia under a protectionist 
trade policy, to block the outsourcing of labour it would look very good “at 
first sight” because it would seem like “you’re protecting jobs among your own 
workers in your own country”.

But he argues what would happen is that other nations would continue to use 
the cheap labour and would “out compete” the protectionist nation – hurting 
economic growth and hitting profit makers in that nation, and even more so, the 
workers.

Basu is not an economist who only thinks in terms of GDP growth. 

Earlier this month 
<http://www.sida.se/English/press/current-topics-archive/2016/stockholm-statement/>
, along with Nobel laureate Joseph Stiglitz and three other former chief 
economists of the World Bank, he signed “the Stockholm Statement” which seeks 
to guide policymaking.

The first principle of the statement is that “GDP growth is not an end in 
itself”.

Basu notes that too often those who argue in favour of reducing inequality and 
poverty do so by arguing that it “is actually good for GDP growth”. He argues 
however that while this is often the case, reducing inequality or poverty is 
“worthwhile as an end in itself even if it slices off a little of the GDP 
growth”.

Thus he argues the way to respond to the declining share of wages due to 
globalisation and automation is for both an open economy (which is good for GDP 
growth), but also that governments must “think of some form of redistribution 
so that workers get their income shored up.”

To this end, while not discounting the idea of a universal basic income, he 
argues “the time has come to allow workers to get a share of profits”.

He also argues that this redistribution of income should also “take the form 
of better services likes health and education.”

Free trade is viewed as economic catnip, but the benefits are not for everyone 
| Greg Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/jul/11/there-are-economic-benefits-to-free-trade-but-not-for-everyone>
Basu argues this “doesn’t mean a need for a large government” but rather it 
means a need for “a redistributed government which takes away a slice from the 
rich and provides it to the workers in the form of health benefits education 
and also some form of profit share”.

Globalisation is not about to stop, and neither are the concerns of workers – 
especially as we are seeing in Australia a time of flat real wage growth and 
declining share of income going to workers.

This does not mean we need to cower and put up trade barriers which will only 
exacerbate the problems. But neither does this mean we can carry on still 
thinking only of GDP growth. To both improve our economy and also dampen the 
nationalistic xenophobia that quickly turns to racism, governments must adopt 
policy more targeted to inclusive growth. They must realise that with the 
greater flexibility of labour comes the need for greater emphasis on 
redistribution of income.

Failure to do so will only see inequality increase and the fires of 
nationalism – and all the dangerous sparks associated with it – burn hotter.
 