
The ballot papers are on their way to more than half a million Labour members 
and supporters. Already people are telling other people that they havevoted 
Jeremy, unless they have voted Owen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/13/owen-smith-to-challenge-jeremy-corbyn-labour-leadership>
. And as this great festival of party political empowerment kicks off, out come 
new ideas about restoring party democracy to policymaking, and other corners it 
hasn’t reached since the days ofJohn Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/may/12/john-smith-labour-britain-prime-minister>
.

Smith and Corbyn pledge to hand power back to party members
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/22/owen-smith-and-jeremy-corbyn-pledge-to-hand-power-back-to-party-members>
Jeremy Corbyn’s proposals “to democratise the country from the ground up” 
don’t quite have the polish of the finished product. It may well be, as 
sceptical observers suspect, the start of a campaign to reconstruct theparty of 
the 1980s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/10/corbyn-led-labour-might-turn-into-1980s-trotskyist-tribute-act-says-cruddas>
 – a vehicle for radical-left ideas that didn’t sell well to voters then and 
probably would not now. He may, possibly, have overestimated the appetite for 
detailed policy debate in draughty committee rooms.

But Owen Smith is on to it too. Today he promised members that they would be 
giventhe power to sign off on the manifesto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/22/owen-smith-and-jeremy-corbyn-pledge-to-hand-power-back-to-party-members>
. He says he will lead a revolution in accountability although, perhaps wisely, 
he has not yet explained how. This is a big moment: it means that by 
mid-September Labour will be led by someone who has promised to legitimise 
disruption. It’s a novel answer to the Brexit disenchantment. Eat your heart 
out, challenger parties such asPodemos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/22/politics-spain-podemos-radical-europe-uk>
 andSyriza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/26/spain-podemos-syriza-victory-greek-elections>
, the Labour party is going to challenge itself.

So farewell, technocratic vote-maximising strategies aimed at winning marginal 
seats. Adieu, top-down leadership. The 24-hours news cycle is so 1990s. 
Political communication now is unmediated, instant, intimate. It comes direct 
to you on your phone. It interrupts your private conversations to entice you 
into a community of people who care about the same things as you, who like the 
same things, who want the same solutions you do – who even hate the same 
people. This is the wisdom of crowds. Unless it turns out to be wrong: then it 
may look more like the folly of a narcissistic echo chamber.

In an age of disruption it is never easy to know what to forget for ever and 
what to rediscover. It is easy to sympathise with party activists who want a 
voice. It is harder to remember now the bitter rows and unfeasible policies 
that led to them being excluded from influence, or that direct democracy does 
not always produce very useful results.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fcorbyn-v-smith-labour-leader-voting-system-democratic-car-crash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0b4dff3cdade0f8d413d1ff3b6ec09d9618d94c%2F591_0_4553_2733%2F4553.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It%E2%80%99s%20Corbyn%20v%20Smith%20for%20Labour%E2%80%99s%20next%20leader.%20But%20being%20a%20winner%20isn%E2%80%99t%20enough%20%7C%20Anne%20Perkins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fcorbyn-v-smith-labour-leader-voting-system-democratic-car-crash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%E2%80%99s%20Corbyn%20v%20Smith%20for%20Labour%E2%80%99s%20next%20leader.%20But%20being%20a%20winner%20isn%E2%80%99t%20enough%20%7C%20Anne%20Perkins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fcorbyn-v-smith-labour-leader-voting-system-democratic-car-crash%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0b4dff3cdade0f8d413d1ff3b6ec09d9618d94c%2F591_0_4553_2733%2F4553.jpg>
 ‘The TV election interview that disclosed Ed Miliband’s two kitchens was as 
catastrophic as Gordon Brown’s encounter with Gillian Duffy.’ Photograph: 
Enterprise News and Pictures 
No one ever draws attention to the national anxiety when universal suffrage 
was introduced – before the innate conservatism of the great majority of voters 
became apparent, when politicians would lie awake at night wondering how to 
prevent revolution.

But it is one reason why Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> 
used to have an inelegant but serviceable balance of power involving MPs, the 
trade unions and the constituency parties. The activists have always had a 
formal voice. When Corbyn and Smith talk about ideas coming from the bottom up, 
they are reverting to an old tradition of democratic responsiveness, when trade 
unions could normally be relied on to hose down excessive democratic ambition 
and MPs were always there as the final backstop.

The hasty introduction in 2014 of the new election rules 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/02/labour-party-brave-new-world-editorial>
, giving every member an individual say in the leadership, changed one piece of 
a complicated interlocking system without considering its impact. The upshot is 
a democratic car crash. Somehow a situation has been created where a majority 
of MPs may not support the winning leadership candidate, but the new leader 
cannot become prime minister without MPs’ backing. At a single unintentional 
stroke the purpose of having a Labour party has been undermined.

As the textbooks point out, the object of political parties is to mobilise 
support: not to set up angry WhatsApp groups but to win elections. The 
important but small democracy of a political party must ultimately become part 
of the wider and more important democracy of choosing a government. The need to 
win elections imposes a certain kind of leadership that is not necessarily very 
good at accommodating the views of activists, or any other criticism either.

Last year a group of academics drew up a helpful series of handbooks, one for 
each party, analysing the characteristics of successful leadership. They make 
ideal summer reading for autodidacts with a vote to cast in the next few weeks. 
But for those who have already been away, here’s a recap. Will the man you vote 
for as Labour leader win an election? Is he a competent manager, a good 
communicator? Does he exude a plausible capability?

It’s no good saying election-winning is just another excuse for more 
stultifying policies of vote-maximisation. Every major party leader since Neil 
Kinnock has resigned in the aftermath of election defeat (and Iain Duncan Smith 
was the victim of a palace coup for fear of it), so it is hard to argue with 
the significance for the leader of delivering victory.

Labour party: brave new world, maybe | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/02/labour-party-brave-new-world-editorial>
Yet in the social media age the person at the top is not just important for 
their capacity to make strategic judgments, manage an increasingly centralised 
government and drive through policy reform. To most voters the party leader is, 
to an extraordinary degree, the essence of a party, its brand identity, a proxy 
for its principles and its purpose.

And that’s why aspects of leadership that appear trivial are now dominant. The 
TV election interview that disclosedEd Miliband’s two kitchens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/13/ed-miliband-two-kitchens-use-smaller-one>
 was as catastrophic as Gordon Brown’sencounter with Gillian Duffy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/apr/28/general-election-2010-gordon-brown>
. His “bigoted woman” remark and Miliband’s London home that was plainly beyond 
most people’s wildest dreams, were perceived as revealing leaders who had 
betrayed the idea of the party.

Count up how many people you know who are both the likable embodiment of a 
political manifesto and also an effective leader, and remember why great 
political leaders don’t come along very often.

Whoever wins has to be magnanimous. As a matter of urgency, the party must 
sort out the mess it has created. And that is now down to the party members.

They have been handed a huge responsibility – for their party and for the 
country. Now they must exercise unprecedented power with the utmost wisdom: it 
may be their decision, but it is a decision much bigger than them.
 