
The American election feels like the upending of the previously familiar 
political world because that’s what, in many respects, it is. But not in all 
respects. It is very important not to exaggerate or to over-generalise what the 
election ofDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> 
means. Only by not exaggerating and not over-generalising can we understand the 
true and specific seriousness of what is really happening. One of the things 
that has happened this week is, after all, very traditional indeed. Since 1950, 
America has had seven two-term administrations: those of Eisenhower, 
Kennedy-Johnson, Nixon, Reagan, Clinton, George W Bush and Obama. Only once – 
when George Bush Sr was elected in 1988 – did the outgoing president’s party 
get its candidate returned to the White House. The other six times they failed. 
After eight years of the same party in power, Americans tend to vote for 
change, as they did on Tuesday. That looks like an established pattern to me.

Similarly, it makes good headlines to treat Trump’s win as a tsunami of the 
ignored that overwhelmed the established and complacent. Again, in some 
respects that is true. But be careful. It hardly squares with the result of the 
popular vote, in which HillaryClinton got more votes than Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/hillary-clinton-popular-vote-electoral-college-donald-trump>
 this week, only the second time in the past 100 years that a winner has 
trailed his rival. Nor does it easily explain why Trump, who was supposed to be 
bringing squadrons of new voters to the contest, actually polled fewer votes 
than Bush in 2004, John McCain in 2008 and even Mitt Romney in 2012.

If you delve into the exit poll material 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/11/08/us/politics/election-exit-polls.html?_r=0>
 from Tuesday’s contests, the simplicities also diminish, to be replaced by a 
much more nuanced demographic picture. It’s a strange uprising of the poor in 
which a majority of those on lower incomes voted for Clinton, or in which the 
majority of those who thought the economy was the biggest issue facing America 
voted for Clinton too. Yet both things happened this week. And it’s an odd 
young-voter rejection of Clinton in which she actually polled more strongly 
among millennials (55% 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/11/08/us/politics/election-exit-polls.html?_r=0>
) than she did among any other age demographic.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fdonald-trump-obama-have-excellent-conversation-white-house-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20and%20Obama%20have%20%E2%80%98excellent%20conversation%E2%80%99%20at%20White%20House%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fdonald-trump-obama-have-excellent-conversation-white-house-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20and%20Obama%20have%20%E2%80%98excellent%20conversation%E2%80%99%20at%20White%20House%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fdonald-trump-obama-have-excellent-conversation-white-house-video&media=>
Trump and Obama have ‘excellent conversation’ at White House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/10/donald-trump-obama-have-excellent-conversation-white-house-video>
We perhaps get closer to the matter when we learn that fully 78% of those who 
think their financial situation is worse today than in 2012 voted for Trump, 
and only 19% for Clinton. Or that 63% of those who think life for the next 
generation will be worse voted for him too. Or that 65% of those who think 
trade takes away US jobs voted Trump. Yet don’t leap to the conclusion that 
these left-behinds and pessimists are the majority of the electorate. They 
aren’t. They are only about a third of it. Most Americans think things are not 
going too badly.

Now I’m not arguing that nothing important happened on Tuesday. That would be 
absurd. But I am arguing that the American mood this week was within the bounds 
of the foreseeable and the explicable. Those of us who did not foresee it 
certainly have some explaining to do. Even so, the really distinctive thing 
that happened was not the size or composition of the majority that sent Trump 
to Washington. That’s in many ways very familiar. The really distinctive thing 
was Trump himself. He, Trump, is the revolution, not his voters. The change is 
Trump and Trump is the change.

This because he himself is a unique phenomenon in presidential politics. As is 
often said, he is the first president of the modern era to be elected without 
political or military experience. He is other firsts too: the first to campaign 
so relentlessly on Twitter; the first to pledge to jail his opponent; the first 
to get into slanging matches with his own party; the first to abuse so many 
minorities so flagrantly or to flaunt such sexual aggression towards women; the 
first to deny that his predecessor is an American.

What really stands out about Trump, however, is not his personality and 
manner, unattractive though they are. What stands out is that he is an 
anti-liberal. Trump is neither a social liberal nor an economic liberal. That 
marks him out from every modern American president. Not every president of 
recent times has been both kinds of liberal. Of the last three men in the White 
House, Clinton was both. Bush was a social conservative but an economic 
liberal, while Obama was generally the reverse. Trump, on the other hand, is 
neither.

That is why Trump matters so much. He is an anti-liberal president for 
post-liberal times. He embodies extreme hostility to social liberalism – in the 
form, to take a few examples, of his contempt for ethnic minorities, his hatred 
for Muslims, his indifference to due process, his dismissal of rights, his 
willingness to use torture, his mocking of the disabled, his dismissal of 
political correctness, and above all, perhaps, his attitude to women. He is not 
alone in these attitudes in his party. Indeed, in some respects, Trump is the 
culmination of the deep-rooted hatred for social liberalism, embodied for 
decades for many Republicans byHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>, that has marked the 
American conservative right for years and has few echoes in Europe.

One-party control of Washington hands Trump enviable power
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/donald-trump-republicans-control-washington-congress>
But Trump is even more hostile to economic liberalism. His entire campaign has 
been marked by the insistence that government can protect American jobs and 
livelihoods against globalisation. This preparedness to stand against global 
liberal economics is the core of Trump’s uniqueness. But it is also by far the 
most interesting and potent aspect of his campaign.

In his own deeply egotistical and socially illiberal way, Trump stands for 
something true. He stands for the recognition that the global liberal order has 
not worked well, that intervention by the state is the only means of correcting 
and revising it and that socially liberal US regimes have fallen short. He also 
grasps that many voters have concluded this, not on the basis of prejudice 
(though prejudice is often involved) but on the basis of their own direct 
experience.

The real 'shy Trump' vote - how 53% of white women pushed him to victory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/white-women-donald-trump-victory>
Abhor Trump, by all means. There are many reasons to do so. But do not ignore 
his insight. The answer to Trump and Trumpism, in America and beyond, is not 
indignation and a determination to recreate the old liberal and socialist 
projects in a purer form than ever. It is indignation, a touch of grudging 
respect, and a willingness to decide what is worth saving from those projects 
of the past – and what needs to be junked – if they are to be renewed for 
modern times as they can be.
 