
Those of us with only a smattering of knowledge about the ancient world know 
one thing about Cato the Elder. During Rome’s long wars against Hannibal, Cato 
ended every speech in the senate with the same words: “Carthage must be 
destroyed.”

“Brexit <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> must be stopped” 
is unlikely to last as long as Cato’s catchphrase has managed to. But it 
focuses the mind. Those who think Brexit must be stopped are not the majority. 
But they have a case and a cause, and they are right. So how might stoppage be 
achieved?

Probably not by a political movement headed by Tony Blair. The former prime 
minister is not heading back into frontline politics. But he is one of the 
biggest names to insist thatBrexit is not yet irrevocable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/24/tony-blair-brexit-could-be-stopped-if-britons-change-their-minds>
. He told the New Statesman last week that Brexit “can be stopped 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/uk/2016/11/tony-blair-s-unfinished-business>
 if the British people decide that, having seen what it means, the pain-gain 
cost-benefit analysis doesn’t stack up”. And on that he is absolutely right.

When inflation rises and growth slows next year, make sure Brexit’s role is 
clearly spelled out

Blair carries so much baggage that it is inconceivable he either could or 
should play the leading role in any campaign. The Iraq war was wrong and it is 
no part of my argument that the past can be brushed aside. But Blair has 
serious things to say about Brexit that serious people ought to listen to. It’s 
time his critics were big enough to give him a break.The 439-70 House of 
Commons vote this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/30/labour-mps-accuse-snp-of-opportunism-over-tony-blair-motion>
 against the SNP’s effort to sanction Blair for the events of 2003 may suggest 
there is some space for the former Labour leader to at least be heard. But 
don’t hold your breath.

If Brexit is to be stopped it will require time, a change of public mood, and 
an alliance. The SNP, Greens, Liberal Democrats, significant parts of the 
Labour party and a minority of Tories would all have roles to play. People from 
outside politics are crucial too. This week’s joint press conference byNick 
Clegg, Chuka Umunna and Anna Soubry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/28/open-britain-mps-condemn-silencing-of-pro-eu-arguments-tony-blair>
 was a start. But as Clegg says, to turn the referendum around needs the 
people’s consent, not a procedural trick. This will only happen if the public 
mood changes. Anti-Brexit campaigners should try to change it, and here’s how.

The first point is to be clear who they need to be talking to, rather than 
squabbling about which of them is entitled to do the talking. The name of this 
game is changing minds. So there is absolutely no point crafting a campaign 
that is aimed at fundamentalist Eurosceptics who never wanted Britain to be 
part of the EU in the first place. Nor is there any point in focusing on 
racists and xenophobes. People who don’t like foreigners or people with 
coloured skin are not going to change their minds.

But that leaves a lot of people who voted for Brexit, in hundreds of thousands 
of cases, on the basis of their own experience. They were sold a false 
prospectus by the leave campaign; but they need a better one, which offers them 
hope, support, material improvements in their lives, and confidence. Theresa 
May gets this, though she is doomed to promote Brexit and not to stop it. Those 
who want to stop Brexit need to learn this lesson: the aim of any campaign must 
be to persuade these voters that there is a better way of getting the things 
they want than leaving the EU. Don’t berate, persuade. And get out of the 
bubble.

The second key principle is to accept that this is a long game. Brexit won in 
June 2016. It won’t be turned around quickly. Stopping Brexit is on the margins 
of political possibility right now. It could be thatBrexit will be slowed by 
the supreme court’s ruling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/15/supreme-court-judges-views-on-article-50-legislation-anger-leave-campaigners>
, due in January. But that’s just the start. Opponents of Brexit should settle 
in. Time is on their side.

The negotiations with the EU will take a minimum of two years – longer if 
there is a transitional phase. The pressure to bring things to a head will be 
enormous and will grow, both in Britain and in the other 27 EU countries. 
British opponents of Brexit must be EU reformers too.

Tony Blair: Brexit could be stopped if Britons change their minds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/24/tony-blair-brexit-could-be-stopped-if-britons-change-their-minds>
The third point is to remember Cato. Chip away, every day. Every time 
something new and troubling happens, make it clear that things would be 
different if Brexit were stopped. This week’simmigration figures showed a 
pre-referendum surge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/17/uk-employment-hits-record-high-amid-rise-in-eu-workers>
. Without Brexit this wouldn’t have happened. Hate crimes have proliferated. 
Brexit shares the blame for that. When inflation rises and growth slows next 
year, make sure Brexit’s role is spelled out. If ministers abandon the single 
market in favour of migration curbs, make Brexit’s responsibility clear. Unless 
anti-Brexit campaigners have established in the public mind that there is a 
clear and viable no-Brexit alternative, they won’t be in a position to make the 
most of their opportunities.

The fourth point is the other side of the same coin. The leave campaign lied 
through its teeth about the benefits of Brexit. It said there would be£350m 
extra every week for the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/24/mps-letter-urges-chancellor-honour-vote-leave-campaign-350m-pound-nhs-promise>
. Last week the chancellor said precisely nothing about any extra NHS spending 
in the next four years. Andlook what is actually happening to the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/30/ambulance-target-failures-health-chiefs-say-problem-system-wide>
. The leave campaign landed the May government with a huge promise that it 
cannot deliver. The opposition parties need to link the two at every 
opportunity.

Stopping Brexit will not be easy. Recovering from a big defeat is hard. The 
campaign is more likely to fail than to succeed. The Brexiteers will fight very 
dirty. But the prize is immense – and Hannibal was not defeated in a day.
 