
For a team supposedly in a bad place, stuck with a coach they no longer 
respect, trying to rise above a rugby infrastructure on the point of collapse 
and coming off a World Cup campaign that was uninspiring in the extreme, Italy
didn’t half play well in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/06/france-italy-six-nations-match-report>
. They lost, as they have always done at the Stade de France, but they were 
organised and full of ideas and invention. They should have won.

It was slightly inauspicious for the great Sergio Parisse that he made the 
call, as captain on the field and spiritual leader of the team, totake the 
drop-kick at goal with the last play 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/07/italy-sergio-parisse-crucial-miss-france>
. That was not his mistake – he has scored with one before, against Scotland, 
and practises for such things. His mistake was to fail. It was a poor shot.

Sergio Parisse: Italy’s awesome No8 all too familiar with the pain of defeat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/12/sergio-parisse-italy-defeat-england-six-nations>
It didn’t matter then – apart from the small matter of Italy being the 
stronger team in all departments bar the left-wing and the scoreboard – and it 
doesn’t matter now. Italy should be inspired by what they did in Paris and 
ready to have a real go on Sunday in Rome. Not achieving a first in France 
would pale into insignificance if they beat England. That would be a first to 
cherish.

The front five will hold their own and their driving maul is a beast. Even if 
they dare not overuse it against England, their experience at forming one 
should give them a good idea of how to stop one. Stop England’s lineout drive 
and their scoring potential is much diminished – unless, that is, a green light 
has been given to something entirely different.

Why are Italy still going nowhere in the Six Nations?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/11/italy-six-nations-sergio-parisse-jacques-brunel-wooden-spoon>
In the back row, two players account for 210 of the 513 caps won by the entire 
Italy team.Parisse, naturally, has the most with 115 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/12/sergio-parisse-italy-defeat-england-six-nations>
, but Alessandro Zanni is an unsung force at wing forward. Francesco Minto is 
even more invisibly industrious. The Italian back row will be primed to stop 
Billy Vunipola, and even if England begin with the intention of using their 
strike charger as a dummy runner, Billy will have to pick up the scraps if 
Italy exert pressure at the scrum and at the breakdown. Yards may be harder to 
gain from a standing start than they were at Murrayfield.

Stopping England is not unfamiliar. But how can Italy score? Carlo Canna 
played with authority in Paris, but he is now a known product and will be 
marked accordingly. As will Michele Campagnaro and Leonardo Sarto. Italy have 
good individual runners but now have to work out the means of releasing them. 
England’s defence is horribly mean.

Jacques Brunel, who appears to be less unpopular than previously thought, has 
made just the one change to his starting team, with Luke McLean in for the 
injured David Odiete at full‑back. Brunel’s team must believe. They must score 
early and copiously and set up a second half to savour. And Sergio, the special 
one, must keep all his wits and skills intact to the very end.
 