
Italians are heading to the polls to vote on a referendum that is seen as a 
test of rising populist forces in the country against the political 
establishment, in a contest that could end in the resignation of centre-left 
prime minister,Matteo Renzi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/matteo-renzi>.

Voters are deciding whether or not to approve sweeping changes to Italy’s 
constitution and parliamentary system, reforms that Renzi has argued would 
increase political stability and give the government more flexibility to tackle 
enduring economic problems.

“In 48 hours, we are playing for the next 20 years. The results are on a 
knife’s edge,” Renzi said in his last campaign rally on Friday night.

Italy referendum defeat would complete Matteo Renzi's rapid downfall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/03/italy-referendum-defeat-would-complete-matteo-renzis-rapid-downfall>
Opposition to the reform has been led by Italy’s second most popular party, 
the anti-establishment Five Star Movement, which has attacked the changes as a 
power grab by the ruling Democratic party. Another opponent, former premier 
Silvio Berlusconi, the leader of the centre-right Forza Italia party who in the 
past has praised fascist dictator Benito Mussolini, has saidapproving the 
reforms could open the door to dictatorship 
<http://www.politico.eu/article/silvio-berlusconi-vote-yes-vote-for-a-dictatorship/>
 in Italy.

In polls leading up to the vote on Sunday before a national polling blackout, 
Renzi’s yes campaign lagged about five points behind the no campaign, with 
about a quarter of Italian voters undecided on the referendum. On Friday, it 
was reported that 40% of eligible Italians abroad cast ballots in the 
referendum, a voting bloc thatin recent elections has favoured Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/01/italy-referendum-constitutional-reform-expats-matteo-renzi>
 and could prove to be decisive in a close contest.

If no wins the race, as polls have predicted, Renzi has vowed to resign. It is 
not yet clear what might happen if Renzi does step down, but the next steps 
would be determined by Italy’s relatively new president, Sergio Mattarella, who 
could cobble together a new government and install a new prime minister, such 
as Pier Carlo Padoan, who currently serves as finance minister.

But there are already signs that Mattarella would come under intense pressure 
by theFive Star Movement <https://www.theguardian.com/world/five-star-movement> 
and the rightwing Northern League to immediately call a new election in the 
event of a no win.

If Renzi ekes out a victory, the news would likely be celebrated by the 
markets and would be seen as a defeat of rising populist sentiment.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fitalys-referendum-five-things-you-need-to-know-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Italy's%20referendum%3A%20five%20things%20you%20need%20to%20know%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fitalys-referendum-five-things-you-need-to-know-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Italy%27s%20referendum%3A%20five%20things%20you%20need%20to%20know%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fitalys-referendum-five-things-you-need-to-know-video-explainer&media=>
Italy’s referendum: five things you need to know 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/02/italys-referendum-five-things-you-need-to-know-video-explainer>
Italy has been depicted as the latest possible domino to fall following the 
UK’s vote to leave the EU and the election of Donald Trump, but some analysts 
say the comparisons have been overblown, especiallyconcerns that it could lead 
to a referendum on the euro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/01/italy-referendum-q-and-a-economic-questions-answered>
 or even Italy’s exit from the EU.


Wolfango Piccoli, an analyst at Teneo Intelligence in London, said Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> was on track to make changes to some 
of its election rules that would probably hamper the M5S in the future, no 
matter what the outcome of the referendum is.

“The M5S is [also] unwilling to govern as part of a coalition given its 
fiercely independent stance. In other words, mainstream parties will hold on to 
power, but governance will suffer,” Piccoli said.

He said the legal and political threshold for a possible “Italexit” was very 
high, and would require votes in parliament and a possible referendum. While 
Euroscepticism is on the rise, there is no overwhelming consensus against the 
single currency or EU membership.

On Saturday, a day when rules prohibited either side from campaigning, the 
toxic tone of the race and the divisions it exposed – even though the topic at 
hand was far less emotionally divisive than hot-button issues in the past such 
as divorce, abortion, and nuclear energy – was seen by theeditor of La 
Repubblica 
<http://www.repubblica.it/speciali/politica/referendum-costituzionale2016/2016/12/03/news/referendum_come_riunire_un_paese_avvelenato-153333009/?ref=HRER2-1>
 as a defining moment in Italian history.

The traditional party structures had broken down, Mario Calabresi wrote in a 
front-page column, and politics had turned into a “showdown between those who 
feel they are sliding down versus those who are considered to be the 
establishment, a fight to the death between pieces of the political class, 
between the destroyers and the destroyed”.

He wrote: “It is a division that not only crosses through a party like the 
Democratic party, but communities, friends and family.”
 