
Several major IVF <https://www.theguardian.com/society/ivf> clinics in 
Australia have been misleading couples about their success rate, an 
investigation by the Australian consumer watchdog has found.

Earlier this year the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/27/australians-will-pay-the-price-for-dominance-of-big-companies-says-accc-chief>
 launched a review of website content from all major Australian IVF clinics and 
found some made success rate comparisons without adequately disclosing and 
quantifying the data used to make the claims.

ACCC commissioner Sarah Court said some IVF clinics had also “used technical 
terms understood by industry participants but which may be misleading to 
consumers without further clarification or explanation”.

Australians will pay the price for dominance of big companies, says ACCC chief
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/27/australians-will-pay-the-price-for-dominance-of-big-companies-says-accc-chief>
Some IVF clinics used “clinical pregnancy rate” data to compare their success 
rates where that data reflected the clinic’s success in creating an embryo, 
rather than live birth rates, the ACCC said. These comparisons were sometimes 
accompanied by photographs of newborn babies, which the ACCC said was likely to 
lead to consumers being given a misleading impression about the rate of 
successful pregnancies achieved by the clinic.

“The Australian consumer law applies to the advertising of all goods or 
services offered to Australian consumers, including complex medical procedures 
such as these,” Court said.

“The ACCC expects that all IVF clinics will take care to ensure that success 
rate comparisons are clear and accurate, and based on data that is explained in 
non-technical terms so that consumers can rely on it to make informed choices 
about which IVF clinic to use.

“The ACCC will continue to monitor complaints received about claims made by 
IVF providers and won’t hesitate to take further action if IVF providers are 
making false or misleading claims.”

The ACCC’s investigation followed a complaint from the Australian Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/health> Practitioner Regulation 
Agency.
 