
Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> remain a work in 
progress but it’s coming together promisingly. During Jürgen Klopp’s first 
campaign at Anfield the players adapted quickly to his high-energy, 
heavy-pressing system and regularly disrupted the opposition’s passing but they 
only sporadically formulated quick, incisive attacking moves themselves.

This season things have improved significantly. The pressing is still 
impressively efficient and remains an extremely useful way of creating chances 
but Liverpool’s passing interplay makes them a more complete attacking force. 
Their 69 shots on target this season is the most in thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague>.

The most impressive aspect of their 4-2 victory over Crystal Palace 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/preview/football/2016/oct/30/alexis-sanchez-provides-arsenal-with-belief-november-slump-can-be-avoided>
 on Saturday evening was the manner in which they filled space dynamically. 
This side feature various forwards who drift around – Philippe Coutinho, Adam 
Lallana, Sadio Mané – and with multiple players varying position there is a 
danger it will become congested in the centre, where they all prefer to play. 
That was never a problem at Selhurst Park with team-mates making a reverse run 
whenever a player drifted out of his natural zone.

Roberto Firmino rounds off Liverpool’s goal rush at Crystal Palace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/29/crystal-palace-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
Liverpool’s opener, scored by Emre Can, was a perfect example. As Liverpool 
built up play in the centre of midfield Coutinho wandered inside from his 
left-sided role – which in isolation felt unnecessary considering Jordan 
Henderson and Can were patrolling that zone effectively, with Lallana in a more 
advanced zone.

Coutinho’s shift prompted movement from others. The left-back Alberto Moreno, 
making a rare Premier League start in place of the unwell James Milner, raced 
forward on the overlap while Can responded by charging into a goalscoring 
position inside the box. Liverpool were offering movement but also balance and 
the goal involved all three players: Coutinho chipped a ball over the top for 
Moreno; he played a cushioned, sidefooted, volleyed cutback towards Can, who 
fired home via a slight deflection. It was a fantastic goal in itself but given 
the context of Liverpool’s excellent movement it felt somehow fitting.

The player who benefits most from all this movement is Coutinho. On paper the 
left-sided position does not particularly suit him – in a more rigid team he 
would be stuck in uncomfortable zones and in a less cohesive team any drifts 
into the centre would leave the side unbalanced – but Coutinho is allowed to 
take up his preferred midfield positions, often finding space away from 
opponents. At times he controlled Saturday’s game, in addition to providing 
some incisive passes in behind. For all his talent Coutinho has sometimes 
struggled to offer a consistent influence on games, but his form this season 
has been excellent.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fjurgen-klopp-liverpool-crystal-palace&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Liverpool's%20J%C3%BCrgen%20Klopp%3A%20'I%20am%20happy%20with%20the%20character%20of%20my%20boys'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fjurgen-klopp-liverpool-crystal-palace>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Liverpool%27s%20J%C3%BCrgen%20Klopp%3A%20%27I%20am%20happy%20with%20the%20character%20of%20my%20boys%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fjurgen-klopp-liverpool-crystal-palace&media=>
Liverpool’s Jürgen Klopp: ‘I am happy with the character of my boys’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/oct/29/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-crystal-palace>
Good partnerships were obvious throughout the final third, however. Mané 
charges into goalscoring positions from his right-sided starting role, which 
works well considering Roberto Firmino often drops into deeper positions; 
Liverpool arguably play without a conventional centre‑forward but that role is 
always filled by someone. When Mané vacates his zone a team-mate fills in, 
typically Nathaniel Clyne on the overlap but sometimes Lallana drifting right. 
At full speed, and combined with sharp passing, it’s a wonderful spectacle.

Nevertheless it is impossible to ignore Liverpool’s defensive weakness. The 
nature of Palace’s first goal – Dejan Lovren inexplicably teeing up the ball 
for the onrushing James McArthur to head home, was laughable and the second, 
when McArthur again headed home, from a right-wing Wilfried Zaha cross, also 
asked questions of the centre-backs.

For long periods Lovren and Joël Matip are barely exposed, courtesy of 
Liverpool’s pressing and Jordan Henderson’s fine work in this relatively new 
defensive midfield role. Both centre-backs are comfortable high up the pitch, 
and that aggressive positioning worked well against an aerial threat like 
Benteke. Too often, though, they are simply found wanting in basic defensive 
situations, and the addition of the goalkeeper Loris Karius has not added any 
obvious authority to Liverpool are the back.

It used to be said great teams were built from the defence but Klopp is taking 
a very different approach. First, there was the impressive pressing high up the 
pitch. Next, there was the slick possession play and integrated movement. The 
defensive solidity required to win a title is yet to be witnessed. On the 
evidence so far we may have to wait until next season before Liverpool become 
efficient at both ends of the pitch.
 