
Widowed at 34, Jackie Kennedy gave an interview to Life magazine a week after 
the assassination of her husband 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/22/jfk-assassination-timeline>. 
“There’ll be great presidents again,” she said, “but there’ll never be another 
Camelot again.”


Jackie review – Natalie Portman astonishes in remarkably intimate portrait
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/13/jackie-review-natalie-portman-kennedy-jfk>
The metaphor of King Arthur’s mythical land features prominently in Jackie 
<http://www.foxsearchlight.com/jackie/>, a new film starring Natalie Portman 
that retells the 1963 shooting and its aftermath from the first lady’s point of 
view. Fascination with the Kennedys and their gilded world – their so-called 
Camelot – never seems to wane, but the movie may take on an added poignancy and 
nostalgia for Democrats looking through the prism of America under Donald and 
Melania Trump.

The cultural presence of a president is often remembered long after policies 
are forgotten. Many in New York, Washington and other liberal cities are coming 
to terms with an imminent sea change. To give one example, Barack and Michelle 
Obama hosted the multiracial cast of the musical Hamilton at the White House. 
Last week,Trump condemned them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/19/mike-pence-booed-at-hamilton-performance-then-hears-diversity-plea>
 for expressing political concerns to Vice-President-elect Mike Pence.

The 35th president, John F Kennedy, and his wife Jackie were champions of the 
arts, at ease with the world of Broadway shows. The actor Richard Burton is 
heard reciting lines from Camelot in the new film. The incoming 45th president, 
by contrast, is seen by critics as a philistine and vulgarianwho never reads 
books 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/07/25/donald-trumps-ghostwriter-tells-all>
 and gets riled by his portrayal on Saturday Night Live.

“The Kennedys were like movie stars,” said Clint Hill, 
<http://clinthillsecretservice.com/> 84, a former Secret Service agent who was 
in the Dallas motorcade when the president was assassinated. “They were young 
and attractive. People envied them and wished they had the same lifestyle.”

Hill, who was assigned to Jackie and has written a memoir, Mrs Kennedy and Me, 
added: “Of all the first ladies we’ve had,Jackie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jackie> Kennedy stands out. She changed the 
role. She was elegant and sophisticated. She took an intense interest in the 
historical furnishings of the White House. She brought in paintings and 
furniture that represented the past. She brought entertainers that had not been 
there before.”

Jackie is directed by a Chilean, Pablo Larraín, and structured around the Life 
magazine interview 
<https://www.jfklibrary.org/Asset-Viewer/Archives/THWPP-059-009.aspx> by 
Theodore H White at Hyannis Port. It has beenpraised by critics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/13/jackie-review-natalie-portman-kennedy-jfk>
 as an artful approach to a conventional subject – “looping and dizzy, sad and 
intimate”, said Vanity Fair – with a cast including Peter Sarsgaard as Robert 
Kennedy, Greta Gerwig, John Hurt and Richard E Grant. In one scene, Portman, 
who has been tipped for an Oscar, is shown washing off her husband’s blood in a 
shower.

Anita McBride, once chief of staff to first lady Laura Bush, said: “I looked 
at the trailer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/05/jackie-trailer-natalie-portman-oscars>
 and was struck how young young she was. What a level of responsibility to take 
on as a young mother who was very cognizant [of] the way the White House was 
seen on the world stage. She will always be a figure of grace and strength and 
we can’t forget her elegance.”

‘This country cannot afford to be materially rich and spiritually poor’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fjackie-kennedy-biopic-natalie-portman-jfk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea441870e75fe985c27263a30bca7e56c3e21d4d%2F0_259_3143_1886%2F3143.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jackie%20Kennedy%20biopic%20casts%20spotlight%20on%20a%20brighter%20American%20age&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fjackie-kennedy-biopic-natalie-portman-jfk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jackie%20Kennedy%20biopic%20casts%20spotlight%20on%20a%20brighter%20American%20age&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fjackie-kennedy-biopic-natalie-portman-jfk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea441870e75fe985c27263a30bca7e56c3e21d4d%2F0_259_3143_1886%2F3143.jpg>
 Jacqueline Kennedy sought to make the White House ‘a showcase of American art 
and history’. Photograph: Michael Ochs Archives/Getty Images 
The film goes on limited release on 2 December, seven weeks before Obama 
leaves the White House and Trump is inaugurated.

At 43, Kennedy was the youngest person ever elected US president. At 70, Trump 
is the oldest. The Kennedys were the first president and first lady born in the 
20th century, a generational shift likened to the replacement of black and 
white with colour. Trump had record disapproval ratings during the campaign, 
lost the popular vote and has triggered protests in major cities.

Jackie trailer: Oscar-tipped Natalie Portman as the former first lady
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/05/jackie-trailer-natalie-portman-oscars>
Whereas the cerebral Kennedy is remembered for his soaring rhetoric, citing 
the likes of Leonardo da Vinci and Shakespeare 
<https://www.kennedy-center.org/Pages/VirtualTour/JfkQuotes> and insisting, 
“This country cannot afford to be materially rich and spiritually poor,” Trump 
is a businessman and reality TV star who recently opined: “You have to be 
wealthy in order to be great.”

Jackie announced soon after her husband’s election 
<http://americanhistory.si.edu/first-ladies/jacqueline-kennedy> her intention 
to make the White House “a showcase of American art and history”. Newspapers 
adored her glamour, from her silk chiffon inaugural gown to her pillbox hat, 
making her one of the most photographed women in the 20th century. Melania, a 
model, shares an interest in fashion.

At Jackie’s behest, the Spanish cellist Pablo Casals performed at the White 
House, a moment recreated in Larraín’s film. The first lady persuaded France to 
let the Mona Lisa be displayed in Washington, the first time the painting had 
been loaned abroad. She was instrumental in saving numerous historic buildings 
from the wrecking ball.

Judging from their reception so far, the Trumps will have a tougher time with 
the arts community.Betty Boyd Caroli, <http://www.bettyboydcaroli.com/> author 
of America’s First Ladies, said: “Jackie said she wanted the White House to be 
the best of everything and she brought in cultural talent. I don’t know how the 
Trump administration will handle that. The first lady will be judged on who 
performs there, especially if it goes badly.”

Melania faces another uphill battle, Caroli said, though by no fault of her 
own. “Jackie had a good sense of American history. Melania was born in 
communist Yugoslavia and learned English later in life. If you come here as an 
outsider, you’ll never know the country as well as someone who grew up here. 
That’s a huge disadvantage as far as I can see.”

Jackie’s stock has risen among historians, Caroli said, with many now rating 
her impact as second only toEleanor Roosevelt. 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/1600/first-ladies/eleanorroosevelt> “The audiences 
I speak to are more complimentary now. She made an impression in other 
countries and was a style icon and intelligent.”

But for all its glitter, the legend of Camelot has been challenged amid 
revelations of JFK’s womanising and secretly poor health. His presidency was 
cut short – his vice-president, Lyndon B Johnson, achieved far more in terms of 
legislation, notably regarding civil rights and combating poverty.

Anthony Giardina, <http://anthonygiardina.com/> a novelist and playwright who 
grew up in the suburbs of Boston, not far from the Kennedy dynasty, observed: 
“When you look back at the Kennedy administration, as much as they thrilled us, 
it was the more pedestrian Johnson who got things done. We find it’s often the 
less glamorous figures, the Hillary Clintons if you will, who actually get 
things done.”

‘When Mr Trump takes over, you’ll see him fit the mould’

Kennedy was a relatively inexperienced senator. Trump has no political 
experience at all. But Hill, who stayed with Jackie for a year before returning 
to the White House, serving five presidents over 17 years – his most recent 
book is Five Presidents – said: “When Mr Trump takes over the Oval Office, 
you’ll see him fit the mould. When they walk in, they realise the immense 
responsibility.

Oscars 2017: 11 female performances too good to be overlooked
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/25/oscars-2017-best-actress-rebecca-hall-kate-mckinnon>
“The weight of the office begins to bear down considerably. It’s more intense 
the people realise. When you compare photos of the presidents when they start 
and finish in office, you can see they’ve aged considerably.”

As for the forthcoming film, Hill has his reservations, challenging its 
depiction of what time of day the Life interview took place and Jackie asking 
him what calibre of gun was used by assassin Lee Harvey Oswald, a conversation 
he maintains never happened.

“It’s a mixed thing,” he said, speaking from his home near San Francisco. “I’m 
glad they recognise her importance but it’s sad they depict her in a manner 
that’s not factual.

“They take a great deal of dramatic licence. A lot of things were fabricated. 
It misleads people. It changes people’s view of history and gives them a false 
impression of what happened.

“Jackie Kennedy really was one of a kind and it would be impossible for any 
actress to do her justice.”
 