
Twitter’s chief executive responded to the sudden departure of four senior 
executives on Sunday bytweeting a detailed statement 
<https://twitter.com/jack/status/691486263732383744> emphasising their 
contribution to the company as it moved from “near zero revenue to the 
over-$2bn run rate it is today”.

Jack Dorsey confirmed that senior vice-president of engineering Alex Roetter 
<https://twitter.com/aroetter>, vice-president of global media Katie Jacobs 
Stanton <https://twitter.com/KatieS>, HR vice-president Skip Schipper 
<https://twitter.com/skipschipper> and senior vice-president of product Kevin 
Weil <https://twitter.com/kevinweil> are all leaving the embattled social media 
firm.

Attempting to reassure staff and investors about the stability of the company, 
Dorsey said chief operating officer Adam Bain would be taking on additional 
responsibilities, including “revenue-related product teams”, media and HR.
Jack (@jack) 
I’m forever grateful to @aroetter <https://twitter.com/aroetter>, @katies 
<https://twitter.com/KatieS>, @skipschipper <https://twitter.com/SkipSchipper> &
@kevinweil <https://twitter.com/kevinweil> for everything they’ve given to 
Twitter. They are absolutely amazing!
 <https://twitter.com/jack/status/691486263732383744> January 25, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/jack/status/691486263732383744> 
Chief technology officer Adam Messinger will be heading up engineering, 
consumer product, design and research, user services andTwitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> mobile development platform 
Fabric. Dorsey said the two of them would be partnering “day and night” to 
coordinate the company’s development.

Twitter is under increasing pressure from shareholders to increase revenues 
and become more aggressive against competitors including Facebook and younger 
rivals such as Snapchat.

Stock rout demotes Twitter CEO Jack Dorsey from billionaire to millionaire
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/20/twitter-square-jack-dorsey-downgraded-billionaire-millionaire-tech-stocks>
Dorsey said he had wanted to talk to Twitter staff about the changes later in 
the week, but now needed to set the record straight after “inaccurate press 
rumours”. He did not explain which reports were inaccurate, although news of 
the departures was first reported byRe/code 
<http://recode.net/2016/01/24/big-exec-departures-at-twitter-media-head-stanton-and-product-head-weil-leaving/>
 earlier in the day.

“I’m sad to announce that Alex Roetter, Skip Schipper, Katie Stanton and Kevin 
Weil have chosen to leave the company. Alex and Kevin, both here over five 
years, scaled the ads product and engineering teams,” he said. “[They] have run 
all of product and engineering together for the last 18 months, helping to 
drive an increased pace of execution.

“Katie, also here over five years, has grown a global team that brings the 
world’s best, most engaging, and most powerful content onto our services.”

Schipper, he said, “played a key role scaling our HR functions … globally”. 
All four are said to be planning time off.

Twitter is planning to announce two new board members, a new chief marketing 
officer and a head of PR, according toRe/code 
<http://recode.net/2016/01/24/big-exec-departures-at-twitter-media-head-stanton-and-product-head-weil-leaving/>
 and theNew York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/25/technology/twitter-to-appoint-new-board-members-and-chief-marketing-officer.html?_r=0>
.
Chris Sacca (@sacca) 
One of @jack <https://twitter.com/jack>'s strongest talents is landing top 
shelf talent and board members.https://t.co/lUltVIMCyh <https://t.co/lUltVIMCyh>
 <https://twitter.com/sacca/status/691361698683293696> January 24, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/sacca/status/691361698683293696> 
Long-time Twitter investor Chris Sacca, who has also been outspoken in his 
criticism of the company, said Dorsey would be able to appoint strong talent, 
but that Twitter would need to ensure new board membersincreased the diversity 
<https://twitter.com/sacca/status/691361698683293696> of the board.
 