
Central bank governors are gathering at the fishing resort of Jackson Hole in 
Wyoming to discuss how they can dig themselves out of the monetary hole caused 
by the 2008 financial crash.

The central banks have cut interest rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>
 to zero and beyond, they have pumped trillions of dollars into the global 
financial system and devised novel ways to make sure most of the money is used 
to cut the cost of credit to ordinary consumers and businesses.

The aim has been to boost growth and jobs at a time when governments of all 
colours have refused to ditch their austerity programmes and support 
productivity enhancing investment.

Before the conference, deputy US Federal Reserve governor, Stanley Fischer, 
said monetary policy was not equipped to boost productivity growth. But 
governments have ignored the pleas of central bankers,leaving Fed boss Janet 
Yellen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2016/aug/22/what-central-bankers-really-want-read-janet-yellens-mind>
, the Bank of England’s Mark Carney, Mario Draghi at the European Central Bank 
and Haruhiko Kuroda at the Bank of Japan to carry the burden.


In Jackson Hole, Yellen, Carney’s deputy Nemat Shafik and many others will 
debate how to piece back together the monetary system so it bears some 
resemblance to the one that existed before the crash. Under the title Designing 
Resilient Monetary Policy Frameworks for the Future, attendees will discuss the 
hurdles they must leap before they can achieve their stated aim. These include:

Markets addicted to low rates

Financial markets sank like a stone in the summer of 2013 when the Fed, 
believing the world had recovered from the Greek crisis the year before, hinted 
that it would begin to tighten monetary policy. The so-called “taper tantrum” 
revealed that several major economies, including Turkey and Brazil, were still 
addicted to cheap debt after borrowing heavily in the US currency. They faced 
crippling interest bills if dollar interest rates went up.

What do central bankers really want? To read Janet Yellen's mind
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2016/aug/22/what-central-bankers-really-want-read-janet-yellens-mind>
Last year the Fed was poised to try again but this was scuppered after the 
Chinese authorities bungled a depreciation of the yuan, triggering a stock 
market plunge. Such was the severity of the market reaction, the Fed only 
managed a 0.25% rise in December.Fischer said 2016 was fertile ground for 
another rise 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-08-21/fischer-signals-2016-rate-hike-with-economy-nearing-fed-goals>
, possibly in September, but the huge volume of borrowing by governments and 
private corporations, especially among the emerging markets, Brexit, and the 
slowing US economy continues to make the Fed wary.

Negative interest rates

Kuroda recently said he would not rule out a “deepening cut” to the country’s 
negative interest rates <http://www.ft.com/negative-interest-rates>. Draghi has 
followed the Japanese into negative territory, dragging the Swedish, Danish and 
Swiss national banks with him.

Negative rates mean that commercial banks must pay to keep their funds on 
deposit with a central bank. The policy aims to encourage commercial banks to 
do other things with the money – lend it or invest it in riskier assets.


But the effect has been to squeeze the gap between lending and borrowing 
rates, hitting bank profits. Even the Bank of England’s recent interest rate 
cut to 0.25% is expected to hit the profits of high street lenders.

Carney has vowed to avoid negative interest rates for just this reason and 
alongside the base rate cut to 0.25%, he set aside £100bn of cheap loans for 
the banks with the express aim of maintaining their profit margins.

Stagnant eurozone

Draghi is expected to release further funds later this year to boost 
lacklustre growth in the eurozone. The 19-member currency zone is trundling 
along with GDP growth just above 1% but this anaemic rate of expansion is 
unlikely to improve the dire jobs situation across much of the continent or 
push inflation closer to the European Central Bank’s 2% target.

Central bankers worry that for all Draghi’s optimism, Europe is going to be on 
monetary life support for a generation, as the the wealthy baby boomers of 
Germany, France and Italy stash their savings rather than spend it. For every 
euro the boomers stash away or invest in property, the central bank will need 
to print two just for the economy to inch ahead.


The latest figures show France beginning to recover and generate some private 
sector growth but with several countries still in recession and Greece ready to 
erupt at any time, the eurozone remains a a long-term problem

Fragile emerging markets

Brazil and Turkey are case studies in how strong emerging market economies can 
flip into recession, undermining the confidence among global investors that the 
recovery from 2008 is nearing completion.

Brazil suffered from the knock-on effects of a slowdown in China, along with a 
string of domestic scandals, while Turkey found its corporate sector facing 
extra credit costs following its heavy borrowing in dollars. Both economies 
were roaring in 2013 at a time when the west was struggling, propping up global 
growth. Within a couple of years they were in recession while Russia and 
China’s growth rate had slumped, leaving central banks to delay any return to 
normality.

Currency wars

Some central banks are frank about their determination to make exports more 
competitive by driving down the value of the local currency. Japan is a case in 
point. Kuroda was appointed by prime minister Shinzo Abe to fire two of the 
three arrows designed to rescue a stagnant economy – a cut in the cost of 
credit and a lower yen. A recent rise in the yen against the pound, the yuan 
and euro is likely to bring further monetary easing this year.

Draghi, despite his denials, has embarked on the same mission at the ECB. 
Almost all the rise in Italian and French exports in the last couple of years 
can be attributed to a cheaper euro. In London the lower value of the pound was 
widely seen as a positive post-Brexit benefit, not least by theBank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor>.

China has followed the same policy over the last year, sometimes clumsily, at 
other times without the world taking much notice.

For all of them the target is the same: the US. They want to drive down the 
value of their currency to compete with American businesses, which have enjoyed 
a stellar recovery riding on the back of a cheap dollar. The fear is that a 
rise in US interest rates and the value of the dollar is not a step towards 
normality but a shock that will upset the applecart again.
 