
Jake Gyllenhaal could be any early-30s urbanite. He is sitting in front of me 
wearing a plain white T-shirt and huge pillowy Nikes, and with a semi-wildman 
beard and gleaming eyes. He may look normal now, but in his new film,Southpaw, 
a boxing movie in which he plays a troubled brawler called Billy Hope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/27/southpaw-trailer-jake-gyllenhaal-boxing-film>
, he is a huge and sculpted light-heavyweight, a slab of murderous muscle.

The remaking of his own body is becoming a Gyllenhaal signature. His physique 
in Southpaw is a shocking leap from the skeletal Lou Bloom inNightcrawler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/02/nightcrawler-review-dan-gilroy-jake-gyllenhaal-rene-russo>
, the sulphurous LA noir about a ghoulish journalist selling footage of freeway 
pileups to TV news shows. “This transformation,” declared the film’s 
distributor Harvey Weinstein atCannes, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/may/15/cannes-uncovered-day-3> 
“is amazing.”

Weinstein was appearing onstage with Gyllenhaal to fire the starting gun for 
the 2016 Oscars race, telling guests the actor would have his full support in 
awards season. Known for his sharp-elbowed campaigning, the mogul announced: 
“We’ll get revenge” – the wrong to be righted being the Academy’s failure this 
year to recognise Gyllenhaal’s turn inNightcrawler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/nightcrawler>. Weinstein declined to comment 
further for this piece. Gyllenhaal smiles when the subject comes up.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fjake-gyllenhaal-im-fascinated-with-what-it-is-to-be-a-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F10%2F1436545330723%2F373bb9df-7947-49e9-adad-020c378b6dce-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jake%20Gyllenhaal%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20fascinated%20by%20my%20own%20anger%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fjake-gyllenhaal-im-fascinated-with-what-it-is-to-be-a-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jake%20Gyllenhaal%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20fascinated%20by%20my%20own%20anger%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fjake-gyllenhaal-im-fascinated-with-what-it-is-to-be-a-man%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F10%2F1436545330723%2F373bb9df-7947-49e9-adad-020c378b6dce-1360x2040.jpeg>
 A vision of Zen tranquility … Gyllenhaal. Photograph: Andrew H. Walker 
“It’s flattering if someone mentions these things, but frankly it’s also 
unfortunate because everyone should see a movie and have their own experience. 
And I know your job is to create context …” He catches himself, keen not to get 
off on the wrong foot. “Look, it’s Harvey. And Harvey is Harvey. I love him, I 
really do. But everyone is entitled to their own opinion. And that’s the best I 
can say about that.”

For Southpaw <https://www.theguardian.com/film/southpaw>, there were long 
months of learning to box, dawn runs, skipping, sparring. The fight scenes 
still freaked him out. “Even when you’re onlyfilming a fight, even when it’s a 
movie, in the ring you feel totally naked.” He makes it sound like a sex scene, 
a monstrous test of nerve. “It’s a strange thing, 700 extras watching.”

Gyllenhaal is likable, inclined to the earnest but self-aware, quick to grin. 
“The thing was, whenever I took a real hit, my first thought was always: 
‘Someone better have got a good fucking angle on that.’ That’s an actor.” He 
pauses, as he often does. “It may have all been a bit reckless.”

His willingness to get battered may have helped make the part feel like his 
own. For several years,Southpaw was to have been a vehicle for Eminem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/dec/15/eminem-boxing-movie-southpaw>; 
Gyllenhaal was only cast once the rapper dropped out. In that first 
incarnation, the talk was of a parallel between the star’s hard-knocks youth in 
Detroit and Billy, a bruiser from a New York orphanage. With Gyllenhaal, the 
link is less clear: the son of a successful director and screenwriter, he grew 
up in LA, acting as a child. He appeared in his first film at 11, playingBilly 
Crystal’s son in City Slickers. 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/movies/videos/flashback-jake-gyllenhaal-plays-billy-crystals-son-in-city-slickers-20141030>

Yet Southpaw is not his first high-profile role as a blue-collar dude in a bad 
situation. In the Gulf war dramaJarhead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/jan/13/3>, he was a fragile marine; in 
End of Watch, <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/nov/22/end-of-watch-review>
 a sturdy cop. He says the reason the boxing movie endures is because the boxer 
is such a universal figure, while few of us relate to actors. “Believe me, I 
take acting seriously, I take it more seriously than …” Again, he reverses his 
train of thought. “I take it very seriously, let’s just say that. I do also 
recognise that it is absurd.”

To Dan Gilroy, the writer and director of Nightcrawler, there will have been a 
reason for the role. “I think Jake was probably attracted to Southpaw as a 
physical transformation and also as: ‘OK, here’s someone I’ve never played 
before, from a certain socio-economic background, a place of hardship and 
struggle.” I’m sure those things were the challenge for him.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F23%2Fsouthpaw-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F23%2F1437659153275%2FKP_367692_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Southpaw%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F23%2Fsouthpaw-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Southpaw%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F23%2Fsouthpaw-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F23%2F1437659153275%2FKP_367692_crop_640x360.jpg>
 The film team review Southpaw 
By now, Gilroy says, Gyllenhaal could take his pick from any superhero movie 
in Hollywood; instead, he makes small, jagged films such as Nightcrawler. The 
weight loss was the actor’s idea – two stone in 10 weeks. “And to do that he 
had to fight the industry logic tooth and nail. Because their default position 
is ‘no’.” Gilroy mimics a nervous executive: “‘What do you mean, you want to 
lose weight? Don’t lose weight! People know you as Jake, we’re hiring you as 
Jake! Let me just give you a nice haircut so that you look personable and women 
will like you.’ That’s the industry. He doesn’t listen. He’s ballsy.”

But there has always been ambition. In 2002, at 21, Gyllenhaal came to London 
to do theatre, feeling that he should. He starred in the quickfire Kenneth 
Lonergan playThis is Our Youth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2002/mar/18/theatre.artsfeatures>, at the 
time the third most famous member of a three-handed cast including Anna Paquin 
and Hayden Christiansen, then playing Anakin Skywalker in George Lucas’s second 
batch of Star Wars films.

The play’s director Laurence Boswell was alarmed to discover his only stage 
experience had been in a school play. He found himself stunned by how good 
Gyllenhaal was. “My sense was that he was tough enough, ruthless enough, 
ambitious enough and skilled enough to become a big star.” As well as his 
talent and his sweetness, Boswell also mentions his “political and strategic 
skills”, and the industry nous that comes from a Hollywood family. (Boswell 
mentions his older sister, actress Maggie Gyllenhaal, as a particular 
influence.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fjake-gyllenhaal-im-fascinated-with-what-it-is-to-be-a-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F10%2F1436545417412%2F87698fab-f0f0-42ad-abb8-842660c291d7-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jake%20Gyllenhaal%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20fascinated%20by%20my%20own%20anger%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fjake-gyllenhaal-im-fascinated-with-what-it-is-to-be-a-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jake%20Gyllenhaal%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20fascinated%20by%20my%20own%20anger%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fjake-gyllenhaal-im-fascinated-with-what-it-is-to-be-a-man%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F10%2F1436545417412%2F87698fab-f0f0-42ad-abb8-842660c291d7-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Gyllenhaal in Nightcrawler. Photograph: Chuck Zlotnick 
At 34, having done nothing professionally but act, you wonder if Gyllenhaal 
feels the job needs to be gruelling to matter. Does he take parts and then find 
he wants to transform physically – or take parts precisely because they let him 
stretch and shrink and get weird with his body?

“Does the arrow draw forth the target or vice versa?” He ponders in silence. 
“Well, I’ve realised I’m fascinated with what it is to be a man. And as a man, 
physicality is important. I’ve gone on searches …” He sees me squinting 
uncertainly. “I mean, pushing myself to the limit. With Nightcrawler, I was 
searching for a physical, chemical state that would come from depriving myself. 
I was interested in what that would bring out. It wasn’t about losing weight. 
It was about what happens with a certain kind of deprivation.”

Gyllenhaal has never had a reputation for hedonism, though his career has 
grazed against tragedy; to many he will always be linked with Heath Ledger, his 
lover in the pioneeringBrokeback Mountain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/jan/06/3>, who would die of a 
prescription drug overdose in 2008. His own drive sounds like a potent species 
of workaholism. “He pushes himself harder than I or any director could ever 
push,” Gilroy says. “He puts more of himself into his characters than any other 
actor I’ve heard of.”

Should Weinstein win the day, the lesson will surely be that you get an Oscar 
for playing musclebound orphans called Hope, not ghoulish LA hyper-capitalists. 
But Gyllenhaal says he thinks Billy might be just as dark as Lou, chewed up by 
rage. “That was a big reason for me to do this movie – I’m fascinated by my own 
anger, too.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fjake-gyllenhaal-im-fascinated-with-what-it-is-to-be-a-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F10%2F1436545489762%2F97addd62-339a-4d34-9296-aea3b16da90a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jake%20Gyllenhaal%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20fascinated%20by%20my%20own%20anger%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fjake-gyllenhaal-im-fascinated-with-what-it-is-to-be-a-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jake%20Gyllenhaal%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20fascinated%20by%20my%20own%20anger%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fjake-gyllenhaal-im-fascinated-with-what-it-is-to-be-a-man%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F10%2F1436545489762%2F97addd62-339a-4d34-9296-aea3b16da90a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 With Heath Ledger in Brokeback Mountain. Photograph: AP 
He smiles, a vision of Zen tranquility. Really? Does he have a lot of anger? 
“I would aspire to be someone who is only ever angry at injustice. But frankly, 
I’m also angry in traffic. And I seriously wonder why. But not just that. There 
are things that …” He stalls as if there’s something on the tip of his tongue. 
“I mean, all I can say is: Look, my work expresses best what I’m trying to 
explore, and you can see from the work I’ve done lately the areas where I’m 
searching. And the answer to your question is yes, of course, I have anger. Not 
all the time. But yes. And I’m very curious about it. Not because I go: ‘Ooh, 
what’s angry like?’ It’s something I experience and want to understand.”I tell 
him, and it’s true, that as I was sitting with his people waiting to be ushered 
in here, I Googled his name. Prominent among the results was a MailOnline story 
detailing the lunch he enjoyed yesterday with a “mystery brunette” in Chelsea. 
The piece pointed out Gyllenhaal appearing to scratch his back with his fork. 
“Uncouth,” it sniffed, amid the paparazzi shots taken through the restaurant 
window. Does any of that make him angry?

He takes a moment. “Well, to be frank, that had yet to sail past my 
consciousness. But no, I am no longer curious about that stuff. And it doesn’t 
make me angry. What does make me angry is how easy it is to destroy rather than 
create …” At this, he embarks on a meandering tangent on the theme of 
positivity that starts with the flaws of social media, veers into serving on 
the Cannes jury with the Coen brothers, takes in his enjoyment of the Broadway 
musical Fun Home, and rounds off with his new film. “Maybe I’m contradicting 
myself,” he says eventually, “and I hope I am, because the point here was to 
confuse you.”

A deeply traditional kind of boxing movie, Southpaw comes with a modern twist. 
Although Weinstein was the public face of its production, much of the finance 
came from the Chinese entertainment giantDalian Wanda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/09/how-chinese-tycoon-wang-jianlin-is-turning-hard-cash-into-soft-power>
 – owner of, among many other things, cinema chains across Asia and the US. For 
Gyllenhaal, such deals are part of the eternal balancing act between art and 
commerce. He was a producer on Nightcrawler, as well as its star; Gilroy thinks 
he may end up directing, too. His mood right now is, he says, less imperial: 
“At this point, I’m ecstatic if I’m in a movie that just works, even a little 
bit. Movies are so hard, just that is miraculous.”

Southpaw goes on general release in the UK and the US on 24 July
 