
In the age of multiple No7s being packed into the back row, of David Pocock 
and Michael Hooper doubling up and reinforcing the effectiveness of breakdown 
specialists, especially on a night of open play, ready-made for them, it was 
James Haskell who stole the show. The great overgrown puppy dog of England is 
not a game-reading No8, it is said. He’s too conspicuous to be a 6 and not 
artful enough for 7. Maybe not, but he had the all-round game of his life in 
Brisbane.

Having put in a shift that was mostly physical, with its huge tackles and 
grappling intensity, he was asked afterwards about Australia’s opening burst, 
when they scored two tries. The Hask briefly went into thoughtful mode. He had 
worked out what was wrong. The fault was all his, because, as he put it, he was 
“blowing a bit”. Once he got his second wind, that is, everything would be 
better. And he was right, of course, because as soon as he adapted to the 
rhythm of the night he was outstanding.

England hold off Australia fightback to win thrilling series opener
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/11/australia-england-first-test-match-report>
Eddie Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eddie-jones>, who apparently 
reminds Haskell day in, day out of the precariousness of the wing forward’s 
hold on his position, must take a little bit of credit for finding a cure to a 
leaking defence. Off went Luther Burrell and on came George Ford, not the most 
obvious change of personnel in the light of what was happening at the start of 
the match. But it worked and the diminutive Ford played his part in 
reorganising the line and the speed of its advance.

Ford as chief of defence and Haskell as head of back-row strategy – this was 
not a night of conventional roles. And they weren’t the only ones to write a 
script in defiance of expectation. Dan Cole’s most obvious role would have been 
to play Mr Bodyline, more prop than Harold Larwood, but the most nagging and 
niggling of tormentors, briefed to hurt ribs. But Cole played the part of Mr 
Bodyangle, comprehensively winning the all-important duel with the lauded Scott 
Sio, the spearhead of the Australian scrummaging revolution.

Cole’s angles may suggest that he was turning in – as tightheads under 
pressure from a pincer movement against them by the opposition hooker and 
looseheads have been doing since time immemorial – but it doesn’t matter. If 
you don’t concede penalties then you don’t stop doing whatever it is that’s 
working. To have Sio sent to the sin-bin was proof of a game well spent.

To have players forced to confront the less than obvious and find solutions 
for themselves seems very much the England way now, and would appear to stand 
in contrast to the ways of the World Cup, when the programming looked 
altogether more rigid. Coach Jones insists on only one absolute: that his 
players be tough and a little bit rough. It seems to have uncluttered a few 
minds and England are patently enjoying themselves.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Fjames-haskell-england-australia-eddie-jones-george-ford-brisbane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5d07b415d9fa3a50ae6f8a86790c8ffc4e2f631%2F0_0_3479_2088%2F3479.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=James%20Haskell%20keeps%20it%20simple%20as%20England%E2%80%99s%20muscle%20eclipses%20Australia%20%7C%20Eddie%20Butler&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Fjames-haskell-england-australia-eddie-jones-george-ford-brisbane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=James%20Haskell%20keeps%20it%20simple%20as%20England%E2%80%99s%20muscle%20eclipses%20Australia%20%7C%20Eddie%20Butler&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Fjames-haskell-england-australia-eddie-jones-george-ford-brisbane%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5d07b415d9fa3a50ae6f8a86790c8ffc4e2f631%2F0_0_3479_2088%2F3479.jpg>
 James Haskell, centre, breaks for the line to set up the field position for 
Marland Yarde to score. Photograph: David Rogers/Getty Images 
There were clearly things that went wrong during the sticky patch. Mike Brown 
was out of sorts at full-back and the collective lines were fluffed. Israel 
Folau took full advantage to show, as if anybody needed reminding, of how 
sumptuously gifted he is on the ball. If Bernard Foley’s try had not been 
disallowed for the obstruction by the newcomer, Rory Arnold, on Burrell, the 
damage might have been irreparable, and Folau might have been irresistible all 
night.

But the review was all part of the fun and within a very short space of time, 
England had pulled themselves together and begun their comeback. Sides that do 
not flinch when a long way from home and two tries down, but who draw strength 
from the challenge, are in a good place.

New Zealand power away from Wales with second-half dismantling
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/11/new-zealand-wales-first-test-match-report>
Australia, playing for the first time together since the World Cup final of 
last October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/31/new-zealand-australia-rugby-world-cup-final-match-report>
, were possibly a bit surprised to start so well. Their gradual loss of the 
power game to England will certainly make them stroke their chins. That was not 
part of the plan. What they did well, and which may develop as the series 
proceeds, was pass deep behind the frontline of attackers. It is no surprise at 
all to see Australia leading the way in the discovery of a way to beat an 
onrushing defence. New Zealand, by way of contrast,had earlier  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/11/new-zealand-wales-first-test-match-report>
sought to turn Wales’s blitzers with a diagonal kicking game by Aaron Cruden – 
an approach that, of course, worked perfectly for England with the last play in 
Brisbane when Ford threaded through a little gem for Jack Nowell.

Australia on the other hand preferred in general to keep the ball in hand and 
were prepared to go a long way back with their passes in order eventually to 
find a way round the defence. The masters of the flat-back three-quarters of 
old are becoming devotees of an old French style, sweeping forward from way 
back. It’s a new take on an old theme, an adaptation of something ancient to 
the thoroughly modern game.

It will be very interesting to see where Australia go from here. They will 
want more snarl up front, but it’s hard to rectify a deficiency without 
compromising a strength. More grunt, less purr. Is that the way for Australia 
to haul themselves back into the series? The questions always seem a little 
more awkward when you lose.

As for England, having already found so many solutions to problems presented, 
they will presumably be happy to order more of the stuff that was so good. It’s 
simpler that way. Don’t think, Hask; just repeat.
 