
Heather Phillipson <http://www.heatherphillipson.co.uk/> is talking human 
hearts. “I had it installed especially,” she says, “to catch all the cliches. 
Hearts are the best bins for cliche. Hearts get top marks for looking at home 
pretty much anywhere. Hearts are there to catch passing feelings and strangle 
them. I wish I were as alive as my heart – and as deadly.”

So begins Commiserations, her eulogy to the heart and all its flailings. For 
heart, read hurt. Phillipson’s long poem provides the voiceover to one of the 
two films for which she has just won the £10,000Jarman award 
<http://flamin.filmlondon.org.uk/jarmanaward>. The prize is named after 
film-makerDerek Jarman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/derek-jarman>, who was 
also a painter and a marvellous writer. It seems apt that Phillipson, whose 
work you could also describe as “multi-disciplinary”, should win.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F166956905&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F166956905>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F166956905&media=>
 100% Other Fibres, which helped Phillipson to the Film London Jarman award 
In the past few years, Phillipson has had me following an audio-guide around 
Gateshead and Newcastle, watching videos while seated in a boat marooned in a 
gallery, and in the back seat of a car. We spoke last week, in a bar near her 
Hackney studio, before the winner was announced. I knew she’d won. She didn’t. 
My heart was pounding. Phillipson has published three volumes of poetry 
(shortlisted for the 2013 Fenton Aldeburgh first collection prize and the 
Michael Murphy Memorial prize, and she was named a Next Generation Poet in 
2014), but the page is not enough.

Women film-makers dominate Jarman award shortlist for 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jun/17/women-film-makers-dominate-jarman-award-shortlist-for-2016>
Her poems have become the core of her videos and installations, read with 
deadpan assurance over cheesy visual effects, cartoon elements, explosions and 
scraps of found footage. Her work has a horrible sort of hilarity. Sometimes 
people don’t get the switches in tone, she tells me. There always has to be a 
moment of electric charge between the different elements. “My work often deals 
with anxieties of the present moment,” she says. “One recurrent theme is our 
relationship to animals.”

At Schirn Kunsthalle in Frankfurt 
<http://www.schirn.de/en/exhibitions/2015/heather_phillipson/>, Commiserations 
became part of a huge installation under the museum’s cupola. Red binbags, 
giant cartoonish cutout human eyes and wriggly sperm were suspended overhead, 
and the installation was dominated by a giant human foot. A very superficial 
reading of her work, she says, is that it’s really poppy and fun. “But I think 
my work has got more and more angry and overtly political. Looking back at my 
old work, there was a lovely innocent time when I could make a video about 
french kissing. Not that it was really that, but I didn’t have to think about 
fascism, that it was on my doorstep.”

The US election has crystallised what she wants to make next. “It is quite 
abject, and also absolutely furious. It’s really angry. The most angry thing 
I’ve made, or it will be.” What’s the process? Do she know how things will end 
up, as stand-alone poems, video works, installations? “Generally the writing 
goes into videos. I use audio to highlight certain bits of language or set a 
tone, along with pieces of music that I use strategically.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fheather-phillipson-jarman-award-video-art-poetry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff97d7c7b08c72638c8639761b78dc9dcbaa6ad87%2F0_91_2953_2007%2F2953.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jarman%20winner%20Heather%20Phillipson%3A%20'My%20next%20work%20will%20be%20furious.%20Fascism%20is%20on%20my%20doorstep'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fheather-phillipson-jarman-award-video-art-poetry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jarman%20winner%20Heather%20Phillipson%3A%20%27My%20next%20work%20will%20be%20furious.%20Fascism%20is%20on%20my%20doorstep%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fheather-phillipson-jarman-award-video-art-poetry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff97d7c7b08c72638c8639761b78dc9dcbaa6ad87%2F0_91_2953_2007%2F2953.jpg>
 Inoculation against cliche … Phillipson’s installation Eat Here. Photograph: 
Schirn Kunsthalle, Frankfurt/Norbert Migueletz 
“The first point of contact with the work is usually through a single screen. 
That’s where I sample and appropriate things from the internet. And I feel that 
my work needs to go back out in that form – which is whyI put it out on Vimeo 
<https://vimeo.com/user2806103/videos/page:1/sort:date> and make it freely 
available. Seeing my videos with a giant foot is one iteration, but it could 
also be that you watch it on your mobile phone, or have a one-to-one 
relationship with it on your computer.”

We are all video-makers these days, she says. “Walking around with a video 
camera in our pockets. There is no exclusivity any more. It’s gone, which is 
nice. There’s a lot of stuff on YouTube that’s not made by anybody who has 
anything to do with the art world. Structurally, it’s all very interesting.”

She samples her own words, in achingly bright hand-drawn script, on the screen 
to add emphasis to her laconic and deadpan voiceover. “I used to think that the 
tone of voice was peculiarly English and wouldn’t translate. A lot of it is 
quite subtle.” She’s also one of the few artists – or poets for that matter – 
to make me laugh out loud. “I’m not going for a big laugh. People aren’t sure 
if they are meant to laugh.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fheather-phillipson-jarman-award-video-art-poetry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f6182a51333f97c23409ee88786696eeaca87e5%2F0_184_2953_1772%2F2953.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jarman%20winner%20Heather%20Phillipson%3A%20'My%20next%20work%20will%20be%20furious.%20Fascism%20is%20on%20my%20doorstep'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fheather-phillipson-jarman-award-video-art-poetry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jarman%20winner%20Heather%20Phillipson%3A%20%27My%20next%20work%20will%20be%20furious.%20Fascism%20is%20on%20my%20doorstep%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fheather-phillipson-jarman-award-video-art-poetry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f6182a51333f97c23409ee88786696eeaca87e5%2F0_184_2953_1772%2F2953.jpg>
 ‘Good news for people who like death’ … True to Size. Photograph: Arts Council 
Collection 
Recently, she has shown in New York, at the New Museum 
<http://www.newmuseum.org/> and at the Performa <http://performa-arts.org/> 
festival, as well as in Germany. “I seem to be getting asked back. In 
non-English-speaking countries, I assume that loads get lost. But even as an 
English speaker the works are so dense, you catch the tone or musicality, 
phrases, but you don’t get the whole thing. Not that there’s something to get. 
You can’t parse it in that way. It’s so dense, like reading a poem.”

Another new work, True to Size, commissioned for the 70th anniversary of the 
Arts Council Collection <http://www.artscouncilcollection.org.uk/home>, is a 
meditation on consumerism, climate change and the end of the world. “Good news 
for people who like death,” it begins, the phrase repeated in a childlike 
voice, then goes on about glutes “till there was so much beauty coming out of 
my ass”, having sex on volcanoes, and whether women have the balls. A lot of 
artists are working with language now, I say. “I do quite a bit of visiting 
tutoring and they say, ‘It would be good for you to come in, because a lot of 
students are working with text.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fheather-phillipson-jarman-award-video-art-poetry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6470b5a76cf48e1801808cfec140c3a310b847b7%2F0_133_1080_1350%2F1080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jarman%20winner%20Heather%20Phillipson%3A%20'My%20next%20work%20will%20be%20furious.%20Fascism%20is%20on%20my%20doorstep'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fheather-phillipson-jarman-award-video-art-poetry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jarman%20winner%20Heather%20Phillipson%3A%20%27My%20next%20work%20will%20be%20furious.%20Fascism%20is%20on%20my%20doorstep%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fheather-phillipson-jarman-award-video-art-poetry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6470b5a76cf48e1801808cfec140c3a310b847b7%2F0_133_1080_1350%2F1080.jpg>
 ‘I quite like being an amateur’ … Heather Phillipson 
The job of all creative art is to make things fresh and real again. Her work, 
I suggest – with its playfulness with language, the flip-flops of alliteration 
and digging through commonplaces to take things somewhere else – is a sort of 
inoculation against cliche. “It’s important to go straight to the cliche and 
look at it. Not being able to accept anything at face value. It’s not a 
one-sided critique. There is something of me that is also somehow complicit, as 
much as you can be savvy to those things. Like the use of music – when you go 
to a film, and you know exactly what its designs on you are, you still find 
yourself welling up with tears. And feeling self-hate when you find yourself 
buying into it, against yourself.”

She can go on the road, do readings, make installations – I envy this, I tell 
her. “There was a turning point when poetry started to be fashionable and 
consumed by the art world. Before, I was doing readings in the literary world 
and suddenly the art world became interested. I resisted it for a while. Then 
it stopped being a separate thing.”

It's the artist's duty to use the latest technology – since it has yet to be 
properly explored

Does she think it gets harder as you develop as an artist, that you begin to 
know too much? “I quite like being an amateur. LikePeter Greenaway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/peter-greenaway> said, it’s the artist’s duty 
to always use the latest technology. That would always render you as an 
amateur. You would always be engaging with something that hadn’t properly been 
explored yet.”

How you renew things is open to question. “Language is a technology that is 
constantly under renewal, and it has clearly changed and evolved over the past 
10 years. The internet has made so much possible. Everyone is on Twitter, 
involved in writing, sharing images and sounds. People move so fluidly between 
those forms. We don’t separate those things in the same way that we used to, 
because they come out of the same form.”

She thinks this levelling was anticipated by people such as Jarman. “He moved 
between different areas so fluidly,” she says, “not caring about people telling 
him that if you’re good at this, you’re going to be rubbish at that. Jarman was 
a world-builder.”
 