
Across the foyer of AFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> House in 
Melbourne, Jason Mifsud distractedly waves his hand in my direction. He’s busy 
with a phone call. Less than an hour before our meeting, the state Labor 
government announced his appointment as executive director for Aboriginal 
Victoria in the Department of Premier and Cabinet. As he hangs up the phone, we 
shake hands, I offer my congratulations and ask if he’ll take a break in 
preparation for the new role. “Not in my line of work,” he responds with a 
grin. “Aboriginal affairs is a full time job.”

 From 2007, Mifsud, 42, was the most senior Aboriginal administrator at the 
AFL. The job title changed over the years, but essentially he was in charge of 
running the Indigenous and multicultural programs. It’s a position that granted 
him great influence but also brought considerable controversy. Mifsud leaves an 
organisation that has increased Aboriginal participation at both grassroots and 
administrative level, established multicultural and Indigenous rounds, and 
introduced the Indigenous Advisory Group. Yet there was also thatchaotic 
six-week period in 2012 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/sport/afl/loose-lips-fail-to-sink-jason-mifsud/story-fnca0u4y-1226317979424>
 where he clashed spectacularly with several high profile players and coaches 
on the issue of race, issued a public apology to former Melbourne coach Mark 
Neeld, offered his resignation to the AFL and had senior Aboriginal players 
Dean Rioli and Michael Long call for his sacking.

 Mifsud’s career in the AFL system, both as a player and administrator, was 
bookended by two of the most important moments in Australian sport. Taken by St 
Kilda in the 1993 pre-season draft, he was sitting with coaches and fellow 
reserves at Victoria Park as Collingwood fans hurled racist abuse at his 
team-mate Nicky Winmar, prompting Winmar to turn to the crowd, lift his jumper 
and point defiantly to his black skin. And then in 2015, Mifsud watched as fans 
relentlessly booed Adam Goodes into retirement. In both cases, he saw the 
trauma experienced by the men away from the cameras and the footy field.

If you’re born into the Aboriginal community, you’re born into politics. It’s 
your choice if you want to play it or not

As Mifsud and I eat lunch at the long table in the foyer, a large, colourful 
mural hangs above our heads. Titled The Game That Made Australia, it displays 
several famous images ofAustralian rules football 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-rules-football> since 1858 – a 
ruck duel between Ron Barassi Senior and Polly Farmer; Winmar’s iconic stand at 
Victoria Park; a handshake between two captains against the backdrop of a 
picture of the Australian land mass. At the top of the mural, a green footy 
field recedes seamlessly into the rich red earth of an outback oval.

 The unity that the mural depicts is, of course, a grand exercise in 
mythology. Try as it might, footy has never quite reconciled black and white 
Australia. Some, like Mifsud, argue that it has done better than most: there is 
the Indigenous round, a corporate infrastructure to encourage Aboriginal 
players and administrators, while the NITV programThe Marngrook Footy Show 
gives authority to the theory that Australian rules football came from the 
Aboriginal gamemarngrook.
Fitzroy Stars interactive 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/03/mike-embed/giv-27167hOYJKT3sRe30/>
 Much like the Redfern All Blacks rugby league club in Sydney, the Fitzroy 
Stars are an advancement organisation, a social adhesive, a bastion of pride 
and positivity and a network for employment, health and emotional support. Sir 
Douglas Nicholls Oval, the club’s home ground in Thornbury, is also home to the 
Aborigines Advancement League, one of the oldest Aboriginal organisations in 
the state. The clubhouse is a shared space, andUncle Alf Bamblett 
<http://www.theage.com.au/victoria/victorian-aboriginal-leader-alf-bamblett-remembered-as-uncle-alf-20150316-1m0lak.html>
 was president of both institutions until his passing in 2015. Despite being 
located outside the suburb, the Stars remain part of the soul of Fitzroy – an 
enduring symbol in an era of gentrification. As the rapper Briggs sang in the 
opening line of his 2015 hitThe Children Came Back 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3-wMbFntrTo&feature=youtu.be>: “I’m Fitzroy, 
where the Stars be.”

 In October 2015, Mifsud was announced as the new head coach of the Fitzroy 
Stars. The season starts on 9 April. “I’m only going back to coaching because 
it’s the Stars,” he says. “I wouldn’t have gone anywhere else.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fjason-mifsud-and-fitzroy-stars-a-man-on-a-mission-at-a-club-that-means-so-much%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc08fe4d6aed2084853656629fc3d3145143e5c71%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jason%20Mifsud%20and%20Fitzroy%20Stars%3A%20a%20man%20on%20a%20mission%20at%20a%20club%20that%20means%20so%20much&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fjason-mifsud-and-fitzroy-stars-a-man-on-a-mission-at-a-club-that-means-so-much%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jason%20Mifsud%20and%20Fitzroy%20Stars%3A%20a%20man%20on%20a%20mission%20at%20a%20club%20that%20means%20so%20much&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fjason-mifsud-and-fitzroy-stars-a-man-on-a-mission-at-a-club-that-means-so-much%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc08fe4d6aed2084853656629fc3d3145143e5c71%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 Aboriginal colours are seen on a caravan at the Stars’ base in Thornbury. 
Photograph: Paul Jeffers for the Guardian 
“This weekend is not about footy,” Mifsud announces to his players, “this is 
everything but footy. This isn’t just a footy camp, it’s about togetherness and 
connectedness. We’re fortunate to have an opportunity to spend time this 
weekend. I honestly believe it’s the best thing for us as a group of 
individuals to be there for each other in this really challenging circumstance.”


 The Stars’ 2016 season has started with sorry business. One of the players 
passed away in mid-February. His funeral is on the afternoon of the first day 
of pre-season camp, out at the Cummeragunja Mission near Shepparton. Aboriginal 
men are four times more likely to commit suicide then non-Aboriginal men, and 
the loss has hit the players hard.

 “You know how I feel about vulnerability,” Mifsud says. “If we need to cry, 
hug, laugh or train, we’ll do whatever we can to get through the weekend.” On 
the car trip home from training, Mifsud calls one of the players to check he’s 
OK, and assure him he can call at any time he needs. His job at the Stars will 
be assessed on far more than on-field results – there is a wider pastoral role 
at play. “When you’re in an Aboriginal footy club you deal in realities, not 
statistics,” he says simply. “I don’t see these boys as statistics.”

There are a lot of teachable moments in footy which are absolutely 
transferable to life

 The Fitzroy Stars are a mix – some of them are former AFL players, some 
should be playing VFL football, a few of the young blokes are aiming for the 
very top, while others still are of more modest talent. Many of them are 
connected to the club by history, memory and blood – the recurring surnames are 
Brown, Bamblett, Edwards, Austin, Saunders, Briggs, Murray and Thorpe.

 Mifsud has mostly inherited this squad, and there’s a kaleidoscope of 
personalities for him to handle. Such as the captain, Djaran Whyman, the former 
North Melbourne player who refers to himself as “all action”, never stops 
grinning and has an encyclopaedia of one-liners at his disposal. Such as Lionel 
“Jacko” Proctor, the former Richmond player whoalways puts his body on the line 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ne3A0cNViVI> for the club. Such as Coree “Coz” 
Thorpe, whose family history is intertwined with the club and who leads by 
quiet example. Or Jai Burns, the hard man with an iron constitution, who can 
make you feel 10 times stronger just by looking at you.

There are more. Luke McKeown, a ginger-haired psychologist’s dream who 
smothers his face in blue zinc before he trains and has an endless stream of 
deviant stories, each one more outlandish than the last. Matt Seadon, the 
staunch unionist with an easy smile who will be Mifsud’s assistant coach. Rivva 
Karpany, a talented cultural dancer from South Australia who has come across 
from Port Adelaide Magpies this season to try and make it to the VFL. Alister 
Thorpe, who wrote anacademic paper 
<http://www.healthinfonet.ecu.edu.au/key-resources/bibliography/?lid=28157> on 
the importance of the club to the community. Kyle Lambley, the smallest and 
youngest player in the group who doesn’t say much, but when he does, speaks 
with an authority and confidence that belies his age. Gary Saunders, a 
thoughtful bloke with a Mr. T haircut who helped redesign the iconic Koori 
Mural which fronts Sir Douglas Nicholls Oval. And of course Mungara Brown, the 
impossible-to-ignore ball of energy who thrives on contest and scrimmage, 
whether it be in footy or in conversation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fjason-mifsud-and-fitzroy-stars-a-man-on-a-mission-at-a-club-that-means-so-much%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f353884bfb991ae9ba716d0d1c0a44e50fde676%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jason%20Mifsud%20and%20Fitzroy%20Stars%3A%20a%20man%20on%20a%20mission%20at%20a%20club%20that%20means%20so%20much&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fjason-mifsud-and-fitzroy-stars-a-man-on-a-mission-at-a-club-that-means-so-much%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jason%20Mifsud%20and%20Fitzroy%20Stars%3A%20a%20man%20on%20a%20mission%20at%20a%20club%20that%20means%20so%20much&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fjason-mifsud-and-fitzroy-stars-a-man-on-a-mission-at-a-club-that-means-so-much%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f353884bfb991ae9ba716d0d1c0a44e50fde676%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 Mifsud’s charges listen intently in a team meeting during a pre-season 
training session at the Stars’ home ground in Thornbury. Photograph: Paul 
Jeffers for the Guardian 
 Mifsud is searching for leaders. “The technical parts are not that hard,” he 
says over an afternoon training session, “but how do you inspire a collective 
vision and unbreakable belief? There are a lot of teachable moments in footy 
which are absolutely transferable to life.”

 He delegates jobs to players, support staff or hired hands, and then sticks 
tight to his own role. When the players file into the Anglesea YMCA on Friday 
night, many come directly from the funeral. Mifsud suggests a smoking ceremony 
take place to cleanse the bad spirits, and asks one of the senior players, 
Alister, to conduct the proceedings. He leaves the boot-camp drills to Aidan 
Grimes, an Irish trainer who usually works with professional athletes but keeps 
coming back to the Stars because they are the best group of players he’s worked 
with.

Mifsud runs the training session, but enlists Anita Schmidt, a young, 
newly-appointed strength and conditioning coach to conduct the warm up. A white 
woman with little previous experience of Aboriginal people, Anita marched with 
Mifsud on Invasion Day and has been embraced completely by the players. This 
growing gender balance is not a token effort – 66% of the board members are 
women, this pre-season camp includes both footballers and netballers for the 
first time ever, and the club is now known officially as the Fitzroy Stars 
Football and Netball Club.

Mifsud has been coaching men for more than 20 years. Between 1994 and 2008, he 
won premierships at Caramut, Koroit and Beaumaris, and worked briefly at AFL 
clubs St Kilda and Western Bulldogs. Leading by example has been one ongoing 
trait – at 21, in his first senior coaching job, he led Caramut to the club’s 
first flag in 27 years, kicking a whopping 211 goals in the season. On the 
Sunday of the pre-season camp, we run five kilometres up and down a steep 
stretch of the Great Ocean Road. Jai leads, naturally, followed closely by 
Kyle, Djaran, Rivva and Coz. Each lap I pass Mifsud, who nicknames me 
“soccer-Joe” and tells me to keep running. Despite his dodgy knee, he continues 
to pound his way up and down the track.

Koolyn Briggs, a young centre half forward, is struggling, and Mifsud hovers 
just off his right shoulder, talking him all the way through the run. After the 
session finishes we walk back along the track to camp. I chat to Jikola Whyman, 
a young flyer who joined the Stars last season so he could win a flag with his 
uncle Djaran. “Other coaches might’ve just watched us run,” he tells me. “I 
think Koolyn probably would’ve given up if Jason hasn’t pushed him like that.”

 Back in the change room, I ask Mifsud how his knee held up. “When you’ve had 
a bit of experience, you learn to change the question,” he responds. “Instead 
of it being ‘how am I going to do this run?’, it becomes, ‘what example am I 
setting by stopping?’ Koolyn’s achievement is more important… ultimately a bad 
knee means nothing against that.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Ffitzroy-stars-take-you-along-on-their-gruelling-pre-season-training-camp&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F3%2F3%2F1456981587885%2FKP_1820061_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fitzroy%20Stars%20take%20you%20along%20on%20their%20gruelling%20pre-season%20training%20camp&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Ffitzroy-stars-take-you-along-on-their-gruelling-pre-season-training-camp>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fitzroy%20Stars%20take%20you%20along%20on%20their%20gruelling%20pre-season%20training%20camp&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Ffitzroy-stars-take-you-along-on-their-gruelling-pre-season-training-camp&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F3%2F3%2F1456981587885%2FKP_1820061_crop_640x480.jpg>
 The Fitzroy Stars take you along on their gruelling pre-season training camp. 
 Between the commando crawls along the beach, team bonding exercises and long 
runs on Saturday and Sunday, Mifsud sets aside a time on Saturday evening to 
talk about values. During one of the team commando crawls on the Saturday 
afternoon, as we edge slowly along the beach covered in sand, arms burning and 
almost at breaking point, Mungara suddenly belts out the club song. It spurs us 
all on, and immediately creates an opportunity for Mifsud to speak about 
leadership and the role of culture on the sporting field.

 His Latin motto, concilio, meaning “as one”, is soon replaced by Rivva, who 
suggestskuma kaaru, a word from the Kaurna language that means “one blood”. 
Mifsud then recounts the backstory of thewar-cry famously performed by Sydney 
Swans player Adam Goodes <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=32PZWtjbtq0>.

 “Basically the war-cry came out of my lounge room,” he tells the players. “In 
2009 we took the Flying Boomerangs Under-15 development side to Papua New 
Guinea and one of the things that jumped out was how their mob bring their 
culture to life through dance, song and language.

 “I said, ‘we gotta do something’. The young boys from the Flying Boomerangs 
came up with this dance that incorporates multiple languages, and they 
performed it to the AFL All-Stars.

 “Goodesy came up to me and said ‘uncle, I want to talk to the boys’. He asked 
the boys if they could teach him the dance. They spent a day learning it, 
Under-15s teaching these senior professional players, and at the end Goodesy 
became emotional. He basically said, ‘thanks for gifting me the war cry – 
there’ll be a day when I pay you back’. Then of course we saw how it fucking 
split the nation.”

Fitzroy Stars: Melbourne's only Aboriginal footy club - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/mar/04/fitzroy-stars-melbournes-only-aboriginal-footy-club-in-pictures>
“I can tell you, there’s no other sporting club having this conversation right 
now. This may be our moment for us to leave our footprints for the future. In 
100 years, when this is adopted as an Australian football war cry and performed 
by everyone, every sporting team, our grandkids can say that the Fitzroy Stars 
were the first knockabout suburban club to do it. While the AFL clubs worry 
about their protocols and what their fans might think… we play our first game 
on 9 April.”

 Quiet fills the room. Mifsud tells the players it’s their decision, and asks 
for their thoughts.

 “What do the non-Indigenous boys think?” Coz immediately asks. “I call Luke 
my brotherboy, but some members of the team might not connect to the war cry. 
This is our club, this is our culture, but it doesn’t matter if you’re black, 
white, red or green, you’re part of us.”

 Luke, the red-head whitefella, barely misses a beat. “We joined this club 
because we love being with blackfellas,” he says. “It’s absolutely brilliant.”

 The rest of the group are all in on the idea, but agree to develop their own 
war cry that suits the Fitzroy Stars. Koolyn, who played with the Flying 
Boomerangs and was the song-man during one of the war cries on tour in South 
Africa, tells the group that performing it pre-match made him feel 
“unstoppable”. Rivva, a deeply cultural man who has also been a song-man during 
a school footy war cry, agrees. “You feel strong and spiritual,” he says, “you 
make that brotherhood – after we did it we felt so close.”

 And so it’s decided. The Fitzroy Stars will carry the conversation started by 
Adam Goodes into the Northern Football League, and by doing so, may well be the 
first ever club to perform a war-cry week-in, week-out.

 “320 nations and all different dialects,” concludes Mifsud, “our war cry, our 
dance, our way on our dirt. We’ve been dreaming for thousands of years… maybe 
this is our next dream.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fjason-mifsud-and-fitzroy-stars-a-man-on-a-mission-at-a-club-that-means-so-much%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F83c76846256bc9a8353aba2fe0d6b35506415788%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jason%20Mifsud%20and%20Fitzroy%20Stars%3A%20a%20man%20on%20a%20mission%20at%20a%20club%20that%20means%20so%20much&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fjason-mifsud-and-fitzroy-stars-a-man-on-a-mission-at-a-club-that-means-so-much%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jason%20Mifsud%20and%20Fitzroy%20Stars%3A%20a%20man%20on%20a%20mission%20at%20a%20club%20that%20means%20so%20much&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fjason-mifsud-and-fitzroy-stars-a-man-on-a-mission-at-a-club-that-means-so-much%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F83c76846256bc9a8353aba2fe0d6b35506415788%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 ‘In football and in life, tell me where you want to get to, build a winning 
team, and let them get to work,’ Mifsud says. Photograph: Paul Jeffers for the 
Guardian 
 “I come from two islands,” says Mifsud, often. “One is Australia, the other 
is Malta.” Born to a Yorta Yorta and Gunditjmara mother and a Maltese father, 
Mifsud’s childhood was split between the family home in the tiny south-western 
Victorian town of Ellerslie, “the mission mob” in Braybrook, and his Maltese 
family in Northcote. He left school at 15 to start an apprenticeship as a 
landscape gardener and concentrate on his footy.

 At 24, not long after he was delisted as a St Kilda player, Mifsud was thrust 
into running the Gunditjmara Aboriginal Cooperative just as the Howard 
government delivered the first funding blows to the Aboriginal and Torres 
Strait Islander Commission and the community controlled organisations. Within 
18 months he’d brought together the five Aboriginal communities of south-west 
Victoria to agree to a regional health plan. By doing so, funding was secured 
for the establishment of Aboriginal medical services. “If you’re born into the 
Aboriginal community, you’re born into politics,” says Mifsud. “It’s your 
choice if you want to play it or not.”

I want to make a difference and develop community aspiration. Sport has that 
power

 His new role in the state government, which began on 29 February, is the 
logical next step in his career. Mifsud believes Aboriginal affairs is an 
“incremental business”, and will focus on key pillars such as economic 
participation, a land strategy, and elevating Aboriginal identity and culture. 
He is a supporter of the Recognise campaign for constitutional reform, and also 
an advocate for a treaty. Working at Aboriginal Victoria will give him the 
power to push these policies, but when he was offered the job, one of his 
“non-negotiable” conditions was that he could still coach the Fitzroy Stars.

 “For me it’s a challenge to stay connected with the community apart from 
protests and marches, which are drop-in and drop-out occasions,” he says. “I’ve 
been fortunate with how footy has provided me leadership roles, and I feel an 
obligation to give some of that knowledge back. I wasn’t short on coaching 
offers, but I want to make a difference and develop community aspiration. Sport 
has that power.”

 To suggest that this is simply a one-way process, however, would only tell 
half the story. Most of his life, Mifsud has to be a professional blackfella – 
challenging stereotypes, straddling cultural divides, fielding questions from 
whitefellas like me. It’s a mentally exhausting and politically difficult role 
to manage. He’ll forever have to walk in two worlds, but at the Stars – where 
many of the players are connected to him along family lines – he’s just one of 
the mob. Here he can loosen the tie and drop his guard. As I watch him giggling 
and riffing with the players at camp, it’s clear that these 
rough-around-the-edges young men are giving him cultural and spiritual 
replenishment. “I’m in my element,” he grins happily. “I don’t know how to 
articulate it, but that’s the difference between science and religion.”

 The Fitzroy Stars, like any other footy club, want to win. There is always 
tension as to whether they’re a purely community organisation or an elite 
sporting club, but Mifsud believes the two are not mutually exclusive. “I know 
you can be successful and proud and black all at the same time,” he says. “I 
don’t think you have to forfeit your Aboriginality for the sake of success.”

 Mifsud wants to see young Aboriginal boys and girls grow up idolising a 
vibrant, professional and successful Fitzroy Stars – imitating their sporting 
prowess, their off-field behaviour and their war cry. It’s a vision shared by 
the CEO Simon Minton-Connell, who says “everyone walks a little taller” when 
Mifsud is around. Minton-Connell is a big, lumbering Tasmanian whitefella who 
played professional footy in the 1990s and has been with the Stars since 2010. 
The players call him Loaf and rib him endlessly, but he loves them like they’re 
his own sons. When the former coach left last season, the players had bowed out 
of four consecutive finals series, losing two grand finals in 2012 and 2013. 
“There’s been a lot of heartache in this group,” he says. “I think they were 
emotionally in trouble last year. We could have lost half the playing group 
until the appointment of Jason Mifsud.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fjason-mifsud-and-fitzroy-stars-a-man-on-a-mission-at-a-club-that-means-so-much%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a4eaedb0d911918b7b47a696fe11a294b9449aa%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jason%20Mifsud%20and%20Fitzroy%20Stars%3A%20a%20man%20on%20a%20mission%20at%20a%20club%20that%20means%20so%20much&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fjason-mifsud-and-fitzroy-stars-a-man-on-a-mission-at-a-club-that-means-so-much%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jason%20Mifsud%20and%20Fitzroy%20Stars%3A%20a%20man%20on%20a%20mission%20at%20a%20club%20that%20means%20so%20much&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fjason-mifsud-and-fitzroy-stars-a-man-on-a-mission-at-a-club-that-means-so-much%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a4eaedb0d911918b7b47a696fe11a294b9449aa%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 The Stars have a rich history, but even so the club’s future is far from 
guaranteed. Photograph: Paul Jeffers for the Guardian 
 Still, the club is at a crossroads. Without wealthy benefactors or a proper 
social club, the Stars have for the past two years needed financial support 
from the state government. The club is determined to promote healthy lifestyle 
choices, and can’t rely on pokies or alcohol sales like their opponents. “We 
need to find other ways to make money,” says Minton-Connell matter-of-factly.

 The current funding arrangement runs out at the end of 2016. The board want 
to pull up the handbrake and completely reverse this situation. Minton-Connell 
is hoping to build what he calls “the mecca of Aboriginal sport” to carry out 
the wishes of Uncle Alf Bamblett. Next year the club will have juniors, and the 
aim is to become a destination club for football, netball, basketball, 
athletics and potentially other sports. They are lobbying for an upgrade to Sir 
Doug Nicholls Oval in order to be able to increase professionalism and raise 
their own revenue. Ultimately, the dream is to get promoted from the Northern 
Football League Division Two, win Division One, become a VFL club and enter a 
women’s team into the AFL.

 All this was decided before Mifsud landed his role in government. By 
circumstance, the club has gained not only a coach but an influential voice in 
the corridors of power. Moreover, there are already ministers in the Andrews 
government that recognise the fundamental importance to the community. “Can you 
imagine if we’re not here?” says Minton-Connell. “There’s guys out there, if 
they’re not here on the footy field, they’re on the streets…. We’re so much 
more than a football club.”

 With the weight of responsibility on his shoulders, Mifsud is right where he 
wants to be – shaping policy during the week, kicking goals on the footy field 
on weeknights and weekends. A common Misfud-ism is: “sometimes you’ve gotta be 
the tip of the spear, other times you’ve gotta be the shaft.” These two new 
roles will allow him to be both.

 “Eighteen players on the footy field, 40,000 Aboriginal people in Victoria,” 
he says. “In football and in life, tell me where you want to get to, build a 
winning team, and let them get to work.”
 