
It is more than 30 years since Bright Lights, Big City 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/bright-lights-big-city.html>, Jay McInerney’s 
first and most famous novel was published, and everything and nothing has 
changed. The 61-year-old still lives in Manhattan, in a penthouse a few blocks 
from one of his first addresses in New York. (In the early 1980s, the rent on 
his Bowery apartment was $375 a month. A night at the Bowery Hotel, where 
McInerney stayed last week while his air conditioning was being fixed, is 
$425). He doesn’t snort cocaine in club bathrooms any more, but when he’s in 
the city, he still goes out “every night”. And he retains a charm perennially 
described as “boyish” but that strikes me, today, as something more tentative, 
a state of mild bafflement that seems poised between hopefulness and the 
ever-present threat of disappointment.

The most unwavering aspect of McInerney’s life, at least as it pertains to his 
public image as a novelist, is his identification with the upper echelons of 
New York society, an affiliation that has earned him a reputation over the 
years as a social butterfly.McInerney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jay-mcinerney> is the first to say of his 
own experience: “It became a little unrepresentative. Successful novelist is 
not an everyman category,” and to add, somewhat ruefully, that unlike the 
protagonist of his latest novel,Bright, Precious Days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/24/bright-precious-days-jay-mcinerney-review>
, who struggles to raise kids in New York on a publishing salary, when 
McInerney’s own children were born, “I was actually pretty flush.”

The novelist’s divorce from Helen Bransford, his third wife and his children’s 
mother, wiped him out financially, but his fourth wife,Anne Hearst 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anne_Hearst>, is an heiress and “a certified 
member of the Upper East Side social crowd,” the ins and outs of which continue 
to preoccupy his work. In light of all this, I had expected to find someone a 
little mannered, a touch absurd in the Tom Wolfe style. Instead, this morning, 
McInerney is guileless to a degree that makes me feel vaguely anxious for him.

Bright, Precious Days is the third novel in a series, after Brightness Falls 
<https://www.nytimes.com/books/98/09/27/specials/mcinerney-falls.html> and The 
Good Life <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/mar/05/fiction.features1>, 
and chronicles the lives of Russell and Corrine Calloway, who came to New York 
in the 1980s chasing a literary dream and woke to find themselves, at 50, in a 
small apartment with two children, one bathroom and no money for summer plans. 
McInerney calls this the “life not lived”; had he not become a successful 
writer, he would in all likelihood have become an editor like Russell Calloway, 
one of the stretched middle classes in a city increasingly hostile to anyone 
not on or married to a banking salary. “They’re lucky and privileged in some 
ways,” he says. “But in other ways – most 50-year-old parents would like to 
have some space and multiple bathrooms. These are the kind of sacrifices people 
maketo stay in Manhattan 
<http://ny.curbed.com/2016/7/1/12070504/nyc-real-estate-market-reports-q2-records>
. Is the price of being a New Yorker worth it?”

This question and the assumptions underpinning it are, as with the focus of so 
much of McInerney’s work, vulnerable to a charge of “so what?”. The Calloways, 
who live above their means and knock around town with hedge fund managers and 
billionaires, might move out of the city to a perfectly good life elsewhere. 
That they can’t bring themselves to go – not even to the suburbs, but merely 
uptown to Harlem – is not a drama with wide-ranging appeal. Meanwhile, their 
creator’s view from the penthouse can come across, in these times, as a little 
unseemly. Beyond the exigencies of the story, the rich matter, says McInerney, 
because, “I think as a writer it’s certainly interesting to observe them. And I 
think not enough people do. These people have a huge influence on the way that 
we all live. And I do think these [hedge fund] guys are usually either figures 
of satire or weird wish fulfilment – girly romance-novel fantasy. But more 
often they’re objects of derision.”

Jay McInerney: no one sets out to be the voice of a generation – I certainly 
didn’t
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/03/voice-of-generation-bright-lights-big-city-jay-mcinerney>
There is an assumption of philistinism, I say.

“Exactly. And sometimes it’s justified. I had dinner with a friend of mine 
last night who’s a Wall Street guy, and he’s on the board of theWhitney Museum 
<http://whitney.org>, he’s the major patron of the Roundabout Theatre 
<http://www.roundabouttheatre.org>. He’s involved in so many cultural and 
charitable activities – I admire that. I know him because he’s a wine 
collector. I make fun of wine collectors; some of them are philistines. But I 
don’t know. I try to keep an open mind.”

McInerney is, famously, a wine collector himself 
<http://www.epicurious.com/archive/chefsexperts/interviews/jay-mcinerney-wine> 
and his enthusiasm for his billionaire chums on the scene is so artless, it 
feels a little grudging to hold it against him. Nonetheless, a few months ago, 
his old friendBret Easton Ellis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jul/26/bret-easton-ellis-pain-misogyny-drugs>
 took McInerney to task, telling the Sunday Times that their friendship had 
cooled because Easton Ellis wasn’t rich enough for McInerney.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fjay-mcinerney-regret-trump-associated-city-i-love-new-york-bright-lights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71c4b278718d8a7b2423c1a26e7053da9e742705%2F0_138_3772_2263%2F3772.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jay%20McInerney%3A%20'You%20can%20only%20blow%20up%20your%20life%20so%20many%20times%20before%20it%20becomes%20ridiculous'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fjay-mcinerney-regret-trump-associated-city-i-love-new-york-bright-lights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jay%20McInerney%3A%20%27You%20can%20only%20blow%20up%20your%20life%20so%20many%20times%20before%20it%20becomes%20ridiculous%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fjay-mcinerney-regret-trump-associated-city-i-love-new-york-bright-lights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71c4b278718d8a7b2423c1a26e7053da9e742705%2F0_138_3772_2263%2F3772.jpg>
 McInerney and Bret Easton Ellis on the town together in 1990. Photograph: 
Catherine McGann/Getty Images 
“Huh!” says McInerney. “I didn’t see that!” He looks taken aback. Actually, 
I say, Easton Ellis’s first charge was that their friendship had cooled because 
McInerney didn’t like how his friend had portrayed him in his novel,Lunar Park 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/lunar-park.html>. “I actually thought it was 
very fun,” says McInerney and laughs, mirthlessly. “He insists on saying that. 
I thought it was very amusing. Bret never says ... you can never take anything 
he says straight. He’s always gone for effect. Up until a couple of years ago, 
I saw him pretty regularly. I hope to see him next month when I go to LA on 
book tour. We were very, very close. I think when Bret decided to leave New 
York he chose to reject a lot of what he left behind. He had a very hard time 
here in the end and I think that, basically, he’s very down on New York for 
very complicated reasons – some personal, some symbolic – and I think 
I represent New York and his old life, including some very difficult aspects.”

In their heyday, the two men, along with the novelist Tama Janowitz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/09/scream-tama-janowitz-review-memoirs-reluctantly-famous>
, formed a literary rat pack and were frequently out on the town until dawn. 
McInerney gives a big sigh. “Personally, I’m a little sad about his wholesale 
rejection of the city. He’s been saying for the last 10 years that New York’s 
over, New York’s over. Well, just because you chose to leave, doesn’t mean 
everything ended.”

One thing that strikes me about McInerney’s image in that era is that he was 
only a “bad boy” in comparison to some perversely old-fashioned idea of the 
novelist. UnlikeEdward St Aubyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/aug/17/edward-st-aubyn-interview>, 
say, McInerney never seemed in any real danger of falling down a drugs hole 
never to return.

“No, no, I wasn’t that guy”, he laughs. “I was the guy who, after staying up 
till dawn, would feel horribly hungover and remorseful for the next few days, 
before I went out and did it again. What is that book of [St Aubyn’s], set in
New York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>? It’s just gruelling. 
And wonderful.”

He means Bad News, the second in St Aubyn’s series of five autobiographical 
novels that describes how he nearly died from a heroin overdose while in New 
York in the 80s. “It makes me think, ‘Hey, I’m not so bad!’ He was so far out 
there. Also, I had to write.”

You weren’t privately funded, I say.

“I wasn’t. I graduated from college and my parents said goodbye and good luck. 
They paid my tuition, and that was it. So I was scrambling around. When I first 
came to New York, I was writing freelance book reviews, doing freelance copy 
editing. Until I published Bright Lights, I was very strapped. Which I’m, 
frankly, grateful for. I’ve seen far too many trust fund kids fail to launch in 
any direction except down.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fjay-mcinerney-regret-trump-associated-city-i-love-new-york-bright-lights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15b7aa6088544dde1991f5de4688af48754cd223%2F0_133_1797_2245%2F1797.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jay%20McInerney%3A%20'You%20can%20only%20blow%20up%20your%20life%20so%20many%20times%20before%20it%20becomes%20ridiculous'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fjay-mcinerney-regret-trump-associated-city-i-love-new-york-bright-lights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jay%20McInerney%3A%20%27You%20can%20only%20blow%20up%20your%20life%20so%20many%20times%20before%20it%20becomes%20ridiculous%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fjay-mcinerney-regret-trump-associated-city-i-love-new-york-bright-lights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15b7aa6088544dde1991f5de4688af48754cd223%2F0_133_1797_2245%2F1797.jpg>
 McInerney with his fourth wife, Anne Hearst, in 2005. Photograph: Startraks 
Photo/Rex/Shutterstock 
McInerney grew up all over the US as his father, a sales and marketing 
executive, frequently changed jobs, eventually settling in Pittsfield, 
Massachusetts for his high-school years and graduating from Williams College in 
1976. He went on to attain a masters degree, studying writing underRaymond 
Carver <http://titan.iwu.edu/~jplath/carver.html>, at Syracuse University, and 
then moved to New York, where he set about living the rackety life that would 
provide the material for his first novel.

Bright Lights sold millions of copies when it came out in the mid-80s and 
established McInerney as an arresting new talent and, perhaps,, thanks to the 
vigour and innovation of that book, with its famous second-person narrative – 
“you are not the kind of guy who would be at a place like this at this time of 
the morning” – as a more literary novelist than he would turn out to be. In 
Bright, Precious Days, there are many good, sharp scenes that nail the social 
swirl and hypocrisy of wealthy New York, but there isn’t much in the way of 
real psychological acuity, and many of the characters struggle to rise above 
the level of stereotype. McInerney has, it seems to me, suffered over the years 
by trying to flog himself into a posher novelist than he naturally is.

Either way, he seems touchingly pleased with the good reviews the novel has 
earned in the US. “For years, I felt like I had been paying for the success of 
Bright Lights, Big City; my perceived manner of life, whether it’s the alleged 
partying or being a semi-public figure, or being comfortably off. I feel like, 
with this book, it was finally judged on its merits. There are a lot of people 
out there who resented me. I hope that’s over.”

Most novelists who read their own reviews can probably recite by rote the best 
and worst lines, but few would expose themselves to potential ridicule by doing 
so in public. McInerney is so game – and, in this regard, so likable – that he 
plunges in regardless, quoting word for word not one, but two Janet Maslin 
reviews in the New York Times, one of which is seven years old. Her review of 
his latest novel “was a little cryptic”, he says. “But then when she said, 
‘Please, Mr McInerney, write another,’ I thought, I guess she likes it. Because 
her review of my short stories – ‘His idea of etiquette is holding a girl’s 
hair while she snorts a line of cocaine’ – was favourable but very prickly.”

McInerney is surely right when he says his early fame and wealth tipped 
opinion against him. Twenty years ago, when his twins were born, he was living 
in very un-writerly style in a four-bedroom co-op in the Carlyle hotel. (It was 
originally a two-bedroom, but, when the twins arrived, he bought the co-op 
downstairs from his friend Stephen Fry, and knocked through). “And look – I 
wish I had been more sensible. I wish I had invested more wisely. I wish I had 
bought the painting that Jean-Michel Basquiat offerred me at three in the 
morning, for $700. It would be worth like $30m today. I didn’t invest wisely, I 
didn’t conserve the money. I got divorced three times, which squandered money. 
On the other hand, I haven’t been a trainwreck, either. I’ve been stumbling 
along fairly successfully.”

His worst financial period was in 2000, when McInerney was overdue by a year 
in delivering The Good Life and living alone in a one-bedroom apartment. “I was 
really up against the wall. I was getting divorced and trying to take care of 
the kids, and I had to really produce to get my way out of this. I was in debt. 
It was boom and bust. The Carlyle apartment mostly went to my ex-wife and kids 
– which is as it should be. I don’t regret any of that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fjay-mcinerney-regret-trump-associated-city-i-love-new-york-bright-lights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faea207f62772b94c380ba46076dd1b8356dd1c10%2F0_95_3496_2097%2F3496.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jay%20McInerney%3A%20'You%20can%20only%20blow%20up%20your%20life%20so%20many%20times%20before%20it%20becomes%20ridiculous'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fjay-mcinerney-regret-trump-associated-city-i-love-new-york-bright-lights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jay%20McInerney%3A%20%27You%20can%20only%20blow%20up%20your%20life%20so%20many%20times%20before%20it%20becomes%20ridiculous%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fjay-mcinerney-regret-trump-associated-city-i-love-new-york-bright-lights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faea207f62772b94c380ba46076dd1b8356dd1c10%2F0_95_3496_2097%2F3496.jpg>
 McInerney in 2006: he likes his fine wine. Photograph: David 
Howells/Rex/Shutterstock 
He and his ex-wife remained on good terms, which is characteristic of 
McInerney. “Of the various exes,” he says, “including the ones that I didn’t 
marry, I’m close to all but one or two.” One knows men like this and they are 
always on good terms with their exes, always given the benefit of the doubt by 
their women on the basis of likability, affability and a mild but irresistible 
propensity to appear slightly lost. To marry four times is, of course, not a 
sign of cynicism, but its opposite. “I am an optimistic person. I like to think 
I’m romantic.” McInerney shrugs and looks pained. “I also think I’ve settled 
down. You can only blow up your life so many times before it becomes a little 
ridiculous.”

In other words, he grew up and is now something of an elder statesman – “a 
scary thought. Well, I’ve been waiting!” The trilogy is an attempt by McInerney 
to take a mature, “panoramic view of New York” and some aspects of that 
are more successful than others. The publishing world is, of course, very well 
rendered, but Corrine Calloway runs a food bank in the Bronx and there is some 
excruciating dialect – “Don’t you be talking ’bout my kids. Ain’t none ayo’ 
fuckin’ bidness” – from the characters there, to whom Corrine ministers before 
popping off to lunch at the Four Seasons with her billionaire lover. I mention
Jonathan Franzen’s spat over race 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/interrogation/2016/07/a_conversation_with_novelist_jonathan_franzen.html>
 – the novelist’s confession, in an interview in Slate, that he doesn’t write 
books about race because, “I don’t have very many black friends.”

“Did he? I missed that one. Oh lord. Well. On the one hand I suppose I 
understand that response. On the other hand, I think if you’re someone like 
Jonathan Franzen, who attempts to write on the grand scale about the large 
issues of the republic, and of existence, I can understand why somebody noticed 
this omission. It’s true. Now that I think about it, there aren’t any black 
characters in his books. Well, far be it from me to criticise Franzen. He’s an 
important novelist. But yeah, suddenly it does seem slightly surprising.” 
McInerney laughs good-naturedly. “I hadn’t thought of his work in that way, but 
looking back, yup: white, white, white.”

Bright, Precious Days by Jay McInerney review – more precious than bright
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/09/bright-precious-days-by-jay-mcinerney-review>
The current political landscape is one that, along with everyone else in the 
US, McInerney can only look on at in wonder. In the 2008 election, he was an 
early Obama supporter and says of his tenure: “I don’t think he’s done a 
terrible job, given what he’s faced. I’m not sure who could’ve dealt with that 
obstructionist Republican congress; a Lyndon Johnson, or someone with slicker 
legislative skills could’ve brought them around a little, maybe, although 
obstructionism is the religion of these rightwing republicans.”

Incredibly, Rudy Giuliani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/11/rudy-giuliani-donald-trump-anything-legal-war>
, currently stumping for Trump, officiated at McInerney’s fourth wedding. They 
haven’t met this election season but generally, “When I see him, I just avoid 
the subject of politics altogether, because I know we’re not going to agree on 
anything.”

As for Trump: “He’s this cartoon of a New York tycoon, and barely a tycoon at 
that. I have friends in the real estate business and they say, number one, he 
has hugely overinflated his wealth, and number two,he’s impossible to do 
business with 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/17/us/politics/donald-trump-business.html?_r=0>
; he’s not trustworthy, he sues everybody. He’s not well regarded in that 
community.”

It’s the community McInerney holds dear. “And seriously, he was not a presence 
on the Upper East Side social world.He’s not charitable 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-boasts-of-his-philanthropy-but-his-giving-falls-short-of-his-words/2016/10/29/b3c03106-9ac7-11e6-a0ed-ab0774c1eaa5_story.html>
, or philanthropic and he’s not social. One of the reasons many of us think he 
won’t release his tax returns is that he’s never given anything to charity in 
his life. As a New Yorker, I regret that he’s associated with the city I love.”

Whenever McInerney starts a new novel, he has to clear out of the city to 
Vermont, or Rhode Island, until he has the thing under way. But he always comes 
back. And when he’s in New York, he really does go out every night. “Every 
night,” he says. “Otherwise, I don’t know; that’s the point of New York?”

It is this, 30 years down the line, that distinguishes McInerney from so many 
other burnt-out veterans of his city and his trade – the utter lack of a jaded 
world view. “This is a nice apartment,” he says, enthusiasm rising. “But most 
of what I’m paying for is out there.”
 