
There is no shortage of people who could make it into the bad books of the 
European commission president,Jean-Claude Juncker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/jean-claude-juncker>.

There’s the whistleblower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/29/luxleaks-pwc-antoine-deltour-avoids-jail-but-is-convicted-of-theft>
 and journalists who uncoveredtax avoidance on a vast scale  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/05/-sp-luxembourg-tax-files-tax-avoidance-industrial-scale>
in his native Luxembourg. And the Hungarian prime minister, Viktor Orbán, who 
has alarmed EU leaders with a series of authoritarian and populist policy 
announcements. A whole chapter could be devoted to perfidious Brits, chief 
among them Boris Johnson and Nigel Farage.

While the true list of his enemies remains secret, Juncker has revealed he 
keeps “a little black book” to note down the names of people who cross him. “I 
have a little black book called Le Petit Maurice where for the past 30 years I 
have noted when someone has betrayed me,” the EU presidenttold the Belgian 
newspaper Le Soir 
<http://plus.lesoir.be/52657/article/2016-07-30/juncker-au-soir-vous-ne-pouvez-pas-faire-de-la-politique-si-vous-naimez-pas-les#_ga=1.38014051.1705812438.1452092600>
.

Juncker explained it wasn’t very full, because people “rarely betray me”. He 
added: “I am not vengeful, but I have a good memory.” Juncker’s black book was 
a constant companion during his 18 years as prime minister of Luxembourg. He 
would tell people attacking him: “Be careful. Little Maurice is waiting for 
you.”

Although it is tempting to imagine Juncker has devoted pages to Nigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage>, the EU president claimed 
he respected the Ukip leader and found him “very funny” and erudite.

But Juncker, known for his exuberant bear hugs and back-slapping greetings, 
was also at pains to explainhe had not embraced Farage when they last met at 
the European parliament in Strasbourg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/28/meps-boo-nigel-farage-insults-in-european-parliament>
. “I whispered something in his ear that was not a compliment. The photos gave 
the impression that I embraced him.”

He also said he regularly called Orbán a dictator to his face, and he 
described his humour as calculated, rather than cynical.

The Luxembourger took charge of the European commission in 2014 after almost 
two decades running the grand duchy, as well as eight years in charge of 
eurozone finance ministers’ meetings.

In recent weeks, he has faced calls to stand down. Going on the offensive, 
Juncker criticised the “disgusting” attacks on him and said he had no intention 
of standing down.

He said he was sad about Brexit, because he would spend the next two or three 
years focusing on the “deconstruction” ofEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, rather than its consolidation.
 