
Donald Trump’s nominee for US attorney general will be forced later on Tuesday 
to defend a career dogged byclaims of racism and bigotry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/jeff-sessions-racism-retaliation-donald-trump-douglas-wicks-thomas-figures>
, as Democrats begin a struggle to block cabinet appointments made by the 
president-elect.

Jeff Sessions as attorney general: a terrifying prospect for black Americans | 
Bakari Sellers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/19/jeff-sessions-terrifying-prospect-black-americans>
Jeff Sessions, a law-and-order Alabama conservative loathed by civil rights 
activists, is due to be questioned by senators at the first confirmation 
hearing of an overloaded week in Washington, where Republicans are moving to 
steamroller opposition to nine of Trump’scontentious selections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/05/tom-price-senate-investigation-insider-trading-trump-administration>
.

Democratic Senate leaders have accused Trump of trying to “jam through 
unvetted nominees”, while in an extraordinary statement, the nonpartisanOffice 
of Government Ethics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/08/trump-cabinet-nominees-ethics-review-conflict-of-interest>
 condemned the “vote-a-rama <http://politicaldictionary.com/words/vote-a-rama/>
” strategy as unprecedented in its four-decade existence.

The Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, dismissed such concerns on 
Monday. “Everybody will be properly vetted as they have been in the past,” he 
told reporters after meeting Trump in New York, “and I’m hopeful that we’ll get 
up to six or seven – particularly the national security team – in place on day 
one.”

The selection of Sessions, who was denied a federal judgeship 30 years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cifamerica/2009/may/05/jeff-sessions-arlen-specter-judiciary-committee>
 amid explosive allegations of racial discrimination, has met especially strong 
opposition from campaigners distressed by the senator’srecord on a wide range 
of issues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/19/jeff-sessions-terrifying-prospect-black-americans>
.

David Cole, legal director of the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), is to 
testify at the Senate judiciary committee hearing despite the group’s 
longstanding policy of remaining neutral on presidential appointments. Letters 
of opposition have been sent to senators from campaigners for the rights of 
women, LGBT people, racial minorities and many others.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fjeff-sessions-confirmation-hearing-attorney-general-racism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdae699ba64373c480fedc57615f664396eedfd8d%2F0_57_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jeff%20Sessions%20confirmation%20hearing%20to%20shine%20light%20on%20history%20of%20racism%20claims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fjeff-sessions-confirmation-hearing-attorney-general-racism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jeff%20Sessions%20confirmation%20hearing%20to%20shine%20light%20on%20history%20of%20racism%20claims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fjeff-sessions-confirmation-hearing-attorney-general-racism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdae699ba64373c480fedc57615f664396eedfd8d%2F0_57_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Jeff Sessions has been accused of ‘disregard for the rule of law and hostility 
to the protection of civil rights’. Photograph: Jonathan Ernst/Reuters 
Writing on behalf of 200 campaign groups, the Leadership Conference on Human 
Rights said: “Senator Sessions has a 30-year record of racial insensitivity, 
bias against immigrants, disregard for the rule of law and hostility to the 
protection of civil rights that makes him unfit to serve as the attorney 
general of the United States.”

Sessions, who has also come under criticism for his hardline anti-immigration 
stance, has vehemently denied being racist. His nomination has attracted 
support from several law enforcement and police groups in addition to 
conservative campaigners.

The Senate must vote to approve a president’s major appointments. As the 
minority, Democrats will be unable to block any of Trump’s picks who receive 
full Republican support. Sessions, who has cultivated deep relationships with 
colleagues during 20 years in the upper chamber, is likely to be approved.

Speaking to reporters at Trump Tower in New York on Monday, the 
president-elect said he was not concerned about Sessions’ chances, calling him 
a “high-quality man”.

“Confirmation is going great,” Trump said. “I think they’ll all pass … they’re 
all at the highest level.”

Rex Tillerson, Trump’s nominee for secretary of state 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/18/leak-rex-tillerson-director-bahamas-based-us-russian-oil-company>
, appears most in danger of facing dissent from Republican ranks over a close 
relationship he has built during his work as chief executive of the Exxon oil 
corporationwith Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/rex-tillerson-secretary-of-state-trump-russia-putin>
, the Russian president.

John McCain, the hawkish Arizona senator and former presidential candidate, 
has said that while he may support Tillerson’s nomination, “there’s also a 
realistic scenario that pigs fly”.

Tillerson’s confirmation hearings are scheduled to begin on Wednesday, when 
they may be conveniently overshadowed by Trump’s first press conference since 
July. Also planned for Wednesday are confirmation hearings on Trump’s nominees 
forCIA director 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/jeff-sessions-attorney-general-trump-cabinet>
,education secretary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/23/betsy-devos-education-secretary-trump-administration>
 andtransportation secretary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/29/elaine-chao-trump-transportation-secretary-nominee>
, and a second day of hearings on Sessions, in which black congressmen are 
expected to testify against him.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fdonald-trump-cabinet-nominees-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20guide%20to%20Donald%20Trump's%20potential%20cabinet%20of%20billionaires%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fdonald-trump-cabinet-nominees-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20guide%20to%20Donald%20Trump%27s%20potential%20cabinet%20of%20billionaires%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fdonald-trump-cabinet-nominees-video&media=>
A guide to Donald Trump’s potential cabinet of billionaires 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/22/donald-trump-cabinet-nominees-video>
In 1986, Sessions became only the second person in 50 years to have his 
appointment to a federal judgeshipdenied by the Senate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/jeff-sessions-racism-retaliation-donald-trump-douglas-wicks-thomas-figures>
, after Democrats such as Joe Biden and Ted Kennedy voted against his 
nomination by Ronald Reagan.

Jeff Sessions accused of retaliation after claims of racism cost him a 
judgeship
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/jeff-sessions-racism-retaliation-donald-trump-douglas-wicks-thomas-figures>
J Gerald Hebert, a former justice department civil rights attorney who worked 
with Sessions in Alabama, testified to senators that Sessions had dismissed 
organisations such as the National Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People (NAACP) and the ACLU as “un-American” and suggested a white civil rights 
attorney was a race traitor for taking on a voting rights case in Alabama 
during the 1980s.

Senators also heard that Sessions had referred to a black official in his US 
attorney’s office as “boy” and instructed him to be careful what he said to 
white people. If confirmed, Sessions would succeed the first and second black 
US attorney generals – Eric Holder and Loretta Lynch.

More recently, Sessions has courted controversy by sharply attacking the Black 
Lives Matter <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/black-lives-matter-movement> 
protest movement, which he called “really radical” and blamed for a spike in 
violent crime in some US cities.

In an interview with the Guardian, Hebert said Sessions had “never apologised” 
for the offensive remarks aired in the 1980s and since then “really hasn’t done 
anything to forge a record of fairness and equality when it comes to minority 
citizens”.

He described the prospect of Sessions being America’s most senior law 
enforcement official as “frightening”.

“I’m concerned not only about his overseeing the civil rights division, which 
I consider to be the crown jewel of the justice department because it protects 
fundamental rights of all Americans,” said Hebert, “but also his record for 
slanting the law.”
 