
Donald Trump’s nominee for US attorney general 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/jeff-sessions-attorney-general-trump-cabinet>
 was once accused of calling a black official in Alabama a “nigger”, and then 
gave a false explanation to the US Senate when testifying about the allegation.

Trump picks Jeff Sessions for attorney general and Mike Pompeo for CIA chief
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/jeff-sessions-attorney-general-trump-cabinet>
Senator Jeff Sessions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/jeff-sessions-trump-attorney-general-criminal-justice-reform>
 was said to have used the racist term in November 1981, when talking about the 
first black man to be elected as a county commissioner in Mobile, where 
Sessions was a Republican party official and a federal prosecutor.

Asked about the alleged remark five years later, during Senate hearings on his 
ill-fated nomination by President Ronald Reagan for a federal judgeship, 
Sessions denied saying it and claimed the alleged timing did not stand up to 
scrutiny.

“My point is there was not a black county commissioner at that time,” Sessions 
said, in response to questions from Joe Biden, then a senator for Delaware. 
“The black was only elected later.”

But this was not true. Public records show Douglas Wicks had become the first 
black person elected to one of Mobile’s three county commission seats in 
September 1980 – more than a year before Sessions allegedly referred to him 
using the racist term.

Wicks, a Democrat, said in an interview that he was made aware of Sessions’s 
alleged remark about him at the time. He alleged that Sessions was hostile 
toward him and other African Americans.

“Sessions wasn’t the only one,” said Wicks. “It was commonplace at the time. 
You had a very racist atmosphere.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjeff-sessions-trump-attorney-general-racial-slur%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9dee507220264489921022b2a3f5caecdfab0e2%2F37_17_639_799%2F639.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jeff%20Sessions%3A%20Trump's%20attorney%20general%20pick%20accused%20of%20racial%20slur%20in%201981&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjeff-sessions-trump-attorney-general-racial-slur%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jeff%20Sessions%3A%20Trump%27s%20attorney%20general%20pick%20accused%20of%20racial%20slur%20in%201981&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjeff-sessions-trump-attorney-general-racial-slur%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9dee507220264489921022b2a3f5caecdfab0e2%2F37_17_639_799%2F639.jpg>
 Douglas Wicks was the first black person elected to one of Mobile’s three 
county commission seats. Photograph: Courtesy Douglas Wicks 
A spokesman for Sessions did not respond to a request for comment.

The Republican-controlled US Senate judiciary committee voted in June 1986 to 
reject the appointment of Sessions to the southern Alabama judgeship, after 
hearing of the alleged slur about Wicks and several other allegations of racist 
remarks.

Sessions, a former US attorney and state attorney general, has been a US 
senator for Alabama since 1997. His nomination last week by Trump for US 
attorney general has reopened a decades-long dispute about his racial views.

Cornell Brooks, the president of the National Association for the Advancement 
of Colored People (NAACP),called his selection “deeply troubling” 
<http://www.naacp.org/latest/naacp-statement-appointment-jeff-sessions-attorney-general/>
. Democratic congressman Luis Gutierrez of Illinois said Sessions was the 
choice of people who had “nostalgia for the days when blacks kept quiet”.

If confirmed, Sessions would succeed the first and second African Americans to 
serve as US attorney general, Eric Holder and Loretta Lynch.

Trump’s presidential transition team on Sunday released a list of endorsements 
for his nomination of Sessions from a series of law enforcement organizations 
and former federal officials.


John Ashcroft, the former US attorney general, described the suggestion that 
Sessions was racist as a “30-year-old fabrication” and said the senator was 
fair to everyone. “Nothing so completely rivals the injustice of racism more 
profoundly than the reckless labeling of persons who are not,” Ashcroft said in 
a statement.

The header to the Trump team’s press release said the endorsement list 
featured both “civil rights and law enforcement groups”. But the only purported 
civil rights group mentioned was the Black American Leadership Alliance, a 
rightwing group whose leadership has ties to ananti-immigration campaign network
 
<https://www.splcenter.org/fighting-hate/extremist-files/group/federation-american-immigration-reform>
 that was declared a hate group by the Southern Poverty Law Center.

Sessions was accused during the 1986 Senate hearings of calling the NAACP 
“un-American”, and to have said he thought the Ku Klux Klan were “OK until I 
found out they smoked pot”. He later said this comment was meant as a joke.

Sessions’s deputy in the US attorney’s office for Alabama’s southern district, 
who was black, testified to senators that Sessions had called him “boy” and 
instructed him to be careful what he said to white people.

Wicks, the black Mobile official, said he did not hear Sessions use racist 
language himself but was informed that he had done so by Cain Kennedy, who was 
Alabama’s first black circuit judge. Kennedy, a former state legislator, died 
in 2005.

The allegation that Sessions slurred Wicks was made public by Dan Wiley, 
another Democratic county commissioner in Mobile. In the 1980 elections, Wiley 
had defeated a Republican opponent by just eight votes.


Sessions, who was a member of the county’s Republican executive committee, had 
been involved in running the losing GOP campaign. He then led a long, bitterly 
fought and ultimately unsuccessful legal battle by the Republicans to overturn 
the election result, alleging various irregularities in the vote.

This appeal was still moving through the state and federal courts late in 
1981, well after Wicks was elected to the county commission in September 1980 
and had taken office the following January.

The “nigger” allegation was relayed to Sessions by Biden during the Senate 
hearings on the judgeship in March 1986. Sessions was accused of stating that 
Jon Archer, the third county commissioner and the only Republican, would keep a 
close eye on Wiley and Wicks, the two Democrats. Wiley died in 2008.

“It is suggested that you stated to Mr Wiley at the conclusion of a 
particularly contentious hearing back in 1981, ‘Do not worry,’ or ‘do not be 
too happy’ – he could not remember the precise phrase – ‘Jon,’ meaning Archer, 
‘will be watching you and the nigger,’” said Biden.

Sessions denied this. “Senator, I did not,” he said. “That is an absolute 
false statement.” After Biden accepted the denial, Sessions made his false 
remark about the timing of the alleged statement, which went unchallenged by 
the senators.

'Justice for some': advocates worry Jeff Sessions could halt criminal justice 
reform
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/jeff-sessions-trump-attorney-general-criminal-justice-reform>
Wicks said he quickly made himself unpopular among the Mobile establishment 
after his election by working to dismantle racial segregation and bias in 
county institutions from the jails system to the libraries.

“I was quite outspoken and frankly I was quite knowledgable,” said Wicks.

Spokespeople for Trump did not respond to a request for comment.

 