
High theater was on full display during Senator Jefferson Beauregard Sessions’ 
confirmation hearing for attorney general this week. He fielded compliments on 
his character and knocked softball questions from his Republican colleagues out 
of the park. All while seeking to assure us that he is just a misunderstood 
southern gentlemen who loves the law, hates the Klan and only prosecuted voting 
rights activists to save black people from themselves.

 It didn’t work in his confirmation hearing for a federal judgeship, but 
unfortunately, he may get away with it this time.

Jeff Sessions: Senate grills attorney general nominee on KKK and bigotry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/10/jeff-sessions-confirmation-hearing-attorney-general>
 In his hearing testimony, he blamed everyone but the police for the nation’s 
policing problem. He criticized “the smearing of whole departments” while he 
himself reduced whole communities to erroneous crime statistics. He expressed 
worry over how critiques of misconduct have affected police morale, without 
addressing the morality of police killing unarmed women, men, and children. And 
he saluted the many officers who have been killed in the line of duty – again 
with no mention of the people who have been killed at the hands of the police.

 This should be of no surprise. 

Sessions has criticized the Department of Justice’s civil rights division for 
having an “agenda”, but his record suggests he has an agenda of his own – one 
in complete opposition to the historic, hard-fought, bloodstained agenda that 
has come to be codified in the very laws the civil rights division is 
specifically tasked with enforcing.


The late Coretta Scott King underscored this point 30 years ago in a newly 
discovered,searing indictment 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/powerpost/wp/2017/01/10/read-the-letter-coretta-scott-king-wrote-opposing-sessionss-1986-federal-nomination/?utm_term=.dd7fc575ac4c>
 of Sessions’ agenda in a letter to the Senate judiciary committee that was 
neither made public nor entered into the congressional record by either 
then-Senate judiciary chair Strom Thurmond or Chuck Grassley. In it she 
lambasts Sessions for doing with the law what local southern sheriffs did “with 
clubs and cattle prods” during the civil rights movement.

 The threat Sessions poses to civil rights is not just rooted in past 
controversy, it is evident from the positions and actions he has taken on some 
of the leading issues of the day.

 Instead of debating whether Sessions’ comments, or even past cases, make him 
“a racist”, we should look at the larger systemic picture and be concerned with 
the harm that will result from giving a man with his views the official power 
to act on them.

 A known opponent of policies for both legal and undocumented immigration, 
Sessions opposed reform bills in both 
<http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-na-pol-sessions-immigration-20170109-story.html>
 the Bush and Obama administrations. In fact, Sessionsargued 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/opinion/2015/11/12/sessions-reduce-immigration-boost-jobs-column/75587586/>
 that the term “immigration reform” needed to be “reclaim[ed]” and 
“reappl[ied]” to “legislation that benefits Americans”, and he openly promotes 
the rhetoric that immigrants take jobs and opportunities from hardworking, 
deserving Americans.

 He presents 
<http://www.sessions.senate.gov/public/index.cfm/issues-priorities> his 
immigration policies as a defense of American workers, describing the 2013 
immigration reform bill that he opposed as “offer[ing] nothing except lower 
wages, higher unemployment and a heavier tax burden” for American citizens.

 When Barack Obama issued executive orders to protect so-called Dreamers and 
the parents of American citizens or lawful permanent residents, Sessions urged 
Congress to defund the orders, calling them “amnesties 
<http://www.washingtonexaminer.com/sessions-defund-obamas-executive-orders/article/2576270>
”.

 Sessions has said 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/08/us/politics/jeff-sessions-attorney-general.html?_r=0>
 that it is the job of the attorney general to check the powers of the 
president (and said so again on Tuesday in response to a question from 
Republican Senator Chuck Grassley), but the real question is who will check 
Sessions if he is granted the authority to carry out his anti-immigrant agenda?

 Sessions’ position on national security is closely aligned with his 
anti-immigrant stance. He voted to undermine the prohibition on barring 
immigration to the US on the basis of religion and went on atirade 
<http://www.sessions.senate.gov/public/index.cfm/2015/12/sessions-delivers-remarks-in-opposition-to-global-right-to-migrate-amendment>
 against the “global right to migrate” in the process.

 Although he conveniently said the opposite at his hearing, Sessions supports 
torture 
<http://www.al.com/news/index.ssf/2015/06/sessions_explains_no_vote_on_a.html>, 
contravening both universally accepted human rights law, domestic and 
international. He also opposes the closing of Guantánamo Bay and the right of 
detainees to due process and access to American courts, despite multiple 
rulings upholding those rights by the US supreme court.

 And what about black lives? After years of communities, activists, scholars 
and the government working to make issues of race and policing part of the 
national conversation, a Sessions attorney generalship would effectively end 
cooperative efforts between federal and local governments on issues of police 
reform and accountability.

 While the Obama administration’s DoJ has investigated local police 
departments and interactions between the police and the communities of color, 
Sessions has the support of the conservative Fraternal Order of Police and 
other major police organizations and lamented today that “law enforcement is 
unfairly maligned by a few bad actors”.

The story of the nomination of Jeff Sessions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/jeff-sessions> is not simply one of 
ideology: it is about what happens to the people when their nationally 
appointed advocate is incapable, uninterested and unwilling to protect them.

If we’re not careful, we might soon find out.
 