
The Trump administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration> is prepared to 
weaken legal deals struck by the justice department under Barack Obama forcing 
local police to prevent excessive force or racial bias, Trump’s nominee for 
attorney general said on Tuesday.

Jeff Sessions: Senate grills attorney general nominee on KKK and bigotry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/10/jeff-sessions-confirmation-hearing-attorney-general>
Senator Jeff Sessions <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/jeff-sessions> of 
Alabama said he would not rule out the “withdrawal or modification” of consent 
decrees secured by the justice department from departments such as Ferguson, 
Missouri, which he said tend to “undermine respect for our police officers”.


“I would just not commit that there will never be any changes in them,” 
Sessions told Senator Mazie Hirono of Hawaii during his confirmation hearing in 
Washington. He said earlier in the day that law enforcement had been “unfairly 
maligned” by political leaders in recent years.


Consent decrees are court-enforced lists of reforms that are typically struck 
when justice department civil rights investigators discover a “pattern or 
practice” of unconstitutional policing by a department. A total of 25 such 
investigations have been opened under the Obama administration.


Officials are currently rushing to complete investigations into policing in 
Chicago and Baltimore before the Trump administration takes office. Reports on 
both departments are expected to be published in the coming days.


Sessions, a law-and-order conservative, has consistently attacked what he sees 
as the overreach of federal authorities into local policing. While allowing 
that some consent decrees were legitimate, Sessions on Tuesday complained that 
it was a “difficult thing” for a city to be taken to court by the federal 
government.


“I think there’s concern that good police officers and good departments can be 
sued by the Department of Justice when you just have individuals within a 
department who have done wrong,” said Sessions. “It can impact morale, it can 
impact and affect the view of citizens to that police department.”


Federal officials are currently enforcing 19 agreements with departments, 
according to a report the department released last week. This includes several 
reached by the Obama administration with cities such as Cleveland; Newark, New 
Jersey; and Albuquerque, New Mexico.


The key points from Jeff Sessions' confirmation hearing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/10/jeff-sessions-attorney-general-confirmation-hearing-news>
The consent decree with Ferguson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/10/ferguson-department-of-justice-lawsuit-police-reforms>
, which grew out of scathing findings of an inquiry prompted by unrest around 
the fatal police shooting of an unarmed black 18-year-old in August 2014, 
demands that the city overhaul its criminal justice system and refocus its 
policing on de-escalation and avoiding the use of force.


Changes to consent decrees would need to be proposed in court by justice 
department officials and approved by a federal judge.
 