
“I don’t like that word,” says Jenna Coleman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/jenna-louise-coleman>, wrinkling her 
nose. “People describe me as that a lot, and it makes me cringe. It feels 
dirty.”

In the garden lounge of a London hotel, we are talking about the word driven. 
“Something about it feels ruthless, which doesn’t sit well with me.” It would 
be impossible to describe the gentle, slightly reticent presence next to me as 
gimlet-eyed. But it’s also hard to describe her rise without sensing that 
ambition and determination must have played a part. Her first job, at just 19, 
was wild child Jasmine Thomas in Emmerdale. Intended to be a small role, she 
grew into a series regular, and Coleman set aside thoughts of drama school to 
play her for five years. She followed this with acclaimed BBC series Waterloo 
Road, original dramas by Julian Fellowes and Stephen Poliakoff, and then the 
big one. In 2012 she wasanointed Clara Oswald 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/nov/10/jenna-coleman-doctor-who-peter-capaldi>
, the sparky and instantly lovable companion to Doctor Who, beamed into 
millions of households across the world. These things don’t justhappen.

She’s about to return in a leading role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/16/jenna-coleman-quits-doctor-who-queen-victoria>
, playing Queen Victoria in ITV’s high-budget chronicle of the formidable 
monarch. It’s rare for British actors to hold the public’s attention, or enjoy 
quality parts, after abandoning an established soap character.Sarah Lancashire 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sarah_Lancashire> did it; arguably Martine 
McCutcheon <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Martine_McCutcheon> did it, for a 
while. But on the whole, the less familiar you are the better. Jude Law’s start 
on daytime soapFamilies <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Families_(TV_series)> is 
now forgotten, likewise Ioan Gruffudd’s five years on Welsh-languagePobol y Cwm 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p001pp0l>. (Most implausibly, Sir Ben Kingsley 
spent two yearson Coronation Street 
<http://www.whatsontv.co.uk/coronation-street/coronation-street-news/sir-ben-kingsleys-pride-in-coronation-st-role-236966/>
 in the 1960s, having an affair with Ken Barlow’s wife Val.) So how did Coleman 
travel from farm to castle in such a short time? Presumably having a Tardis 
helps.

“A lot of interviews talk about Emmerdale and then Doctor Who – but there were 
six years between those,” she protests. “You should have seen me when I was 
trying to get an agent. It was like, ‘I’ve only worked in soap, I’ve not been 
to drama school, I’m 22 years old and haven’t worked for a year. I’m a great 
catch!’ ” She’d stayed longer than she wanted to on Emmerdale; despite having 
been nominated for best newcomer at the NationalTelevision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television> Awards, it took her a long 
time to be considered for significant roles afterwards. “I’m northern, and 
working class, so people put you in a box. It’s crazy.” She would be sent 
scripts for supporting characters with northern accents, “and I’d be pointing 
out different parts, saying, ‘I think I can do that.’ It took a long time to 
get any meetings. I had to take a job at a pub in Hampstead.”

She’s describing the kind of unpromising situation that can consume young 
actors for a decade or longer, but her zeal to turn things around marks her 
out. She became an avid self-taper, sending casting directors scene footage in 
very different roles, showing off her range. “I love playing away from myself, 
expanding people’s perceptions.” She took herself out to LA for pilot season, 
where she went up for various unattainable parts, returning home jobless but 
fearless, and rich in audition experience.

Fans always ask which Doctor I prefer, but it’s a question I can’t answer... I 
usually say David Tennant

It paid off. The Beeb started taking note, and Coleman has since impressed in 
all her high-profile roles. She was wounded and aggressive as hard girlLindsay 
James in Waterloo Road <http://bbc-waterloo-road.wikia.com/wiki/Lindsay_James>, 
impertinent as Oswald (she won the role because she could talk faster than Matt 
Smith). As Victoria, she is at her most vulnerable playing the young Queen; the 
arc toward the obstinate and grand presence Victoria eventually becomes is one 
Coleman is relishing.

So, isn’t there anything embarrassing on her CV at all? “I did a lot of dance 
shows as a child: when I was 10 I played an Italian bridesmaid with Darren Day 
in Summer Holiday, the musical. I got the job by singing Happy Birthday to 
myself in the audition, literally inserting my own name into the song” she 
breaks off, laughing to herself. “Sorry, I’ve gotPeter Capaldi 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0134922/> in my head. He always takes the piss out 
of me for that.” She mimics Capaldi’s impression of a theatrical impresario, 
boasting about his latest protege: “This one, oh, she started young… hahaha!”

Her affection for her former Time Lord is clear. She originally joined the 
BBC’s flagship show as a viable love interest for Matt Smith, the pair flirting 
like colts and even kissing. However it was when the Doctor regenerated into 
Capaldi’s grouchy, blepharitic form that things got really interesting. 
Negotiating Clara’s love-anger at the disappearance of her handsome suitor and 
guilt towards the older man who needs her, was a skilful balancing act, 
resolving itself in a deeply touching relationship.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fjenna-coleman-victoria-doctor-who-put-in-box%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6cd266d7c78de4ba521691211d8cf908fcb8d88%2F82_217_2847_1709%2F2847.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jenna%20Coleman%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20northern%20and%20working%20class%2C%20so%20people%20put%20you%20in%20a%20box%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fjenna-coleman-victoria-doctor-who-put-in-box%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jenna%20Coleman%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20northern%20and%20working%20class%2C%20so%20people%20put%20you%20in%20a%20box%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fjenna-coleman-victoria-doctor-who-put-in-box%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6cd266d7c78de4ba521691211d8cf908fcb8d88%2F82_217_2847_1709%2F2847.jpg>
 Playing Queen Victoria in ITV’s take on the formidable monarch. Photograph: ITV
“Peter is so graceful. His work is detailed, sensitive, intuitive; I’d love to 
be like him when I’m older. We have our own bizarre language, and make each 
other laugh.” She admits that working on the genre-pushing show taught her a 
lot. (She stayed on the show for three years.) “It moves from comedy to action 
film to farce; it’s domestic and epic. Peter and Matt do takes in so many ways, 
throw so many balls in the air – it’s an invaluable experience.” Heading off 
the inevitable, she adds, “Fans always ask which Doctor I prefer, but it’s a 
question I can’t answer.” It’s obviously Peter though, isn’t it? “Hahaha! I 
usually say David Tennant.”

She’s also having fun with Victoria co-star Rufus Sewell 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rufus_Sewell>, who plays Lord M, her most 
trusted adviser. “They had an indefinable relationship: prime minister and 
Queen, but also father and daughter; some said they were lovers, too. He spent 
every night at the palace, and she became totally obsessed with him. The public 
drew cartoons calling her Mrs Melbourne.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fjenna-coleman-victoria-doctor-who-put-in-box%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcabd84d3503f99dbbd5234d43f4aff7752a7249b%2F37_593_3675_4594%2F3675.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jenna%20Coleman%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20northern%20and%20working%20class%2C%20so%20people%20put%20you%20in%20a%20box%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fjenna-coleman-victoria-doctor-who-put-in-box%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jenna%20Coleman%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20northern%20and%20working%20class%2C%20so%20people%20put%20you%20in%20a%20box%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fjenna-coleman-victoria-doctor-who-put-in-box%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcabd84d3503f99dbbd5234d43f4aff7752a7249b%2F37_593_3675_4594%2F3675.jpg>
 Ruffle dress by Victoria, Victoria Beckham fromharveynichols.com 
<http://harveynichols.com/>. Opening shot: zip top by Magda Butrym from 
netaporter.com <http://netaporter.com/>. Polo neck by Rosetta Getty from 
harveynichols.com <http://harveynichols.com/>. Jeans by Frame Denim from 
brownsfashion.com <http://brownsfashion.com/>. Shoes, from a selection, 
casadei.com <http://casadei.com/>. Stylist: Melanie Wilkinson. Stylist’s 
assistant: Billie Brand. Hair: Ben Cooke for Lockonego at Frank Agency. 
Photograph: Jon Gorrigan for the Guardian 
Victoria is about other unusual relationships: that of the young queen and her 
manipulative German mother, who devised a system of rules to keep Victoria 
isolated and dependent; and the first cousin to whom she proposed. “On one 
level they’re Vic and Albert, teenage lovers getting to know each other. But 
they’re also playing roles, because it’s a unique business transaction.” 
Negotiating these contradictions, and avoiding the lavish blandness typical of 
many period dramas, is what concerns Coleman most.

“You have to keep fighting for detail. You have to use the set creatively. 
There’s so much life in a palace that we don’t usually see.” Many of Victoria’s 
dresses and personal artefacts are on public display at Kensington Palace, her 
childhood home. Coleman researched these assiduously, mining period texts as 
well as Victoria’s own journals, in which she wrote an estimated 60m words. 
“The best research material I saw was actually her paintings. Her daughter 
censored the diaries, but the watercolours really let you see through her eyes. 
I found one of her governess, with lots of detail and colour, and then one of 
her mother, which is in silhouette and black.”

Did she avoid watching The Young Victoria <http://gb.imdb.com/title/tt0962736/>
, Emily Blunt’s earlier interpretation? “Oh no, I didn’t shy away from that, or
Judi Dench’s Mrs Brown <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0119280/> – we’re telling 
the untold story between those two points. Emily does a great ‘soft regal’ 
voice which helped me. Normally when I read scripts, a voice for the character 
jumps out at me, but this was harder. It changes over time. I usedKate 
Winslet’s Marianne from Sense And Sensibility, 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0114388/> too, to find passion.” Coleman closely 
examined films such asJane Campion’s Bright Star 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0810784/> and Saul Dibb’s The Duchess 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Duchess_(film)>, “trying to pick up the era 
– how does a footman pass me, how do I respond? The tiny unconscious things of 
that world.”

There have been a lot of proposals. You feel responsible for making it a 
romantic moment

What was she most attracted to in the character? “Her flaws. She was impatient 
and emotional, and had this absolute will. Her ladies in waiting describe her 
as the most stubborn person you’d ever meet, and they were her best friends.” 
Charming. How would Coleman’s own circle of friends describe her? “Oh – I don’t 
know. It’s intriguing. You never know how people see you, do you? I’ll text one 
and ask,” she says, fiddling with her phone. “They’ll probably say ‘Shut up, 
I’m at work. We have proper jobs.’ ”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fjenna-coleman-victoria-doctor-who-put-in-box%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67dd2210980bd949ef2421a65efd36dba0f3d482%2F256_44_2102_1261%2F2102.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jenna%20Coleman%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20northern%20and%20working%20class%2C%20so%20people%20put%20you%20in%20a%20box%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fjenna-coleman-victoria-doctor-who-put-in-box%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jenna%20Coleman%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20northern%20and%20working%20class%2C%20so%20people%20put%20you%20in%20a%20box%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fjenna-coleman-victoria-doctor-who-put-in-box%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67dd2210980bd949ef2421a65efd36dba0f3d482%2F256_44_2102_1261%2F2102.jpg>
 As wild child Jasmine Thomas in Emmerdale. Photograph: ITV/REX/Shutterstock 
Coleman was born in Blackpool, “which everyone dismisses as stag-and-hen 
central, but has a charm you don’t appreciate until you leave. Something to do 
with faded 50s glamour and nostalgia.” Her grandfather, now in his late 70s, 
has worked on the seafront all his life and still does, “getting on his bike 
and working the hoopla”. With no other performers in her family, she counts 
herself fortunate to have been shown a way to pursue acting. At school she 
became obsessed with the polymathAnthony Minghella 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anthonyminghella>, devouring his plays and 
studying his process as a film director, which involved an unusual degree of 
involvement in every department, from costume to props to camera, as well as 
acting as producer. Another influence was her drama teacher at Arnold School, 
Colin Snell, who treated his students as adults, encouraging them to think and 
act for themselves. “We operated a semi-professional theatre company. He’d take 
us up to the Edinburgh fringe festival. I was lucky to fall in with him – I 
just moved school and he was there. The place has been bulldozed now.”

Coleman is aware of how far her life has moved in the past four years. “I was 
filming in Paris last week, Florence the week before – oh my God, that sounds 
really jet-setty, doesn’t it?” she asks with a flash of horror. She recently 
bought her own place in London, but has yet to stay there. The strangest facet 
of fame is dealing with fans; a factor multiplied tenfold withDoctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who>, which is popular in 
places as far-flung as South Korea and Brazil. At international Comic-Con 
events, galaxies of ultra-fans queue in their thousands to meet her, dress like 
her, and ask her nerdy questions she can’t answer. (Before she got the job, she 
hadn’t even seen the show.)

What’s the weirdest thing that’s happened at one? “There have been a lot of 
proposals. I’ve had two – but they’re always a bit rushed, and you feel 
responsible for making it a romantic moment.” That’s very generous. What does 
she say? “Congratulations?” Isn’t that a weird thing to say when someone asks 
to marry you? “They’re not proposing to me! They come in with their partner and 
propose with me in the middle.”

Her own love life has inevitably come under scrutiny, in particular her 
reportedly on and off relationship with Game Of Thrones actorRichard Madden 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0534635/>. Last year she was pictured chatting with 
Prince Harry at a polo event, the royal hand on her knee. Tabloid speculation 
inevitably ran rampant that she was dating the playboy Prince. “We’re just 
friends,” she says. “I don’t really want to talk about him – we’re still 
friends, and I don’t think it’s fair.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fjenna-coleman-victoria-doctor-who-put-in-box%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ac10e7a0103bdf93855f8c5e5babc3342de3eae%2F7_289_3684_4605%2F3684.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jenna%20Coleman%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20northern%20and%20working%20class%2C%20so%20people%20put%20you%20in%20a%20box%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fjenna-coleman-victoria-doctor-who-put-in-box%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jenna%20Coleman%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20northern%20and%20working%20class%2C%20so%20people%20put%20you%20in%20a%20box%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fjenna-coleman-victoria-doctor-who-put-in-box%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ac10e7a0103bdf93855f8c5e5babc3342de3eae%2F7_289_3684_4605%2F3684.jpg>
 Top and trousers bothmotherofpearl.co.uk <http://motherofpearl.co.uk/>. 
Makeup: Valeria Ferreira at Caren using Dior Fall Look and Capture Totale 
Dreamskin Cushion. Photographer’s assistant: Nick Martin. Photograph: Jon 
Gorrigan for the Guardian 
That button-bright face, with its optimistic features, belies the birthday she 
celebrated a few weeks before we meet. “Yeah, I spent it filming in Italy, with 
glandular fever. I mean, what does 30 mean? I remember picking up my diary on 
the day, waiting to be struck by some profound realisation, and…” She leaves a 
comically long pause. “Well, I’m not sure yet, but I’m enjoying getting older. 
I have always looked a lot younger than I am.”

She has a certain ambivalence about her elfin appearance, though at 5ft 2in 
Coleman is still taller than the diminutive Victoria, who only stood 4ft 11in. 
Much is made in the series of the Queen’s height, and her struggle to be taken 
seriously. Can she relate? “Drama school can’t teach you how to hold your own 
on a set, how to come into a huge crew, with big cameras and men everywhere. 
That took a long time – I’m still working it out, really.” She comes back to an 
image of the teenage Victoria suffering from typhoid, pressurised to abdicate 
her powers. “She’s ill in bed, surrounded by men in wigs trying to make her 
sign a regency. I would never do what she did – which is turn around and say 
no. I find that fascinating.”

Stories like these make it obvious that Coleman is in her element on set – 
with disappointingly little tendency towards diva behaviour. She tells a story 
about filming with a younger, less experienced actor on Doctor Who. “There’s a 
type of mark [tape stuck to the floor to show an actor where to stand] we use 
called a sausage – it’s slightly raised so when you hit your mark you can feel 
it. I was calling out, ’Can I get a sausage, please?’ His face! He stood there 
for 10 minutes, thinking he was waiting for Jenna’s 11am sausage to arrive.” 
She cackles, then considers. “Although I’ve done lots of scenes with Dash 
(Victoria’s beloved spaniel) recently, and we have to bribe him, so a lot of 
the time I actually am walking around with a little sausage in my hand.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dx74zS1LSuto&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dx74zS1LSuto>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dx74zS1LSuto&media=>
 Victoria. 
Despite her early success, she is keen to keep learning. She lists her 
favourite actors, all strong women with impeccable CVs, particularly on stage. “
Helen McCrory <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0567031/>, Ruth Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ruth-wilson>, Denise Gough 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm1740112/> – actors whose whole bodies are alive, 
you can’t take your eyes off them.” She talks with approval about the creative 
risk of Matt Smith’s current job, an improvised and ever-changing Anthony 
Neilson playat the Royal Court in London 
<http://www.royalcourttheatre.com/whats-on/unreachable>. Coleman has recently 
made the foray into big films, playing opposite Emilia Clarke inMe Before You 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2674426/>. Do her ambitions lie in Hollywood?

“No, not hugely. I’ll chase a great part in a great script wherever it is. I’d 
never live in LA – it’s always a relief to come home and talk about other 
things.” She’s secure enough not to need a plan, confident enough to stop 
nailing the accelerator. Having spent four years on Who, followed by six months 
on Victoria, she’s allowing herself to relax a little. Well, sort of. “I’m 
taking some time off – you become boring when all you see in life is a trailer. 
I’m going to read, pick up my camera. I’m keeping a journal, writing stories 
and short films. There’s talk of some plays.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fjenna-coleman-victoria-doctor-who-put-in-box%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c48656d9de0511970e9debe3f50aea432a3b4c1%2F431_340_3836_2301%2F3836.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jenna%20Coleman%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20northern%20and%20working%20class%2C%20so%20people%20put%20you%20in%20a%20box%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fjenna-coleman-victoria-doctor-who-put-in-box%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jenna%20Coleman%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20northern%20and%20working%20class%2C%20so%20people%20put%20you%20in%20a%20box%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fjenna-coleman-victoria-doctor-who-put-in-box%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c48656d9de0511970e9debe3f50aea432a3b4c1%2F431_340_3836_2301%2F3836.jpg>
 With Peter Capaldi in Doctor Who. Photograph: Simon Ridgway/BBC 
She looks set to confound the curse of the companion, many of whom have sunk 
back into obscurity after their appointment with the Doctor. And of course, 
Coleman has form when it comes to overcoming expectations. When was the last 
time she watchedEmmerdale <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/emmerdale>? 
“A long time ago. I think I’m still in prison.” (Her character left after 
beating a policeman to death with a chair leg and dumping the body in a lake 
with her lesbian lover.)

For now, it’s checkout time. From here Coleman is off to New York, then LA for 
promotional duties (Victoria will air there, on the same channel as Downton 
Abbey), then has plans to take off around Italy, having rewatched The Talented 
Mr Ripley. Before she heads off, her phone pings. It’s her friend Amanda, 
taking time out from her proper job to tell a famous friend what she’s really 
like. Coleman reads the text aloud, in a deadpan voice. “What is Jenna like? 
Fucking small, weirdly so. Hmm. Cheeky, shy and –” she wrinkles her nose in 
distaste, before resigning herself to the verdict. “Driven! Well… I guess it 
might be true.”

• Victoria starts on ITV on 28 August
 