
Jeremy Hunt, the culture secretary, will set out his version of events to the 
Leveson inquiry <https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry> on Thursday 
as he fights to save his ministerial career amid a weight of allegations 
casting doubt on his handling of the BSkyB takeover bid.

The Conservative vowed last month to give "my full record of events" when he 
faces the judge-led inquiry in a week that has seen a number of fellow cabinet 
ministers take the stand.

Hunt is expected to make a day-long appearance and be grilled on evidence 
revealed over the past five weeks suggesting that his officeset up a private 
back channel to Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/apr/24/jeremy-hunt-calls-resign-bskyb>
 at a time when he was charged with making a quasi-judicial decision on whether 
to allow its takeover of BSkyB.

He is also expected to be questioned over whether he explicitly backed the 
move prior to taking over responsibility for the decision from business 
secretaryVince Cable <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/vincentcable>.

Hunt, who has received strong backing from David Cameron, told MPs in a 
statement on 25 April 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201212/cmhansrd/cm120425/debtext/120425-0001.htm#12042542001052>
, that he was "totally confident that when I present my evidence, the public 
will see that I conducted this process with scrupulous fairness throughout".

Hunt made the statement the day after emails released by the Leveson inquiry 
appeared to reveal inappropriate communication between his department and News 
Corp and on the day that his special adviser, Adam Smith, quit after conceding 
that his "activities at times went too far" when correspondence between himself 
and the News Corporation lobbyistFrédéric Michel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/frederic-michel> emerged.

Since then, both Michel and Smith have appeared before Leveson. Cameron has 
repeatedly faced down calls for Hunt to resign,including as recently as last 
week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/may/25/david-cameron-jeremy-hunt-bskyb>
 after a draft email surfaced showing that Hunt was privately pushing for the 
takeover to be allowed before he was appointed to oversee the process.

Labour leader Ed Miliband said in an urgent question to the prime minister 
last month that Cameron should get Sir Alex Allan, his independent adviser on 
ministerial interests, to investigateclaims that Hunt broke three rules in the 
ministerial code 
<http://www.labour.org.uk/ministerial-code-investigation-on-bskyb,2012-04-25> 
in relation to his dealings with News Corporation.

But the prime minister insisted at the time that there was no evidence that 
Hunt had broken the ministerial code and stressed it was best for Hunt to be 
allowed to give evidence to the Leveson inquiry.

"What we have is a judge-led inquiry, witnesses required to give evidence 
under oath, full access to papers and records, cross-examination by barristers, 
all live on television," Cameron told MPs on 30 April. "There is nothing this 
tough or this rigorous that the civil service or the independent adviser could 
provide."

He added: "I will not wait until the end of the Leveson Inquiry to take 
action, if action is needed. If new evidence emerges from the Leveson Inquiry 
that the ministerial code has been broken, I will either seek the advice of Sir 
Alex Allan or take action directly."

Cameron defended Hunt again amid fresh Labour calls for his resignation after 
the inquiryheard in Smith's evidence last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/may/25/jeremy-hunt-must-resign-labour?newsfeed=true>
 that the culture secretary had written an outspoken memo to Cameron staunchly 
supporting the £8bn Murdoch bid for BSkyB, a month before he was handed the 
task of adjudicating on it.

The draft, sent on his private Gmail account to Smith on the afternoon of 19 
November 2010 goes much further in explicitly backing the bid than the final, 
more sanitised draft.

Hunt demands of the bid: "Why are we trying to stop it?" and claims that if 
ministers do not back the bid, they could end up in the wrong place 
"politically". Both phrases were removed from the later draft, about which 
Smith emailed: "Much happier with this version!"

Hunt also goes into considerable detail in the original draft showing that he 
has already rejected the arguments of the bid's opponents.

It also emerged last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/may/24/jeremy-hunt-text-frederic-michel>
 that Hunt exchanged texts with Michel at least four times despite telling 
parliament he had no unofficial contact with the News Corp lobbyist while he 
was considering the company's bid for BSkyB.

The culture secretary told the Commons on 25 April: "Throughout the bid 
process, when I got responsibility for it, the contact that I had with Fred 
Michel was only at official meetings that were minuted with other people 
present."

Text messages shown to the Leveson inquiry suggest Hunt had undisclosed 
conversations with Michel as recently as July last year. Michel told the 
inquiry that he exchanged "one text every three months" with Hunt over the 
period.

Cameron continued to stand firmly behind Hunt, insisting that the culture 
secretary acted "impartially" from the moment he took charge of handling the 
decision in December 2010 and that what he had said about it previously was not 
relevant.

The prime minister also said he had no regrets about giving the task to Hunt.

On Wednesday the inquiry heard evidence from Cable, who was stripped of his 
power to adjudicate on the BSkyB bid in its early stages after he was covertly 
recorded by Daily Telegraph journalists saying he had "declared war on Murdoch" 
last December.

Cable told the inquiry that Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation made "veiled 
threats" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/may/30/vince-cable-murdoch-bskyb-bid> 
that if he did not approve the company's BSkyB takeover his Liberal Democrat 
party would be "done over" by its newspapers.

Cable said that he believed News Corp were trying to get him stripped off his 
role by proving political bias, but refused to be intimidated by these veiled 
threats in his handling of the News Corp/BSkyB deal.
 