
The airport where Jeremy Clarkson claims a worker refused to let the 
presenters of The Grand Tour on to a flightin revenge for a row over the 
Falklands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/16/jeremy-clarkson-flying-falklands-top-gear-argentina>
 has challenged his account, saying the employee was Spanish rather than 
Argentinian and the trio were too late to board.

Stuttgart airport said that while the reports suggested a member of its ground 
staff had behaved in a way that had not met its standards in a dispute with the 
former Top Gear presenters, the trio had missed repeated calls to board while 
sitting in the lounge.

A spokesperson said: “Due to airline policy, after a certain time of absence 
the luggage will be removed from the aircraft and the missing passengers will 
be withdrawn from the passenger list. From this point there is no chance for 
boarding, even if the passengers show up.

Amazon to stream The Grand Tour in 200 countries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/16/amazon-stream-the-grand-tour-200-countries-december>
“Nevertheless the personal behaviour of the staff member described in the 
media does not conform to our approach on customer service at Stuttgart 
airport. Stuttgart ground services will investigate the event with its staff. 
We do already know that the employee mentioned is Spanish, not Argentinian.”

The Sun had reported 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/2193124/furious-jeremy-clarkson-slams-ignorant-little-worm-who-kicked-top-gear-star-and-pals-off-flight-in-rant-over-falklands-number-plate-row/>
 Clarkson’s claim that Manuel Pereira had shouted “I’m from Argentina so fuck 
you!” during a dispute over James May, Richard Hammond and himself not being 
allowed to board a flight from Stuttgart to Heathrow.

Clarkson described Pereira as “a stupid, bitter and twisted little man who 
can’t get it into his head that Argentina’s armed forces are completely 
useless”. He also said the men were on time for their flight, alleged that 
airport workers falsely accused them of being drunk, and said the incident was 
reported to police.

He told the Sun: “This ignorant little worm made us miss our plane and he will 
pay for it. The police said it was a hate crime and he would be arrested.”

Representatives of Clarkson declined to comment further on the claims.


In October 2014, the then cast and crew of the BBC’s Top Gear had to flee 
Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/oct/03/top-gear-argentina-jeremy-clarkson-bbc>
 after being pelted with stones by a crowd incensed that one of their vehicles 
had a numberplate that appeared to refer to the Falklands conflict. The BBC 
denied that this was deliberate.


Clarkson was dropped by the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/25/jeremy-clarkson-top-gear-contract-bbc>
 in March 2015 after an “unprovoked physical and verbal attack” that left a 
colleague bleeding and in need of hospital treatment. May and Hammond decided 
to follow Clarkson out of the door and werepicked up by Amazon for The Grand 
Tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/16/amazon-stream-the-grand-tour-200-countries-december>
.

The latest controversy coincides with the debut of the new show on Amazon 
Prime on Friday.
 