
Hometown: New York.

The lineup: Nomi Ruiz (vocals, songs), Andrew Raposo (bass), Morgan Wiley 
(keyboards).

The background: Jessica 6 was a character in the 1976 sci-fi movie Logan's Run 
about a dystopian 23rd-century society where the world's population and 
resources are managed by killing everyone as soon as they turn 30. Jessica 6 is 
also the name of the second New Band of the Day chosen for 
theguardian.com/music this week by guest editor Antony Hegarty. We are not 
aware if Antony has seen the movie, or indeed if he would condone the practice 
of systematised global euthanasia, but we do know that he really likes this New 
York trio who make art-disco or downtown hipster funk, the sort that would have 
seemed quite at home on ZE Records alongside Was (Not Was), Cristina, Material, 
James White/Chance and the rest had they been around in the early 80s. Or the 
sort that you could easily imagine being snapped up by today's DFA label.

They would fit quite nicely alongside DFA act Hercules & Love Affair's woozy 
funk and murky disco, which makes sense because the idea of the three members 
of Jessica 6 starting a band together occurred as they toured as part of 
Hercules' band in 2007.We were among the first 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/jan/08/popandrock> to say complimentary 
things about H&LA, which is just as well seeing as how Jessica 6's Nomi Ruiz 
sang on their album, as did ourtemporary boss 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fb8S51M2GAc>. In fact, if memory serves, we 
took one listen to Nomi's deep, husky, androgynous tones, clocked the post-rap 
context, and described her as "Sade meets Wu-Tang Clan's RZA". God, we were 
good then.

Jessica 6 are good right now. So good that we decided to call them at home in 
NYC and tell them. It was Nomi who answered the phone, so it was Nomi we asked 
about Jessica 6's modern take on Prince, P-funk, Paradise Garage disco and 
electro-punk. "It's a blend of dance music, soul, pop, hip-hop and R&B," 
explained the 24-year-old doyenne of New York's fashion demi-monde and arty 
cognoscenti, who has worked with everyone from Debbie Harry to Chanel. "Are we 
a 21st-century Chic? Maybe. Our album is really eclectic. There are some 
ballads on there, and some new jack swing." Jessica 6 are so Interview/ZE it's 
not true. Is Nomi – hailed as having the "spookily effortless air of a future 
pop icon" – the spiritual lovechild of Andy Warhol and Grace Jones? Of Patti 
Labelle andSteve Rubell 
<http://www.amazon.com/Biography-Steve-Rubell-Lord-Disco/dp/B000FKP21C>? "I'm 
just a downtown girl," she laughs. "I run around with lots of people. I'm with 
the hip-hop guys, the art bitches, the gays, I'm on the west side with the 
party promoters and DJs, then I'm in Williamsburg with the music dorks …" What 
can we expect from Jessica 6 when they play over here later this year? The 
scuzzy energy of CBGBs meets the low-rent glamour of Paradise Garage? "Yes, 
that's perfect. It will be very sexy, with a little bit of punk, a lot of 
dancing and high energy. Really real, fun and soulful." And best of all, 
nobody, under or over 30, gets to die.

The buzz: "They're Vanity 6 meets Inner City" – URB magazine 
<http://www.urb.com>.

The truth: It's disco for Strokes fans as well as Studio 54 nostalgists.

Most likely to: Abhor euthanasia.

Least likely to: Abhor the youth in Asia.

What to buy: The single Fun Girl is available on Midnight Sun Sound. The album 
See the Light will be released next year.

File next to: Peaches, Amanda Blank, Hercules & Love Affair, Fan Death.

Links: jessica6music.com/bios.html <http://jessica6music.com/bios.html>

Wednesday's new band: Oneohtrix.
 