
Jill Stein <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/jill-stein> has requested a 
full recount of the presidential election in Wisconsin, alleging that foreign 
hackers could have skewed the result by obtaining the state’s voter database 
and then filing bogus absentee ballots.

Stein, the Green party’s candidate in the presidential election, formally 
filed for a recount with Wisconsin authorities shortly before the state’s 5pm 
deadline on Friday. She also planned to request recounts in Michigan and 
Pennsylvania in the coming days.

Wisconsin’s election board agreed on Friday to the statewide recount. The 
process, including an examination by hand of the nearly 3 million ballots 
tabulated in the state, is expected to begin late next week after Stein’s 
campaign has paid the required fee, the Elections Commission said.

The state faces a 13 December federal deadline to complete the recount, which 
may require canvassers in Wisconsin’s 72 counties to work evenings and weekends 
to finish the job in time, according to the commission.

The Wisconsin filing, a copy which was obtained by the Guardian 
<https://www.dropbox.com/s/9q5o4e3lj8uszu1/Wisconsin%20Recount%20Petition%20of%20Jill%20Stein%20%2800268242x9CCC2%29.pdf?dl=0>
, focuses on a “significant increase in the number of absentee voters as 
compared to the last general election”. It had been thought that it would 
instead focus on the scale of Donald Trump’s victories in counties using only 
electronic voting.

“This significant increase could be attributed to a breach of the state’s 
electronic voter database,” Stein said in her petition regarding the rise in 
the number of absentee ballot filings. Trump won a narrow victory in the state 
againstHillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>, 
surprising pollsters.

The 64-page recount filing contains an affidavit from J Alex Halderman, the 
director of the University of Michigan’s centre for computer security, who is 
an expert on election integrity.

“One explanation for the results of the 2016 presidential election is that 
cyberattacks influenced the result,” Halderman writes in his five-page account.

Halderman said the hacking theory was “plausible” because other cyberattacks 
took place during the election campaign, some voting machines used in the US 
are highly vulnerable, and skilled hackers could change the result and “leave 
no outwardly visible evidence”.

Could Jill Stein's vote recount change the outcome of the election?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/25/election-recount-outcome-jill-stein>
Stein had raised more than $5m to fund her recount campaign. The deadlines for 
Michigan and Pennsylvania are next week.

Her move to challenge the counts has split opinions, with some energized by 
the thought it has potential to show defeated Democrat Clinton is the rightful 
election winner, and those who see Stein’s intervention as an expensive gimmick 
to promote the Green party.

The fundraising site explained that Stein’s campaign “could not guarantee” any 
of these states would have a recount. “We can only pledge we will demand 
recounts in those states,” the site said.

Amid questions from some quarters about how the money would be used, the site 
said: “If we raise more than what’s needed, the surplus will also go toward 
election integrity efforts and to promote voting system reform.”

Earlier on Friday, Stein said she was acting due to “compelling evidence of 
voting anomalies” and that data analysis had indicated “significant 
discrepancies in vote totals” that were released by state authorities.


“We do not have a smoking gun,” Stein told CNN. “On the other hand, we have a 
system that invites hacking, tampering and malfeasance.”

She said her campaign had no direct evidence voting systems had been hacked – 
something independent experts have also been skeptical about. And Stein 
insisted the recount was not meant to block Trump, the surprise election 
winner, from becoming president.


Stein has frequently expressed disappointment in Clinton, and the day before 
the electiondescribed 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3914778/This-mushroom-cloud-waiting-happen-Jill-Stein-blasts-warmonger-Hillary-arguing-vote-lead-nuclear-war-Russia.html>
 the Democratic nominee as a “warmonger” and said a victory for the former 
secretary of state would be “a mushroom cloud waiting to happen”. Those 
comments led to Steinbeing condemned 
<https://twitter.com/bueti/status/793818892384735232?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw> by 
elected members of the Green party in Europe.

“Both of the candidates were at the highest level of distrust and dislike in 
our history and in my view, we as voters deserve a voting system that we can 
believe in,” Stein said on Friday. “And to my mind, having a verified vote is 
just a first step”.

Stein launched the campaign amid wider calls to recount or audit election 
results 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/23/hillary-clinton-election-vote-recount-michigan-pennsylvania-wisconsin>
. Groups of academics and activists were concerned that foreign hackers may 
have interfered with voting systems.

These groups have called on Clinton to intervene. She is leading in the 
popular vote bymore than 2.1m votes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/24/hillary-clinton-popular-vote-lead-2-million>
, a lead which is expected to grow. But Trump won narrow victories against 
Clinton in Pennsylvania and Wisconsin earlier this month and was declared the 
victor in Michigan on Thursday – sealing his electoral college win.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fjill-stein-election-recount-clinton-trump-michigan-pennsylvania-wisconsin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F399f3da8401e80fdaf671e703aae967a3d94b018%2F0_123_3200_1922%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jill%20Stein%20requests%20Wisconsin%20recount%2C%20alleging%20hackers%20filed%20bogus%20absentee%20ballots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fjill-stein-election-recount-clinton-trump-michigan-pennsylvania-wisconsin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jill%20Stein%20requests%20Wisconsin%20recount%2C%20alleging%20hackers%20filed%20bogus%20absentee%20ballots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fjill-stein-election-recount-clinton-trump-michigan-pennsylvania-wisconsin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F399f3da8401e80fdaf671e703aae967a3d94b018%2F0_123_3200_1922%2F3200.jpg>
 ‘We do not have a smoking gun,’ Jill Stein has said. ‘On the other hand, we 
have a system that invites hacking, tampering and malfeasance.’ Photograph: 
Mandel Ngan/AFP/Getty Images 
Stein launched her fundraising effort on Wednesday afternoon and quickly 
surpassed the initial $2m fundraising goal by early Thursday morning, prompting 
her campaign to raise the goal to $4.5m. After crossing that threshold, the 
campaign increased the goal to $7m.

These funds will be used to file recount requests and for attorney’s fees, 
according to Stein’s campaign manager, David Cobb. He said $1m was needed for 
Wisconsin, $600,000 for Michigan and $500,000 for Pennsylvania. The rest of the 
money is expected to go to legal fees associated with the recount.

Adam Parkhomenko, national field director for the Democratic national 
convention and a longtime Clinton aide, said he did not support Stein and 
“never will”, but: “I support democracy and the right to count every vote. And 
kudos to her for leading on this.”

US elections are so dominated by Democratic and Republican candidates that 
third-party candidates like Stein are more often seen as representing protest 
votes than a person with a legitimate shot at the White House. But these votes 
can greatly affect the race. For instance, Stein’s total votes inMichigan 
<http://www.nytimes.com/elections/results/michigan> and Wisconsin 
<http://wisconsinvote.org/election-results> were greater than the gap between 
Clinton and Trump, as were votes for the other major third-party candidate, 
Libertarian Gary Johnson.

And while it cannot be assumed that Stein voters would have voted for Clinton 
if Stein had not been on the ballot, it is a sensitive issue in such a tight 
race.

“I really wish Jill Stein had not waited until after the election to be so 
concerned about a few thousand votes tipping the election to Trump,”said Dan 
Pfeiffer, a former senior policy adviser to Barack Obama. 
<https://twitter.com/danpfeiffer/status/801868100060659712>

He criticized the fundraising campaign as a “wasted” effort and said funds 
could be better used to help Democrats in smaller, local races.

There was more energy around third-party candidates in 2016 because of the 
unpopularity of the main party candidates. Yet in the past two days, Stein’s 
recount campaign has raised more money than she did in the entirety of the 
presidential campaign. As of 19 October, Stein had raised $3.5m for her 
presidential race,according to the Center for Responsive Politics. 
<https://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/candidate?id=N00033776> 
 