
Jim O’Neill, the former Goldman Sachs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/goldmansachs> chief economist, has 
stepped down as a Treasury minister and resigned the Conservative whip amid 
reported tensions over Theresa May’s approach to China.

The high-profile businessman was given a peerage and appointed to George 
Osborne’s Treasury team last year with responsibility for the “northern 
powerhouse” project.

He is known for coining the phrase “Brics”, an acronym for the emerging 
economies of Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa.

However, he resigned his post as commercial secretary to the Treasury on 
Friday without giving a reason for his departure, apart from saying he had 
successfully completed a review of antimicrobial resistance, which he started 
before he was a minister.

In his letter to the prime minister, he played down speculation that he was 
unhappy in the job because of her cautious approach towards Chinese investment, 
and her replacement of Osborne’s focus on the north with a broader industrial 
strategy across the whole country.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fjim-oneill-resigns-treasury-minister-conservative-whip-theresa-may-tensions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2ee727481439df87c01ba673ad0aaf3dc765788%2F0_105_3189_1913%2F3189.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jim%20O'Neill%20resigns%20Treasury%20post%20and%20Tory%20whip&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fjim-oneill-resigns-treasury-minister-conservative-whip-theresa-may-tensions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jim%20O%27Neill%20resigns%20Treasury%20post%20and%20Tory%20whip&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fjim-oneill-resigns-treasury-minister-conservative-whip-theresa-may-tensions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2ee727481439df87c01ba673ad0aaf3dc765788%2F0_105_3189_1913%2F3189.jpg>
 Jim O’Neill (second from left) on the former chancellor George Osborne’s team 
in March. Photograph: Stefan Rousseau/PA 
“I primarily joined, however, for the specific purpose of helping deliver the 
northern powerhouse, and to help boost our economic ties with key growing 
economies around the world, especially China and India, and other rapidly 
emerging economies,” Lord O’Neill wrote.

“The case for both to be at the heart of British economic policy is even 
stronger following the referendum, and I am pleased that, despite speculation 
to the contrary, both appear to be commanding your personal attention. I am 
leaving knowing that I can play some role supporting these critical initiatives 
as a non-governmental person.”

It’s in Britain’s interest to bond with China now | George Osborne
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/19/george-osborne-britain-should-bond-china-now>
However, there has been persistent speculation that O’Neill would step down 
following a Financial Times report in July that cited his unhappiness withMay’s 
approach to China 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/ee21d6be-572a-11e6-9f70-badea1b336d4.html?siteedition=uk#axzz4L4l7bnot>
, exposed by her handling of plans for a new nuclear plant at Hinkley Point.


His decision to resign the Conservative whip and sit as a crossbencher in the 
House of Lords also suggests an ideological break with May’sConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> in comparison with the 
party’s approach under David Cameron and Osborne.

May said she was sorry about O’Neill’s resignation and thanked him for his 
service. She wrote: “You have made a significant contribution to driving 
forward the government’s work on delivering growth beyond the south-east 
through the northern powerhouse and on promoting stronger economic links with 
emerging economies, including China and India. You have laid important 
foundations in these areas, and the government will build on them.

“I would particularly like to pay tribute to your ground-breaking work on 
antimicrobial resistance. You should take great pride in seeing your review 
culminate this week in the UN high level agreement.

“You have played a vital role in building global consensus on this important 
issue, which will have long-lasting benefits.”
 