
I was driving out of Luanda, the capital of Angola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/angola>, when I came to a taxi rank. These 
two guys were selling black and blue overalls hung from a huge tree. I looked 
at them and thought: “They are the hollow men.” Visiting Luanda after thecivil 
war <https://www.theguardian.com/world/1999/feb/25/2>, which ended in 2002, was 
like Mad Max meets Canterbury Tales. Time had collapsed.A whole generation of 
men had died 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/may/05/angola-brutal-history-mpla-leftwing-discipline-betrayal>
 in the war. Many others lost their childhood.

It was late afternoon, the light was going, it was murky. I thought they 
looked like military uniforms but also puppets. Above that central figure is a 
bit of branch that makes it look like the overalls could be worked like a 
marionette. All skin and no bone. They felt like the shell of things.

People wanted to forget the war. I was surprised how little my driver and 
interpreter knew about it

I’d never really photographed outside South Africa before. I wasn’t trying to 
make a documentary image about the state of things inAngola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/angola>. I was just keen to find something 
emblematic. Also, I hadn’t worked in black and white for about five years. 
People thought I was insane lugging all this film around. But there’s something 
about that darkroom process and those silver gelatin prints. It’s to do with 
time and slowness.

People want to forget. I was surprised how little both my driver and 
interpreter knew about the civil war. Nearly a million died and millions were 
displaced. It lasted 27 years – one of the longest civil wars in Africa. But 
there was this sense that the past is the past andwe need to move on 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/14/angola-president-dos-santos-giving-up-power-2018-should-we-believe-him>
 and talk of other things.

The two guys at the taxi rank asked me why I was photographing these overalls. 
I suppose I was looking for echoes of the human. I get into arguments with my 
friendDavid Goldblatt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2010/nov/25/david-goldblatt-south-africa-photography>
 [a South African photographer]. He says I like landscape because it doesn’t 
talk back. But I like making images that are open-ended, that allow people to 
project on to them.

On the journey home, I had to put the film I’d shot through a very old scanner 
at the airport. I developed the print myself and seem to remember the X-ray 
machine had made a sort of baseline fog on all my images.

A kid once saw this shot and said to me: “It looks like the ghosts of dead 
men.” I nearly burst into tears. It was the perfect reading of the image.


Jo Ractliffe’s CV
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fjo-ractliffe-best-photograph-ghosts-angola-civil-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc47edfd3b39e908dabecec95af0b90159d909ab4%2F74_14_715_882%2F715.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jo%20Ractliffe's%20best%20photograph%3A%20the%20ghosts%20of%20Angola's%20civil%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fjo-ractliffe-best-photograph-ghosts-angola-civil-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jo%20Ractliffe%27s%20best%20photograph%3A%20the%20ghosts%20of%20Angola%27s%20civil%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fjo-ractliffe-best-photograph-ghosts-angola-civil-war%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc47edfd3b39e908dabecec95af0b90159d909ab4%2F74_14_715_882%2F715.jpg>
 Jo Ractliffe 
Born: Cape Town, South Africa, 1961.


Studied: University of Cape Town.


Influences: “Robert Frank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/nov/07/robert-frank-americans-photography-influence-shadows>
 andManuel Álvarez Bravo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/oct/22/guardianobituaries.arts>. But I’m 
also influenced by poets likePablo Neruda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/06/chile-admits-pablo-neruda-might-have-been-murdered-by-pinochet-regime>
.”


High point: “End of Times, a project I did in 1996 in the remote Karoo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/mar/17/alternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays>
 in South Africa, with local kids doing workshops using pinhole cameras.”


Low point: “In 1995, an exhibition in Johannesburg I’d spent five years making 
came crashing down. The ceiling bolts weren’t strong enough.”


Top tip: “When I’m working with people I don’t know, in places that are not 
mine, I ask myself, ‘On what terms am I here?’”

 