
Of all the hats Georgia congressman John Lewis has worn over his more than 50 
years in public life as a protester, activist and representative for Georgia’s 
fifth district, perhaps none is more unexpected than that of comic book 
protagonist.

But now, nearly eight years after the idea was hatched for the March trilogy – 
agraphic novel memoir of Lewis’s experiences in the civil rights movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/10/black-history-month-best-books-authors>
 – Lewis hopes it will help inspire a new generation to get into what he likes 
to call “good trouble”, and help young Americans understand how far the nation 
has come.

“I don’t think I’ve changed much. I still consider myself an activist,” he 
says. “I tell people all the time if you see something that is not fair, not 
right, and not just, then you have a moral obligation to do something about it 
– to get in the way, to get in trouble.”

Most recently, Lewis got in the way during a June sit-in to protest 
congressional inaction on gun control 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/22/house-democrats-stage-sit-vote-gun-control>
 after the mass shooting that left49 dead in an Orlando nightclub 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/orlando-terror-attack>. That time, the 
protest ended without confrontation. For Lewis, that makes it an outlier. The 
75-year-old has been arrested more than 40 times in his life, and five times 
since he was elected to Congress nearly 30 years ago. Lewis added with pride: 
“I’ll probably get arrested again.”

Many of those arrests are depicted in the more than 500 pages of illustrated 
civil rights history covered in March, which released its final instalment 
earlier this month. Book three picks up withthe bombing of the 16th Street 
Baptist church 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/mar/07/sarah-collins-rudolph-birmingham-bombing-video>
 in Birmingham in 1963, and ends with the 1965 signing ofthe Civil Rights Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jun/29/civil-rights-act-us-politics-democrats-south>
 by President Lyndon Johnson.

Rosa Parks: 60th anniversary of a historic day in Alabama – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/gallery/2015/dec/01/rosa-parks-60th-anniversary-bus-seat-civil-rights-pictures>
The series, first released in 2013, covers virtually every major civil rights 
moment of the 1950s and 1960s, fromRosa Parks’ arrest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jan/31/rosa-parks-100-american-rebel-justice>
 on a Montgomery city bus to the 1965 Bloody Sunday attack by police and 
deputized white civilians on protesters in Selma. That episode left Lewis with 
scars on his head that are still visible.

The medium of a graphic novel might seem counterintuitive for such heavy 
subject matter. It was certainly without precedent as a publication by a 
sitting congressman. But in fact, a little-known and sparingly pressed comic, 
the 1956 publicationMartin Luther King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/martin-luther-king> and the Montgomery 
Story, served as an integral part of Lewis’s early civil rights education in 
the principles and practices of non-violence. “It became like our Bible, our 
guide. It influenced so many of us,” Lewis says.

The comic told the story of how black Montgomery citizens organized and used 
nonviolent resistance to protest and ultimately overturn Jim Crow segregation 
on buses in Montgomery and throughout the state of Alabama. Published by the 
Fellowship of Reconciliation, a faith-based nonviolent action fellowship, the 
14-page illustrated account of the Montgomery bus boycott has remained popular 
with activists around the globe for decades. It played amajor inspirational 
role in the 2011 Arab spring protests in Egypt 
<http://wamu.org/news/11/08/24/mlk_comic_book_helped_inspire_arab_spring.php>, 
for example.

The congressman’s fond memories of the work are much of the reason why, when 
one of his staffers raised the idea of a graphic novel portrayal of Lewis’s 
stories from the movement, he was willing to at least give it some thought.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fjohn-lewis-congressman-march-graphic-novel-civil-rights-memoir%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8423f5269123aab81c84bdf5f7aaa3e13802cf2%2F0_0_676_950%2F676.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Lewis%3A%20'I%20don%E2%80%99t%20think%20I%E2%80%99ve%20changed%20much.%20I%20still%20consider%20myself%20an%20activist'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fjohn-lewis-congressman-march-graphic-novel-civil-rights-memoir%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Lewis%3A%20%27I%20don%E2%80%99t%20think%20I%E2%80%99ve%20changed%20much.%20I%20still%20consider%20myself%20an%20activist%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fjohn-lewis-congressman-march-graphic-novel-civil-rights-memoir%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8423f5269123aab81c84bdf5f7aaa3e13802cf2%2F0_0_676_950%2F676.jpg>
 March book three cover Photograph: Top Shelf Comix 
“Finally, he said: OK, I’ll do it, but only if you write it with me,” said 
Andrew Aydin, a coauthor of the book.

Aydin, a lifelong comics fan, said when Lewis first told him about The 
Montgomery Story, he was immediately hooked. “I’ll never forget going home that 
night and looking it up on the internet, reading about it, and just being 
absolutely fascinated with the idea of a comic book playing a meaningful role 
in the civil rights movement.”

The idea for the series came on the day of Barack Obama’s inauguration in 
2009, with the congressman telling some of his stories from the movement to 
visitors in his office. “All I could think is: I shouldn’t be the only one 
witnessing this,” Aydin said. “So part of it was finding a way to show everyone 
else what I saw that day.” To date, the books have been adopted by schools in 
more than 40 states, including in large districts like New York City, and have 
also been used by more than a dozen college “common reading” programs.

Lewis said he saw the value in retelling the story of the civil rights 
movement as, essentially, an illustrated collection of memoirs because of the 
format’s accessibility to audiences of different ages. “When I first moved to 
Atlanta, I used to attend Dr Martin Luther King Sr’s church, and sometimes his 
son [King Jr] would be preaching. And Daddy King, as we called him, would say: 
‘Make it plain, son, make it plain,’” Lewis recounted. Producing March “in the 
form of a graphic novel is making it plain and making it simple”.

Coalition of activists affiliated with Black Lives Matter outline policy agenda
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/01/black-lives-matter-release-policy-statement>
By making it plain, Lewis and Aydin are confident that the book can have a 
significant and sustained impact on a new generation of activists and 
protesters. “These smart, gifted young people are picking up where we left 
off,” Lewis said of the Black Lives Matter movement, praising the numerous 
nonviolent marches and acts of civil disobedience it has initiated. But March 
is also a cautionary tale. “Don’t make the same mistakes that we made. Stay 
focused,” Lewis said. “Never hate, never become bitter, never become hostile.” 
And on this point, Lewis believes modern activists would do well to copy the 
discipline and preparation of his generation.

“We had so called ‘do’s and don’ts’, and we lived by those. The day the first 
mass arrest occurred in Nashville, Tennessee, every single student arrested, 
all 89 of us, had a copy on them,” Lewis said, adding: “Discipline is 
everything.” The “don’ts” included not to “strike back nor curse if abused”. 
The “dos” included to “remember the teachings of Jesus Christ, Mahatma Gandhi 
and Martin Luther King. Love and nonviolence is the way.”

And for Lewis, while the names and faces, and the exact contours of racial 
oppression, have certainly changed over the past half-century, the strategy has 
not. Lewis added: “Our struggle is not a struggle for a few days for a few 
days, a few weeks, a few months or a few years – it is a struggle of a 
lifetime.”
 