
There was a curious moment during Tuesday’s oral argument at the US supreme 
court <https://www.theguardian.com/law/us-supreme-court>. The justices were 
considering Spokeo, Inc v Robins, a case about whether a man named Thomas 
Robins could sue a company that put erroneous information online in violation 
of the federal Fair Credit Reporting Act.

At one point, Chief Justice John Roberts posed an odd hypothetical scenario 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/john-roberts-immigration_56388721e4b079a43c04775d>
 that seemed, at first, a left-field tangent, to Deputy Solicitor General 
Malcolm Stewart as he argued in favor of Robins’s right to sue:

Mr Stewart, let’s kind of say your Congress thinks that the president is not 
doing enough to stop illegal immigration, so it passes a law that says, ‘anyone 
in a border state – so it’s particularized – who is unemployed may bring an 
action against an illegal immigrant who has a job.’ And they get damages, maybe 
they get an injunction. Can Congress do that?

At first glance, you might think that the chief justice has joined in the 
anti-immigrant hysteria that has helped propel Donald Trumpto the top 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/us/2016_republican_presidential_nomination-3823.html>
 of the Republican primary polls. Fellow justice Antonin Scalia useda case 
<http://prospect.org/article/supreme-court-strikes-most-arizona-immigration-law-making-scalia-very-angry>
 about an Arizona immigration law to rant like a second-string wingnut talkshow 
host about the scourge of illegal immigration in 2012 – is Roberts a convert to 
Scalia’s position?

Maybe, but anti-immigration rhetoric is just a means to an end in this case. 
His question actually reflects his consistent hostility to many citizens 
getting a fair day in court.

This case involves the legal concept of “standing”. In order to bring a suit 
in federal court, someone has to show that they have suffered some concrete 
injury under the law. When challenging school segregation in the 1950s, for 
example, the NAACP couldn’t just file a lawsuit arguing that such laws violate 
the 14th amendment. They had to find a plaintiff in a particular school 
district who was harmed by the policy and wanted to sue.

In this case, there is a question about whether Robins has standing to bring 
the case – whether he was actually harmed by the publishing of false 
information online. While Robins argues that he did suffer a concrete harm from 
the published misinformation, he also argues that the violation of the law is, 
in itself, a sufficient injury to allow a lawsuit to proceed.

Roberts’s hypothetical, then, was not advocating a terrible immigration 
policy. Rather, he was tweaking the government with a reductio ad absurdum. If 
we allow Robins to sue, Congress could pass all kinds of crazy laws liberals 
wouldn’t like! As with most slippery slope constitutional arguments, this isn’t 
very convincing – virtually any power given to Congress can be theoretically 
used to pass unwise laws, but this doesn’t mean that the powers cease to exist. 
If Congress has the authority to expand standing to allow people to sue if laws 
are violated, it doesn’t vanish because it can do so for ends some people 
consider undesirable.

But it’s nonetheless revealing of Roberts’s underlying agenda. Like many 
conservative judges, Roberts has sought to make it more difficult for people to 
get the standing to sue in federal court. In 2007, for example, Roberts joined 
anopinion 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hein_v._Freedom_From_Religion_Foundation> that 
held that taxpayers did not have the standing to challenge expenditures by the 
executive branch that go to religious institutions.


Conservative justices on the supreme court have also narrowed standing in 
environmental cases. In a 1992 opinion written by Justice Scalia, the court
denied <https://www.law.cornell.edu/supremecourt/text/504/555> standing to 
citizens bringing a lawsuit based on the Endangered Species Act. Vigilant 
citizens were denied the ability to compel enforcement of the statute in the 
face of executive inaction.

The conservative war on standing is part of a broader campaign to make it more 
difficult for groups like consumers and employees to get a fair hearing in 
federal court. In addition to narrowing standing, conservatives have made it 
more difficult to bring class action suits andtwisted federal law 
<http://prospect.org/article/most-pro-business-court-new-deal-strikes-again> to 
prevent citizens from challenging mandatory arbitration agreements required by 
monopolies.

There is more at stake in this case, therefore, than whether Robins can pursue 
his case. The courtmight make it more difficult 
<http://www.scotusblog.com/2015/11/argument-analysis-second-time-around-no-easier-for-justices-in-standing-case/>
 for a wide range of civil rights and consumer lawsuits to proceed. And the 
chief justice’s silly hypothetical aside, it won’t be marginalized groups like 
undocumented immigrants who will benefit if the court continues to put up 
barriers to the courthouse door.

• This article was amended on 5 November 2015. An earlier version said 
“Engendered Species Act” where “Endangered Species Act” was meant.
 