
John Cleese <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/john-cleese> will receive the 
Rose d’Or lifetime achievement award in Berlin next month and the comedy 
veteran has said he is delighted with the accolade.

The 10 best Fawlty Towers moments
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/sep/18/the-10-best-fawlty-towers-moments-40th-anniversary>
The Fawlty Towers star has been chosen as the winner of the prestigious prize 
by the European Broadcasting Union (EBU) for his outstanding contribution to 
entertainment broadcasting throughout his career, which has spanned more than 
five decades.

Cleese, 76, teasing one of his Monty Python 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/monty-python> co-stars, said: “I am 
delighted by this chance to annoy Terry Gilliam and I’m also very humbled by 
the offer of an all-expenses-paid holiday in Berlin.”

Jean Philip De Tender, the EBU’s media director, said that “no one is more 
deserving” of the award. “(Cleese) has been making audiences around the world 
laugh for 50 years and his writing and instantly recognisable performances have 
contributed to some of the best and funniest entertainment on television and in 
film,” he said.

Cleese is best known for writing and starring in sitcom Fawlty Towers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/sep/18/the-10-best-fawlty-towers-moments-40th-anniversary>
 and co-founding and appearing in surrealist comedy group Monty Python since 
the 1960s. He also appeared in A Fish Called Wanda, two Harry Potter films and 
two James Bond movies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fjohn-cleese-to-receive-rose-dor-lifetime-achievement-award%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7857b1e1195f90df411eaadaff327562f501b72b%2F0_21_1985_1191%2F1985.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Cleese%20to%20receive%20Rose%20d'Or%20lifetime%20achievement%20award&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fjohn-cleese-to-receive-rose-dor-lifetime-achievement-award%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Cleese%20to%20receive%20Rose%20d%27Or%20lifetime%20achievement%20award&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fjohn-cleese-to-receive-rose-dor-lifetime-achievement-award%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7857b1e1195f90df411eaadaff327562f501b72b%2F0_21_1985_1191%2F1985.jpg>
 John Cleese as Basil Fawlty and Prunella Scales as Sybil Fawlty in Fawlty 
Towers. Photograph: BBC-1 
He previously won a Rose d’Or in 1967 for his appearance in BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> programme Frost Over England.

The Rose d’Or awards, which were first presented in 1961, recognise the best 
in entertainment programming across television, online video and radio. The 
55th annual Rose d’Or Awards ceremony will take place in Berlin on 13 September.
 