
For all the time and money that fanatical opponents of providing health care 
to the uninsured poor and middle class have poured into their legal struggle 
against President Barack Obama’s signature domestic policy achievement, the 
Affordable Care Act (aka “Obamacare”),they’ve now failed twice to achieve their 
ultimate objective. Thursday, in a 6-3 vote,the US supreme court refused the 
opponents’ invitation 
<http://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/14pdf/14-114_qol1.pdf> to willfully 
misread the law to take health care away from millions of people.

Showing a legal craftsmanship that has too often been absent from his major 
opinions, Chief Justice John Roberts calmly obliterated the latest challenge to 
the ACA, providing a model of how to properly read a statute. (Hint: if your 
method of statutory interpretationshows that Spain was invaded by the “Moops” 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2014/07/new-secret-history-of-the-obamacare-deniers.html>
, you’re doing it wrong.)

Obamacare upheld by US supreme court as conservative justices rescue law
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/25/obama-healthcare-law-upheld-supreme-court>
Roberts’ opinion simply stated what should have been obvious: Congress 
anticipated that at least some states would not establish their own health 
insurance exchanges, authorized the federal government to establish exchanges 
on their behalf, and did not intend for this federal backstop to fail. 
“Congress passed the Affordable Care Act to improve health insurance markets” 
concluded the chief justice, “not to destroy them.”

Opponents to the law had argued the opposite: resting on a single phrase of 
the statute taken out of context 
<http://gawker.com/king-v-burwell-the-supreme-court-case-that-could-dest-1689366354>
, they argued that, although the law created exchanges that allow people not 
covered by their employer to purchase insurance, and provided the non-affluent 
with subsidies to help them purchase that insurance, people in states that 
didn’t establish an exchange who purchase their insurance through a federal 
exchange shouldn’t get the subsidies at all, possibly making their insurance 
unaffordable.

As Roberts’s opinion carefully explains, however, the plaintiffs’ claim was 
plainly wrong when the provision is read in the context of the statute as a 
whole. Roberts observed that, “State Exchanges and Federal Exchanges are 
equivalent – they must meet the same requirements, perform the same functions, 
and serve the same purposes.” If the court had accepted the theory of the law’s 
opponents, Roberts wrote, no one utilizing a federal exchange would qualify for 
a subsidy, “But the Act clearly contemplates that there will be [subsidy-] 
qualified individuals on every Exchange” even if the law doesn’t spell it out 
to its opponents’ satisfaction.

Even the court’s dissenters in this case once understood that Congress 
wouldn’t establish federal exchanges if they wanted them to fail – when it was 
politically convenient for them to understand it. Thursday’s majority opinion, 
in observing that it is “implausible that Congress meant the Act” to establish 
federal exchanges that wouldn’t work, cited the joint dissent written by 
Justices Antonin Scalia, Clarence Thomas, Samuel Alito and Anthony Kennedy in 
NFIB v Sebelius – the first case the court heart on the ACA –which assumed that 
the subsidies would be universally available. Kennedy was at least consistent 
in his assertion that subsidies would be available to all; the other three 
dissenters in Sebelius changed their interpretations in this case because their 
objective is apparently not to construe the statute fairly, but to inflict the 
maximum amount of damage to it.

Antonin Scalia decries 'jiggery-pokery' of 'SCOTUScare' in scathing dissent
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/jun/25/antonin-scalia-dissent-jiggery-pokery-scotuscare-king-v-burwell>
Justice Scalia’s histrionic, protesting-too-much dissent provides plenty of 
evidence that his legal reasoning gave way to his political positions. 
Attempting to answer the question of why Congress would go to the trouble of 
designing a federal backstop that was designed to fail, Scalia asserted that, 
without the subsidies, the “the individual mandate [would continue] to 
encourage people to maintain coverage, lest they be ‘taxed.’” This is simply 
nonsense: in many cases, because Americans with low incomes aren’t mandated to 
carry insurance if it represents a financial hardship, without the subsidies, 
many people wouldn’t carry insurance nor be taxed for not doing so.

As he did at oral argument 
<http://theweek.com/articles/542544/sphinx-hack-swing-vote-key-takeaways-from-supreme-courts-big-obamacare-case>
, Scalia also showed himself as embarrassingly out of touch with American 
politics circa 2015. “The Court predicts that making tax credits unavailable in 
States that do not set up their own Exchanges would cause disastrous economic 
consequences there,” wrote Scalia. “If that is so, however, wouldn’t one expect 
States to react by setting up their own Exchanges?” Apparently, Scalia intends 
this question to be rhetorical; but the actual answer isOf course we would not. 
We’ve already seen more than 20 Republican-governed states turn down large 
amounts of free federal money that could be used to expand Medicaid, inflicting
significant human as well as economic costs on their states 
<http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/2014/05/party-death>. The idea that these 
states would act to cooperate – or simply in the best interests of their 
citizens – this time is absurd. And whatever Scalia thinks, Congress didn’t 
think they would, either, and established a federal backstop exactly for that 
contingency.

Many feared that, even if the court upheld the subsidies, it would do so by 
deferring to the IRS because the statute was ambiguous; such a ruling would 
have left open the option for a future Republican administration to wreck the 
federal exchanges. Thurday’s opinion, however, seems to foreclose that 
possibility: since the court found that the ACA clearly makes subsidies 
available to those using the federal exchanges and that and Congress did not 
delegate to the IRS, a future Republican administration will not be able to 
wreck the exchanges unilaterally by simply altering the IRS’s interpretation of 
the statute.

Conservatives will undoubtedly charge Roberts with being a closet liberal, but 
he isn’t: he’s just someone who believes that the Affordable Care Act should be 
interpreted in a way that makes sense, not distorted to achieve the goals of 
its opponents. And, in this case, his decision to prioritize law over politics 
will actually save lives. Not bad for day’s work.
 