
John McDonnell may have unnecessarily made a fool of himself on Wednesday (he 
did) bywaving a battered copy of Mao’s Little Red Book at George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/25/john-mcdonnell-mao-zedong-little-red-book-george-osborne>
. But the shadow chancellor does not look as stupid today as the cheerleader 
Tory newspapers whose headlines trumpeted an “end to austerity” by “Generous 
George” in his “Happy Hour” autumn statement.

That’s nonsense, as many of the smarter accompanying articles 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-3334410/ALEX-BRUMMER-George-Osborne-morphing-Gordon-Brown.html>
 acknowledge in the same newspapers. Osborne, like Gordon Brown before him, is 
playing career politics. Behind the spin this was a stealth tax-increasing 
quasi-budget, one which again squeezed public services. He had totake to the 
airwaves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/25/george-osborne-taps-27bn-windfall-for-tax-credits-u-turn>
 at breakfast time to deny that austerity is over. That bit is true.


 At this early stage in the political cycle, when a re-elected chancellor can 
afford to take tough decisions for the general good, this one ran away from the 
gunfire generated bytax credits <https://www.theguardian.com/money/taxcredits> 
andpolice budget cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/mar/07/police-england-wales-budget-cuts-government-funding-austerity-bbc>
. That was politically prudent and cheered by his backbenchers, but also 
unheroic, the correction of Osborne’s ownill-judged mistakes they cheered in 
July <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/budget-2015-july> after his third 
budget in 16 months. It all rests on what the redoubtable Institute for Fiscal 
Studies is calling “silly numbers”.

 Let’s look at McDonnell’s bad call first: it’s easier. You can watch him 
trying to talk his way out of ithere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2015/nov/26/john-mcdonnell-mao-little-red-book-joke-video>
, insisting that he has successfully flagged up the sale of UK state assets to 
foreign states like communist China – as globalists like Ed Balls and co have 
failed to do, he implies.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-chairman-mao-moment-mcdonnell-throws-the-little-red-book-at-osborne-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Chairman%20Mao%20moment%3A%20McDonnell%20throws%20the%20Little%20Red%20Book%20at%20Osborne%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-chairman-mao-moment-mcdonnell-throws-the-little-red-book-at-osborne-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Chairman%20Mao%20moment%3A%20McDonnell%20throws%20the%20Little%20Red%20Book%20at%20Osborne%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-chairman-mao-moment-mcdonnell-throws-the-little-red-book-at-osborne-video&media=>
McDonnell throws the Little Red Book at Osborne. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2015/nov/25/the-chairman-mao-moment-mcdonnell-throws-the-little-red-book-at-osborne-video>
 It’s a fair point (why is it right for foreign states to own and run British 
state assets?), one of several good ones I thought McDonnell made in what is a 
scary performance to give: an instant reaction to a detailed statement over 
which many have toiled for months. You can readOsborne in full 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201516/cmhansrd/cm151125/debtext/151125-0001.htm>
 andMcDonnell’s reply 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201516/cmhansrd/cm151125/debtext/151125-0002.htm>
, orwatch them both <http://www.parliamentlive.tv/Commons>, as I did from the 
press gallery. I can’t say I recommend it.

 Overnight media coverage has been uniformly hostile, as Roy Greenslade 
explains 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/nov/26/big-red-faces-for-labour-after-mcdonnells-little-red-book-joke>
. The sketchwriters –here’s John Crace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/25/john-mcdonnell-mao-zedong-little-red-book-commons-spending-review>
 – were similarly unsympathetic. But so were Labour MPs I spoke to – some 
angry, some incredulous that their colleague, heavily tainted by his leftwing 
outlook, should draw attention to it in this way.

John McDonnell’s Mao moment is a dirty trick on his own party | Jonathan Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/25/john-mcdonnell-mao-little-red-book-dirty-trick>
 I argued it was counterintuitive, that McDonnell had been trying to poke 
gentle fun at himself while skewering Osborne’s ideological oddity in selling 
assets – some strategically sensitive – cheap to foreigners. It had gone wrong 
because he hadn’t set the joke up well enough, the quote from Mao wasn’t witty 
or apposite enough. It didn’t work as theatre.

 As for throwing the book across the dispatch box, I’ve seen many versions of 
the gesture over the years. It never works. A few weeks after I got my first 
press gallery ticket, Michael Heseltine picked upthe mace 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/82544.stm> and waved it at Labour MPs 
after a disputed vote over aircraft and shipbuilding nationalisation (it’s the 
opposite of privatisation, children). It was meant to symbolise Labour’s 
disrespect for parliament, but it looked like attempted grievous bodily harm. A 
chastened Hezza apologised the next day.

 McDonnell isn’t apologising, nor need he. But it was an error of taste and 
judgment. Newspapers which admired Hitler and General Franco have been quick to 
point out that Mao was a bloodthirsty tyrant too. He was – but he will remain a 
modernising hero, the man who reversed the “century of humiliation” for most 
Chinese. I wouldn’t be surprised if they insist on callingHinkley Point C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/29/hinkley-point-c-nuclear-power-station-cost-customers-4bn>
 in Somerset the “Mao Power Station” as a gesture of reverse humiliation.

What does it tell us about the beleaguered Corbyn/McDonnell regime? Not much 
that we didn’t already suspect. McDonnell is a more powerful political 
personality, he has well-formed and articulate views. Unfortunately he dare not 
share many of them with the British public, that’s why his “whatLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> would do instead” finale was 
rather lame.

 It’s OK to make a cautious case for “investment for growth” but voters have 
to trust you before they listen to you. McDonnell’s Mao joke set back that 
project. It’s not that he doesn’t have a sense of humour, but it’s a dark and 
dangerous one, better for party meetings with the faithful than for broad 
daylight. Someone in the back office team should have had the courage to say: 
“No John, it doesn’t quite work.” They didn’t. McDonnell’s self-belief, his 
arrogance if you prefer, carried the day.

 But let’s look on the bright side. Just as McDonnell on Wednesday reinforced 
impressions that he is unlikely ever to be chancellor, so Osborne reinforced my 
suspicion that he will never succeed David Cameron and move next door to No 10.

 He lacks Cameron’s easy charm and physical presence, voice even. As with 
McDonnell, his sense of humour and wit is darker, his jokes draw blood in ways 
that unsettle many. And in being so overtly political in his calculations he 
too much resembles the last chancellor to make the move, Gordon Brown. Not an 
encouraging precedent.

 Millions of expert words have already been written or uttered on this autumn 
statement <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/autumn-statement-2015>, so I 
will refrain from adding to them except to stress that Osborne’s U-turn rests 
on what theIFS <http://www.ifs.org.uk/> calls £27bn worth of “silly numbers” 
provided by their Treasury twins, theOffice for Budget Responsibility 
<http://budgetresponsibility.org.uk/>, run by Robert Chote who used to run the 
IFS.

Autumn statement 2015: five key charts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/25/autumn-statement-2015-five-key-charts>
 Having previously underestimated tax receipts, the OBR has now raised its 
projections for 2015-20 as well as raising its growth forecasts and assumed 
that interest rates will remain low for longer, much as the Bank of England is 
currently hinting. All that may be true, but it wasn’t obvious at the time of 
the July budget, so it may not be true for long. Events are beyond 
number-crunchers’ control too.

 It amounts to what Jonathan Freedland calls money found not down the sofa but 
down a “hypothetical future sofa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/25/santa-george-osborne-autumn-statement-gifts-future-sofa>
”, used to soften but not repeal future pain, even on tax credits eventually.

 There are good things in this statement – there always are – though whether 
business rate reform or subsidies for homeowners work well is another matter. 
What is real and tangible today is that £28.5bn worth of taxincreases. They 
include the £11.6bn apprenticeship levy or “tax on jobs”, £6.2bn worth of 
higher council tax to offset government cuts in social care, the more 
justifiable £3.8bn to be taken from the overheated buy-to-let market, and the 
removal of nurse training grants.

 When Tory MPs digest the small print – listening on Wednesday I kept tweeting 
“check the small print” – they may like less what they find. They may also see 
it as more statist, more interfering than they like either, too much Brown-ish 
meddling as Osborne tacks to the centre under pressure from the opposition 
(Tory as well as Lib Dem, SNP and Labour).

 McDonnell cheekily claims the credit for the U-turns, but Labour deserves 
some credit it won’t get in its unhappy state. McDonnell won’t ever be 
chancellor, but my hunch is that if Jeremy Corbyn is still Labour leader in 
2020, the prime minister he’ll be facing won’t now be Osborne. Too flexible for 
his own good.

 Who will it be? Too soon to say. As the pre-Mao Chinese curse goes, we live 
in interesting times.
 