

He has been dubbed the “rottweiler of Radio 4” and was told by David Cameron: 
“You’ll interrupt yourself in a minute.” But Today presenterJohn Humphrys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/john-humphrys> has described his 
interviewing style as “possibly over-friendly” and “obsequious”.


“A little timid and nervous. I’m always worried I might upset someone. If 
anything, I err on the side of obsequious,” Humphrys told thenew issue of Radio 
Times <http://www.radiotimes.com/>. 

“I think I’m possibly over-friendly.”

John Humphrys on Twitter, TV and why 'sitting down is the new smoking'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/29/john-humphrys-twittter-tv-sitting-down-smoking-today-programme>
Some of Humphrys’ interviewees on Today might beg to differ, including Cameron 
whoappeared on the programme a day before the EU referendum 
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/uk/682184/david-cameron-radio-4-eu-referendum> 
that prompted his resignation as prime minister. Humphrys was also responsible 
for the interview that helped seal the fate of the then BBC director general, 
George Entwistle <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AE4L8C8ql3E>.

But his famously straightforward interviewing style has not been enough to 
earn him top spot in a Radio Times poll of the nation’s favourite radio voices, 
which was topped by his Radio 4 colleagues Eddie Mair andKirsty Young 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/kirsty-young>.

Humphrys was runner-up among the men, in a top five that also included Radio 
2’s Ken Bruce, Classic FM’s John Suchet, andRadio 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio4> continuity announcer Neil Nunes.

Young pipped former Radio 4 continuity announcer Charlotte Green to the top 
women’s spot in a top five that included Woman’s Hour’s Jenni Murray and Jane 
Garvey, and Today’sMishal Husain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mishal-husain>. Green is now a presenter on 
Classic FM, and reads the Radio 5 Live football results on Saturday afternoons.

Asked to explain the preponderance of Scottish or Irish presenters among the 
nation’s favourite voices,Desert Island Discs’ presenter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/jan/27/desert-island-discs-70th-birthday>
 Young said: “It’s a fashion. There’s also the classless thing – to an Irish or 
Scottish person, that voice has class and they can place it, but to most 
English people they can’t place an Irish or Scottish accent in class terms.”

Eddie Mair: a rising BBC star
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/mar/25/eddie-mair-bbc-star-boris-johnson>
Mair, presenter of Radio 4’s PM, said of his interviewing style: “It sounds 
highfalutin but we’ve got a job to do. James Boyle [formerRadio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 4 controller] wanted the network to 
sound unbuttoned, and so I think it’s our job, as the hired hands, to deliver 
that.”

Jane Anderson, Radio Times radio editor, says: “It’s been 14 years since RT 
ran a voice poll.

“Charlotte Green was then your leading woman without having a show of her own, 
and sadly, our last leading man, Terry Wogan, died in January. His lilting 
Irish burr, almost musical in its delivery, delighted our readers for decades.

“But Terry’s influence lives on. When he won, he topped a list dominated by 
those who spoke ‘BBC English’. That’s now changed: four of today’s top 10 
voices are Scottish, two are Welsh and, in the case of Neil Nunes, his rich, 
deep baritone arrives with a Jamaican accent.”

The poll asked Radio Times readers to vote for their favourite voices from a 
shortlist of 40, and received more than 32,000 votes.


The nation’s favourite radio voices (Radio Times poll)

Women 

1 Kirsty Young 
2 Charlotte Green 
3 Jenni Murray 
4 Mishal Husain 
5 Jane Garvey 
6 Lynn Bowles 
7 Corrie Corfield 
8 Susan Rae 
9 Sarah Walker 
10 Anne-Marie Minhall 

Men

1 Eddie Mair
2 John Humphrys
3 Ken Bruce
4 John Suchet
5 Neil Nunes
6 Henry Blofeld
7 Barry Cryer
8 Charles Collingwood
9 Michael Berkeley
10 Steve Allen
 