
Do the Right Thing: an antidote to man-heavy ‘I’m funnier than you’ panel shows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/08/do-the-right-thing-review-panel-comedy>
The panel show’s death knell may well have been sounded by Harry Enfield. A 
man with an unwavering knack for zeroing in on the zeitgeist, in his and Paul 
Whitehouse’s 2014 tribute to BBC2, the Story Of The Twos, the pair mashed up 
every hackneyed panel show ingredient – from a gurning, pen-tapping Ian Hislop 
to the Buzzcocks item whereabuse is hurled at a lineup of extras 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3dO-3v1Asjg> – into a Frankenstein’s monster 
of a programme that oscillated between soullessly automated performance and 
crowd-pleasing inanity. The echoing refrain was Paul Merton’s smug non sequitur 
of a punchline. “Is it a dolphin in a bathtub?” he mooted repeatedly, to 
deafening laughter.

When that sketch aired, it felt cathartic. At that point, the TV panel show – 
which had been ubiquitous, wildly popular and, frequently, a joy – was starting 
to seem stale. Fast forward two-and-a-half years, and the genre has truly 
fallen from grace: Never Mind The Buzzcocks has been axed,Stephen Fry has left 
QI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/28/qi-stephen-fry-sandi-toksvig-has-made-it-sing>
,8 Out Of 10 Cats has moved to More4 
<http://www.chortle.co.uk/news/2016/10/12/25976/8_out_of_10_cats_to_return_with_new_captains>
 after its last Channel 4 series barely scraped a million viewers, while the 
past five years have seen Mock The Week’s ratings halve. Only the father of the 
trend, Have I Got News For You, continues to hold the fort, a sometimes 
relevant but hardly essential shadow of its former self.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-2z-AdzgKjY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-2z-AdzgKjY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-2z-AdzgKjY&media=>
So where did it all go wrong? Although the Harry and Paul skit was a 
scathingly accurate survey of the panel show scene, this was about more than 
individual programmes descending into smug parodies of themselves. Instead, the 
genre’s demise explains the way comedy itself has changed over the decade. 
First to desert the format wasBuzzcocks host Simon Amstell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/mar/09/simon-amstell-dysfunction-my-career>
, who quit the show in 2009 and used his subsequent sitcom Grandma’s House to 
denounce its meanness. But Amstell had not been alone in his cruelty. This 
panel show golden age was fuelled by a particularly furious form of banter, the 
kind encouraged by 8 Out Of 10 Cats’ caustic host Jimmy Carr, but probably best 
encapsulated by Frankie Boyle, whose Mock The Week residency made the show 
must-watch TV. Yet the way Boyle’s career has evolved is, like Amstell’s, 
indicative of how times have changed: in 2008, Boyle was making jokes on Mock 
The Week about the unattractiveness of young female Olympians;nowadays he’s 
writing op-eds for broadsheet newspapers about Conservative foreign policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/frankie-boyle>.

The Comedian's Comedian: the podcast that gets inside funny people's heads
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/sep/06/comedians-comedian-stuart-goldsmith>
This move within comedy towards nuance and insight and away from shouting down 
Hugh Dennis to deliver a gross gag about the Queen’s genitals has proved fatal 
to the panel show cause, and it stemmed partly from a rising consciousness 
about identity politics. At the turn of the decade, the combative and 
overwhelmingly male format began to attract accusations of misogyny from women 
including Victoria Wood, Mariella Frostrup (who called HIGNFY a “disgrace”) and 
Jo Brand (who observed that women were “perceived as window dressing” on 
Buzzcocks and “figures of ridicule” on They Think It’s All Over and HIGNFY). 
These voices of protest became so strong that in 2014 there was an edict from 
the BBC’s director of TV banning all-male panel shows.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ftv-panel-show-format-comedy-mock-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2555329665659180b05ec02b0d418f3b30caf163%2F189_54_1596_958%2F1596.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Joke's%20over%3A%20how%20the%20TV%20panel%20show%20fell%20from%20grace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ftv-panel-show-format-comedy-mock-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Joke%27s%20over%3A%20how%20the%20TV%20panel%20show%20fell%20from%20grace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ftv-panel-show-format-comedy-mock-the-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2555329665659180b05ec02b0d418f3b30caf163%2F189_54_1596_958%2F1596.jpg>
 All similes... Nevermind The Buzzcocks Photograph: Brian Ritchie/Talkback 
Thames 
Women on panel shows – have I got views for you | Myf Warhurst
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/feb/19/myf-warhurst-women-panel-shows-bbc>
By that time, the panel show was already embracing niceness. An increased 
sensitivity about offence combined with panel show overkill – from Sky’s Duck 
Quacks Don’t Echo to Charlie Brooker’s You Have Been Watching, the cheap and 
easy-to-produce format was everywhere – led to the commodification of anodyne 
“witty banter”. Things were changing on the comedy scene at large, too. On the
Comedian’s Comedian podcast last year, Mock The Week host Dara O Briain 
<http://www.comedianscomedian.com/125-dara-o-briain/>observed that the new 
generation of guests – Sara Pascoe, Romesh Ranganathan, Rob Beckett (also a 
team captain on 8 Out Of 10 Cats) – were more “conversational” than vicious. 
This cosy style doesn’t exactly lend itself to the rambunctiousness for which 
the panel show was loved. Instead it favours parlour game-based offshoots of 
the genre that don’t rely on nastiness for entertainment –8 Out Of 10 Cats Does 
Countdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/feb/14/8-out-10-cats-does-countdown>
,Would I Lie To You? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/sep/12/would-i-lie-to-you-review-tinchy-stryder-jack-dee-rob-brydon>
,Taskmaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jul/28/dave-game-show-taskmaster>
 – as well as podcasts, which offer a more intimate kind of humour and are 
becoming increasingly popular with comedy fans.

In their day, there was something intoxicating about the no-holds-barred panel 
show back-and-forth. But there seems to be little room for it in a society that 
has begun to appreciate empathy – and neither, conversely, in a more brutal 
political climate that is not particularly suitable for dissecting for cheap 
laughs. Perhaps, when the world lightens up again, they’ll be back.

Have I Got News For You airs Fridays, 9pm, BBC1; QI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/qi> airs Fridays, 10pm, BBC2; 8 Out 
Of 10 Cats airs Tuesdays, 9pm, More4

• This article was amended on 2 December 2016 to correct the name of the panel 
show You Have Been Watching. An earlier version misnamed it as Have You Been 
Watching.
 