
The role of special advisers and their relationship with civil servants has 
once again come under scrutiny as Jonathan Stephens, the permanent secretary at 
the Department for Culture, Media and Sport, faced questioning on Thursday 
about the situation regarding contact with News International.

At a hearing of the Common's public accounts committee  
<http://www.parliamentlive.tv/Main/Player.aspx?meetingId=10685>on Thursday, 
Stephens came under repeated questioning from the committee chair, Margaret 
Hodge, over the role of Adam Smith, the former special adviser to the culture 
secretary Jeremy Hunt.

Asked by Hodge whether he had agreed as permanent secretary to enable a 
special adviser to act as a channel of communication between the department and 
News International, Stephens repeatedly refused to answer, replying that the 
statement made by Smith, who resigned on Wednesday, had made clear "that the 
nature and content of those contacts was not authorised by the Secretary of 
State and that the result was that it fell short of the requirement established 
by the Secretary of State and the permanent secretary".

Hunt appeared in the Commons on Wednesday to defend his position 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/apr/25/jeremy-hunt-rupert-murdoch?cat=politics&type=article>
 but questions remain over the relationship between his special adviser and the 
civil servants in the culture department.

One former civil servant commented  
<http://adragonsbestfriend.wordpress.com/2012/04/26/did-jeremy-hunt-ask-civil-servants-to-act-unlawfully/>
that while the ministerial code, the civil service code, and the special 
advisers' code of conduct are all clear that no minister or special adviser 
should be asking their civil servants to do anything unlawful or illegal, "it's 
rock and hard place stuff - in particular for junior officials".

There will be questions about just how much senior civil servants in the 
department knew about Smith's acitivities and whether junior officials would 
have been aware of any channels available to raise any concerns, should they 
have had any.
 