
Such is the level of suspicion in this story that even the date of death is 
deemed proof of a conspiracy.Twenty years ago, JonBenét Ramsey, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2006/jun/25/features.magazine37> a 
six-year-old girl known for ever to the world by the uncomfortably adult poses 
she struck in her beauty pageant photos, was found bludgeoned and garrotted in 
her family’s basement in Boulder, Colorado. The killer has never been found 
and, ever since, the case has been picked over by experts, the tabloids and an 
endless slew of internet obsessives.

It is impossible to overstate how huge this case was – and still is – in the 
United States <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/aug/18/usa.danglaister>. 
Every year, the US media promise “A chilling new discovery” and “Latest twist”, 
even though the case remains as cold as Christmas in Colorado. There is now not 
one single part of this sad tale that has not been seized on – by the public, 
by the police, by JonBenét’s parents, John and Patsy – as proof of a coverup, 
even down to the child’s gravestone near Atlanta, Georgia, where she was born. 
There, the date of death is literally carved in stone: 25 December 1996. Yet 
even this is seen as a lot less stable than its material suggests. After all, 
doubters say, how could John and Patsy have known that their daughter died on 
Christmas Day if they didn’t find her body until the early afternoon of the 
26th? Surely the gravestone is evidence of their guilt that so many have long 
assumed, despite them being exonerated in 2008 by DNA evidence?

The few undisputed facts are as follows: just before 6am on 26 December, Patsy 
called the Boulder police department from her home. Her daughter had been taken 
from their home in the middle of the night, she said. She had found a 
two-and-a-half-page ransom note demanding $118,000 for her safe return. The 
police arrived at the Ramsey house, along with many of the Ramseys’ friends, 
who wandered freely around the property. After the kidnappers failed to call at 
the promised time, one of the officers suggested to John that he look around 
the family’s large house. He went down to the basement with a friend and there 
he saw his daughter, bound and gagged. When he brought her upstairs, it was 
obvious she had been dead for some time. She had been bashed over the head, 
strangled with a garrote fashioned out of a nylon cord and her mother’s 
paintbrush, and possibly sexually assaulted. There was no immediately obvious 
sign of a break-in, and the house was so large, the perpetrator must have known 
its layout very well to have found JonBenét’s bedroom in the middle of the 
night and taken her down to the basement without waking anyone else.

Some historical crime stories fascinate the public years later because of what 
they say about the times in which they happened.The OJ Simpson case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/09/hadley-freeman-were-hooked-on-the-oj-simpson-case-all-over-again-but-how-much-has-changed>
 andthe Manson killings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/16/second-summer-charles-manson-why-cult-murders-still-grip-us>
 are two obvious examples, both of which have experienced a revival of interest 
this year, thanks to their retelling in pop culture. The story of JonBenét 
Ramsey is different.

The case is certainly in the spotlight again, with three US networks – CBS 
<http://www.cbs.com/shows/the-case-of-jonbenet-ramsey/>, A&E 
<http://www.aetv.com/specials/the-killing-of-jonbenet-the-truth-uncovered> and 
Investigation Discovery – all recently screening their takes on the case to 
varying degrees of tackiness. The media coverage of this case was, and remains, 
almost unparalleled in its tawdriness. Photos of the little girl’s autopsy were 
bought and published by US tabloid the Globe. One journalist claimed to convert 
from Judaism to Christianity in order to attend the Ramsey’s church and glean 
insights from staring at the back of John and Patsy’s heads. (“I had never seen 
anyone pray for his own soul the way Patsy was praying for hers … At that 
moment, I decided she was the killer,” the journalist, Jeff Shapiro, said in 
probably the best-known book about the case, Lawrence Schiller’s Perfect 
Murder, Perfect Town.) The whole story has long been covered in a thick sheen 
of schlock. The only interesting thing about its historical context is that the 
case happened in the aftermath of the OJ Simpson trial, just when the media was 
desperately seeking another case that would similarly hold the public’s 
attention.

But while JonBenét’s murder may well never be solved, there has never been any 
mystery about why it still exerts such a fascination. Like Madeleine McCann, 
JonBenét was a pretty blond child from a well-off family, allowing the public 
the pleasure of looking at this photogenic child while simultaneously 
experiencing a quiet, unacknowledged frisson of schadenfreude at her parents’ 
pain. Add to this the undeniably sexualised pageant photos, in which the 
six-year-old wiggled and pouted in a manner that looked all the more 
fascinatingly horrific after her brutal death, and you have the perfect 
made-for-media confection. But none of these factors really explains the 
passion this case excites.

Pretty much from the moment this story broke, there have been two theories 
about what happened: either JonBenét was killed accidentally by one or both of 
her parents, or her then nine-year-old brother, Burke, and the parents staged a 
faked kidnapping to cover up the killing; or it was a botched kidnapping by a 
mystery outsider. Part of the reason this case has never been solved is because 
the Boulder police department badly bungled the first few days. Understaffed 
during Christmas and wholly unprepared for such an extraordinary case, they 
failed to secure the crime scene. They didn’t even find JonBenét’s body in the 
basement, leaving John to do so hours later. Their relationship with the 
Ramseys completely broke down when they threatened to refuse to release 
JonBenét’s body for burial unless the Ramseys came infor an interview 
<http://web.dailycamera.com/extra/ramsey/1997/04/25-2.html>, and there were 
frequent leaks from the Boulder police department to the media. “The police 
were not there to help us. They were there to hang us,” John Ramsey has said 
since. A 2015Reddit ask me anything (AMA) discussion with former Boulder police 
chief Mark Beckner 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/UnresolvedMysteries/comments/2wowat/i_am_former_boulder_police_chief_mark_beckner_i/>
 did little to disprove the Ramseys’ belief that the police continue to assume 
they were guilty. (Beckner has since expressed regret for the AMA, saying he 
hadn’t realised it would be made public.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fjonbenet-ramsey-the-brutal-child-that-still-haunts-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F891b5411c80992ad07d39058c1d2af6dcb417bd7%2F16_0_3146_4816%2F3146.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=JonBen%C3%A9t%20Ramsey%3A%20the%20brutal%20child%20murder%20that%20still%20haunts%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fjonbenet-ramsey-the-brutal-child-that-still-haunts-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=JonBen%C3%A9t%20Ramsey%3A%20the%20brutal%20child%20murder%20that%20still%20haunts%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fjonbenet-ramsey-the-brutal-child-that-still-haunts-america%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F891b5411c80992ad07d39058c1d2af6dcb417bd7%2F16_0_3146_4816%2F3146.jpg>
 JonBenét Ramsey. This and other photographs of her competing in beauty 
pageants helped to turn the public against the family after her death. 
Photograph: Sipa Press/Rex Features 
“The biggest mistake in this case is that there was a phenomenal number of 
people who decided on the first day that they knew what happened, and they 
would not allow new information to change that, and that boggles my mind,” says 
journalist and Boulderite, Charlie Brennan, who has been covering the story 
from its first days.

However, it is understandable why the police suspected the Ramseys. When a 
child is killed at home, it is statistically likely that a parental figure was 
involved. The Ramseys, according to the police, were reluctant to be 
interviewed (the Ramseys have vociferously denied this), and John was overheard 
on the phone an hour after finding JonBenét making arrangements for his family 
to leave the state (he has since said he was just trying to keep them safe). 
They were also swift to hire lawyers – suspiciously quick in the eyes of many. 
As for the date on her gravestone, her parents have since said they chose it 
because that was the last time they saw their daughter.

“The Ramsey case is a criminal Rorschach test – every piece of evidence can be 
looked at in several ways, and I’ve never seen that in any other case,” says 
Brennan. One example of this is the weirdly long ransom letter, demanding a 
very specific amount of money, which happened to be almost exactly what John 
Ramsey had received as a bonus that year. Even weirder, the note was clearly 
written in the Ramseys’ house, using a pad of paper and pen that were there. To 
some, this proves the Ramseys must have written it: what kidnapper would hang 
around to write such a long note? But to others, this is proof that they 
didn’t. Why would the Ramseys mention John’s bonus in the letter? It must have 
been someone with knowledge of his well-publicised business affairs who wanted 
to hurt him. The killer could have broken in while the family was out on 
Christmas Day visiting friends, their defenders say, and written the note while 
they were out, lying in wait until they went to sleep.

Then there are the pageants. Without question, the images of the little girl 
sashaying on stage in makeup, which were released without her parents’ consent, 
helped to turn public opinion against the Ramsey family. It certainly turned 
many people in Boulder against them.

“Boulder sees itself as a very sophisticated community and a lot of people 
figured that this whole spectacle was beneath them,” says Brennan. “The Ramseys 
had only moved to Boulder a few years earlier [from Georgia], and then the 
whole pageant thing came to light, which was something that was completely 
foreign to most people in Colorado and more associated with the deep south. So 
a lot of Boulderites felt: ‘This does not reflect us, they are not one of us.’” 
As a result, Brennan says: “A lot of people in Boulder feel there is no mystery 
– they know who did it.”

Even JonBenét’s parents seemed divided about the pageant issue. In their book 
about the case, The Death of Innocence, that they wrote together in alternate 
sections, John insists beauty pageants were just “one of her many hobbies”. 
Patsy, however, spends the next seven pages describing her daughter’s “gift” at 
“performing” (she also doesn’t mention any of her daughter’s other hobbies). 
Beauty pageants were unusual in Colorado, she writes, but she had done them 
herself when she was younger. For one, she bought JonBenét “a Ziegfeld Follies 
costume, reminiscent of the one I had worn in the Miss West Virginia Pageant 
some 20 years earlier. Like mother, like daughter.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fjonbenet-ramsey-the-brutal-child-that-still-haunts-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6008da9dee980daa4c8a0a6e92fde1f2dde4aa46%2F0_0_1672_2048%2F1672.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=JonBen%C3%A9t%20Ramsey%3A%20the%20brutal%20child%20murder%20that%20still%20haunts%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fjonbenet-ramsey-the-brutal-child-that-still-haunts-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=JonBen%C3%A9t%20Ramsey%3A%20the%20brutal%20child%20murder%20that%20still%20haunts%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fjonbenet-ramsey-the-brutal-child-that-still-haunts-america%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6008da9dee980daa4c8a0a6e92fde1f2dde4aa46%2F0_0_1672_2048%2F1672.jpg>
 Protesters unhappy at the lack of a decision in the murder case march outside 
the justice centre in Boulder, Colorado, in 1999. Photograph: Reuters 
So Patsy, in particular, was shocked by the negative public reaction to the 
pageant photos after her daughter’s murder. One newscaster said the 
six-year-old resembled “a hooker”. Pretty much only pageant photos of JonBenét 
were used in the media, even though she had only been in nine pageants. There 
was a definite intimation in the now-hysterical media coverage that to put your 
child in a beauty pageant was weird, unnatural and sexually suspect. JonBenét 
was simultaneously deified as a photogenic angel and vilified as a child 
temptress, and her parents were criticised for fetishising her looks, while the 
public and media did exactly the same thing themselves. “What I saw on the 
pageant video … you don’t do that to a six-year-old,” JonBenét’s former dance 
teacher, Kit Andrew, says in Perfect Murder, Perfect Town.

But there is an alternative way of looking at the pageants. Child beauty 
contestants, while unusual in Colorado, are hardly unknown in the US. Thousands 
of pageants still take place every year, and no one is saying every parent 
involved is a potential killer. In fact, far from incriminating the Ramseys, 
the pageant photos could be seen as almost exonerating them: it could very 
easily be argued that the pageants brought JonBenét to the attention of a local 
paedophile, and several have since been suspected, but never charged.

John and Patsy’s general demeanour was also deemed suspicious by the police, 
the media and the public. “The Ramseys didn’t appear to behave the way parents 
in this situation are ‘supposed’ to behave. They didn’t cling together and 
constantly comfort and reassure each other,” John Douglas writes in The Cases 
That Haunt Us.

But John and Patsy were, they write themselves, “in shock and medicated so we 
could function” for weeks after the murder. So to judge how they spoke, looked 
and interacted as being indicative of something was not really fair. But this 
is what happens to every parent who loses a child in a high-profile case: their 
behaviour is scrutinised for clues.

When a parent loses a child, the most natural human response is sympathy. But 
that is not what many feel for parents in high-profile cases.When Madeleine 
McCann went missing in 2007 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/15/madeleine-mccann-probably-not-taken-far-mother-kate>
, her father, Gerry, and in particular her mother, Kate, were widely 
criticised: Gerry, some sniped, was too articulate and Kate looked too pretty. 
What kind of mother puts on eye shadow when her daughter is missing?Kerry 
Needham was dismissed as a feckless teenage mother when her baby son, Ben, went 
missing on Kos in 1991 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/16/ben-needham-mother-kerry-missing-toddler-digger-accident-kos>
.When two-year-old Lane Graves was killed by an alligator at Disney World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/23/disney-alligator-attack-father-tried-to-wrestle-sons-head-from-animals-jaws>
 in a freak accident earlier this year, parenting chat sites were swamped with 
people criticising the parents for letting a little boy play near the water in 
the evening, as though that were unusual on a Florida holiday.

Parent-blaming is all-too-common these days, and usually the point is to make 
other parents feel better about their own parenting skills. But in cases such 
as that of JonBenét, something else is going on. By demonising parents who have 
suffered a terrible trauma, the rest of us can reassure ourselves that they are 
different from us: those parents are flawed, even evil, and we are good and 
therefore our child will never go missing – in Kos, in Praia de Luz, from our 
house in the middle of the night – like theirs did. The rush to blame 
JonBenét’s parents can also be partly put down to the public needing to 
reassure themselves that, contrary to what the Ramseys said, killers don’t 
break into houses and murder children where they should be most safe. That only 
happens when the parents themselves are killers. And yet.

Brennan says: “In 2000, I wrote a piece that ran in the Dallas Morning News 
pointing out that, nine months after this crime, someone broke into a house 
near the Ramsey house and was in the process of assaulting a nine-year-old girl 
in the middle of the night and was chased out by her mother. The girl went to 
the same dance studio as JonBenét. The police said they believed it had no 
connection to the Ramsey case.”

After writing about the case for 20 years, Brennan says he has come to believe 
the family weren’t involved: “If you look at the autopsy photos and you see the 
deep furrow in her neck created by that ligature, you see a tremendous amount 
of force was used. That does not suggest staging to me – the person who did it, 
meant it. But the Ramseys have nothing in their background to suggest that this 
level of evil dwelled in their hearts,” he says. But this theory, like the ones 
about whether the Ramseys behaved how they were “supposed” to, relies on 
imagining how we would behave if our child had been killed, or if we had killed 
them accidentally. But no one can do that accurately. And anyway, it’s 
irrelevant, since the case is about the Ramseys, not anyone else.

American obsession: how JonBenét Ramsey gave rise to the online detective
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/09/jonbenet-ramsey-murder-20-year-anniversary-online-detectives>
It is entirely possible JonBenét was killed by a member of her family. It is 
also very likely the case will never be solved: Patsy has since died and the 
case gets colder every year. The ghoulish hysteria around her murder has lasted 
more than three times longer than JonBenét’s life did. “I’ve covered lots of 
big stories: the Challenger, presidential elections. But this – it is something 
that I’m thinking about all the time,” says Brennan. “It is an impossibly 
complex, seemingly unsolvable riddle.” It is also the death of a child, killed 
with shocking brutality. But it’s hard to see the truth beneath the schlock.

The Killing of JonBenét: Her Father Speaks, 9pm, 11 December, Crime and 
Investigation; Who Killed JonBenét?, 10pm, 18 December, Lifetime; The Case of 
JonBenét Ramsey, 22 December, More4
 