
Considering the level of pre-match hype, this was a disappointingly flat 
contest lacking intensity or technical quality. But then that was precisely 
what José Mourinho wanted:Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> had created chances and scored 
goals at a staggering rate this season, and United blunted the home team 
impressively for long periods. Mourinho has been doing this in away matches at 
big clubs for much of the past 12 years, and while legitimate questions have 
been asked of his attacking blueprint, defensively he remains a fine coach.

José Mourinho criticises ‘cautious’ Liverpool after bore draw at Anfield
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/17/jose-mourinho-liverpool-anfield-manchester-united-jurgen-klopp>
There was little complex about Mourinho’s approach, and United’s primary 
strategy was ensuring they did not pass their way into trouble. David de Gea 
always kicked long, throw-ins were chucked down the line, and the centre-backs 
barely ever had the ball. Eric Bailly played just 14 passes, Chris Smalling 
only seven – whereas the Liverpool centre-back duo, Dejan Lovren and Joël 
Matip, played 92 and 70 respectively.

United were desperate to prevent their duo being caught on the ball, or their 
passes being intercepted – they did not want to remotely encourage Liverpool’s 
pressing. In fact, if anything, United’s pressing high up the pitch was more 
successful than Liverpool’s, as the home side’s goalkeeper Loris Karius 
experienced a couple of nervy moments with the ball at his feet.

Once United had cooled the tempo they started to frustrate Liverpool with 
their possession play, too. Marouane Fellaini and Ander Herrera were not 
pressed aggressively by Liverpool’s midfielders, and were happy to play 
sideways passes without attempting much penetration.

United’s attacking approach was basic, with few signs of genuinely dangerous 
possession play, and depended largely upon Paul Pogba, in a more advanced role 
than he has been accustomed to at the top of the midfield trio, pushing forward 
to link up with Zlatan Ibrahimovic. That combination created the game’s first 
clear-cut chance, 10 minutes into the second half, when Pogba’s cross was met 
with a curiously misjudged header from the Swede.

Manchester United’s Paul Pogba fails to live up to price tag in draw at 
Liverpool
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/17/paul-pogba-manchester-united-liverpool-premier-league>
Liverpool were more purposeful in possession, particularly with the 
positioning of their full-backs. Nathaniel Clyne and James Milner attacked, 
which meant Marcus Rashford and Ashley Young were pushed backwards, at times 
meaning United often looked like they were deploying a back six. This allowed 
the full-backs, Antonio Valencia and Daley Blind, to stick tight to their 
opponents, Roberto Firmino and Sadio Mané.

Daniel Sturridge was quiet in the first half, miscontrolling one long ball in 
behind, and lurking on the outside of United’s centre‑backs without directly 
influencing play. Worryingly for Sturridge, Liverpool looked brighter after his 
departure on the hour. Adam Lallana replaced him and played in the centre‑left 
midfield role, with Coutinho pushing forward to the left flank and Firmino 
moving upfront.

There was suddenly excitement down the left: clever movement inside from 
Coutinho, quick passing from Lallana, Firmino making sudden movements towards 
the ball to drag the centre-backs out of position. There had been a growing 
feeling that Sturridge simply does not suit Jürgen Klopp’s system, both with 
and without the ball, and this underlined that impression. For their next big 
game it would be a surprise to see him in the starting XI.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fjose-mourinho-liverpool-manchester-united-klopp-tactics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b563e9d6b2f476bbbf983985dfa038d8b967a45%2F0_346_3196_1918%2F3196.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jos%C3%A9%20Mourinho%20reverts%20to%20type%20and%20again%20cancels%20out%20Liverpool%E2%80%99s%20ambition%20%7C%20Michael%20Cox&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fjose-mourinho-liverpool-manchester-united-klopp-tactics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jos%C3%A9%20Mourinho%20reverts%20to%20type%20and%20again%20cancels%20out%20Liverpool%E2%80%99s%20ambition%20%7C%20Michael%20Cox&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fjose-mourinho-liverpool-manchester-united-klopp-tactics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b563e9d6b2f476bbbf983985dfa038d8b967a45%2F0_346_3196_1918%2F3196.jpg>
 David de Gea denies Roberto Firmino. Photograph: Peter Powell/EPA 
Despite an underwhelming contest there were plenty of good performers here, 
particularly for United. Herrera was outstanding in a screening midfield role: 
anticipating the play well, making crucial interceptions and making 12 tackles, 
the most of any player. Young perfected the ‘defensive winger’ role Mourinho 
wants in big games, winning all six of his tackles, and it would not be a 
surprise to see him become a regular in games when Mourinho wants to shut down 
attacking full-backs.

David de Gea ensures Manchester United hold Liverpool in stalemate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/17/liverpool-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
Bailly continues to impress with his reading of the game and covers behind his 
fellow defenders excellently, while Valencia’s last-ditch tackle on Firmino in 
the closing stages underlined his improvement in his relatively new position of 
right-back. De Gea, meanwhile, made two outstanding second-half saves.

Of course the fact all these players were in defensive positions, or 
performing defensive roles, rather summarised United’s display – this game will 
not live long in the memory.
 