
José Mourinho <https://www.theguardian.com/football/jose-mourinho> has hit out 
at “football Einsteins” for trying to undermine his and Manchester United’s 
achievements in the wake of the team’s recent run of three successive losses.

United returned to winning ways in beating League One’s Northampton Town 3-1 
in the third-round of the EFL Cup on Wednesday. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/21/northampton-town-manchester-united-efl-cup-match-report>
 Afterwards, Mourinho praised his team for delivering a “positive performance” 
before turning on critics following thescrutiny that has come his and United’s 
way following defeats to Manchester City, Feyenoord and Watford last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/20/manchester-united-jose-mourinho-losses-mount>
.

Marcus Rashford helps stuttering Manchester United beat Northampton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/21/northampton-town-manchester-united-efl-cup-match-report>
“I know that some football Einsteins – football is full of Einsteins – I know 
that they tried to delete 16 years of my career,” the Portuguese told MUTV. 
“They tried to delete an unbelievable history of Man United football club and 
to focus on a bad week with three bad results. But that’s the new football – 
it’s full of Einsteins.

“I can understand clearly the disappointment if the fans are disappointed with 
the last week. I understand completely but I’m sure that with the team going 
back home [against Leicester City on Saturday] they will be behind the team 
like they always are.”

Goals from Michael Carrick, Ander Herrera and Marcus Rashford eased United to 
victory at Sixfields and into the fourth round,where they will face Manchester 
City at Old Trafford next month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/21/efl-cup-fourth-round-draw-manchester-united-manchester-city>
.

“We deserved to win clearly,” said Mourinho “[It was as] difficult as I was 
expecting, but we were totally in control for the first 35 minutes and then we 
were again in control for the last 45.

“The team was in control from the beginning and the substitutions were just a 
contribution but overall the team was completely in control. So, difficult 
match but overall a positive performance.”
 