
It is generally unwise to judge a footballer on the basis of a major 
international tournament, but Paul Pogba’s underwhelming Euro 2016 raised 
questions about his tactical flexibility rather than his level of talent. When 
Didier Deschamps changed formation midway through the competition,Pogba 
struggled to adapt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/15/paul-pogba-france-didier-deschamps-problem>
.

Stormzy and laundry ladies: the new face of transfer announcements
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/09/stormzy-and-laundry-ladies-the-new-face-of-transfer-announcements>
Deschamps had intended to play a 4-3-3 system, a formation that suits Pogba’s 
talents perfectly. Pogba’s best performances with Juventus came in that system, 
particularly in the midfield that featured Andrea Pirlo dictating play, giving 
Arturo Vidal and Pogba licence to bomb forward.

It was an unusual midfield trio, with the playmaker in the deepest role, and 
the other two players given more ball-winning responsibility. But it suited 
Pogba perfectly: he could showcase his energy and tenacity when attempting to 
regain possession, plus his drive, trickery and long-range shooting ability 
when going forward. Broadly speaking, he is an all-rounder, a box-to-box 
midfielder who is outstanding technically and physically.

Deschamps, however, switched to a 4-2-3-1 system midway through the tournament 
toaccommodate Antoine Griezmann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/02/france-antoine-griezmann-euro-2016>
 in his favoured central position, forcing Pogba into a deeper role alongside 
Blaise Matuidi. That compromised his style considerably: neither he nor Matuidi 
is a natural defensive midfielder, with both defined more by their attacking 
power than their positional discipline. In that role Pogba looked highly 
uncomfortable, his limitations in possession exposed. He was unable to play 
penetrative passes from deep positions; with Juventus he had never had this 
responsibility.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fpaul-pogba-jose-mourinho-manchester-united-4-2-3-1%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F907872361c71f24fe9354042d540ddfe04c3d20e%2F27_0_707_424%2F707.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jos%C3%A9%20Mourinho%20may%20struggle%20to%20get%20best%20from%20Paul%20Pogba%20in%20a%204-2-3-1%20formation%20%7C%20Michael%20Cox&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fpaul-pogba-jose-mourinho-manchester-united-4-2-3-1%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jos%C3%A9%20Mourinho%20may%20struggle%20to%20get%20best%20from%20Paul%20Pogba%20in%20a%204-2-3-1%20formation%20%7C%20Michael%20Cox&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fpaul-pogba-jose-mourinho-manchester-united-4-2-3-1%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F907872361c71f24fe9354042d540ddfe04c3d20e%2F27_0_707_424%2F707.jpg>
 How United could line up with Paul Pogba in the team. Photograph: The Guardian 
Those performances may concern José Mourinho, who had appeared set to use a 
4-2-3-1 formation withManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> this season. Mourinho 
traditionally likes playing more disciplined midfielders in the two deep roles, 
although in his second spell at Chelsea he initially used Cesc Fàbregas there 
with great success before shifting the Spaniard higher up the pitch, 
particularly in big games. Pogba is comparable to Fàbregas, or perhaps even 
Steven Gerrard: his major weakness is his positional ability.

Top 10 most expensive football players in the world – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2016/aug/09/top-10-most-expensive-players-in-the-world-paul-pogba>
It is easy to imagine Mourinho allowing Pogba to play a deep midfield role at 
home to Hull City, difficult to foresee the same format away at Manchester 
City. Pogba could theoretically play as a No10, although that would be a 
relatively unfamiliar position for him.Henrikh Mkhitaryan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/06/manchester-united-henrikh-mkhitaryan-signs>
, the intelligent attacking midfielder recruited from Borussia Dortmund, would 
be more suited to that role, but appears set to start on the right flank, 
drifting infield.

The obvious solution would be a switch to a 4-3-3. That would suit Pogba 
perfectly, and Mkhitaryan offers a wonderful variety of midfield skills and is 
versatile enough to play that position effectively. It would also suit 
Manchester United’s first-choice holding midfielder Michael Carrick, now 35, 
who could play a slightly deeper role.

Ander Herrera is another midfielder clearly suited to the shuttling role in 
4-3-3, and the same is probably true of Marouane Fellaini and Morgan 
Schneiderlin.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fpaul-pogba-jose-mourinho-manchester-united-4-2-3-1%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41b9ce3da6840a03ef6cc9911dabd6db6ed578cd%2F0_107_3500_2235%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jos%C3%A9%20Mourinho%20may%20struggle%20to%20get%20best%20from%20Paul%20Pogba%20in%20a%204-2-3-1%20formation%20%7C%20Michael%20Cox&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fpaul-pogba-jose-mourinho-manchester-united-4-2-3-1%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jos%C3%A9%20Mourinho%20may%20struggle%20to%20get%20best%20from%20Paul%20Pogba%20in%20a%204-2-3-1%20formation%20%7C%20Michael%20Cox&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fpaul-pogba-jose-mourinho-manchester-united-4-2-3-1%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41b9ce3da6840a03ef6cc9911dabd6db6ed578cd%2F0_107_3500_2235%2F3500.jpg>
 Some of Paul Pogba’s best performances for Juventus came in the midfield with 
Andrea Pirlo, left, and Arturo Vidal. Photograph: Tony Gentile/Reuters 
In attack, Zlatan Ibrahimovic has spent the last few years in a 4-3-3 for 
Paris Saint-Germain, and Anthony Martial and Memphis Depay are wide forwards 
rather than wide midfielders, likely to appreciate playing 15 yards higher up 
the pitch. The disappointed parties would probably be Wayne Rooney, who still 
seems to favour a No10 role and hasbeen informed he will not play deep in 
midfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/05/jose-mourinho-wayne-rooney-back-in-attack-manchester-united>
 under Mourinho, and Juan Mata, whose future was perilous anyway, having been 
sold by Mourinho at Chelsea.

Mourinho has generally favoured a 4-2-3-1 formation in his past two jobs, at 
Real Madrid and Chelsea. His Plan B, however, has been the 4-3-3, and that 
system makes most sense to get the world’s most expensive footballer playing in 
his optimum position.
 