
José Mourinho has insisted Marcos Rojo is “an aggressive but clean player” 
after the defender risked a red card by launching into another two-footed 
challenge during Manchester United’s 2-1 victory againstCrystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace>.

Rojo lunged at Wilfried Zaha during the first half at Selhurst Park, with the 
game still goalless, but was only booked by the referee, Craig Pawson. The 
Argentina international had been guilty of a similar offence against Idrissa 
Gueye in therecent draw at Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/04/everton-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
, earning a yellow card from Michael Oliver that night at Goodison Park. “From 
the sidelines, it did look bad,” said the Palace manager, Alan Pardew, of 
Rojo’s latest offence. “He jumps two-footed on [Zaha], and we’ve been to all 
these meetings where [we’re told] that’s a red card.”

Zlatan Ibrahimovic late goal gives Manchester United win at Crystal Palace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/crystal-palace-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
Mourinho refused to comment on the tackle itself but was quick to defend his 
player’s conduct. “He’s playing really well, phenomenal,” said the Portuguese, 
whose side are now unbeaten in seven Premier League games and six points off 
the top four. “He’s a clean player, aggressive. His nature, Argentinian, is 
emotional but very clean, and he’s playing probably the best football of his 
career. I didn’t comment on David Luiz’s tackle on Marouane Fellaini, or Danny 
Rose’s tackle on Henrikh Mkhitaryan. So I’m not going to comment on this one.”

Both teams had reason to bemoan oversights by the officials, with Pardew 
dismayed that the visitors’ opener in first-half stoppage time had been allowed 
to stand after Zlatan Ibrahimovic’s apparent handball and with the scorer, Paul 
Pogba, in an offside position. Yet Joe Ledley’s handball might have earned 
United a penalty of their own after the interval before Ibrahimovicplundered 
the winner the visitors’ dominance merited 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/crystal-palace-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
.

Wayne Rooney had been substituted at 1-1 just after the penalty incident and 
took out his own frustrations on the fourth official, Stuart Attwell. “Wayne 
was angry about a possible penalty,” said Mourinho. “He was complaining with 
the referee on the pitch and the fourth official on the bench. He was really 
upset with it. But even at 1-1, I told him to forget it.

Cesc Fàbregas sweeps Chelsea past Sunderland and six points clear at top
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/sunderland-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
“We’ve achieved two big wins in a few days. Big because two victories is like 
six draws. If you win two in five matches and lose three, in terms of points 
it’s better than five draws. But the reality is I forget my draws and focus on 
my performances, and the performances have been good for a long time. The 
players deserve these two happinesses: happiness at home and happiness away. 
Now comes West Bromwich Albion, very difficult, and then Sunderland and 
Middlesbrough, and Leicester who are a few points from relegation. Very 
difficult. But we are playing well.

“If we’d had the points we lost at home, or not drawn matches we’d done more 
than enough to win, we’d be close to the top of the league. But we lost those 
points and, now, we are just closing the gap to the top four. Three matches to 
play until the end of the year. Let’s see how it ends on 31 December and we can 
feel then, and smell, what is possible to do in the second half of the season.”
 