
José Mourinho always did take the League Cup – typically the lowest priority 
for managers at elite clubs – more seriously than most of his peers. Yet 
whether he regards Manchester United’sflourishes of finery as West Ham were 
swatted aside 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/30/manchester-united-west-ham-united-efl-cup-match-report>
 as a genuine turning point remains tantalisingly difficult to assess. Of 
course,he watched the game from his secret hiding place 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/01/jose-mourinho-mkhitaryan-secret-location-manchester-united-west-ham>
, so cameras were not privy to the expressions that might have given some clues 
as to whether he is convinced his plans for a more balanced, more effective 
team are belatedly coming together.

Encouraging though it was to see some of the stranger conundrums of the season 
beginning to stylishly resolve themselves – Henrikh Mkhitaryan and Anthony 
Martial in particular – the key for Mourinho is to translate some of the 
positive vibes United are capable of summoning from cup games into the league.

Premier League: 10 things to look out for this weekend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/02/premier-league-10-things-to-look-out-for>
United’s form has fluctuated joltingly between competitions. At Old Trafford 
that contrast has been keenly felt. On the one hand, the Europa League and EFL 
Cup have been the platform for upbeat performances – helping themselves to 
goals aplenty against Fenerbahce, Feyenoord and West Ham, and the sweet taste 
of anarrow derby victory over Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/26/manchester-united-manchester-city-efl-cup-match-report>
. But league successes remain a source of the kind of frustration to make a 
manager kick out at a poor, unsuspecting water bottle.

The recent sequence of draws is part of a broader picture that goes deeper 
than this stodgy spell of league travails for Mourinho. Strong, consistent runs 
of Premier League wins, his staple when he first arrived in England andagain 
during Chelsea’s 2014-15 title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/03/premier-league-chelsea-crystal-palace-match-report>
, have become painfully elusive.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Frui-faria-says-jose-mourinhos-send-off-is-part-of-the-game-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rui%20Faria%20says%20Jos%C3%A9%20Mourinho's%20sending%20off%20is%20'part%20of%20the%20game'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Frui-faria-says-jose-mourinhos-send-off-is-part-of-the-game-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rui%20Faria%20says%20Jos%C3%A9%20Mourinho%27s%20sending%20off%20is%20%27part%20of%20the%20game%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Frui-faria-says-jose-mourinhos-send-off-is-part-of-the-game-video&media=>
Rui Faria says José Mourinho’s sending off is ‘part of the game’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/nov/27/rui-faria-says-jose-mourinhos-send-off-is-part-of-the-game-video>
For a man whose career has been built on a powerful obsession with winning, it 
is bizarre to see that his Premier League win percentage could not be more 
average. There have been 34 full-time managers employed in English football’s 
top division since the start of last season, and Mourinho is currently ranked 
at No17, exactly halfway down, in terms of regularity of victories. Middle of 
the road has never been his thing but here he is, slap bang in the land of the 
nothing special.

The man himself is not shy to remind anyone that he was the champion as 
recently as 18 months ago. But ever since reclaiming the Premier League title, 
his win percentage has dropped radically. The fact this takes in spells at two 
major clubs, with his Chelsea andManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> squads embellished 
with high-calibre talent, makes for a puzzling period in his managerial life. 
He has overseen only nine wins out of the 29 league games he has presided over 
during this and the last campaign.

His win percentage of 31.03% falls comfortably below the two highest ranked 
managers at the moment. Antonio Conte is leading the way at Chelsea with a 
whopping 76.92%, closely followed by Pep Guardiola. Arsène Wenger, Jürgen 
Klopp, Claudio Ranieri, Manuel Pellegrini and Louis van Gaal all come in at a 
win rate of between 50-55% – considerably higher than Mourinho.

Then there are a whole bunch of managers that would not normally be held in 
the kind of esteem Mourinho is used to, including a few who were turfed out of 
lesser-profile clubs like Francesco Guidolin and Quique Sánchez Flores.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fjose-mourinho-land-of-nothing-special-manchester-united%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad095b476e11082fdb86a2449a9aef5a8ae71302%2F0_220_2108_1265%2F2108.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jos%C3%A9%20Mourinho%20searching%20for%20a%20route%20out%20of%20the%20land%20of%20nothing%20special%20%7C%20Amy%20Lawrence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fjose-mourinho-land-of-nothing-special-manchester-united%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jos%C3%A9%20Mourinho%20searching%20for%20a%20route%20out%20of%20the%20land%20of%20nothing%20special%20%7C%20Amy%20Lawrence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fjose-mourinho-land-of-nothing-special-manchester-united%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad095b476e11082fdb86a2449a9aef5a8ae71302%2F0_220_2108_1265%2F2108.jpg>
 Henrikh Mkhitaryan and Anthony Martial impressed against West Ham. Photograph: 
Tom Purslow/Man Utd via Getty Images 
It is instructive to look at the teams Mourinho has beaten in the league 
during this time: Aston Villa and Norwich City (both relegated last season), 
West Bromwich Albion, Southampton, Bournemouth and this season’s struggling 
Leicester City (all around mid-table), Hull City and Swansea City (gasping for 
air at the bottom of the league) and Arsenal (invariably a fixture he could 
regard as pretty close to a banker). It has been too long since he has emerged 
triumphant from one of the higher-octane Premier League challenges.

If the crumbling of his Chelsea standing was a shock to the system, it cannot 
help that he has not immediately been able to bounce back and reclaim some of 
the winning mentality associated with the bulk of his trophy-laden CV. It 
allows the critics to begin to wonder if the dip is not necessarily temporary, 
and for the manager’s own dark mood to simmer. He needs the fix that only a 
string of wins can bring. What makes it all the more frustrating is the sense 
that his United team are not a million miles away from finding a clearer rhythm.

A trip to an out-of-sorts Everton on Sunday is next on United’s agenda and it 
will be fascinating to see the kind of team Mourinho selects. His sparse use of 
Martial and Mkhitaryan in the attacking department has been bewildering. On 
their game,as they relished demonstrating with panache in midweek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/30/manchester-united-west-ham-united-efl-cup-match-report>
, they possess qualities United have missed badly at times this season.

Was the brio against West Ham, as they combined their quick-thinking artistry 
to dovetail with Zlatan Ibrahimovic and Wayne Rooney, the start of something 
new? Are the shackles falling away? Is the balance and clinical edge the team 
has been missing sharpening at last?

Flashes of encouragement are one thing. What Mourinho dearly needs is 
something more substantial and more consistent. Not much less than a needed win 
at Goodison Park will do.
 