
It was a long wait. Mary Aguti, 48, is just one of 30 members of the 
Emorikikinos village savings and loans association (VSLA), who lost their 
savings worth Ushs 4.2m (£1,200) tothugs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/katine/2009/oct/23/machete-attack-vsla-charges?/> 
after their treasurer, Mary Kokoi, and her daughter were attacked at home with 
a machete androbbed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/katine/2009/oct/16/money-stolen-machete-attack/> 
in October last year. But last monthmoney pledged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/katine/2009/nov/17/vsla-stolen-money/> to replace 
their loss was at last delivered to the group.

I was visiting Aguti, a widow with seven chdildren, at her home in Olochoi 
village to find out just how she was faring now she could once again access her 
hard-earned savings. I realised while travelling through thickets on almost 
non-existent roads to Aguti's home how difficult the wait must have been.

As soon as I arrived, I could not help noticing how happy she was. "Eyalama 
awanyun [I am happy to see you]," was her greeting to me in her local language.

She immediately started thanking African Medical Research Foundation (Amref) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/katine/amref/>, Barclays Bank and the Guardian, 
supporting partners in theKatine community development project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/katine/2008/sep/23/background.news/>, in 
north-eastern Uganda, for giving the savings group back what they thought had 
been lost. "We never thought this could actually happen. At first, when we 
received information that you [Guardian and Barclays Bank] were going to help 
us replace our savings, some of us were in doubt.

"The doubt almost became real when Amref kept giving us promises after promises
 <https://www.theguardian.com/katine/2010/sep/14/katine-savings-funding-delays/>
. Our fears were only cleared last month when Amref showed us half of the 
money, then eventually the whole of it," said Aguti with a broad smile.

She told me how receiving the money had turned her dreams into reality; she 
had immediately gone out to buy a cow to provide her grandchildren with milk.

In Teso, a family without a cow for milk and oxen for ploughing is considered 
very needy. But now, she said, the cow would next year enable her to provide 
her family with a balanced diet since she would have milk for her family and be 
able to sell the surplus to meet her basic needs.

"As soon as I received my share of the money, I decided to send my son to 
Katine market to buy a cow. He did not find one because the cost was too high," 
she said. "Later, I sent him to Arapai market where he bought one at Ushs 200, 
000 [£57].

"I did not want to wait because anything could again happen to the money. I 
still have memories of how I cried and prayed to God to return that money. So 
it was an opportunity fully utilised," Aguti actually received Ushs 185,000 
(£53) but added more Ushs 15,000 (£4) to acquire the calf.

Aguti is not the only one excited about the replaced funds. According to James 
Edaru, secretary of the Emorikikinos farmers' group, most of the group members 
have put their cash to proper use. While some have bought cows and bulls, 
others have bought iron sheets and plots or gone for medical attention that 
they not been able to afford before.

"For example, Apolot Antasia bought a bull, Aguti Mary bought a cow, Igwame 
Immaculate took her children to school, Asio Immaculate bought a bull, 
Victorina Arayo bought six bags of cement and wire mesh to construct her house, 
while I'm going to make bricks because I want to build a house for my 
children," he said.

Edaru, too, is full of praise for the way Allan Rusbridger, Guardian's chief 
in Editor, and John Varley, chief executive officer of Barclays Bank, fulfilled 
their promise during a visit to Katine made weeks after the robbery to make 
good their loss.
 