
Central Coast Mariners

Just take a look at the expression on Nick Montgomery’s face. A dopey 
half-grin, shoulders back, rabbit-in-the-headlights eyes, the poor bloke knows 
he’s on a hiding to nothing. To his left, Liam Reddy look incredulous. And who 
can blame them – the new Central Coast Mariners kit they’re modelling is a true 
shocker. A garish palm tree rises across the front, just below the Masterfoods 
sponsor. “The new playing kit identifies commitment to the Central Coast whilst 
matching the entertaining and innovative mantra with a bright recognisable 
kit,” read the club’s press release. The fans said otherwise, and for a day 
those bored at work photoshopped all sorts of humorous alternatives onto the 
jersey, most notablySideshow Bob’s head 
<https://twitter.com/Dougiejam/status/628543237175664640>.

#CCMFC (@CCMariners) 
NEWS | #CCMFC <https://twitter.com/hashtag/CCMFC?src=hash> made a bold 
statement today in revealing their new@ALeague <https://twitter.com/ALeague> 
2015/16 kit GALLERY:http://t.co/TwHKayPfcd <http://t.co/TwHKayPfcd> 
pic.twitter.com/QDWRbavWwa <http://t.co/QDWRbavWwa>
 <https://twitter.com/CCMariners/status/628389430391373824> August 4, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/CCMariners/status/628389430391373824> 
 Mariners chief executive Shaun Mielekamp said the palm tree was “a call 
nationally to all sports fans to pencil in a visit to Central Coast Stadium 
where there are water views from every seat and a match day experience you will 
never forget”. This much is true – water views are a inviting feature of 
Central Coast Stadium, and just as well, considering the absolute trash the 
Mariners produced on the field last season. Strangely, Mielekamp also insisted 
the yellow was a nod to cancer charities, which seems contrived considering 
yellow is hardly a new feature of the jersey. Worst of all, however, is the 
thought that this kit was the fruit of a “collaborative process” which included 
the members.

Melbourne Knights

 In 2007 Melbourne Knights, formerly Croatia, had been out of the national 
league for two seasons, and were searching for a way back in. The then chairman 
Matt Tomas, decided the club needed a bold kit to reflect their bold ambitions. 
So they got a new kit manufacturer, Hummel, who produced a garish red, blue and 
white camouflage jersey with white shorts and socks. The away kit was a 
fetching grey camo number.

The Joy of Six: Australian on-air arguments | Russell Jackson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jun/25/the-joy-of-six-australian-on-air-arguments>
Camouflage has made an appearance in the jerseys of other football codes as 
well, notably amongst rugby league teams on Anzac Day. The fans, 
unsurprisingly, were not happy. Not just because the offending jerseys looked 
terrible, but because the club has always played in red jerseys, white shorts 
and blue socks, the colours of Croatia. This was the first departure from that 
tradition, and according to one committee member from the time, the fans “lost 
their shit” and after just a few games the kits had to be re-made (hence the 
dearth of photographic evidence available). The camo stayed, but was diluted 
somewhat with different shades of red. The white shorts and blue socks returned.

It was as if the spirit of the nineties had re-emerged in the tiny 
microclimate of Sunshine North in Melbourne’s western suburbs. All they needed 
to complete the look was to commission a range of Melbourne Knights-branded 
bucket-hats and double denim tracksuits. In keeping with the nineties 
aesthetic, Knights made an audacious play to get back in the national league 
not long after. When Adelaide United owner Nick Bianco handed back the licence 
in 2009, Tomas confirmed that Knights would buy the licence and get some of the 
former National Soccer League clubs to act as feeder clubs. Of course, it never 
happened, but the Knights camo kit goes down as one of the more zany moments in 
the club’s history.

Collingwood Warriors

In 1989, after years of debate, the NSL finally switched its season from 
winter to summer. The shift allowed football some breathing space against the 
rival codes of rugby league and Australian rules, and established a tradition 
which continues today. By the mid-nineties, the other codes began to see the 
value in football using their grounds in their off-season, and in 1996 
Collingwood announced that they would enter a team in the NSL. Football 
officials were rapt. “The challenge for us has been to take soccer into the 
mainstream of Australian society,” announced Soccer Australia chairman David 
Hill. “And what better way to do it – particularly in a city like Melbourne 
where Aussie rules is religion – than to get the Aussie rules teams to put 
teams into our national soccer league.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fjoy-of-six-australian-football-kits%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feae44363f1914c2efa8bee27a536bd8faa30ebfd%2F0_0_2047_1557%2F2047.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20Australian%20football%20kits%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fjoy-of-six-australian-football-kits%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20Australian%20football%20kits%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fjoy-of-six-australian-football-kits%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feae44363f1914c2efa8bee27a536bd8faa30ebfd%2F0_0_2047_1557%2F2047.jpg>
 Kimon Taliadoros, looking every bit a product of the mid-nineties in his 
Collingwood shirt. Photograph: Sean Garnsworthy/Getty Images 
 The plan was interrupted however, when Collingwood formed a partnership with 
Heidelberg Warriors, a side that had been pushed out of the NSL in 1995. 
Established as Alexander the Great in the mid-fifties, Heidelberg were backed 
by Greek-Australians. Before long there were disagreements amongst the 
management, usually split between the Australian rules people and the football 
people. The kit was reflective of an uneasy relationship: the iconic black and 
white stripes of Collingwood were interrupted by flashes of Heidelberg yellow. 
Besides the ham-fisted design, the yellow served as a reminder that the club 
was simply Heidelberg in disguise, and after a promising beginning at Victoria 
Park, Collingwood Warriors died an ignoble death. They may have only lasted one 
season, but they managed to deliver one of the more horrible kits in Australian 
sporting history. Sports fans will always look back at this cross-code 
experiment with a wince.

Socceroos 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQvxhzsum3cg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQvxhzsum3cg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQvxhzsum3cg&media=>
They say true genius is never truly appreciated until it’s gone. Perhaps the 
same could be said for the Socceroos kit from the early nineties – reviled in 
its time but hailed by football hipsters today. The jersey was a unholy medley 
of jagged yellow and green flashes, with an oversized Australian coat of arms 
on the left breast. The dark green shorts had a fetching panel of spew down 
either side.


 Ned Zelic scored that brilliant goal against the Netherlands with the jersey 
on his back. Graham Arnold wore it with an afro and moustache; Kevin Muscat 
looked fetching in it with his flowing mullet, but nobody wore it better than 
Robbie Slater – the Socceroos spew and his ginger flat-top is Australian men’s 
fashion at its finest.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fjoy-of-six-australian-football-kits%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb47f2dcdc40be11e65ee4de225317d566c2649c%2F0_0_2084_3239%2F2084.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20Australian%20football%20kits%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fjoy-of-six-australian-football-kits%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20Australian%20football%20kits%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fjoy-of-six-australian-football-kits%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb47f2dcdc40be11e65ee4de225317d566c2649c%2F0_0_2084_3239%2F2084.jpg>
 It’s Robbie Slater again, still not looking too bothered by the atrocity he’s 
wearing. Photograph: Getty Images 
 In a previous column, I described the kit as a cross between a Les Patterson 
Hawaiian shirt and an acid-trip in a wattle field. Produced by a little known 
kit provider, the rumour is that a notable powerbroker from the Australian 
Soccer Federation was close to that manufacturer. But whatever the politics at 
play, it is a true classic.

South Melbourne

 When South Melbourne qualified for the Club World Cup in 2000, it was a 
financial saviour for the club. Just by showing up in Brazil, the club pulled 
an appearance fee of $3.8 million, every penny of which they badly needed. In 
Australia, the press had a field day with the David and Goliath story of a 
bunch of part-time footballers coming up against the might of Manchester 
United. In England, they weren’t so kind. “As for the Oceania representatives, 
South Melbourne, the mind boggles,” wrote Brian Glanville for theSunday Times. 
“There are probably more than 50 European or South American teams that could 
comfortably see them off and their coach, Ange Postecoglu (sic), has been 
guilty of some tub-thumping of the grandest order, claiming that his team have 
a real opportunity of progressing in the competition.”

Unperturbed by the criticism, South went on an ambitious sponsorship drive. 
Incredibly, they tried to cram six sponsors on the front of their jersey. Fair 
enough, in one sense: it was a once in a lifetime opportunity for the club to 
rake in the sponsorship dollars. But not only did it make their kit look like a 
patchwork quilt, it was thoroughly against the rules of Fifa. At the last 
minute South had to scramble around for a new kit from a Brazilian supplier, 
and naturally this didn’t go down well with their original kit supplier, Puma. 
The embarrassing gaffe was followed by three losses, each played in a rather 
plain blue number. The club was welcomed home by the tax office, who had a few 
questions about the player bonuses. But that is a story for another day…
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fjoy-of-six-australian-football-kits%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49035117ed9c614696f25fe5f55efc9ec89adbf3%2F0_0_3072_2064%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20Australian%20football%20kits%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fjoy-of-six-australian-football-kits%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20Australian%20football%20kits%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fjoy-of-six-australian-football-kits%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49035117ed9c614696f25fe5f55efc9ec89adbf3%2F0_0_3072_2064%2F3072.jpg>
 The South Melbourne players sport the rather uninspired all-blue kit with just 
one sponsor on the front of the shirts. Photograph: Shaun Botterill/Getty Images
Reebok’s A-League monopoly

The autocratic rules of the A-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> have been a regular gripe of 
almost every Australian club member, volunteer or member of staff. After 
decades of clubs and state bodies holding power over the national federation, 
FFA took a historic opportunity to put them back in their place in the 
revolution of 2004. Conformity subsequently characterised the A-League’s first 
decade – a salary cap to artificially equalise the competition, peculiar 
restrictions on club names and a closed-shop competition to ensure stability 
are just a few of these measures.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fjoy-of-six-australian-football-kits%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12e71140faecc10010433582f7befde8c4d11af4%2F0_0_3000_2483%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20Australian%20football%20kits%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fjoy-of-six-australian-football-kits%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20Australian%20football%20kits%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fjoy-of-six-australian-football-kits%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12e71140faecc10010433582f7befde8c4d11af4%2F0_0_3000_2483%2F3000.jpg>
 Same but different. Jacob Timpano of Sydney and Stewart Petrie of the Mariners 
during the 2006 grand final. Photograph: Mark Nolan/Getty Images 
But who remembers the Reebok tyranny of 2005-2011, when every A-League strip 
was a one-size-fits-all template? The Reebok kits were depressingly monotonous, 
although some of the first season kits were worse than others – Queensland 
Roar, for example, decided to combine orange, royal blue and maroon.

In the grand final in 2005, Central Coast Mariners and Sydney FC turned out in 
essentially the same kit, distinguishable from one another only by the colour 
scheme. Both had the same, dark blue over-the-left-shoulder design, and the 
same little coloured ‘v’ at the neck. The league-wide ‘official uniform 
supplier’ made the competition appear plastic, and was of great chagrin to fans 
hoping to see their new clubs develop an independent identity.

That being said, in light of the Central Coast Mariners latest effort, perhaps 
democracy doesn’t work after all.
 