



The almost 17 years Juliet Lyon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/12/juliet-lyon-now-right-time-to-leave-prison-reform-trust>
 spent as director of thePrison Reform Trust 
<http://www.prisonreformtrust.org.uk/> before stepping down in July was good 
preparation for her new role as chair of the Independent Advisory Panel on 
Deaths in Custody (IAP). With figures last month showing violence and death in 
English and Welsh prisons at anall-time high 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/21/prison-violence-at-wholly-unacceptable-level-ombudsman-finds>
, the need for the IAP has probably never been greater. At the PRT Lyon often 
came into contact with bereaved families whose loved ones had died while in the 
care of the state. Although some were homicides, most were self-inflicted.

As a long-term prisoner, I was frequently on wings and landings when fellow 
prisoners took their own lives. Myfirst-ever article 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/1998/jan/14/guardiansocietysupplement> for 
the Guardian in 1998 was about the impact that such deaths have. There were 
1,247 prison suicides in the 20 years I served before my release in 2004, 
according to figures from the charityInquest <http://www.inquest.org.uk/>.

Why I’m leaving the Prison Reform Trust now | Juliet Lyon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/12/juliet-lyon-now-right-time-to-leave-prison-reform-trust>
These days death is even more prevalent in our prisons. In the 12 months to 
June this year there were321 prison fatalities 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/543284/safety-in-custody-bulletin.pdf>
. With 74 more than during the same period the previous year, it was the 
highest toll ever recorded in England and Wales.Of these, 105 were 
self-inflicted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/28/suicides-and-assaults-in-prisons-in-england-and-wales-at-all-time-high>
, 186 were recorded as death from natural causes, (although since the average 
age in the case of such deaths is 56 it suggests that these might not be just 
“natural”) – and at least five were prisoner-on-prisoner killings. Twenty-five 
other deaths are still waiting to be classified. As well as the record deaths, 
last year there were on average 160 cell fires a month, more than 34,000 
instances of self-harm and an almost trebling of incidents involving violence.

So how does the IAP plan to bring about a reduction in deaths? Lyon says: “A 
priority is to learn from bereaved families and people who have attempted 
suicide in custody and survived.” She says that just before we met she spoke to 
a mother whose son had been killed in prison. “If the state deprives you of 
your liberty, the one thing it has an obligation to do is to keep you safe. The 
high rate of deaths currently indicate that something is going terribly wrong.”

The IAP, an independent arms-length body, set up in 2008 on the recommendation 
of theFulton review 
<http://iapdeathsincustody.independent.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2010/02/The-Fulton-Report-2008.pdf>
 into deaths in custody advises ministers from the Home Office, the Department 
of Health and the Ministry of Justice. Its remit is to “act as the primary 
source of independent advice to ministers and service leaders on measures to 
reduce the number and rate of deaths in custody”.

While deaths in police and immigration custody have remained constant 
<http://iapdeathsincustody.independent.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/IAP-End-of-Term-Report-2016.pdf>
 and decreased in the case of those detained under the Mental Health Act the 
increase in prison deaths is a particular concern. “What you can see from the 
figures,” says Lyon, “is that the work the Prison Service did from about 2007 
on safer custody was pretty effective. There was an intense concentration on 
how to make prison safer, particularly on how to reduce suicide. Safer custody 
teams in all prisons, working closely with the Samaritans and 
Samaritans-trained ‘prisoner listeners’ led to quite a drop in self-inflicted 
deaths.

“Few people know that almost 2,000 prisoners, trained by local Samaritans, now 
work day and night in almost every prison across England, Scotland and Wales to 
support people in need. Nothing else does as much to show how much 
responsibility and care people in prison can shoulder and to save countless 
lives.”

The IAP, she says, will focus on clusters of deaths in particular prisons and 
look at how to reduce high numbers of natural deaths in custody. “We’ll also be 
briefing ministers on evidence and solutions to the distressing rise in the 
deaths of women in prison, 11 in the year to June 2016 compared to one death 
the year before – and on the particular vulnerability of people still serving 
the long-abolished indeterminate sentence for public protection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2012/sep/18/strasbourg-judges-indeterminate-sentences-unlawful>
 (IPP). We have to really be prepared to work across departments to find 
solutions, but we can set and monitor guidelines.”

The justice secretary Liz Truss has declared very publicly that she wants to 
makeprison safety 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201617/cmselect/cmjust/647/64702.htm>
 her priority and when she was home secretary, Theresa May gave a speech 
supporting the joint PRT and Women’s InstituteCare not Custody 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/care-not-custody-speech> campaign to 
stop vulnerable people ending up in police or prison cells. But prison staff 
cuts, the massive increase in the use of new psychoactive substances – 
so-called “legal highs” – and general overcrowding has meant that prison 
regimes have become more and more limited.

Deaths and self-harm in prison rise sharply
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/28/prison-deaths-self-harm-figures-rise>
Does she agree with the Samaritans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/19/samaritans-urges-action-on-prison-staffing-after-sharp-rise-in-suicides>
 that the cuts are largely responsible for the rise in prison deaths? “The 
causes are complex,” she says, “but sucking hope out of the system has taken a 
terrible toll. Research and best practice show that good staff-prisoner 
relations, personal officer work, information-sharing with other disciplines, 
mental healthcare and constructive regimes with time out of cell, contact with 
family and friends and something to work towards all make a positive 
difference.”

She says she welcomes the opportunity and the responsibility to help reduce 
deaths in custody. “When someone takes their own life it is hard to describe, 
or even imagine, the despair that has led to it or the pain of loved ones left 
behind. If you talk to anyone charged with the care of people who are detained, 
they never forget a death in custody – it’s like swallowing a stone that never 
goes away.” She says she had lots of misgivings about giving an interview so 
early in her new role.

“But as long as it goes beyond a day in the papers and serves as a firm 
reminder of the state’s duty to protect life and the pressing need to make 
prisons safer then it will be worth it.”

Curriculum vitae

Age 66.

Lives North London.

Family Married, two children.

Education Exeter University (English and drama degree); Institute of Education 
(Rights MA).

Career 2000-16: director, Prison Reform Trust; 1990-2000: associate director, 
Trust for the Study of Adolescence; 1980-90: regional manager, Richmond 
Fellowship; 1976-79: head of community education, Court Fields school, 
Somerset; 1975-76: teacher in charge, Dryden Clinic Exe Vale; 1971-75; social 
services foster parent, Devon and Camden; 1971-72: research assistant, Schools 
Council.

Public life Chair, Independent Advisory Panel on Deaths in Custody; visiting 
professor, Birkbeck, University of London; CBE.

Interests Gardening, beekeeping.
 