 The distinguished social anthropologist and hispanicist Julian Pitt-Rivers, 
who has died aged 82, belonged to that generation of Oxford scholars who opened 
a new chapter in British social anthropology by studying the sovereign 
societies of the Mediterranean littoral - in his case the Andalucian village of 
Grazelema - rather than the indigenous peoples of the British empire.
He was born in London to a wealthy family with academic and military 
traditions. His great-grandfather was Lt Gen Augustus Henry Lane Fox 
Pitt-Rivers, a pioneer in the study of material culture and founder of the 
Pitt-Rivers museum at Oxford.

After Eton, Julian studied at the University of Grenoble, and in Paris, before 
enrolling at Oxford, where his education was interrupted by the outbreak of the 
second world war. He served in north Africa and Europe, ending the war with the 
rank of captain. After a spell as instructor to the future King Faisal of Iraq, 
in Baghdad, he returned to Oxford to complete his studies.

Between 1949 and 1952, Julian did fieldwork in Grazalema. It was not an easy 
time for such work, as Spain was still recovering from civil war. Irregular 
Republican forces operated in the Andalucian countryside, and landed gentlemen 
visited their estates under armed police escort. Officials of the Franco regime 
were suspicious of research, and reluctant to give information.Anthropology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/anthropology> did not exist in Spanish 
universities; in a society divided by fierce antagonisms of region and class, 
any empathetic study of a region, or of the poor, could be subversive.

The subject was regarded as a private pursuit of gentleman scholars, the most 
eminent of whom was Julio Caro Baroja. Undeterred, Julian bought a smallholding 
in the country and invited Caro Baroja to visit him. Julian received his 
doctorate in 1953. His book, People Of The Sierra, appeared the following year 
- and was dedicated to Caro Baroja.

As an account of a way of life, it was very much of its time and place, and, 
as such, is an important historical document. But it also had a lasting effect 
as a model community study, justly admired for expressing subtle analysis in 
clear language. On the strength of it, in 1956-57 Julian was invited to the 
Berkeley campus of the University of California as a visiting assistant 
professor. This was followed by a visiting professorship at the University of 
Chicago, on a half-yearly basis from 1957-69. From 1960-62, he also co-directed 
the university's Chiapas project in Mexico and undertook extensive fieldwork in 
central and south America.

Intermittently, he also did fieldwork in France, and, from 1964-71, took up a 
second part-time post at l'Ecole pratique des hautes études (l'EPHE) of the 
University of Paris. During this period, he was, with John Perisitianya, a key 
figure in a series of international conferences on the anthropology of the 
Mediterranean that, in effect, set the agenda for the subject for more than a 
decade.

Julian was appointed professor of anthropology at the London School of 
Economics in 1971, though he maintained his home in France. In 1977, he 
returned definitively to the country, first to a post in Aix-en-Provence, then 
Paris Nanterre, then to the chaire d'ethnologie religieuse de l'Europe at 
l'EPHE, where he stayed until retirement in 1986.

In a series of articles, he made seminal contributions to developing arguments 
on honour, gender, spiritual and fictive kinship, friendship and 
patron-clientage, and myth and ritual, addressing phenomena as diverse as race, 
sorcery, mana, grace, hospitality, marriage by capture and bullfighting. 
Indeed, on the last, he wrote a report to the European parliament. He delivered 
the Marret lecture at Oxford in 1988 and the Radcliffe-Brown lecture at the 
British Academy in 1995.

It was, however, in Spain that Julian was most honoured. There, his fieldwork 
at Grazalema is widely recognised as having marked the beginning of modern 
social anthropology in the country. In 1989, the Fundacion Machado in Seville 
organised an Homenaje Andaluz to him and his work, and dedicated a volume of 
their journal to articles about him. In 1996, the Spanish government made him a 
knight commander in one of their most prestigious orders, awarding him the 
Encomienda de Isabel la Catolica.

For later generations of anthropologists, the name Pitt-Rivers has been almost 
synonymous with the anthropology of Spain. To those of us who followed him into 
the field in Andalucia, Julian was friendly and unselfish, prepared to discuss 
theory, to offer fieldwork advice, to facilitate meetings with key people, or 
simply to chat over drinks.

An urbane and erudite companion, he also had a feel for the countryside. He 
was as likely to talk about wild irises in the mountains of Andalucia as about 
village anarchists, about the state of crops in the fields as about honour. The 
boot of his car was as likely to be full of prunes from his French estate as of 
academic papers and books.

In many ways, his orientation was close to that of his Spanish mentor, Caro 
Baroja, who once remarked to me that he did not understand why Julian took 
university posts when they only interfered with his real work. Research and 
scholarship remained his abiding concerns. He also took a keen interest in the 
Pitt-Rivers museum, promoting relations between his family and the institution, 
and acting as a patron of the Friends of the Museum.

He is survived by his third wife, Françoise. 

 Julian Alfred Pitt-Rivers, anthropologist, born March 16 1919; died August 
12 2001
 