
Netflix <https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> will be alive with the 
sound of music next year with a new series starring Julie Andrews as the head 
of a stage school.

Millions of children learned how to sing through her rendition of the song 
Doh-Re-Mi and now Andrews is aiming to teach a new generation about all the 
different areas of the performing arts in a show she has created with her 
daughter and The Muppets owners the Jim Henson Company.

Julie’s Greenroom features Andrews overseeing a cast of puppet children as 
they create a show and learn about disciplines ranging from dance to mime, 
circus acts to singing and acting – helped by star guests including Alec 
Baldwin, Carol Burnett, Josh Groban and Tituss Burgess.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dza1p24mXDVE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dza1p24mXDVE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dza1p24mXDVE&media=>
 Netflix announcement of Julie’s Greenroom 
Andrews will play Ms Julie, the director of the Wellspring Centre for the 
Performing Arts and give workshops to the puppet children in the school’s 
theatre and advice backstage in the “greenroom”, helped by her assistant Gus, 
played by Giullian Gioiello.

The diverse cast of artistic puppets who appear in the show are called the 
“Greenies,” and have been created by the renowned Jim Henson’s Creature Shop.

Aimed at pre-school children, Julie’s Greenroom will undoubtedly also rekindle 
some of the favourite things from their parents’ own early television memories 
such as stage school show Fame and The Muppets.

Andrews said she has always wanted to make a show about all the elements of 
the performing arts.

“This project represents the fulfilment of a long held dream to educate 
children about the wonder of the arts. I am thrilled to be partnering with my 
daughter and long time coauthor, Emma, to bring this show to life along with 
our co-creator, Judy Rothman-Rofė. We could not be more honoured to be working 
with the extraordinary Jim Henson Company. We are equally delighted to be 
premiering as a Netflix original production.”

“This show is all about awakening children’s interest in the performing arts 
while introducing a new era of puppets to the viewers,” said Netflix director 
of global kids content Andy Yeatman. “It’s been an incredible treat to work 
with Julie on this project.”

“The best of the best have joined together to bring Julie’s Greenroom to 
Netflix,” said Lisa Henson, chief executive of the Jim Henson Company. “Our 
award-winning director, Tony-nominated puppeteers, Broadway composer, and 
accomplished guest artists, led by the incomparable Julie Andrews, together 
will inspire kids to explore, appreciate and celebrate all forms of performing 
arts.”

Julie’s Greenroom will air worldwide on Netflix in early 2017 and is part of 
the global streaming service’s strategy to create more family viewing for its 
more than 81 million subscribers.
 