
On Sunday night, the Grey’s Anatomy actor and social justice activist Jesse 
Williams 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=Jesse+Williams&ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Esearch>
 was honored with a humanitarian award at theBET awards 
<http://www.bet.com/shows/bet-awards.html>. His acceptance speech, in which he 
addressed centuries of systemic racism, cultural appropriation and 
exploitation, was clear, critical and powerful. It excoriated the construction 
called whiteness, which has engaged in “ghettoizing and demeaning our creations 
then stealing them, gentrifying our genius and then trying us on like costumes 
before discarding our bodies like rinds of strange fruit”.
Uche Jombo Rodriguez (@uchejombo) 
#jessewilliams <https://twitter.com/hashtag/jessewilliams?src=hash>

Best speech 🔥🔥🔥🔥🔥https://t.co/3mJekMGp5I <https://t.co/3mJekMGp5I>
 <https://twitter.com/uchejombo/status/747324131285172224> June 27, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/uchejombo/status/747324131285172224> 
Millions of black people tweeted in solidarity – moved by the sense of 
urgency, the lucid and remarkable truth of it.Justin Timberlake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/justin-timberlake> tweeted too. He was, he 
told his 55.6m followers, “inspired” by the speech. This didn’t go over well. 
The dragging began swiftly, from followers who asked about his own 
appropriations of black culture, and particularly his part in the 2004 Super 
Bowl show, in which Janet Jackson was hung out to dry after a stunt in which 
Timberlake exposed her breast – the famous “wardrobe malfunction”.

BET awards diary: searing political rhetoric and bloated back-slapping
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jun/27/bet-awards-beyonce-prince-tribute-political-rhetoric>
Ernest Owens <http://ernestowens.com/>, the black writer, was the first to 
call Timberlake out on Twitter. The singer and actor responded: “Oh, you sweet 
soul. The more you realize that we are the same, the more we can have a 
conversation. Bye.” (On Monday morning,Timberlake apologized 
<http://www.nme.com/news/justin-timberlake/94609>, claiming his tweet was 
misinterpreted.)
Justin Timberlake (@jtimberlake) 
Oh, you sweet soul. The more you realize that we are the same, the more we can 
have a conversation.

Bye. https://t.co/FeTmGLOKVc <https://t.co/FeTmGLOKVc>
 <https://twitter.com/jtimberlake/status/747276674073395200> June 27, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/jtimberlake/status/747276674073395200> 
Now that we are talking about “whiteness” as a real thing – an identity, a 
privilege, the American default – we are flush with examples of what it can 
look like, and how not to do it. There are, of course, the obvious and the 
banal – Trump supporters – but then there are those who think they are so down, 
so woke, that they can come along with “we are all one” after a brilliant black 
celebrity activist delivers a revolutionary speech at an award show for black 
excellence and achievement. We are not all one, Justin Timberlake, and if, as 
you tweeted following Jesse Williams’ radically spot-on speech about the 
centuries of whiteness using and abusing and stealing and co-opting blackness 
at the BET awards last night, you “really do feel we are all one”, then you 
should really stop feeling that way.

Perhaps even more offensive than such a tone-deaf remark from a white man 
whose fame has come from emulating black culture is the casual arrogance, the 
utterly striking condescension of his initial dismissal of Owens. Because it’s 
up to us, the black folks, to read the memo written by white people telling us 
that we are all equal so that we can show up for the meeting and take careful 
notes while you show us how to be black? The very point that Williams was 
making with such resounding clarity was: we are not here for your memos 
anymore. We are here for you to read our memos now.

BET awards 2016: Prince tributes and a show-stopper from Beyoncé – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2016/jun/27/bet-awards-2016-beyonce-prince-tributes-jesse-williams-in-pictures>
“Freedom is always coming in the hereafter, but, you know what, though? The 
hereafter is a hustle. And let’s get a couple of things straight. Just a little 
side note: the burden of the brutalized is not to comfort the bystander. That’s 
not our job, stop with all that … We’ve been floating this country on credit 
for centuries, and we’re done watching and waiting while this invention called 
whiteness uses and abuses us, burying black people out of sight and out of 
mind, while extracting our culture, our dollars, our entertainment like oil, 
black gold.”

It doesn’t really get clearer than Williams’s words. Unless you are so deep 
inside the invention of your whiteness – the delusion of your grandeur, your 
Michael Jackson-influenced dance moves, your Jay Z collaborations, your 
D’Angelo inspired music – that you are unable to see how complicit you are, how 
backward and misguided and violent it is to suggest you are doing us a favor by 
saying “we are all one”. That delusion serves only you, and has been serving – 
and saving – you for years. When Williams said, “Now this is also in particular 
for the black women, in particular, who have spent their lifetimes dedicated to 
nurturing everyone before themselves. We can and will do better for you,” he 
meant black women like Janet Jackson, whose talent and body Timberlake 
exploited when he tore off a piece of her costume to reveal her bare nipple.

The sad truth is that whiteness isn’t really all that much. When you take away 
the appropriation, the racism, the exploitation – what’s left? It’s been a long 
time coming, but we shall not be moved.
 