
When Antonin Scalia was nominated to the US supreme court by President Ronald 
Reagan in 1986, the first Italian-American to serve on the court was 
unanimously confirmed by the Senate 
<http://www.senate.gov/pagelayout/reference/nominations/Nominations.htm>. It 
may well be a year – or several – before the Senate confirms anybody to replace 
Scalia, who died on Saturday at the age of 79. But that vote will almost 
assuredly not be unanimous, regardless of who the eventual nominee is: the 
politics of US supreme court appointments have become as polarized as the rest 
of American politics.

And Scalia himself played a significant role in that very polarization.

Scalia’s legacy will be extensively celebrated by conservatives – Marco Rubio 
spoke for orthodox Republican opinion when he called Scalia one of the greatest 
justices inUS supreme court <https://www.theguardian.com/law/us-supreme-court> 
history at Saturday’s Republican debate – and derided by liberals, many of whom 
wasted little time celebrating his demise and speculating how his absence on 
the court could affect future cases.

But what few political commentators note is that the foundation of his legal 
and political legacy does not so much stem from his majority opinions: landmark 
opinions, after all, tend to be written by either the chief justice or by the 
swing voters, like Justice Anthony Kennedy, and Scalia was neither. He 
certainly wrote numerous important opinions for the court (most notably the 
first opinion to find that the second amendment protected an individual right 
to bear arms in DC v Heller), but his reputation was largely based on his 
dissents and his remarks off the bench.

More than most US supreme court justices, Scalia often wrote to be quoted by a 
general audience – and that style was a mixed blessing for him. Scalia was 
capable of very fine legal writing but, particularly as he aged,his trademark 
blistering zingers were too often made to mask poorly crafted arguments 
<http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/2013/02/scalia-not-just-offensive-ludicrously-overrated>
. (Ina 2013 interview 
<http://nymag.com/news/features/antonin-scalia-2013-10/index6.html>, Scalia 
acknowledged his own concerns about his more recent opinions: “You always 
wonder whether you’re losing your grip and whether your current opinions are 
not as good as your old ones.”)

Scalia’s style of late reflected a justice who both strongly influenced the 
contemporary conservative movement and in turn was heavily influenced by it. At 
oral argument, he was capable of both devastating arguments and of sounding 
like a second-string conservative talkshow host. But, at his best, Scalia 
defended originalism and textualism with a style and wit that could be 
recognized even by those who fundamentally disagreed with him.


In his first decade on the court, Scalia even won some grudging admiration 
from liberals. Perhaps the high point of his intellectual influence across 
party lines was represented by his Tanner lectures at Princeton: they were 
published asa widely discussed book 
<http://press.princeton.edu/titles/5937.html>, complete with respectful 
response essays from prominent liberal scholars like Robert Dworkin and 
Laurence Tribe.

And it’s true that Scalia was not a strict Republican party-liner: there were 
some cases in which he was willing to make common cause with liberal justices 
out of principle. Inone dissent 
<http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/2014/11/great-moments-authoritarianism>, 
he (correctly) characterized the mandatory drug testing of border patrol 
officers as “a kind of immolation of privacy and human dignity in symbolic 
opposition to drug use”. He wrotea brilliant dissent 
<https://www.law.cornell.edu/supct/html/03-6696.ZD.html>, joined by Justice 
John Paul Stevens, upholding the habeas corpus rights of American citizens 
accused of terrorist activities. And in some fourth and sixth amendment cases,
he regularly voted in a civil libertarian direction 
<http://prospect.org/article/scalia-gets-it-right>.


Still, these cases were the exception rather than the rule as his tenure wore 
on, and Scalia increasingly became a partisan lightning rod in court circles 
and in political circles beyond the court.

No discussion of Scalia’s legacy, for instance, can ignore the 2000 decision 
Bush v Gore, in which the court issued an essentially lawless decision awarding 
the presidency to the Republican candidate. Scalia did not write the opinion of 
the court, but he wrote the more nakedly partisan opinion that preceded it and 
has defended it aggressively in public ever since 
<http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/2010/12/wholly-without-merit-the-10th-anniversary-of-bush-v-gore>
.


Bush v Gore is an extreme example but, despite Scalia’s self-presentation as 
America’s Last Honest Judge, Scalia hada way of ignoring his self-described 
legal principles if they conflicted with cherished policy goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/09/affirmative-action-back-before-supreme-court-arguments-against-make-no-sense>
. To take one particularly critical example, the joint dissent to the 2012 US 
supreme court opinion largely upholding the Affordable Care Act co-authored by 
Scalia was so flagrantly inconsistent with Scalia’s previous jurisprudence that
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg was able to quote his previous opinions at length 
in her concurrence 
<http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/2012/06/the-radicalism-and-hackery-of-the-health-care-cases-dissenters>
.

More importantly to some is that, had Scalia’s dissents ultimately shaped 
America, women would not have reproductive rights, the federal government could 
not effectively regulate healthcare, LGBT people would not have the right to 
engage in sexual intercourse without fear of arrest – let alone alone the right 
to marry – and states could single them out for legal disabilities. Women could 
be excluded from state educational institutions, public schools could teach 
creationism in science classes and prisoners could be assaulted by prison 
guards. And, in large part because of Scalia, in America today, the Voting 
Rights Act has been gutted, the rights of employees and consumers have been 
curtailed, Brown v Board is more likely to be used to stop integration than to 
promote it and moneyed interests increasingly dominate elections.


But however one evaluates his legacy, Scalia’s untimely death creates a huge 
political issue that could well become a constitutional crisis. The Senate 
majority leader, Mitch McConnell,has already made it clear 
<http://thehill.com/homenews/senate/269389-mcconnell-dont-replace-scalia-until-after-election>
 that the Senate will not confirm anyone President Obama nominates to replace 
Scalia. That means, for at least a year, the US supreme court will almost 
certainly operate with eight members and, in cases of a 4-4 split, lower-court 
opinions will stand, leading to escalating uncertainty about the state of the 
law.

If the 2016 elections result in the White House and Senate being held by the 
same party, this logjam will probably be broken fairly quickly. Attempts by a 
Senate minority to serially filibuster nominees would almost certainly result 
in the filibuster being eliminated (as it already has been for all other 
federal judicial appointments). But if the 2016 elections result in Hillary 
Clinton or Bernie Sanders facing a Republican Senate –as currently seems likely 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/articles/2016/01/11/calculating_democrats_chances_of_regaining_the_senate.html>
 – all bets are off.

There is no precedent for the Senate simply refusing to allow the president to 
fill a supreme court vacancy 
<http://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2016/2/13/10987236/antonin-scalia-replace>
, but in the current partisan climate a new precedent may well be created. And 
whether political pressure will compel the Senate to approve some presidential 
nominee is unclear.

The politics of replacing Scalia are difficult precisely because the 
consequences are so important. Depending on the results of the 2016 
presidential and senatorial elections, the next person allowed to vote on the 
US supreme court will be similar to either Elena Kagan or John Roberts – and 
the stakes for the reproductive freedom of women, climate change, voting 
rights, civil rights, the ability of the federal government to regulate the 
economy and civil liberties can hardly be overstated.

In a very real sense, the 2016 elections will ultimately result in the 
confirmation or repudiation of the jurisprudence for which Justice Scalia most 
prominently advocated. But he won’t be here to see it.
 