
Seen from above, Kabul looks like a city bursting at the seams. Cars clog the 
streets, negotiating for space with street vendors and donkey carts. At the 
fringes, crude houses pepper the hillsides and the valley along the river, 
spreading far beyond what a short time ago were the edges of the Afghan capital.

Over the past decade, Kabul has become one of the world’s fastest-growing 
cities. The toppling of the Taliban in 2001 and the hope of increased security 
and economic possibilities enticed many Afghans to move here: people displaced 
by fighting in the countryside, refugees returning from Pakistan and Iran, and 
hordes of labourers simply looking for a better life.

The city, however, has been unable to keep up with such fast-paced 
urbanisation, and seems incapable of providing jobs and services to sustain all 
its newcomers. Now, as foreign troops depart en masse and the attention of 
international donors wanes, they leave behind a city beset by criminality and 
economic malaise.

Yet despite being strained beyond capacity, Kabul seems to have lost none of 
its attraction to the people flocking here. Many have made long journeys from 
remote districts in the south of the country, where fighting between insurgents 
and government forces has uprooted thousands of families.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fdec%2F11%2Fkabul-afghanistan-fifth-fastest-growing-city-world-rapid-urbanisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F11%2F1418292000859%2F16c6dc66-9182-48d8-a7cc-c66a4ce5a11c-2060x1369.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kabul%20%E2%80%93%20the%20fifth%20fastest%20growing%20city%20in%20the%20world%20%E2%80%93%20is%20bursting%20at%20the%20seams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fdec%2F11%2Fkabul-afghanistan-fifth-fastest-growing-city-world-rapid-urbanisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kabul%20%E2%80%93%20the%20fifth%20fastest%20growing%20city%20in%20the%20world%20%E2%80%93%20is%20bursting%20at%20the%20seams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fdec%2F11%2Fkabul-afghanistan-fifth-fastest-growing-city-world-rapid-urbanisation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F11%2F1418292000859%2F16c6dc66-9182-48d8-a7cc-c66a4ce5a11c-2060x1369.jpeg>
 Vendors sit under an advertising billboard in Kabul. Photograph: Morteza 
Nikoubazl/Reuters 
Haji Ghafar and his family of 12 arrived in Kabul in October – fleeing 
violence in the Sangin district of Helmand Province, where Taliban militants 
were exploiting the void left by British and American troops. Now the family 
sleeps on bare ground in Charahi Qambar, a sprawling makeshift settlement along 
a main highway. With winter approaching, temperatures are dropping, and the 
family has no blankets and no wood to burn.


“I swear to God, for breakfast we had nothing, my family is very hungry,” 
Ghafar said. “I didn’t even manage to sleep for 30 minutes last night because 
the weather was so cold. My children were shaking from the cold.”

Ghafar’s family travelled three weeks to get to Kabul, across areas littered 
with landmines. During the journey, his parents and one of his sons were 
killed. “We had to leave their bodies behind, on the ground,” Ghafar said.

Though exact data is impossible to obtain (the last official census was 
conducted in 1979),Kabul is estimated to be the fifth fastest growing city in 
the world <http://www.citymayors.com/statistics/urban_growth1.html>, with a 
population which has ballooned from approximately 1.5 million in 2001 to around 
6 million people now. The rapid urbanisation is taking a heavy toll on a city 
originally designed for around 700,000 people. An estimated 70% of Kabul’s 
residents live in informal or illegal settlements.


“The situation is putting a strain on the existing infrastructure and 
resources – and makes it difficult to ensure security across Kabul,” said 
Prasant Naik, country director of the Norwegian Refugee Council, which provides 
legal counselling and shelter to displaced Afghans and is one of the largest 
humanitarian organisations inAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>.

A significant share of Kabul’s economy is driven by illicit businesses, such 
as the drug trade, facilitated by corruption. (According to arecent survey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/12/afghan-opium-crop-record-high-united-nations>
 by the UN Office on Drugs and Crime, Afghanistan’s opium cultivation hit 
record levels this year.)

With economic growth slowed from 9% in 2003 to 3.2% in 2014, jobs are scarce 
and the vast majority of Kabul’s workers are either self-employed or casual 
labourers.

One of them is Khan Mirza who lives in a container in Taimani Project. Five 
years after arriving in the capital from Samangan Province at the age of 14, he 
now runs a scrap metal co-operative of 20 young men. Collecting cans and trash 
for recycling, Mirza earns up to 10,000 afghanis (£110) a month – three times 
more than he made as a shepherd in his village, and enough to send some money 
home to his parents. Still, scrap metal collection was not what he came to 
Kabul to do.


“I would like to go to school and become an engineer or a doctor. I have many 
dreams but there are problems in front of me,” said Mirza, his forehead wrapped 
in a dusty black scarf and his upper lip coated with a finger-wide trail of 
dirt. “You can see my hands, my clothes, they are not clean at all.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fdec%2F11%2Fkabul-afghanistan-fifth-fastest-growing-city-world-rapid-urbanisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F11%2F1418292231735%2Fc635549e-2ce6-4dea-9845-d9ee55758879-2060x1371.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kabul%20%E2%80%93%20the%20fifth%20fastest%20growing%20city%20in%20the%20world%20%E2%80%93%20is%20bursting%20at%20the%20seams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fdec%2F11%2Fkabul-afghanistan-fifth-fastest-growing-city-world-rapid-urbanisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kabul%20%E2%80%93%20the%20fifth%20fastest%20growing%20city%20in%20the%20world%20%E2%80%93%20is%20bursting%20at%20the%20seams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fdec%2F11%2Fkabul-afghanistan-fifth-fastest-growing-city-world-rapid-urbanisation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F11%2F1418292231735%2Fc635549e-2ce6-4dea-9845-d9ee55758879-2060x1371.jpeg>
 The edges of Kabul are spreading ever outwards. Photograph: Daniel 
Berehulak/Getty Images 
Despite hardship experienced by day labourers and the lack of resources 
available for Kabul’s residents, the 2001 American-led invasion undeniably gave 
a boost to the city’s economy. What was then a ghost town ravaged by civil war 
is now a shabby but bustling metropolis. High-rise apartment blocks and glitzy, 
multi-storey wedding halls poke out of the sprawl of traditional single-floor 
buildings.


Kabul is evidently underdeveloped for a population of its size. Many streets 
remain unpaved or untended, as witnessed by the haze of beige dust engulfing 
the city. At the same time, construction sites continue to spring up on every 
street.Urbanisation <https://www.theguardian.com/cities/urbanisation> has 
pushed consumer and labour prices up, and has created a virtual housing bubble. 
In central Kabul, houses trade for hundreds of thousands of dollars.


“Kabul used to be an egalitarian city. Now you have a sort of nouveau riche 
class which is very much in your face,” said Jolyon Leslie, an architect who 
has worked on urban development in Afghanistan since the late 1980s. “In the 
city it is clear to ordinary people how egregiously wealthy some people are.”


The annual national income has increased from $210 (£134) per capita in 2004 
to $700 (£447) in 2013, according to World Bank figures. The fear, however, is 
that the economy will crash once international funding dries up.


More than 90% of Afghanistan’s GDP derives from foreign military spending and 
aid. But by year’s end, Nato will have scaled down its troop presence to 
approximately 12,000 – less than a 10th of the full-force peak of 140,000 three 
years ago.


The US military is a central employer of Afghan civilians, and has spurred the 
creation of logistics and construction businesses all over the country. As the 
number of foreign contractors dwindles, unemployment – currently estimated at 
around 40% – seems unlikely to improve. Companies providing foreign troops with 
everything from bottled water to repairs to uniforms now face a bleak economic 
future.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fdec%2F11%2Fkabul-afghanistan-fifth-fastest-growing-city-world-rapid-urbanisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F11%2F1418292099040%2F9c34fb6b-e7ca-4f21-b9b9-81c13a9c29a8-2060x1371.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kabul%20%E2%80%93%20the%20fifth%20fastest%20growing%20city%20in%20the%20world%20%E2%80%93%20is%20bursting%20at%20the%20seams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fdec%2F11%2Fkabul-afghanistan-fifth-fastest-growing-city-world-rapid-urbanisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kabul%20%E2%80%93%20the%20fifth%20fastest%20growing%20city%20in%20the%20world%20%E2%80%93%20is%20bursting%20at%20the%20seams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fdec%2F11%2Fkabul-afghanistan-fifth-fastest-growing-city-world-rapid-urbanisation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F11%2F1418292099040%2F9c34fb6b-e7ca-4f21-b9b9-81c13a9c29a8-2060x1371.jpeg>
 Shoppers in a downtown market area. Photograph: Shah Marai/AFP/Getty Images 
Kabul’s inability to absorb such large numbers of migrants is partly due to 
the former Taliban regime’s disregard for the city during its five-year rule to 
2001. However, more recent neglect for Kabul’s informal settlements has 
compounded its problems, creating fertile ground for crime and perhaps even 
insurgency, according to Susanne Schmeidl, an analyst who has spent 20 years 
researching forced migration in the country.


“We know from other contexts that unaddressed urban poor populations are a 
recipe for crime,” she said. Newly inaugurated president Ashraf Ghani has 
pledged to give property rights to Kabul’s informal settlers – and that would 
be an important first step, said Schmeidl. The Afghan government has treated 
displaced people and migrants as temporary residents, but it is highly unlikely 
that these people will go back, she said. The Afghan government should also 
“spend more money on apartments and less on poppy palaces,” Schmeidl said, 
referring to the city’s gaudy mansions that many believe are financed by opium 
money and corruption.

According to Leslie, growing crime has also given some people in Kabul the 
sense that they are “besieged by migrants. I don’t necessarily agree with the 
sentiment, but some people feel like they have lost control of the city.”


Judged from their access to basic services like sanitation and water, three 
out of four Kabul residents live in conditions that qualify as informal 
settlements, or slums. That is a much higher proportion than the 33% average in 
developing countries, and beats Sub-Saharan Africa where 62% of people live in 
such areas, according to UN numbers.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fdec%2F11%2Fkabul-afghanistan-fifth-fastest-growing-city-world-rapid-urbanisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F11%2F1418291902672%2Facfbc5a0-6019-4d40-9617-1873330343ad-2060x1313.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kabul%20%E2%80%93%20the%20fifth%20fastest%20growing%20city%20in%20the%20world%20%E2%80%93%20is%20bursting%20at%20the%20seams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fdec%2F11%2Fkabul-afghanistan-fifth-fastest-growing-city-world-rapid-urbanisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kabul%20%E2%80%93%20the%20fifth%20fastest%20growing%20city%20in%20the%20world%20%E2%80%93%20is%20bursting%20at%20the%20seams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fdec%2F11%2Fkabul-afghanistan-fifth-fastest-growing-city-world-rapid-urbanisation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F11%2F1418291902672%2Facfbc5a0-6019-4d40-9617-1873330343ad-2060x1313.jpeg>
 A boy helps make bricks for new apartment blocks next to Aria City, a gated 
high-end residential complex. Photograph: Joel van Houdt for The Guardian 
A significant portion of Kabul’s slum-dwellers gave up relatively decent 
living conditions to move to the city, only to find themselves disillusioned 
and jobless. Shah Nawaz, a 27-year-old father of four, grew up in Iran but 
returned 10 years ago, encouraged by the fall of the Taliban. Now he lives in 
Nasaji Bagrami, an informal settlement on the far outskirts of town, from where 
he travels each day to the nearest roundabout to advertise his services as a 
mason. Most days, he comes home empty-handed.


“God damn me for leaving Iran,” Nawaz said, shaking his head with a resigned 
smile. “I thought the government would give me a piece of land. [In Iran] I at 
least had the opportunity to find work.”


Down the road from Nawaz’s house, several hundred villagers including around 
100 children have occupied a row of half-constructed brick buildings that lack 
windows and doors. With Pakistan’s army shelling the eastern province of Kunar 
from one side of the border, and the presence of Taliban militants steadily 
growing on the other, many families have been fled the area. They have joined 
the 6.4 million Afghans who, according to Schmeidl, are “on the move” inside 
their own country. Another 6.7 million have gone abroad, primarily to Pakistan 
or Iran.

“The Taliban came to our village and said, ‘Either you support us or we won’t 
allow you to live here,’” said Mohammad Alam, a villager in his 50s with a 
chest-long salt-and-pepper beard.


“It broke our heart. We grew up in Kunar, our children grew up there. We were 
not well off but we had businesses,” said Haji Ehsanullah, a village elder. “It 
was difficult to leave Kunar – but we all made the decision.”


In May last year – after a decade without a plan for urban development – the 
government of Kabul approved a new 15-year roadmap, which estimates that the 
population in that period will grow to 8 million. The plan also proposes a 
series of ring-roads to alleviate the gridlock which chokes the city.


With nothing to suggest that the allure of city has faded in eyes of Afghans 
from rural areas, many of whom will likely join the growing crowds of poor 
urban slum dwellers, a plan is certainly needed. “This is the only option for 
most of the people coming here,” Naik agreed. “It is a question of survival.”
 