
The morning I set foot on the Antarctic peninsula for the first time, I saw 
the back of a green-scaled creature between floating pieces of ice. Others in 
the inflatable Zodiac boat saw it at the same time, and we called out to the 
expedition leader, Dr Gary Miller, to identify it. “That’s ice,” Gary said. No, 
no, we said, the thing between the ice. The green, scaly thing. “That’s ice,” 
Gary said. He motored us nearer the object, and we saw it was a piece of ice so 
clear we could see right through it to the dark waters beneath. Not so much 
scaled as pitted, like a golf ball. It had once been part of a glacier, and now 
that it had floated away into warmer environs, the air bubbles trapped in the 
ice were making their way to the surface and popping, hence the pitted texture. 
I had been aware for a while of the crackling sound around us; now Gary 
explained that was the air bubbles, “which might have been trapped over 10,000 
years ago. You’re listening to ancient air escaping.” A little while later, one 
of my fellow voyagers lugged a smaller chunk of clear ice into the Zodiac, and 
that evening the ship’s bartender, Lea, poured drinks over glacier ice – I 
crunched frozen ancient air between my teeth and tried to think of a way to 
convey the wonder of this continent to those who have never been here.

It is a well-acknowledged fact, which I uphold in person, that brown people 
don’t camp. As such, you can imagine how little affinity someone from Karachi 
might feel for the tales of theShackletons 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ernest_Shackleton> and Scotts 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robert_Falcon_Scott> of the world, who didn’t 
merely camp but chose to do so as far from modern plumbing and artificially 
controlled temperature as humanly possible. In addition to remaining largely 
oblivious to the tales of explorers, I have never seenThe Blue Planet 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b008044n> or March Of The Penguins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2005/dec/09/3>, or even Happy Feet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2006/dec/08/2>. In short, there may be no 
one in the UK who has spent less time imagining Antarctica than I have. What, 
then, explains my exhilaration when the possibility arose? Perhaps for a 
novelist the lure of the unimagined is far greater than that of the imagined.
 The hull of the Polar Pioneer Icebreaker. Photograph: Nadeem Aslam for the 
Guardian 
And so, doggedly, I continued to unimagine Antarctica. I read no books, 
watched no documentaries, looked up no websites about it before setting off 
from Heathrow to Buenos Aires to Ushuaia, where, along with 51 other 
passengers, I would board the Russian icebreaker Polar Pioneer for a 10-day 
voyage to the Antarctic peninsula and back to Puerto Williams, Chile, in the 
care ofAurora Expeditions <http://www.auroraexpeditions.com.au>. It was only in 
Argentina that I finally pulled out my copy ofJenny Diski’s Skating To 
Antarctica <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/skating-to-antarctica.html>, which 
at least half a dozen friends had urged me to read, and rightly so. It was the 
book’s details of life on board a cruise ship – which sounded much like the one 
I was about to embark on – that particularly caught my attention, as well as 
the fact that Diski, like me, had chosen to takeMoby-Dick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/13/100-best-novels-observer-moby-dick>
 along on the voyage with her. Diski’s account of the lectures and drills that 
would cut into my reading time en route to Antarctica was, frankly, alarming. 
What should really have alarmed me, however, was her description of 
seasickness, which felled me for nearly 36 hours and kept me almost entirely 
confined to my bunk. The seasickness pills made me so drowsy, it was impossible 
to concentrate, and anyway, the motion of the ship would have made my eyes 
slide off the page if I’d tried to read. If this sounds unpleasant, it wasn’t. 
In my notebook, I wrote: “This does not feel like seasickness so much as sea 
benediction. Lie down, be rocked, do nothing more, the sea commands. There is 
no question of being bored – a half-conscious dreaminess; the cusp of 
hibernation.” Later, I would come to think of it as a necessary transition 
phase in which my brain emptied itself of life’s daily routines and concerns. 
The news cycle, the internet, telephones, cars: all these were left behind.
 A canoeing expedition. Photograph: Nadeem Aslam for the Guardian 
Eventually, the Drake Passage, too, was left behind – and then I discovered 
the wonders of the bridge which was, unusually, open to passengers. Next time 
I’m asked by someone about to take my blood pressure to imagine myself 
somewhere calming, I’ll place myself on one of the high chairs looking out from 
the bridge of the Polar Pioneer on to giant albatrosses and cape petrels and 
icebergs and the occasional whale spout, and penguins who swim as if all the 
joy in the world is contained within that act: high-speed balletic leaps 
followed by impossibly fast underwater glides.

Very occasionally, I was the only person on the bridge, along with the Russian 
crew, but usually there were other people around, both co-travellers and the 
always generous and knowledgable Aurora Expeditions staff (who included 
climbers, a kayaker, photographers and a bird expert). Bridge conversation in 
the early days went like this: “Nice piece of ice… Are those penguins 
Chinstraps… Any whales?” As the days went on and we all came to know each other 
better, talk varied and wandered, but it was always still possible to sit 
silently reading Moby-Dick and glancing up to take in the view, undisturbed. 
The word “fellowship” came to mind more than once as I looked around that 
bridge, at the old Antarctica hands who loved the continent, and those of us 
who had just arrived and were learning to be enamoured of it.

Our first landing – some 48 hours after setting sail from Ushuaia – was on the 
Aitcho Islands in the South Shetlands. Penguins! Snow! More penguins! More 
snow! It was entirely delightful, despite the overwhelming stench of penguin 
poo, but I wouldn’t call it heart-piercing. For that, I had to wait until the 
next day, when Gary took us for our first long Zodiac ride through icebergs. 
More than anything else in Antarctica, it’s the icebergs that filled me with 
longing for what I would lose when the voyage was over, even while I was 
reaching out a hand to snap an icicle off one and slide it into my mouth.
 Chewing on an icicle. Photograph: Nadeem Aslam for the Guardian 
During the first ride through icebergs, I started a process of listing that 
replaced thinking for most of my time in Antarctica. Other people might look at 
the world of ice and expanse, and ask Big Questions about the universe and our 
place in it, but I’ve never had less interest in abstractions than I did during 
those 10 days at sea. Instead, I looked around me – particularly at the 
icebergs – and compiled list after descriptive list. Shapes of icebergs: 
clenched fist, conch shell, the Elgin marbles, bust of Nefertiti, 
half-submerged head of the Statue of Liberty, sphinx with beard made of 
icicles, Easter Island head. Textures of icebergs: whipped cream, desert sand, 
bubblewrap, meringue smashed by the back of a spoon, scaly (an albino 
crocodile), ridged (the roof of a dog’s mouth).

“And will you write about this in fiction?” more than one of my fellow 
travellers asked me. Who knows: sometimes the imagination moves as slowly as a 
glacier, I would answer. And while this was perfectly true, I also knew the 
list-making was nothing but a novelist’s way of hoarding details, just in case.

List of a typical day, so far as such a thing could be said to exist:

7am Awoken by Gary’s voice over the intercom: Well, good morning!

7.30 Breakfast in the dining room.

8am Start putting on layers (silk thermal, base layer shirt, fleece jumper, 
down jacket, Polar jacket provided by Aurora, snood, hat with ear flaps, thick 
trousers, waterproof trousers, skiing gloves, waterproof gloves, two layers of 
ski socks and one layer of thermal socks, gumboots with mohair insoles).

8.25 Layers finally on (I was never really cold, though it’s also true the 
temperature rarely dipped below 0C).

8.30 Board Zodiac, cruise past icebergs to landing.

8.40 Arrive at destination (Hydrurga Rocks, Neko Harbour, Port Lockroy, 
Enterprise Island, Elephant Island).

8.40-11.30 Walk around, or just sit on rock or snow, and look (penguins, 
seals, landscape, seascape, etc).

11.40 Return to Polar Pioneer, unlayer.

12.30 Lunch (salads, soups, freshly baked bread, pies, pasta) and conversation 
with fellow voyagers (age range: 20s to 80s).

1pm Head up to bridge with Moby-Dick, camera and binoculars.

3pm Second outing, either another landing or a Zodiac cruise through nature’s 
sculpture park (ie icebergs).

6pm Back on ship. Return to bridge, or head to bar.

7.30pm Dinner (steak and chips; lamp shanks with jus and mashed potatoes; lamb 
curry – vegetarian/pescetarian/gluten-free options available, courtesy of chefs 
Heather and Kirsty, who had the hardest jobs on board, preparing meals even 
through the choppiest seas).

8.30pm Back to the bridge.

10.30pm Go to sleep rocked by the sea, the curtains surrounding the bed 
blocking light that streams in through the porthole 24 hours a day.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F16%2F-sp-kamila-shamsie-sails-to-antarctica%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F13%2F1421162496877%2F3afb79c1-bdc4-4a93-972f-920e4e78cb05-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kamila%20Shamsie%20sails%20to%20Antarctica&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F16%2F-sp-kamila-shamsie-sails-to-antarctica%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kamila%20Shamsie%20sails%20to%20Antarctica&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F16%2F-sp-kamila-shamsie-sails-to-antarctica%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F13%2F1421162496877%2F3afb79c1-bdc4-4a93-972f-920e4e78cb05-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A penguin on a pitted-surface iceberg. Photograph: Nadeem Aslam for the 
Guardian 
While all that is relatively accurate, it is also true that there was no 
“typical day” – every day felt full of discovery. So there was the day we had 
pizza for lunch on the bow of the ship because the sun was so warm (3C can feel 
like midsummer); the day there was an evening party on deck with music and 
silly hats; the several instances when the nimble little Polar Pioneer, one of 
the smallest ships to take tourists to Antarctica, changed course in order to 
travel alongside a whale pod; the night everyone had an option to camp on ice 
overnight (see earlier, “brown people don’t camp” for my response to this 
option); the evening of the Polar Plunge, with swimsuited voyagers leaping into 
the sea and swimming back to the ship at impossibly fast speeds (brown people 
don’t polar plunge, either); the evening when, by popular demand, there was a 
viewing of Happy Feet in the lecture theatre (Gary was the “penguin consultant” 
for the movie); the afternoon the elephant seal pup clambered on to my legs and 
let me stroke its wet-silk fur; the day we sailed through Neptune’s Bellows 
into the caldera of an active volcano; the day we went souvenir shopping on the 
Antarctic peninsula (at Port Lockroy, where penguins cluster around the union 
jack); the day we found what looked like sun-bleached oars buried deep in snow, 
and dug around them to reveal the skeleton of a whale.
 Despite the overwhelming stench of penguin poo, the experience was 
delightful. Photograph: Nadeem Aslam for the Guardian 
But the passage of time that felt most miraculous was this: on the evening 
when half the ship had decamped to the peninsula overnight, I sat reading in 
the almost entirely empty bar area and became aware of something that had been 
true for over a week, but that had only just made its way to the conscious part 
of my brain, like an air bubble surfacing in glacial ice – I felt entirely 
safe. I’ve lived in various parts of the world of lesser and greater safety, 
from a village in upstate New York to the mad sprawl of Karachi, and I’ve never 
considered myself “nervy” about what it means to be a single woman in any of 
these places. But village or urban sprawl, there is always an antenna that I 
keep raised in public places for footsteps behind me, shadows in front of me, a 
stranger approaching. In Antarctica, despite the glaciers, icebergs, leopard 
seals, submersible lifeboats and the relative strangers on the ship, that 
antenna retracted. Once acknowledged, the sensation of it was so overwhelming, 
I had to step outside on to the deck. It was midnight; as far as I could make 
out, everyone on the ship was asleep or in their cabins, other than Anatoly 
from St Petersburg up on the bridge. Overhead, the sky was early-evening blue, 
but near the horizon there was a band of gold and red, and one of the snowy 
mountains of the nearby peninsula was gold-capped. The ship was anchored, 
rocking gently; icebergs with deep blue veins floated alongside. I leaned 
against the hull of the ship, opened my mouth and breathed in the cold air as 
though it might be possible to ingest Antarctica and take this feeling home 
with me.

Factbox
The trip was provided by Aurora Expeditions <http://auroraexpeditions.co.uk/>; 
it’s12-day Spirit of Antarctica voyage in a twin cabin plus one night each in 
Buenos Aires, Ushuaia and Punta Arenas, starts from £7,995, including 
international flights and transfers. It is part ofSteppes Travel 
<http://www.steppestravel.co.uk/>’s 17-day Antarctica trip 




 