
Home Office minister Karen Bradley has been named as the new culture secretary 
in Theresa May’s first cabinet, succeeding John Whittingdale.

Bradley, a former chartered accountant who cited Michael Howard as an early 
inspiration, arrived in Downing Street on Thursday to be given the new role by 
May in her first full day as prime minister.

Theresa May brings Andrea Leadsom into government as environment secretary - 
live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/jul/14/theresa-may-cabinet-reshuffle-boris-johnson-philip-hammond-rules-out-emergency-budget>
A May loyalist, Bradley lacks the extensive experience of her predecessor who 
spent a decade as chair of the Commons culture, media and sport select 
committee.


But Whittingdale was something of an exception in that regard, and lack of 
experience in the sector has rarely been seen as a barrier to previous 
incumbents of the post.


Bradley, 46, voted to remain in the European Union, telling her constituents 
in an open letter 
<http://www.karenbradley.co.uk/news/vote-remain-open-letter-staffordshire-moorlands>
 that the “positive, patriotic [and] passionate response” was to vote to stay 
within the EU.

A Manchester City fan who has several times declared free tickets from the 
Football Association on her register of MPs’ interests, Bradley lists her 
hobbies in Who’s Who as “travel, wine tasting, cooking [and] puzzles”.


She will be presumably have been relieved, then, that the BBC’s overhaul of 
its online recipe database was not quite as radical as it first appeared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/17/bbc-climbdown-over-online-recipes-after-public-outcry>
.

She is also a big crime thriller fan and reads Charles Dickens’ A Christmas 
Carol every year before Christmas.

But instances in which she tackled the big media issues of the day appeared at 
first sight thin on the ground.

The website They Work For You 
<https://www.theyworkforyou.com/mp/24725/karen_bradley/staffordshire_moorlands/votes>
 reported that Bradley voted for equal gay rights and same sex marriage, and 
for a wholly elected House of Lords.

Characterised as one of “Dave’s dolls” by the Times early on in David 
Cameron’s Conservative leadership, Bradley had a late conversion to politics 
when the company she worked for, KPMG, seconded her to advise the Tories on tax 
policy in 2002.

“I was inspired by Michael Howard in particular,” she told the paper. “After 
seven months I went back to KPMG, but it was too late. I was hooked.”


She gave up her job when she started a family and unsuccessfully stood in the 
constituency of Manchester Withington in the 2005 general election.

She was elected to parliament in Staffordshire Moorlands in 2010.

Bradley, who served as Home Office minister responsible for preventing abuse 
and crime, is understood to have quit Twitter because of the abusive messages 
she received.

A crime thriller fan, she has read “read every Morse, Dalziel and Pascoe, 
Frost and Rebus that’s been printed”,she once said 
<http://www.stokesentinel.co.uk/big-read-staffordshire-moorlands-mp-karen-bradley/story-26688154-detail/story.html>
.


“I could not get through Christmas without Charles Dickens’ A Christmas Carol, 
a hard copy edition of which was a much treasured school prize.

I read it every year, starting on 20 December 20 with Marley’s Ghost, then a 
chapter every day until I finish on Christmas morning with the final chapter.

It means that the last thing that I read on Christmas Eve is the terrifying 
Ghost of Christmas Yet to Come, but it gets me in the mood.

Her department has a brief that ranges from broadcasting and broadband to 
press regulation and encouraging the next generation of British sports stars.


Close to the top of her agenda will be finalising the BBC’s new royal charter, 
due to begin in 2017.

It is just over a year since Whittingdale’s appointment was hailed as a 
“declaration of war” on the BBC by one newspaper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/18/john-whittingdale-culture-secretary-bbc-rupert-murdoch>
.


Whittingdale oversaw a government review of the future of the BBC, which is 
still to be completed, and faced questions asked about his suitability to 
decide press regulation afterrevelations about his relationship with a sex 
worker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/13/the-guardian-view-on-the-whittingdale-affair-sex-and-a-case-for-caution>
.

But despite fears over what it would mean for the BBC, the corporation broadly 
welcomed the government’s white paper on its future 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/12/bbc-white-paper-key-points-john-whittingdale>
, published in May.

There remains, however, the huge financial burden of paying the £700m-plus 
cost of free licence fees for over-75s after last year’s controversial funding 
settlement with the government.

After standing down from his post earlier on Thursday, Whittingdale said he 
wished his successor well 
<https://twitter.com/JWhittingdale/status/753523405022986240> and later posted 
a picture of him leaving the DCMS for the last time, flanked by a “guard of 
honour” of the department’s staff.
John Whittingdale (@JWhittingdale) 
Sad to be leaving @dcms <https://twitter.com/DCMS> I could not have asked for 
more fantastic teampic.twitter.com/tUAQCih1sp <https://t.co/tUAQCih1sp>
 <https://twitter.com/JWhittingdale/status/753574942927626240> July 14, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/JWhittingdale/status/753574942927626240>  