
'Don't write about how much I'm chain-smoking," grumbles Kathy Burke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/kathy-burke>. "Everyone opens with, 'After 
the fourth cigarette … ' and it's boring. So don't be doing that, Ryan, else 
I'll say you're just the same as everyone else." She releases a tight laugh and 
takes another puff. I mean: takes another sip of rosehip tea.

We're up on the roof of London's Tricycle theatre, sitting on two rickety 
chairs beneath a blank November sky. Downstairs, Burke has spent the morning 
directing a new production of Once a Catholic 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/stoke/stage/reviews/n_s/once_a_catholic.shtml>, Mary J 
O'Malley's comedy set in 1957 at Our Lady of Fatima convent school. Burke is a 
versatile actor, adored for her populist, prickly comedy: she wasLinda, the 
voracious ginger foghorn with porthole specs in Gimme Gimme Gimme 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N8LstaBxckU>; carbuncular Waynetta Slob 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fb-f8CTafHs> and teenage lug Perry, both with 
faces like drip-drying seaweed, inHarry Enfield and Chums 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W8RkqbqmttA>; and the stiletto-sharp magazine 
editor Magda in Absolutely Fabulous. ("Here's my list. Cross her off, she 
screwed me. Oh, and put him in, he screwed me. Don't do anything on anyone 
called Freud. I don't like them. Bunch of no-talents with an ancestor.") Burke 
also has a Cannes best actress award for playingRay Winstone's devoted punchbag 
in Gary Oldman's Nil By Mouth in 1997 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_BsPLaS0ksg>. That performance felt doubly 
devastating for revealing an aspect of her partly concealed from the 
mainstream. The collective feeling was: "We didn't know she had it in her."

Now 49, Burke is these days almost as famous for what she doesn't do as for 
what she did. A decade ago, she quit acting to devote more time to one of her 
first loves: directing theatre. "I told my agent, 'I wanna knock the acting on 
the head for a bit.' I thought if I gave it a few years, I might not feel so 
jaded. And it's rolled on to 10 years." She offers a shrug and a smile. Her 
zingy green eyes are set in a pale, mutable face: she can look kind, but also 
unimpressed,as chirpy as the Artful Dodger 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3mV4igWXs8E> one moment, as disconsolate as 
Droopy <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tzqt-ENnmHc> the next.

Occasionally, she will agree to small, strategic bits of acting. Last year, 
she played an abrasive nun with mossy eyebrows in Walking and Talking 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EaEAUlpnRUU>, the autobiographical comedy-drama 
series she wrote for Sky. After being out of action entirely for 18 months 
following an operation and a bout of the bug Clostridium difficile (which she 
contracted while in hospital), she turned up as an ageing spook put out to 
pasture inTinker Tailor Soldier Spy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/sep/15/tinker-tailor-soldier-spy-film-review>
. She appeared alongside her old chumOldman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gary-oldman>, to whom she acted as "skinhead 
consultant" for £30 onMike Leigh's Meantime 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0082727/> when she was 18. "Gary's such a nervous 
wreck," she says of Tinker. "He asked me, 'When's the last time you were on a 
film set?' I said, 'Ten years ago.' He said, 'Oh, blimey.' I went, 'How are 
you?' And he said, 'Ooh, I'm ever so nervous darlin'.' And it became all about 
him so I thought, 'Right, I've just gotta fucking get on with it.'"

Those exceptions aside, she has stayed away from acting. "Until Nil By Mouth, 
I'd always felt in control of my own career. Then, when you're in a successful 
film, you're wanted for other films, which is nice – but before I knew it, I 
didn't have any control and I wasn't seeing family and friends. What should 
have been a really happy time was affecting my personal life. It was non-stop 
work and that's not what I'm about. It also took me away from theatre, which is 
what I love most."

She has just overseen the first "stagger-through" of Once a Catholic and is 
feeling buoyant. "It's about an innocent time, so there is a quaintness and an 
old-fashioned quality to it. The comedy softens the horror. But it's also 
completely bonkers. Through it all, there's the journey of Mary Mooney, this 
little creature we follow. The nuns and priests are spouting off about saints 
and miracles and, in a way, she's a representative on earth of all that, but 
they can't see it. This girl has the most faith of anyone in the play, and yet 
she gets blamed and doubted, a bit like Jesus."

Burke did a speech from the play as an audition piece in the late 1970s. "It's 
been lovely returning to it," she sighs. "It's brought back so much. I can see 
how it's influenced and inspired me. Good, natural dialogue. Very funny." She 
knows the religious terrain, too. Her mother died from cancer when she was two; 
she was then raised in Islington, north London, first by neighbours who 
fostered her, then by her Irish immigrant father. She later attended Catholic 
school in Camden.
 Rehearsals for Once a Catholic at the Tricycle theatre in London, directed by 
Kathy Burke. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
"Mine wasn't as hardcore as the one in the play. The one I went to had just 
turned comprehensive, so we had a lot of the teachers who'd taught in the 
grammar school system and then suddenly had to adapt to having girls like 
myself, who weren't that bright but were there because of being Catholic. I 
don't think there was a lot of patience; I didn't come across much. But there 
wasn't the gruesomeness you get in the play. And at least sex education had 
started to come in." What she didn't learn in biology lessons, Burke picked up 
in the playground or at home. "I had two older brothers who kept dirty mags 
under their mattresses. They didn't know I knew. So I'd have a look at them. 
They're a bit grim, aren't they?"

There was no drama at Burke's school, at least not on the curriculum, but an 
English teacher did improvisation exercises and spotted her talent. He 
encouraged her to sign up for drama lessons at theAnna Scher theatre 
<http://www.annaschertheatre.com/>, near her home. She put her name down at 13; 
just before her 16th birthday, she got in. At 17, she was cast inScrubbers 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wa8ylubMFJM>, which was marketed as a female 
Scum (tagline: "It's a crime what borstal can do to a girl").

She had always been funny among her friends, but her comic presence wasn't 
felt strongly on screen until she started working with French and Saunders in 
the late 1980s. Then her partnership with Harry Enfield gave her a first taste 
of the proprietorial relationship the public can feel toward a favourite 
performer. "Friends were getting a bit fed up 'cause I'd chat to anyone while 
we were out. They'd say, 'Look, whenever we go to the pub, you end up talking 
to people who come up to you and then the night's gone.' So I just thought, 
'Oh, bollocks, I'll stop going out.'"

It was the extraneous attention that partly killed off Burke's enthusiasm for 
acting, more than the job itself. "The thing I hear most about Kathy is, 'Oh, 
she's so down to earth!'" saysJames Dreyfus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2013/jan/11/what-see-in-mirror-james-dreyfus>
, who played Tom, her prissy gay flatmate in Gimme Gimme Gimme. "In fact, she's 
incredibly complex and complicated, and I mean that in a positive way. She's 
fiercely intelligent and hates all the PR crap that goes along with being an 
actress."

If she is the salt of the earth, then she's peppery with it. Her insistence 
that she really is a grumpy old boot would be harder to believe if it wasn't 
corroborated by some intense don't-mess-with-me eye contact, or her transparent 
displeasure at being photographed after the interview. Lately, she found that 
side of herself coming out more while she was writing a new script for TV 
(which, if it gets made, she hopes to direct).

"I hate writing," she says. "I'm quite a solitary person. I like being on my 
own. I live alone. I'm not saying I don't understand loneliness, but I've never 
felt lonely – until I write. When I sit down and write, I can't bear it. I feel 
very much on my own." Though she collaborated on the material she performed 
with Enfield ("Perry is my creation and I'd bodge in with ideas on the rest"), 
she couldn't consider actually writing with someone else. "I'm quite a 
cantankerous soul. People have this impression that I have a happy disposition. 
But I'm dark and cynical underneath. I can see a lot of bullshit in the world 
and it gives me the 'ump, Ryan, it really does!" Her wicked cackle does nothing 
to neutralise the sentiment.
 Burke with Harry Enfield (right) in Kevin and Perry Go Large Photograph: 
Allstar/Cinetext/Sportsphoto 
Even in the hour we spend together, it's clear she probably needs to use both 
sides of the paper when compiling her shit-list.Richard Dawkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/nov/09/lucy-mangan-richard-dawkins-atheism>
 is on there. "I feel like, 'Shut up, Dawkins. Take your tights off and have a 
beer.' I envy faith. If he believed in something, he might not be so arrogant." 
But most of the offenders turn out to be in showbusiness or journalism. There 
were those who had it in forthe BBC3 sketch show Horne and Corden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/organgrinder/2009/mar/11/first-night-horne-corden>
, which she directed. "The sketches weren't up to it, basically. But there are 
certain journalists I will never talk to again because of the disgusting things 
they wrote about Mathew and James."

Then there was the reaction to her Day-Glo sitcom Gimme Gimme Gimme. "It was 
round the time of The Royle Family and The Office. No one would admit they 
watched Gimme. And no one would dare admit they actually fucking liked it!" She 
sees Mrs Brown's Boys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/jan/29/mrs-browns-boys-worst-comedy-ever-made-smash>
 as following in the same tradition and upsetting the same sorts of people. "I 
really love what [creator and writer]Brendan O'Carroll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jan/24/mrs-browns-boys-fourth-series> 
has done. Sometimes in our business, we think we're here to entertain each 
other, and we forget there's an audience at home. They're the most important 
ones – not pleasing the Bafta panel that year. I couldn't give a shit about 
that."

Easy to say when you've been named best actress at Cannes. "Well, there is 
that." Some award-winners will spin a self-deprecating yarn about keeping their 
Oscars in the loft or their Emmys in the shed, but Burke goes one better. Her 
Cannes prize ("It's like a swimming certificate, really") is hanging in someone 
else's bathroom. "My mates Anthony and Peter said they loved looking at it. 
So I said, 'If you like it that much, you can have it. So it's in a toilet 
in Manchester."

Despite Burke's protestations that prizes mean nothing to her, she gave a 
rabble-rousing speech <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=huayAma6y0Y> at the 2002 
British Comedy awards – one of her most stirring performances, in fact – after 
being named best comedy actress for Gimme Gimme Gimme. Rapturous applause 
greeted her opening broadside: "It's about fucking time, innit?" There's an 
intriguing contradiction here: the bruiser who deplores trinkets and trophies 
complaining that she wasn't given her due. Clearly, the show means a lot to her 
– she and Dreyfus still text one another in character as Linda and Tom – but 
did she mean it was about time for her, or for the widely maligned series?

"I meant it about everything really, but yes, there was a semblance of 
arrogance there. It seemed people had been enjoying what I'd been doing for 
years and it'd never been properly acknowledged. So I did think, 'About fucking 
time!' I was just saying what everyone else was thinking." It seems unlikely 
that anyone could deliver such a line with magnanimity, let alone grace. But 
somehow, Burke does.

• Once a Catholic is at the Tricycle theatre, London NW6 
<http://www.tricycle.co.uk/current-programme-pages/theatre/theatre-programme-main/once-a-catholic/>
, from 27 November to 18 January, then at theRoyal Court Liverpool 
<http://www.liverpooltheatres.com/royalcourt.htm> 
28 January to 8 February.
 