
Day 3

The high point of today was watching Joseph Otim, a qualified medical doctor 
who is theAmref (African Medical Research Foundation) 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/katine/amref/> project officer for health in Katine, 
north-eastern Uganda, taking over from the male nurse who is the most senior 
rank at Ojom health centre. He sat in the consulting room for a couple of 
hours, making diagnoses and dispensing advice and prescriptions. And it looked 
to me as if he was enjoying it.

The centre was besieged with patients, mostly women in their bright dresses 
with small babies and children. Dr Otim helped out so that Richard Okelo, the 
"in-charge" nurse, could talk to me and take me around. But the doctor looked 
in no hurry to hand back to Okelo.

Unfortunately, there is a shocking absence of doctors 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/katine/2010/may/07/stephen-malinga-health-workers/> 
in rural parts of Uganda. Some of it is to do with government bureaucracy, but 
much more is about low salaries and reluctance to work in poor, benighted areas 
where the work is hard and there may be neither good accommodation for doctors, 
good schools for their children to attend nor much social life.

So the three level 4 health centres in Soroti district, one of which is in 
Katine, have no doctor, although they are supposed to deliver quality of care 
not far short of a hospital.

Ojom health centre 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/katine/2009/mar/19/ojom-lab-opening/> is a big 
success story for theKatine project 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/katine/2008/sep/23/background.news/>. Amref has 
built a lab, which means patients no longer have to go 15km toTiriri, the level 
4 health centre, 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/katine/katine-chronicles-blog/2010/feb/12/health-news/>
 for blood and urine tests. Malaria – by far the most common disease - can be 
confirmed the same day and appropriate drugs given or not.

Of course, that assumes they have the drugs. The reason for the crowds today, 
and for the last week, is that a drug delivery finally arrived. They are 
supposed to come every two months but they are sporadic and often inadequate.

It was great to know that these people and their children would be treated 
today, but shocking to realise that there is probably always this much need – 
people don't come for no reason, Richard Okelo told me. You don't get the 
worried well in Katine. But if they know there is a stock-out (delivery), they 
will go to the private drug shops, which have medicines but may sell people the 
wrong tablets and charge high prices. So instead of a whole course of 
antibiotics, a woman will buy two or three days' worth. It's a recipe for 
speedy drug resistance, and resistant bugs spread around the globe.

It has to be in everybody's interest - as well as value for money and the 
humane thing to do – to sort out drug supply in poor countries. So why isn't 
anything happening?

One last thing about Ojom – local residents are delighted with their improved 
health centre and staff (a lab assistant is in place to run the tests and Amref 
has done plenty of training sessions for him and the other three staff 
members). But the health centre management committee, made up of local 
residents, wanted me to raise one more issue. In fact, I remember them telling 
me this a year ago. They would like a maternity unit.

It's a big ask and yet a very reasonable one. Local women have to make that 
15km (9-mile) journey along rutted mud tracks for antenatal check-ups, not to 
mention delivery. So, of course, it often doesn't happen. People tell you the 
traditional birth attendants (TBAs) have been stopped and then remark on a 
woman who was delivered by one last week. If women are to give birth in health 
centres, there will just have to be more health centres.
 