
No state criminal charges will be brought against the police officer who 
fatally shotKeith Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/keith-scott-shooting> in North Carolina 
earlier this year, prosecutors announced on Wednesday.

Andrew Murray, the district attorney in Charlotte, said that officer Brentley 
Vinson’s shooting of Scott in September was justified because Scott refused to 
drop a gun held at his side. 

“It is my opinion that officer Vinson acted lawfully when he shot Mr Scott,” 
Murray said at a press conference. “He acted lawfully.”

Scott, 43, never raised or pointed the gun, according to the prosecutor, but 
Vinson felt he posed an imminent threat because he ignored orders to drop it 
and stared at them in a “trance-like state”.

Scott’s wife Rakeyia, who filmed some of his confrontation with police and the 
aftermath, insisted that he was not armed when he was killed.

In a statement, Scott’s family said they were “profoundly disappointed” by the 
decision. “All our family wanted was justice and for these members of law 
enforcement to understand that what they did was wrong,” they said.

Acknowledging that the announcement would cause frustration among some 
residents, Murray said: “We meticulously, thoroughly, reviewed all of the 
evidence in this case.”


Scott’s death on 20 September became another flashpoint in the nationwide 
unrest over the killing of African American men by police officers.Protests and 
riots followed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/23/charlotte-protests-curfew-keith-scott-family-view-footage-of-killing>
 in Charlotte.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fcharlotte-police-keith-scott-shooting-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Footage%20shows%20moments%20before%20police%20shooting%20of%20Keith%20Scott%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fcharlotte-police-keith-scott-shooting-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Footage%20shows%20moments%20before%20police%20shooting%20of%20Keith%20Scott%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fcharlotte-police-keith-scott-shooting-video&media=>
Footage shows moments before police shooting of Keith Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/sep/23/charlotte-police-keith-scott-shooting-video>
In their statement on Wednesday, Scott’s family asked demonstrators to remain 
peaceful. They urged that “everyone work together to fix the system” that led 
to Scott’s death.

Authorities said police were waiting to serve an arrest warrant on someone 
else and noticed Scott had a marijuana “blunt” as he sat in his SUV in the 
parking lot outside his home.

The officers were prepared to ignore the drugs until Vinson saw that Scott was 
also holding a gun, Murray said. The officers, who were in plainclothes and 
tactical police vests, advanced on his vehicle and ordered Scott to get out.

Video evidence released after the shooting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/23/charlotte-protests-suspect-arrested-deadly-shooting>
 showed Scott stepping out into the parking lot, but did not make clear whether 
he was holding a gun, which he had been carrying earlier in a holster around 
one of his ankles.

But all of the police officers at the scene said that Scott was indeed holding 
the weapon, according to Murray, who said the gun was recovered and found to be 
loaded and bearing Scott’s DNA.


“All of the credible and available evidence suggests that he was in fact 
armed,” said Murray.

Murray said Vinson decided Scott was an “imminent threat” after Scott stepped 
out of his SUV with the gun. “Mr Scott looked at Vinson, then looked in the 
direction of each officer, and then looked back at Vinson,” said Murray.


Officers told investigators that Scott, who had been taking prescription 
medication, “had a blank stare as if he was in a trance-like state”.

Murray said Scott was illegally armed with a Colt .380 semi-automatic, which 
he had bought over Facebook. Murray showed a private online message written 
after the shooting by the man who sold Scott the gun. “It’s my fault he’s 
dead,” the message said.

The prosecutor pleaded with those angered by his decision to read the findings 
of state investigators, and insisted that he would have brought charges if they 
had been warranted.

“I would not hesitate to prosecute an officer who, the evidence showed, had 
acted outside the law,” said Murray.

 