
1990s Kevin Spacey: what a glorious man. His knack for embodying a variety of 
dark and complex characters earned Spacey a reputation that has since extended 
into voice acting, stage direction and film production. He reprises his turn as 
Dave Harken inHorrible Bosses 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/27/horrible-bosses-2-review>, out in 
UK cinemas this weekend, inspiring us to a look back at his best performances 
to date. Comment below-the-line and let us know which roles you would choose.

Full disclosure: we couldn’t find a fitting clip of Spacey in LA Confidential, 
and that hurts.

American Beauty <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/jan/28/4>

The maddening mundanity of suburban life served as the backdrop to Spacey’s 
most critically acclaimed performance as disillusioned and depressed Lester 
Burnham. Look no further for Lolita complexes, simmering marital contempt and
that slow-motion shot of rose petals fluttering from Mena Suvari’s 
ceiling-height suspended naked body. Spacey scooped up more than 15 awards for 
the part, including an Oscar, Bafta and two Screen Actors Guild gongs.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DED7_y4jETo0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DED7_y4jETo0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DED7_y4jETo0&media=>
Swimming with Sharks

Spacey has said in the past that Horrible Bosses’ Harken and Buddy Ackerman, 
the hellish movie industry boss he played here, could have been brothers. He 
cut his teeth on the “cruel and merciless employer” role in George Huang’s 1995 
comedy, putting Frank Whaley’s Guy through his paces in a new job, and snarling 
through crushing putdowns that would drive the average person to a quiet cry in 
the office loos.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUo8o-J5nips&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUo8o-J5nips>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUo8o-J5nips&media=>
The Usual Suspects

If you don’t already know the answer to question “Who is Keyser Söze?”, we’ll 
do our best to tiptoe around potential spoilers. Spacey played Roger “Verbal” 
Kint with a chilling and measured intensity in this 1995 whodunnit thriller, 
centred on pinning down the location of an elusive and brutal Turkish crime 
lord. From quoting French poet Charles Baudelaire, in the clip below, to 
dishing out one of his ultimate big reveals at the end of the film, it stands 
out as one of his most memorable roles.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKnGo6Qm0Wt8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKnGo6Qm0Wt8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKnGo6Qm0Wt8&media=>
Seven 

Welcome to classic love-to-hate Spacey, playing a serial killer we only know 
as John Doe. He works his way through a spate of Biblically themed murders – 
making time for some fat- and slut-shaming along the way – but only appears 
onscreen about 90 minutes into the film, alongside Morgan Freeman and Brad 
Pitt’s classic good-cop, bad-cop double act. Pitt’s occasional over-acting 
aside, Spacey swoops in and steals the show as the film builds to its climax.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrS4EJGh9mIg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrS4EJGh9mIg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrS4EJGh9mIg&media=>
Casino Jack

Post-1990s Spacey wasn’t all disappointment (see clangers K-Pax and Pay It 
Forward). He deserves some credit for his portrayal of corrupt politician Jack 
Abramoff, in this 2010 biographical satire. If nothing else, we can at least 
appreciate that the film’s mirror monologues and suited-up politicking prepared 
him for his interpretation of Frank Underwood in Netflix’s House of Cards 
series.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0mz59i898HU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0mz59i898HU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0mz59i898HU&media=> 