
A new US government program to count killings by police, which draws on data 
collected by the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2015/jun/01/the-counted-police-killings-us-database>
, has recorded a sharply higher number of deaths than previous official efforts.

Homicides by police were logged by the Department of Justice’s new system at 
more than twice the rate previously reported by the FBI, according to new data 
that waspublished by the department 
<https://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5864> on Thursday.


Officials said their new method for counting “arrest-related deaths” should 
improve the “reliability, validity and comprehensiveness” of information on 
killings by police, after the weakness of previous efforts was exposed.


“These efforts result in improvements in data completeness and quality,” a 
report by officials working for the department’s bureau of justice statistics 
concluded.


The new “hybrid” system combines a review of open-source data, including the 
Guardian’s series The Counted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/series/counted-us-police-killings>, with a 
survey of local authorities. It recorded 270 homicides by officers in three 
months last year. The FBI said earlier this year that it had counted just 442 
in all of 2015.


Duren Banks, the program’s lead statistician, said the trial had been “a 
success” compared to a previous incarnation, which was estimated to be catching 
only half of all arrest-related deaths before being temporarily shut down in 
2014.


“We really went back to the drawing board to see what was working and what 
wasn’t, and to try to get a more comprehensive count of arrest-related deaths 
in the United States,” said Banks.


Controversy over the government’s lack of official data on killings by police 
was set off by the fatal shooting of Michael Brown in Ferguson, Missouri, in 
August 2014. The death of Brown, an unarmed black 18-year-old, led to protests 
and riots in the town and across the US.


The FBI’s annual count of homicides by police 
<https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2015/crime-in-the-u.s.-2015/tables/expanded_homicide_data_table_14_justifiable_homicide_by_weapon_law_enforcement_2011-2015.xls>
, which depends on chiefs voluntarily submitting their numbers, was discredited 
after it became clear that the method was recording less than half of all 
killings nationwide.


Better data on killings and the use of force by police officers was strongly 
recommended by a White House taskforce on policing convened by Barack Obama 
following the unrest in Ferguson. More protests were sparked in Baltimore and 
other cities amid more questionable deaths of black men at the hands of police.

Reforms to data collection were announced last year after James Comey, the FBI 
director,said it was “unacceptable” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/08/fbi-chief-says-ridiculous-guardian-washington-post-better-information-police-shootings>
 that The Counted and a similar project by the Washington Post held better data 
on the issue than his own officials, a situation he said was “embarrassing and 
ridiculous”.

The Counted will draw to a close at the end of 2016 after working to record 
all deaths caused by law enforcement officers this year and in 2015. Readers 
continue to assist journalists in compiling the data bysubmitting tips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2015/jun/01/us-police-killings-tips>
 or local media reports about deadly incidents.

US government database hopes to tell 'whole story' of police killings after 
year of Guardian count
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/13/justice-department-database-police-killings-counted-statistics>
The FBI is overhauling its own “justifiable homicides” count to include a 
wider range of incidents involving the use of force by police. But neither the 
FBI nor the bureau of justice statistics (BJS) has made clear what action they 
would take if departments simply refused to cooperate with the programs.


The Death in Custody Reporting Act, which was reauthorized by Congress in 
2014, requires states receiving federal funding for law enforcement to report 
all killings by police officers on a quarterly basis. Many states have, 
however, continued to ignore the law without being penalized.

The BJS trial closely examined all deaths in custody – including suicides, 
accidents and some others – from June to August 2015. It initially identified 
377 deaths through media reports and other publicly available sources, 268 of 
which were found to be homicides by officers.


Researchers then sent surveys to almost 500 police agencies and medical 
examiners linked to the deaths identified in their open-source review, asking 
them to confirm the deaths and inform them of any others. During this second 
phase, researchers identified an additional 48 deaths that were not reported in 
the media, two of which were homicides.


Of the agencies contacted by the BJS, about three-quarters responded to the 
program’s queries about arrest-related deaths, with 72% of agencies sending 
complete answers back to the bureau. Other agencies did not respond or denied 
that a death fell into the program’s scope.

Young black men killed by US police at highest rate in year of 1,134 deaths
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/31/the-counted-police-killings-2015-young-black-men>
Banks explained that response rates were largely due to an agency’s capacity 
to respond. Law enforcement officers in Texas and California, for example, are 
required to report deaths in custody, and thus had a high response rate 
throughout the pilot program, she said.

If the rate of homicides recorded by the justice department was consistent, a 
total of 1,080 would have been logged for all of 2015. The Guardian’s count, 
which uses slightly different criteria, ended at 1,146 last year. So far in 
2016, it has recorded 1,025 deaths.


The report released by the BJS on Thursday did not include demographic 
information on the decedents, but Banks said the bureau expects to release 
aggregate racial and other demographic information in a future report.
 