



Rio style 
 Lorna Jane kit Photograph: PR 
If Kit Stop had its way, all Olympic kit – or at least Team GB’s – would 
actually be designed byTracksmith <https://www.tracksmith.com/>, or perhaps, 
more patriotically, in the UK byIffley Road. <https://www.iffleyroad.com/> 
Wouldn’t it be great if it were all simple, retro, stylish and wearable for 
your average runner. Instead we getthis 
<http://shop.teamgb.com/stores/teamgb/en/c/collections/team-gb-replica?CMP=KNC-Google2&portal=teamgbppc&CMP=KNC-GoogleAds&portal=TeamGBAdwords&gclid=CLKP_vCczc4CFdRAGwodmI0Psw>
. Would any woman really turn up to a small local race wearing that 
crop-top-and-pants combo and not feel like an utter fool? At least the men’s 
kit is a little more flattering to those with less-than-Olympic physiques, 
though that’s about all you can say for it.

Kit stop: running-kit reviews and your questions answered
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/the-running-blog/2016/jun/21/running-kit-reviews-women-your-questions-answered>
So, while I try to track down replica Ethiopian running vests, or some 
Canadian kit (just because it’s the most stylish), or a Czech outfit (at least 
I can claim some allegiance there) I instead draw your attention to Lorna Jane. 
The Australian brand is about to launch a transactional site in the UK, and 
already has a great shop in Covent Garden. For women fed up with black leggings 
and pink T-shirts – which seem to be default looks – it’s a great place for 
high-quality, technical kit in more interesting designs. That fantastic 
tropical print above alsocomes in full length leggings 
<http://www.houseoffraser.co.uk/Lorna+Jane/BRAND_LORNA%20JANE,default,sc.html>. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fthe-running-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fkit-stop-running-kit-reviews-and-your-questions-answered%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1663eadffb366b553a99f1d3e5bba31367cb344b%2F123_178_1271_763%2F1271.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kit%20stop%3A%20running%20kit%20reviews%20and%20your%20questions%20answered&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fthe-running-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fkit-stop-running-kit-reviews-and-your-questions-answered%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kit%20stop%3A%20running%20kit%20reviews%20and%20your%20questions%20answered&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fthe-running-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fkit-stop-running-kit-reviews-and-your-questions-answered%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1663eadffb366b553a99f1d3e5bba31367cb344b%2F123_178_1271_763%2F1271.jpg>
 Beats UK headphones. 



Gold-winning tunes

The swimmers wear them in the warm-up room, the cyclists wear them on the 
stationery bikes: clearly, to channel your inner Olympian you needthese 
headphones. Towel, swimming cap and goggles or cycling helmet optional, or at 
least in the gym. Warning: does not come with guarantee of Laura Trott or 
Michael Phelp’s sporting abilities. They do come in a special UK edition 
though. Available at theApple store <http://www.apple.com/>, for limited time 
only.

Kit for kids

If replica team kit gives you the horrors, but you have less cynical kids to 
keep happy, head to Aldi. For bargain prices you can pick up mascots, 
flip-flops or kids (and adult) kit – likethese tracksuit bottoms for £3.99. 
<https://www.aldi.co.uk/team-gb-children%27s-joggers/p/070780056305100> On the 
subject of kids, quite a few people have asked me recently where to buy running 
kit for children. For my money,Decathlon 
<http://www.decathlon.co.uk/C-781258-childrens-running-clothes> and H&M 
<http://www2.hm.com/en_gb/kids/shop-by-product/girls-8-14-years/sportswear.html>
 are the best places to look: good-wearing/washing stuff that won’t set you 
back too much.

Your questions

I am male with size 9.5 feet. My feet are narrow and I struggle with the width 
at the front of most running shoes. The blisters are the worst. Any bright 
ideas? Dominic


Running shoes are always tricky to recommend because one man’s comfy, long-run 
shoe is another one’s blister-inducing nightmare. Generally, though, Adidas is 
the brand reckoned to come up narrowest, though they also tend to be generally 
quite small – many people go up at least half a size in their shoes.Asics Gel 
Foundations <http://www.asics.com/gb/en-gb/gel-foundation-12/p/0010248269.2342> 
are often the go-to recommendation for narrow-footed types, as areBrooks’s 
Addiction or Adrenaline ranges 
<http://www.brooksrunning.com/en_gb/mens-running-shoes/>. One option might 
actually be to try women’s shoes: plenty of women with wider feet do the 
reverse. Nike, for instance, do go up to a 9.5 in women’s, though of course 
that might still be a bit small for you – it just might be worth giving them a 
try in a shop on a treadmill to see how they feel. Nike, in fact, used to make 
a narrow-fit version of their Pegasus, but it doesn’t seem to be available at 
the moment.This article 
<http://beatplantarfasciitis.com/best-running-shoes-narrow-feet/> has some good 
tips for other narrow-fit models.

I wonder, though, if you’ve got the right socks. If you are wearing shoes that 
tend to be too wide in the toe box, it’s possible you might be compensating by 
wearing thick socks. I think there’s a misconception that the thicker the sock 
(or the double-layered kind), the less likely you are to blister. I actually 
find the thinner the better, so I would perhaps experiment with different 
brands. They don’t have to be expensive to be the right ones for you: Nike 
multipacks for a tenner are pretty good, though I remain loyal toLululemon’s 
<http://www.lululemon.co.uk/products/category/men-socks?pagesize=All>. There is 
a lot of good quality, cheap running kit on the market, and it doesn’t have to 
be a pricey sport, but if shelling out a little more on the right socks ends 
your blister hell, it’s money well spent.

More questions answered next time, please do send yours to 
kate.carter@guardian.co.uk or@katehelencarter 
<http://www.twitter.com/@katehelencarter> 
 