
Animated sequel Kung Fu Panda 3 scored a respectable $41m on debut to top the 
US box office this weekend <http://www.boxofficemojo.com/weekend/chart/>, but 
Oscar-winner Natalie Portman suffered a career-worst opening on the troubled 
western Jane Got a Gun.

Directed once again by Jennifer Yuh Nelson, this time with Alessandro Carloni, 
the new Kung Fu Panda film sees the roundhouse-kicking bear meet his birth 
family for the first time, as well as graduating to become a teacher of martial 
arts. Strong reviews and a voice cast featuring Jack Black, Angelina Jolie, 
Dustin Hoffman, Jackie Chan and Seth Rogen once again fuelled the film’s North 
American success.

Kung Fu Panda 3 did even better in China, where it pulled in $58.3m, the 
biggest animated opening of time. The sequel is the first in the trilogy to be 
co-produced by DreamWorks Animation and Shanghai-based Oriental DreamWorks, 
which guaranteed it a preferential release under China’s restricted system.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Fkung-fu-panda-3-scores-high-kicking-41m-at-the-us-box-office%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c829238acd54dadaa7e46399209802902cc04ab%2F274_224_2104_1262%2F2104.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kung%20Fu%20Panda%203%20scores%20high-kicking%20%2441m%20at%20the%20US%20box%20office&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Fkung-fu-panda-3-scores-high-kicking-41m-at-the-us-box-office%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kung%20Fu%20Panda%203%20scores%20high-kicking%20%2441m%20at%20the%20US%20box%20office&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Fkung-fu-panda-3-scores-high-kicking-41m-at-the-us-box-office%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c829238acd54dadaa7e46399209802902cc04ab%2F274_224_2104_1262%2F2104.jpg>
 Proper performance ... Kung Fu Panda 3 Photograph: DreamWorks Animation/AP 
There was less positive news for the week’s other new releases. Coastguard 
drama The Finest Hours, starring Chris Pine and Casey Affleck, landed in fourth 
spot with just $10.3m on debut, a disappointing return given the film’s lavish 
$70m budget. Reviews have been decent, if not stellar, withDeadline labelling 
Craig Gillespie’s movie 
<http://deadline.com/2016/01/the-finest-hours-review-chris-pine-casey-affleck-deftly-navigate-true-coast-guard-tale-1201692972/>
 “an entertaining and expertly crafted Coast Guard tale”.

Fifty Shades of Grey spoof Fifty Shades of Black failed to perform, taking 
just $6.1m in ninth place. The film sees Scary Movie regular Marlon Wayans as 
Christian Black, a riff on EL James’ kinky businessman Christian Grey from the 
popular erotic romance novels and film. Critics have not been kind,with Slant 
Magazine calling the movie 
<http://www.slantmagazine.com/film/review/fifty-shades-of-black> “an aimless, 
if sporadically clever, parody that tirelessly conceives of human sexuality as 
punchlines for its shortsighted cultural ribbings”.

Jane Got a Gun, starring Portman in the title role of a farmer forced to take 
desperate measures to protect her life and home, landed outside the top 10 on 
debut with just $830,000 in North American receipts.The film’s travails have 
been well-documented 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/12/lynne-ramsay-jane-got-a-gun-lawsuit-settle>
: Original director Lynne Ramsay quit production on the indie drama in March 
2013, prior to the first day of shooting, following a three-day standoff with 
producer-financier Scott Steindorff.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Fkung-fu-panda-3-scores-high-kicking-41m-at-the-us-box-office%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff852cdac387669001fe1ec2cdcd26310ed7a09be%2F54_7_1179_707%2F1179.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kung%20Fu%20Panda%203%20scores%20high-kicking%20%2441m%20at%20the%20US%20box%20office&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Fkung-fu-panda-3-scores-high-kicking-41m-at-the-us-box-office%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kung%20Fu%20Panda%203%20scores%20high-kicking%20%2441m%20at%20the%20US%20box%20office&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Fkung-fu-panda-3-scores-high-kicking-41m-at-the-us-box-office%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff852cdac387669001fe1ec2cdcd26310ed7a09be%2F54_7_1179_707%2F1179.jpg>
 Nothing in sight ... Natalie Portman and Joel Edgerton in Jane Got a Gun 
Photograph: PR 
The western was ultimately completed by Warrior’s Gavin O’Connor, who was 
called in at short notice with production already under way. Ramsay’s departure 
also saw Ewan McGregor replace Jude Law as the villain, while Joel Edgerton had 
earlier replaced Michael Fassbender in a heroic role. The acclaimed Scottish 
director of Morvern Callar and We Need to Talk About Kevin later found herself 
the subject of a legal action, butthe two sides settled out of court in March 
2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/12/lynne-ramsay-jane-got-a-gun-lawsuit-settle>
.

 