
The Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party is not in 
charge of Brexit, but it has nevertheless impaled itself on a dilemma about 
post-Brexit immigration. It can’t escape because it doesn’t know what to say. 
The uncertainty is understandable – because Brexit has sharpened the choices 
about migration policy – and at the same time bizarre, because the issue ought 
not to be causing the kind of trouble it undoubtedly is.

On one side of the argument, Jeremy Corbyn and John McDonnell obstinately make 
a virtue of refusing to talk about immigration controls. They prefer to focus 
on labour market regulation. “It is not an objective to reduce immigration,” a 
Corbyn spokesman famously said this autumn. These are “fictitious debates 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/john-mcdonnell-dismisses-calls-for-labour-to-back-immigration-cuts-2016-12>
”, McDonnell said this week.

Jeremy Corbyn may be unassailable, but he is not leading Labour | Rafael Behr
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/14/jeremy-corbyn-unassailable-not-leading-labour>
On the other side, most Labour MPs in seats that voted to leave in June think 
toughening controls is both correct policy and an unavoidable response after 
the referendum. Freedom of movement is “no longer an option”, Andy Burnham said 
this week. “If you are asking me should we carry on with free movement as was,” 
Ed Miliband saidin a recent interview 
<http://www.itv.com/news/update/2016-11-13/ed-milliband-free-movement-of-workers-in-uk-has-to-change/>
, “I don’t think we should.”

This is a profound disagreement and some Labour MPs have lurched too far too 
fast in either direction. It hasn’t quite come to a head yet because, in the 
aftermath of Corbyn’s re-election, neither side of the party is keen to 
recommence the internal battles. But the spectacle of the main opposition party 
putting forward two irreconcilable policies – with frontbenchers such as Keir 
Starmer and Diane Abbott taking different positions on the same day – is 
unlikely to survive prolonged contact with the electorate, as the byelection 
disasters inRichmond Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/02/the-guardian-view-on-richmond-park-slowly-does-it>
 andSleaford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2016/nov/30/sleaford-lincolnshire-brexit-byelection-young-video>
 showed.

Yet the disagreement is not a new one, and Labour has succeeded in managing it 
before. Back in the summer of 1965, Harold Wilson’s Labour government published 
a radically restrictive white paper on immigration from the British 
commonwealth that shocked even cabinet ministers. “This has been one of the 
most difficult and unpleasant jobs the government has had to do,” the housing 
minister Richard Crossman wrote in his diaries. “We have become illiberal,” he 
mourned. “This will confirm the feeling that ours is not a socialist 
government.”

Nevertheless Crossman was absolutely sure that the controls were necessary. “I 
am convinced that if we hadn’t done all this we would have been faced with 
certain electoral defeat in the West Midlands and the south-east,” he went on. 
“Politically, fear of immigration is the most powerful undertow today … We felt 
we had to out-trump the Tories by doing what they would have done … I fear we 
were right.” Antisemitism and racism were endemic in Britain, Crossman 
suspected. “One has to deal with them by controlling immigration when it gets 
beyond a certain level.”

A year of Brexit – Politics Weekly podcast live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/audio/2016/dec/15/a-year-of-brexit-politics-weekly-podcast-live>
High-minded it isn’t. But those words echo today because the essence of the 
argument in which Crossman’s generation participated – hard times, more 
migrants, native resentments, press and public prejudice, liberal principles 
under challenge, electoral defeats – has not altered all that much. Yet just as 
the Wilson Labour party was right to grasp the issue, though it could have 
grasped it far better, so the Corbyn party needs to grasp it in an equivalent 
way too. Granted, much has changed since 1965.Migration today <http:> divides 
about equally between those from the EU coming under freedom of movement, and 
non-EU migrants who require permission. Nor do all migrants come to settle. 
Half of the overall total come to Britainto work 
<http://www.migrationobservatory.ox.ac.uk/resources/briefings/migrants-in-the-uk-labour-market-an-overview/>
, with a quarter coming to study.

The biggest change is the sheer numbers. In the early 1960s, the entire 
population of all black and Asian migrants in the UK was 336,000. Nowadays, the 
UK has upwards of 600,000 people immigrating each year, with about half that 
number moving abroad. Although voters exaggerate the scale of immigration – 
they think 25% of the population are migrants when the true figure is 13% – 
these are big numbers with big impacts.

The other unignorable change is Brexit itself. There are two reasons for this. 
The first is that the Brexit vote was clearly to some degree a plebiscite about 
immigration. The second is that, by voting to leave the EU, Britain has to 
decide whether to seek an association with a single market whose founding 
principles include free movement of labour.

Yet the political perils for Labour are very familiar. After the issue of 
Brexit itself, voters think immigration is themost important question 
<https://d25d2506sfb94s.cloudfront.net/cumulus_uploads/document/lsjvmk0h4d/YG%20Trackers%20-%20Top%20Issues%20161129.pdf>
 facing the country. But Labour’s poll ratings on immigration are terrible. 
Only 11% of voters in the most recent YouGov pollthink Labour is the best party 
on immigration 
<https://yougov.co.uk/news/2016/12/09/voting-intention-labour-voting-intention-lowest-le/>
, with only 29% of Labour voters from the 2015 election – which Labour lost 
badly – agreeing. A mere 5% of leave voters think Labour is best on immigration.

If Labour’s priority is to re-secure its core voters on the issue, that is a 
very bad place to start from. Latestresearch 
<https://drive.google.com/file/d/0B1LkeTCb2GrxRUdsNWdORkM3N2c/view> by Chris 
Hanretty of the University of East Anglia suggests that 64% of Labour’s 232 
parliamentary seats voted leave in June. So if it is correct that immigration 
control was the decisive issue in the leave win, Labour MPs are right to demand 
that, at the very least, their party says something about immigration that 
engages with that stark reality.

Glenda Jackson on her scary reputation: ‘I’ve never understood the fear thing’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/dec/14/glenda-jackson-scary-reputation-never-understood-fear-thing-lear-labour>
There’s a framework for this. For most of the last half-century Labour’s 
policy was that managed migration made community integration and mutual trust 
possible. The policy had periods of success and failure. It was too repressive 
in the 1970s and it was too insouciant in the early 2000s, after EU 
enlargement. But until recently it worked reasonably, and won electoral consent.

Labour’s challenge in 2017 is to renew that same approach around the realities 
of Brexit. It won’t be easy, and it will involve compromises of the sort that 
Crossman expressed half a century ago. The policy cannot be based solely on 
liberal principles. But it cannot be based solely on ignoring those principles 
either.

It has to place intervention in the labour market to ensure fair treatment, 
alongside an unsentimental approach to immigration control. If Labour’s 
factions can at least agree to start from there, there’s just a chance that 
enough of the rest will fall into place.
 