
Labour is considering withdrawing cooperation with the Conservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> in Westminster over a 
proposed 19% reduction in state money to opposition parties in parliament.

Party officials confirmed they would consider halting cooperation with the 
Tories over parliamentary business unless the government considers rowing back 
on plans to cut “Short money” (named after Ted Short, a former leader of the 
Commons)announced in the autumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2015/nov/25/spending-review-george-osborne-autumn-statement->
. Tim Farron, the Lib Dem leader, has described the cuts as an attack on 
democracy.

 Opposition parties claim the government proposal shows the Tories are 
attempting to halt the ability of opposition parties to scrutinise legislation 
at the same time as they are increasing the numbers of Tory special advisers.

Electoral Reform Society warns over funding cut for opposition parties
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/26/electoral-reform-society-state-funding-opposition-parties>
Obstructing “the usual channels” has been discussed, a party source said, but 
would only be used as a last resort if the government failed to come forward 
with new proposals for opposition party funding in the new year.

“The usual channels” describes the working relationships between the 
government and the main opposition party that goes on behind the scenes, 
usually done through the whips’ office.

One long-standing form of cooperation is “pairing” 
<http://www.parliament.uk/site-information/glossary/pairing/> during votes in 
the Commons. If a minister or backbench Tory MP cannot attend a vote because of 
urgent business, a foreign trip or illness, Labour whips will designate one of 
their own MPs to abstain, so the two absent MPs cancel each other out.

The removal of pairing could force ministers to attend every vote and could 
severely hamper plans to get legislation through parliament. David Cameron’s 
government hasa slender majority  
<http://www.parliament.uk/mps-lords-and-offices/mps/current-state-of-the-parties/>
of 16.

Farron said the proposed cut to Short money was an attack on democracy, not 
the cost of politics as the government claims.

“While on the one hand the government want to cut Short money, they are 
spending £289m this year alone on government spinners and marketing. This 
proposal is a purely partisan move that will backfire on the government 
disastrously,” he said.

The spending review in November contained plans to reduce Short money by 19% 
and then freeze it over the remainder of parliament.

It is allocated to help run opposition parties in parliament and is calculated 
by the number of seats won and the number of votes gained. Official figures 
from May showLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> was due to 
receive £5.7m, the Scottish National party £1.1m, the Democratic Unionist party 
£153,000 and the Lib Dems £497,000.


Time for decent Tories to speak up. Our democracy is being rigged | Owen Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/02/british-democracy-disenfranchised-voters-boundary-changes>
The cut was not mentioned by George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> in his autumn statement 
speech to the Commons but emerged later when full documentation was released.



Meanwhile, David Cameron has increased the amount of public money  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/17/osborne-hands-advisers-big-pay-rises-while-freezing-public-sector-wages>
spent on Conservative special advisers over the past year while freezing public 
sector pay.

The Labour chief whip, Rosie Winterton, attended a meeting of opposition 
representatives held in parliament shortly before Christmas to discuss the 
proposed cut. It could be damaging for Labour, which has been shunned by some 
wealthy donors since first electing Ed Miliband and then Jeremy Corbyn as 
leader.

The SNP expressed concern that the cut would have a big impact on its work in 
Westminster as it gears up to perform new roles in the Commons including having 
seats in every select committee and participating in every debate.


Since its dramatic gains in the general election, the SNP has hired many new 
staff who might have to be sacked because of the proposals, a party source said.


It is not acceptable for the party of government to misuse its position to 
undermine the work of the opposition
Angus Robertson, SNP 
The SNP’s Westminster leader, Angus Robertson, said the proposal was a 
fundamental attack, particularly on the work of smaller parties. “It is not 
acceptable for the party of government to misuse its position to undermine 
democratic accountability and the work of the opposition. The government must 
think again,” he said.


The DUP believes the cut would represent a combined loss of £32,392 in the 
next financial year. A DUP official said the government should face further 
scrutiny over how many Tory supporters are now on the public payroll.

“MPs need to be publicly supported in discharging their democratic mandate. 
Ministers already have the vast apparatus of the civil service. There are 
legitimate questions to be asked about whether the government is properly and 
effectively using public funds for party political ends,” the official said.


A No 10 source said: “Cutting the huge deficit we inherited from Labour is 
crucial in building a strong and secure British economy. Government 
departments, local councils and other parts of the public sector have had to 
make savings to help reduce Britain’s deficit. We believe it is right to ask 
political parties to help tackle the deficit too by making savings in Short 
money.”
 