
A government-promoted savings account taken out by more than 500,000 aspiring 
first-time buyers has been dubbed a “sham” that has betrayed young people 
hoping for their first step on the property ladder.

The help-to-buy Isa pays a 25% government bonus of up to £3,000 towards a 
deposit. But it has emerged that this isnot paid until a property sale is 
completed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/20/help-to-buy-isa-clause-attack-first-time-buyers>
, and so cannot be used to the initial deposit demanded by mortgage lenders.


Labour MP David Lammy <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/david-lammy> said: 
“Young people and all those saving in the hope of one day owning their own home 
have got every right to feel betrayed and conned by the government.

“Payment of a 25% bonus upon completion of the purchase of a home will only 
help those lucky enough to be able to already afford a deposit and will do 
nothing whatsoever to help those who are priced out of ever getting on the 
housing ladder.”

Related: Help-to-buy Isa clause under attack for hampering first-time buyers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/20/help-to-buy-isa-clause-attack-first-time-buyers>

Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> said that more than £2m 
has been wasted by the government advertising a “misleading” Isa deal.

The scheme was launched in the 2015 budget, with the then chancellor, George 
Osborne, saying it would help first-time buyers tackle the “high deposits 
required by the banks”.


Rebecca Long-Bailey MP, Labour’s shadow chief secretary to the Treasury, said: 
“Over the weekend we learned that over £9bn goes into the pockets of private 
landlords when instead we should be building council houses and it was also 
revealed that the Tory Isa for first-time buyers was a sham.

 “Adding insult to injury we learn the Tories have blown millions of 
taxpayers’ money on advertising the first-time buyer sham. Young people 
struggling to get on the housing ladder deserve better than this.”

Financial advisers said the help-to-buy Isas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/isas> have, until now, been hugely popular 
among potential young buyers, with over 500,000 accounts. But they said many 
will now be sorely disappointed they can’t access the cash bonus until it is 
too late.

Hargreaves Lansdown’s Danny Cox said: “Clearly saving for property with the 
added bonus from the government is an incentive which works, though now it 
looks like many of these savers are going to feel disappointed by a rule which 
prohibits them from getting their government bonus until after they have 
completed their house purchase.”

However, a Treasury spokesperson defended the scheme, saying the £3,000 bonus 
is included as part of the overall deposit and taken into account by lenders 
when deciding on the loan-to-value ratio.

“This government is committed to helping those who aspire to buy their own 
homes, and that’s why we have made sure they are aware that they can receive a 
government bonus of up to £3,000 if they save into a help to buy Isa. Since its 
launch more than half a million people have made use of the scheme, with over 
22,000 already receiving their bonus.”

Britain’s housing crisis has become one of the key policy areas in the Labour 
party leadership battle, and formed a central plank in Theresa May’s bid to 
become prime minister.


Jeremy Corbyn has argued for a cap on private rent levels, more council 
housing and an end to “social cleansing” he argues has resulted from benefit 
caps and housing sell-offs.

He has also put forward his own plan to extend the right-to-buy  
<http://labourlist.org/2015/06/jeremy-corbyn-right-to-buy-should-be-extended-to-private-tenants/>
scheme to the private rented sector. He has suggested funding subsidised 
mortgages for private tenants by withdrawing £14bn of tax allowances that were 
at the time given to buy-to-let landlords.

Owen Smith has pledged that a government under his control would build 300,000 
homes in every year of the next parliament, equal to 1.5m over five years.

When May launched her campaign for leadership of the Conservative party she 
promised: “We need to do far more to get more houses built. Because unless we 
deal with the housing deficit, we will see house prices keep on rising.”
 