
Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> is this week expected to 
unveil its plans to reform HM Revenue and Customs, including a promise to bring 
greater scrutiny and accountability, as well as more targeted resources, to the 
UK’s much-criticised tax collecting agency.

The shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, who promised a review of HMRC a year ago
 
<http://press.labour.org.uk/post/130055656854/speech-by-john-mcdonnell-to-labour-party-annual>
, is likely to set out plans under a Labour government for a new supervisory 
board of stakeholders to monitor the agency’s conduct and policies.

Supporters believe such a move would go a long way to restoring public trust in
HMRC <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hmrc> after years of whistleblower 
revelations created widespread distrust.

In the wake of the Panama Papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers>, LuxLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/05/-sp-luxembourg-tax-files-tax-avoidance-industrial-scale>
 and other tax scandals, HMRC bosses have been summoned before parliamentary 
committees, but have often hidden behind the duty of confidentiality owed to 
taxpayers.

Labour is likely to propose that senior HMRC executives appear before a new 
supervisory board for regular scrutiny sessions, held in public, in a bid to 
restore trust.

MPs back plan to force global firms to publicly disclose income and tax
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/01/mps-back-for-plan-to-force-global-firms-to-publicly-disclose-income-and-tax>
HMRC’s enthusiasm for tackling the most complex tax avoidance schemes used by 
multinationals such as Google, Apple, Vodafone and Amazon has been questioned 
in recent years.


Earlier this year, the tax office was fiercely criticised for reaching a £130m 
settlement with Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/29/googles-tax-deal-with-the-uk-key-questions-answered-chancellor-taxes>
 over 10 years of disputed tax bills.McDonnell said 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-01-26/mcdonnell-presses-osborne-over-google-s-derisory-u-k-tax-deal>
 it was “derisory”.

Labour is expected to call for a new HMRC supervisory board that would have 
powers to view, in private, tax settlements and deals struck with international 
corporations.


The new board could also have powers to monitor how tax inspectors decided 
whether to prosecute tax evaders in the criminal courts – though Labour is 
expected to stop short of recommending such a scrutiny body have access to 
confidential information on individual taxpayers.


The board could include representatives of small- and medium-sized businesses, 
many of whom have grown increasingly concerned that they are being chased for 
every penny of tax while HMRC is going soft on big international firms. Past 
tax inspectors and representatives of tax fairness campaign groups may also be 
given a voice under Labour plans.

HMRC already has a corporate-style board 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/hm-revenue-customs/about/our-governance>
, where the lead non-executive is Ian Barlow, a former senior partner at KPMG 
who sits on the boards of several large groups including the estate agent 
Foxtons and medical devices group Smith & Nephew.


Barlow has also previously sat on the board of Candy & Candy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/07/hmrc-chair-confirms-giving-business-advice-to-candy-brothers>
, the firm founded by property development tycoons Nick and Christian Candy.

Other HMRC non-executives are Joanna Baldwin, a part-time director at Aviva 
France, Mervyn Walker, a former director of mining group Anglo American, 
Rolls-Royce chief information officer Simon Ricketts, and former 
PricewaterhouseCoopers tax partner John Whiting.

HMRC also has a number of other advisory committees 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/groups/business-tax-forum>, which are dominated 
by executives from multinational corporations.


Last year, one of the UK’s top tax barristers claimed that Britain’s tax 
policy was effectively dictated by companies and not ministers.

Philip Baker QC <http://www.fieldtax.com/barristers/philip-baker-qc/> said 
policymakers and tax experts had learned over recent decades that the mobility 
of companies and jobs meant there was “no question [countries] have to be 
competitive to survive”. As a consequence, governments had to provide the tax 
policies that international corporations wanted.


“I don’t think in the last 20 years or so one can say that governments have 
driven corporation tax policy,” he said. “It’s the large companies that have 
driven the direction of corporate tax policy.”
 