
A week after the Tories raised £160,000 by selling a game of tennis with David 
Cameron and Boris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jul/03/tennis-cameron-johnson-160000-tory-fundraiser>
, the Labour party will on Wednesday be auctioning a five-a-side football match 
against the "shadow cabinet all-stars".

The lucky winner will be able to take on Jim Murphy, Andy Burnham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andyburnham> and Sadiq Khan – all noted 
footballers – plus the ever-enthusiastic Ed Balls, and another, 
as-yet-unidentified shadow cabinet member.

The match will be one of the main items up for auction at Labour's annual gala 
dinner, to be hosted byStephen Fry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/stephen-fry> at the Roundhouse in Camden.

If last week's Tory summer party at the Hurlingham Club had a touch of 
opulence, Labour will be hoping that its bash on Wednesday night will have a 
slightly more refined feel. Where Tory donors splashed out on a champagne 
bottle signed by Margaret Thatcher and a "fantastic eight-gun pheasant shoot" 
in Oxfordshire,Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> supporters 
will have the chance to bid for four works by some of Britain's leading artists.

Sir Antony Gormley <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gormley> has 
donated a cast-iron statue, Small Turn III (2013) from his Blockwise series; 
Sir Anish Kapoor has donated an untitled gouache on paper – a float inside a 
window mount; and Mark Wallinger has donated White Horse (2011), an editioned 
model of the proposed 50m (164ft) sculpture for Ebbsfleet, Kent. The most 
dedicated Labour donors can bid for a Grayson Perry ceramic which is emblazoned 
with the words "Vote Labour".

Tables at the gala dinner will represent sectors including manufacturing, 
contemporary art, music and medical science. In addition to Fry, other guests 
will include the actor Jason Isaacs (Lucius Malfoy in the Harry Potter films), 
the comedian Rhona Cameron and the actor David Morrissey, who played Gordon 
Brown in The Deal.

Miliband will tell the attendees: "One-nation Labour brings people together 
from all walks of life who share our determination to improve our country. We 
are committed to winning this election not in the interests of our party but of 
Britain. Because we know Britain can do better than this."

Dame Tessa Jowell <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tessajowell>, the 
former cabinet minister who is chair of the gala dinner committee, will say: "I 
hope that the Roundhouse inspires you as it does me. It has become a place of 
excellence for art and culture, but it is its young artists that fire the 
engine of irresistible energy. It represents so much of the ambition we hope to 
deliver on in government. Your being here this evening will help us achieve 
that."

Tony Blair attended a Labour gala dinner in 2012 at Arsenal's Emirates stadium 
where he made a joint appearance withEd Miliband 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband>. The joint appearance by the 
current and last but one Labour leader, who have awkward relations, was 
organised by Alastair Campbell.

The auction at last week's Tory summer ball raised around £500,000. Hundreds 
of thousands more are thought to have been raised through table sales.
 