
Labour has stretched its lead over the Tories to five-points but now lags 
further behind theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> on the crucial issue of 
economic credibility, according to the latest Observer/Opinium poll.

The survey suggests that the Tories have not, overall, enjoyed a bounce from 
last week’s autumn statement in which chancellorGeorge Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> promised £2bn more a year 
for the NHS and a £15bn road-building programme.
 The Labour party has extended its poll lead over the Conservatives, but the 
Tories retain the majority of support when it comes to the economy. Photograph: 
Opinium 
The poll, taken mainly after the Chancellor’s speech, puts Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> on 34% (up one point on a 
fortnight ago), the Conservatives on 29% (down one point), Ukip unchanged on 
19%, the Liberal Democracts on 6% (down one point), and the Greens also on 6% 
(up two points).

When asked which party they believed would handle the economy better, both the 
two main parties have seen a fall in backing.

The Tories – with David Cameron and Osborne in charge – have fallen from 35% 
when the question was last asked in September to 32%, while Labour has dropped 
from 23% to 18%.
 Labour has increased its poll margin over the Conservatives to five points, 
while Ukip retains its support. Photograph: Opinium 
The growth in economic optimism reflected in Opinium’s polls over the last 18 
months appears to have petered out. Only 27% said they believed the economy was 
now in good shape with 38% saying the reverse. This compares with a more upbeat 
assesment in September when 31% thought it was in a good state against 35% who 
thought the reverse.

Opinium asked respondents whether they believed a series of promises made last 
week by Osborne were believable or not. Most of the tax cuts he promised, 
including changes to stamp duty, the plan to further raise the personal tax 
allowance, and plans to raise the 40p tax threshold to 50p, were regarded as 
believable by a clear majority of respondents.

There was more scepticism, however, over plans to boost NHS spending and 
inject billions more into road building. 48% believed the pledges onNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> funding against 41% who did not, 
while 47% believed the roads pledge against 40% who did not.

Opinium Research carried out an online survey of 1,940 GB adults aged 18+ from 
3rd to 4th December. Results have been weighted to nationally representative 
criteria.
 