
Lancashire looks set to become the first English county to introduce mayoral 
elections in return for more powers from Whitehall.

The county’s political leaders are close to agreeing a deal to bring in an 
elected mayor, following their neighbours in Greater Manchester and the 
Liverpool city regions where Labour hopes MPsAndy Burnham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/18/andy-burnham-to-stand-for-mayor-of-greater-manchester>
 andSteve Rotheram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/10/corbyn-ally-steve-rotheram-named-as-candidate-for-liverpool-city-region-mayor>
 will win inaugural elections next May.

Councils should take devolved powers now while they still can
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/13/councils-take-devolved-powers-now-tyne-and-wear-north-east>
“I think we are clearly heading towards the position of an elected mayor for 
Lancashire,” said Simon Blackburn, leader of Blackpool council, who heads the 
nascentshadow Lancashire combined authority 
<http://www.lancashire.gov.uk/council/organisation-and-partnerships/lancashire-combined-authority.aspx>
, which brings together the 15 local councils in the county.

Speaking at an event organised by Marketing Lancashire at Burnley football 
club on Wednesday, Blackburn said: “Can we imagine a situation whereby the 
elected mayors of Greater Manchester and Merseyside are striding up Downing 
Street to have a conversation with the prime minister and the chancellor while 
Lancashire continues to speak with 15 voices? I can’t really think that’s going 
to work.

“The government are clear that they want robust and accountable governance 
arrangements – that’s civil servant talk for the need to have an elected mayor.”

Blackburn will chair a meeting on Thursday with Jenny Mein, the leader of 
Lancashire county council, and the leaders of councils in Darwen, Burnley, 
Rossendale, Hyndburn, Pendle, Fylde, Chorley, Preston, Ribble Valley, West 
Lancashire, Lancaster, South Ribble and Wyre.

He said leaders would discuss what the role of elected mayor of Lancashire 
might look like. “It is for the leaders and the people of Lancashire to decide 
how much power they want to place in the hands of that individual.”

If the leaders agree, they will propose a deal with central government asking 
for more spending powers in return for the introduction of a mayor.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fthe-northerner%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Flancashire-likely-to-be-first-county-to-elect-mayor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a248351d0e3fea4900b165f29afc210d0d67408%2F0_219_6582_3949%2F6582.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lancashire%20likely%20to%20be%20first%20county%20to%20elect%20mayor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fthe-northerner%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Flancashire-likely-to-be-first-county-to-elect-mayor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lancashire%20likely%20to%20be%20first%20county%20to%20elect%20mayor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fthe-northerner%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Flancashire-likely-to-be-first-county-to-elect-mayor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a248351d0e3fea4900b165f29afc210d0d67408%2F0_219_6582_3949%2F6582.jpg>
 Andrew Percy, the minister for the northern powerhouse. Photograph: 
Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
Across the Pennines, Lancashire’s arch-rivals in Yorkshire have yet to agree a 
county-wide devolution deal. So far only theSheffield city region 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/19/andrew-percy-northern-powerhouse-minister-sheffield>
 has decided to elect a mayor next May, though that deal could be imperilled by 
a case being heard in the high court this week challenging whether Chesterfield 
in Derbyshire and Bassetlaw in Nottinghamshire should be part of the mayoralty.

The five Labour leaders in West Yorkshire wanted to strike their own deal 
based on theLeeds city region 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/02/west-yorkshire-council-leaders-devolution-bid-northern-powerhouse>
, which includes bits of North Yorkshire. But they have been unable to reach a 
compromise with Tory MPs and councillors in North Yorkshire, who favour a 
Greater Yorkshire deal.

Andrew Percy, the minister for the northern powerhouse project, said on 
Wednesday he could see the merits in a Greater Yorkshire mayoralty, which would 
include his east Yorkshire constituency of Brigg and Goole.

Speaking at the event at Burnley football club, Percy said: “We have to get a 
deal for the rest of Yorkshire. If you look at the port infrastructure, the M62 
corridor, everywhere through to Leeds it’s so important to the economy of the 
north. We want a devo deal because Manchester is powering ahead, so is 
Liverpool, so is Tees Valley just to the north. We’ve got this gap in the 
middle and we’ve got to plug that.”
 