
A Brexit side effect nobody considered

In February 2000, a butterfly flapped its wings in the small town of 
Östringen, just over the German border from France. And with that one flap, 
English cricket was changed for a generation. Maros Kolpak, a goalkeeper in the 
second division of the German handball league, signed a new three-year contract 
with his team, TSV Östringen. Because he was Slovakian, the national federation 
decided to register him as an overseas player. Under league rules, each team 
was only allowed two foreigners in its squad. Kolpak, who had lived and worked 
in Germany for three years already, decided to challenge them in the local 
court. Slovakia wasn’t in the EU, but had recently signed a trade agreement 
with it. Kolpak argued it entitled him to work in Germany without restriction.

Sign up to the Spin
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/sign-up-to-the-spin>
Kolpak’s case went all the way to the European court of justice in Luxembourg, 
where, on 8 May 2003, after almost a full year of deliberation, the judges 
finally settled in his favour. He returned to Östringen and resumed his career. 
But a strong wind had started to blow. The next February, Leicestershire signed 
the South African spinner Claude Henderson as a UK-registered player. He had 
played seven Tests, but felt he had been frozen out by the selectors. South 
Africa was one of 78 nations to sign the Cotonou Agreement with the EU. So 
Henderson was covered by the same court ruling, and entitled to the very same 
rights, that allowed Maros Kolpak to play for TSV Östringen.

In the past few weeks, three recent South Africa internationals have signed 
Kolpak deals. Simon Harmer has joined Essex, Stiaan van Zyl has joined Sussex, 
and Hardus Viljoen has headed to Derbyshire. All three have played Test cricket 
for South Africa in the previous 12 months, and all three have decided to give 
up their international careers for the duration of their contracts. Dane Piedt 
and at least one other current Test playerare also said to be seeking Kolpak 
deals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/12/south-africa-test-player-drain-english-counties-kolpak-deals>
. This is likely to be the last great gust, a final flurry of Kolpak signings 
before Brexit comes into effect, and the route into English cricket through EU 
legislation is cut off by the Home Office.

Henderson was the first Kolpak player. Within five years, 50 more followed. 
The ECB tried to turn back the tide. They brought in a rule that no Kolpak 
player could have played international cricket in the year before he had 
signed. But this was challenged, and overturned, when Yorkshire signed Jacques 
Rudolph in 2007. So the ECB started charging fees to teams who included more 
than two Kolpak players in any one match. This didn’t work either. By 2008,in 
an infamous game between Leicestershire and Northamptonshire 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/countycricket2008/engine/match/319827.html> in a 
Friends Provident Trophy match at Wantage Road, 12 of the 22 players were South 
Africans on Kolpak deals.

In 2009, the ECB finally found a fix. They concocted a another new rule which 
meant that only players who had held a valid work permit for four years would 
be able to sign Kolpak deals, unless, like Viljoen, Harmer, and Van Zyl, they 
had played one Test match in the past two years or five in the past five. Since 
the ECB made that change, the debate has settled down, and the number of 
Kolpaks on the county circuit has declined. Today the ECB say it is around 3-4% 
of the domestic/non-overseas registered playing base. This latest flurry of 
fresh Kolpak signings is down to three things: the weak Rand, the increase in 
quotas in South African cricket, and Brexit.

One of the many little potential side effects that went unreckoned during the 
referendum campaign – incredible, this, since there can scarcely have been many 
more important things to consider – was what the result would mean for county 
cricket. But the Kolpak players themselves, like many other migrant workers in 
the country, soon began wondering where the result left them. The day after the 
vote, Brendan Taylor, on a Kolpak deal with Nottinghamshire, asked the ECB for 
guidance. They’re waiting to hear from the Home Office. In the meantime, 
cricketers are working under the assumption that any Kolpak deal signed before 
the end of 2017 won’t be affected by Brexit. A race is on, then, to hitch up 
with a county club before the door is shut.

Cricket South Africa admit they are powerless to stop England player drain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/12/south-africa-test-player-drain-english-counties-kolpak-deals>
The South African economy is weak, and the government has started pursuing an 
“aggressive” transformation policy, so players in South Africa have two good 
reasons to leave – income and opportunity. In 2015 Viljoen was weighing up an 
offer to move to New Zealand. He decided at the time: “I don’t want to have 
second best. You get brought up in your country to play for your country.” He’s 
now played one Test, against England in January, and seems to have changed his 
mind. There is talk of an “exodus” of top talent, though the player drain isn’t 
yet as bad asthe one affecting South African rugby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/13/allister-coetzee-south-africa-england-to-do-list>
.

Even as the Kolpak system winds down, it’s still unclear after all these years 
whether it has improved English cricket or not. There are good arguments on 
both sides. The standard improved because there were better players on the 
circuit, but by being here those same players denied opportunities to young 
English players. What is clear, though, is that it has undermined South African 
cricket. Piedt counts as a “player of colour” in the quota system. If he and 
others like him sign, the situation will get trickier still. As for the man 
himself, Maros Kolpak is 45, and still playing handball. Only now he’s back in 
Slovakia. The Wisden Almanack tracked him for an interview in 2005. It was the 
first he’d heard that he’d become so famous, and he seemed to be tickled by the 
idea. He’d never intended to change anyone else’s life, he said, but “did it 
for myself”.

• This is an extract taken from the Spin, the Guardian’s weekly cricket email. 
To subscribe,just visit this page and follow the instructions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/sign-up-to-the-spin?utm_source=esp&utm_medium=Email&utm_campaign=The+Spin+2016&utm_term=197632&subid=1298530&CMP=EMCSPTEML942&utm_source=esp&utm_medium=Email&utm_campaign=The+Spin+2016&utm_term=202047&subid=1298530&CMP=EMCSPTEML942&utm_source=esp&utm_medium=Email&utm_campaign=The+Spin+2016&utm_term=203006&subid=1298530&CMP=EMCSPTEML942>
.

Won! Won! Won! 

Congratulations to Graham Downey, Tom Paterson, and Justin Goulding, who all 
correctly guessed that Jack Russell is the first and only player in history to 
twice make the top score in a Test innings after coming in as night watchman. 
After being sent in at No3 against Sri Lanka at Lord’s in 1988, Russell batted 
tilluntil tea on the second day before being caught at cover for 94. Then 
against the West Indies at Bridgetown in 1990 he was sent in on the fourth 
evening with the score at 15 for three, and batted for five hours against 
Curtly Ambrose, Ian Bishop, Malcolm Marshall, and Ezra Mozseley before being 
bowled for 54. Commiserations to the many people who guessed he was the only 
night watchman to twice make fifty50 or more, but Mark Boucher scored two 
centuries in that position.

Never mind. The Nightwatchman <https://www.thenightwatchman.net> is still 
offering Spin readers a special discount on it’sspecial Christmas gift set 
<http://www.thenightwatchman.net/buy/product-category/christmas-gifts>, which 
includes all four issues from 2016 and enough good cricket writing to keep you 
busy till the season starts and after. It normally costs costs £37.99 (+P&P), 
but add the code SPIN16 and it’s yours for £10 less. If you aren’t already 
familiar, there are a selection of extracts from the magazine upon the Guardian 
Sports Network <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/the-nightwatchman>. Go have a 
look, and when you decide you want to subscribe,you can do it here 
<http://www.thenightwatchman.net/buy/product-category/subscriptions>.

Still want more?

Something is stirring in Australia, writes Barney Ronay, an attack of Cummins, 
Pattinson and Starc,a dream of pure, frictionless speed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/09/pat-cummins-australia-need-for-pure-speed>

“If you’re not at the dining table, you’re probably on the menu” Sam Perry on 
the case of “Glenn Maxwell v the Australian Cricket Establishment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/maxwell-criticism-disproportionate-politics-good-leadership>
”

Jon Watts reports from on the state of the sport in a far-flung corner of 
Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/07/cricket-brazilian-outpost-ccc-itaguai>

Four-day Tests? Red cards? Nappy-changing facilities in the gents’ loos? Vic 
Marks askswhen the MCC got to be so radical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/07/gatting-inzamam-holding-red-card-sendings-off-cricket>

And Ali Martin wraps up England’s thrashing in the fourth Test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/12/ravi-ashwin-india-jadeja-jayant-dominance>
. You can find that, and the rest of our coverage from the tour that you may 
already have decided it is better to forget,here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/england-in-india-2016-17>.

Contact The Spin …

… by writing to andy.bull@theguardian.com <mailto:andy.bull@theguardian.com>

In!

To subscribe to the Spin, just visit this page and follow the instructions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/sign-up-to-the-spin?utm_source=esp&utm_medium=Email&utm_campaign=The+Spin+2016&utm_term=197632&subid=1298530&CMP=EMCSPTEML942&utm_source=esp&utm_medium=Email&utm_campaign=The+Spin+2016&utm_term=202047&subid=1298530&CMP=EMCSPTEML942&utm_source=esp&utm_medium=Email&utm_campaign=The+Spin+2016&utm_term=203006&subid=1298530&CMP=EMCSPTEML942>
.
 