
Buses have started taking the remaining asylum-seeking teenagers from the 
Calais refugee camp to undisclosed locations aroundFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, as officials began the final stage 
of clearing the site.

Two UK Home Office workers were understood to be on each bus, taking the young 
people to juvenile centres across France where their applications for asylum in 
the UK and France were due to be processed. No details were revealed about the 
destinations of the buses.

The Calais prefecture had informed the camp’s last residents on Tuesday that 
no further applications for asylum in the UK would be dealt with inCalais 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/calais>. Among the camp’s remaining 
population most appeared to be teenagers, possibly aged between 14 and 17, 
although there were a handful of much younger children.

UK officials, wearing hi-vis jackets marked “Immigration Enforcement”, joined 
UNHCR staff as children were led on to buses shortly after 8am. Large numbers 
of riot police lined the road from the fenced-off area, where an estimated 
1,500 people have been sleeping in repurposed shipping containers for the past 
week, but the first 14 buses left without incident.

By Wednesday evening 1,616 young refugees had been taken away on 38 buses. 
French officials said around 300 women and children would be taken from a 
neighbouring building on Thursday to centres around France.


Several dozen new reception centres had been opened in the past few days, set 
up in holiday camps, youth hostels, disused retirement homes or former military 
bases. Children were told where they would be going when they got on the buses. 
They were not given a choice about their destination, but they were allowed to 
stick with friends and other children from their countries of origin.

“It wasn’t easy to create these reception centres. There was some local 
opposition. But the idea was to split the minors into smaller groups so that 
they could receive more personalised attention as they pursue applications to 
go to the UK, or are helped to be reconnected with family elsewhere inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>,” Steve Barbet, a spokesman for 
the local regional government, said. “Some may decide to stay in France. Others 
may decide to return to their own countries.”

French media have reported that a large number of children sent to children’s 
homes around France have subsequently run away to continue attempting to come 
to the UK illegally.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fwhere-next-the-last-days-of-the-calais-refugee-camp-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Where%20next%3F%20The%20last%20days%20of%20the%20Calais%20refugee%20camp%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fwhere-next-the-last-days-of-the-calais-refugee-camp-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Where%20next%3F%20The%20last%20days%20of%20the%20Calais%20refugee%20camp%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fwhere-next-the-last-days-of-the-calais-refugee-camp-video&media=>
Where next? The last days of the Calais refugee camp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/oct/28/where-next-the-last-days-of-the-calais-refugee-camp-video>
But Fabienne Buccio, the prefect of the Pas-de-Calais region and the most 
senior local official in charge of the operation, said she hoped that the 
presence of UK Home Office staff accompanying these children on the buses would 
convince them that their cases were being treated seriously, and would help 
persuade them to remain.

About 60 Home Office officials were in Calais on Wednesday morning and they 
were expected to remain in France, with the smaller groups of children, until 
the applications of all minors hoping to come to the UK were processed.

“It is important that the British are there on the buses, accompanying the 
minors, showing their engagement with the whole process,” Buccio said. “This is 
the result of long ministeral-level negotiations. This is much more 
personalised than the adult evacuations. The aim is to have no one left here.”

She said she expected several hundred more children to join the 300 refugee 
children who were taken to the UK last month.

By mid morning more than 14 buses had left, with 600 children on them. 
Officials hope to finish the clearance on Wednesday. The shipping containers 
would be removed as soon as they were empty, Buccio said.

The lack of information about where the buses were going had prompted anxiety 
and uncertainty among the younger residents of the camp. Just a few hours 
before they left, some children still thought they were being taken to England.

“Are people going to the UK?” Afsar Khan, 12, from Afghanistan, asked, still 
confused about the dispersal plans. His friend Wali Tajek, 16, from Kabul, who 
was given a different bus number, was disappointed not to be going to Britain. 
“My uncle lives in Halifax. He has a pizza shop. He said he will support me, 
but they don’t let me go,” he said. He said he left Afghanistan because his 
parents were both dead, and because of the Taliban.

“I had an interview a month ago. The French person said they would tell me in 
two weeks, but there was no answer,” he said. The period of confusion had 
unsettled a lot of the teenagers. “There are a lot of fights. People are always 
angry.”

Garbled reports of the diplomatic standoff between France and Britain over the 
fate of the young people had been picked up on by many but with muddled 
accuracy. Many had heard the French president’s request to the UK that they 
should accommodate all the remaining children, and assumed that this would 
happen.

A 16-year-old from Sudan, who was due to get on bus No 33, said he had hoped 
to go to the UK to try to find his brother. “We were so happy last week when we 
heard that the UK will take all the under-age people. We were so happy but now 
we are so worried. Everybody is going crazy.” He said he would get on the bus 
on Wednesday, but if he had another chance to go to the UK in the coming weeks 
he would take it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Frefugees-hope-and-despair-in-calais-camp-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Refugees'%20hope%20and%20despair%20in%20Calais%20camp%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Frefugees-hope-and-despair-in-calais-camp-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Refugees%27%20hope%20and%20despair%20in%20Calais%20camp%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Frefugees-hope-and-despair-in-calais-camp-video&media=>
Refugees’ hope and despair in Calais camp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/oct/17/refugees-hope-and-despair-in-calais-camp-video>
While more than 6,000 adults and children have already left the camp to claim 
asylum in France, those who remain are mostly people who have a strong reason 
to want to go to the UK – family members or friends who are there, or they 
speak very good English. Charity workers have spent months explaining that 
remaining in France is a more sensible option (particularly for older children 
from Afghanistan, who risk being sent back to Afghanistan from the UK when they 
turn 17-and-a-half).

Volunteers who work with some of the small charities that have grown up over 
the past year to help look after the minors said they were taken aback by the 
speed of the decision to move the young people on to accommodation elsewhere in 
France. While there was relief that young people were being moved out of 
containers where water supplies were said to be inadequate, and where there was 
no provision of food, except charity handouts, there was also concern that 
there was no time to hand over details of which children needed extra support.

“There are some with learning difficulties, mental health problems, long-term 
health issues. We’re trying to hand over this information, but we don’t know 
who to pass it to, and there is so little time,” said Michael McHugh, who works 
with the Refugee Youth Service, an organisation part-funded by Save The 
Children.

Volunteers had put up a large sheet of paper on the fences around the shipping 
containers where refugees spent their last night in the camp, so departing 
asylum seekers could write messages. “We are not toys to play with. We are 
kids. We needs lives,” one message said. Another said: “Never give up. Going to 
the UK.”

A fight last night between Afghan and Eritrean teenagers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/01/calais-camp-hit-riots-refugees-teenagers>
 had resulted in large numbers of Eritrean minors leaving the shipping 
containers and sleeping on the floor of the camp’s church, one of the few 
hand-built structures that has yet to be demolished. Four people were injured 
but not seriously.
 