
There's an instructive piece in North West Business Insider 
<http://www.insidermedia.com/northwest/> about the mountain of borrowing which 
underlay those modern landmarks of the North, the Beetham property company's 
various towers. Rising proudly above Liverpool and Manchester they prove to 
have been built on the sort of credit which has slid away in the crunch, like 
sand.

Insider's correspondent David Casey has been reading a report from Baker Tilly 
who were appointed administrators when a winding-up petition was filed at the 
High Court in July for Regional Landmark Hotels, formerly called the Beetham 
Organisation.

This puts the amount owed at more than £50 million and follows previous 
administrations of other parts of the firm, which saw KPMG sell the iconic 
Beetham hotels in Manchester and Liverpool in March to Cypriot businessman 
Loucas Louca for an estimated £65-70 million.The full piece is here. 
<http://www.insidermedia.com/insider/north-west/59602-collapsed-beetham-business-owes-creditors-50m>

A similar fate befell Leeds' highest profile developer Kevin Linfoot, whose KW 
Linfoot firm had the vaulting ambition to design a 54-story glass-clad 
skyscraper with a 32-story twin called Lumiere. Thelaunch scenes 
<http://www.yorkshirepost.co.uk/news/around-yorkshire/local-stories/party_s_over_for_towers_launched_on_high_hopes_1_2507506>
 were extraordinary, even for the giddiest moments of the city's property boom, 
with the French designer Philippe Starck holding court amid stiltwalkers, 
chocolate-coated women and fireeaters.

Linfoot went into administration 
<http://www.yorkshireeveningpost.co.uk/news/latest-news/central-leeds/leeds_developer_in_administration_1_2205597>
 19 months later, in February 2009, and the Lumiere handling companysought 
liquidation <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-leeds-11052964> the following 
years. The site remains an undeveloped plot with plans for a temporary minipark 
being mulled.The skyscraper neededover £1 million just to pay for planning 
costs.

The elan of the schemes, built or not, was remarkable but many felt queasy at 
the scale of lending which inevitably had to underly such vaulting notions. It 
is hard now to recall an era which sawLeeds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/leeds> planners talking about an avenue of 
skyscrapers marching up the hill towards the university with 23 applications 
for towers averaging 35 storeys in the planning system in 2007.

What now? Modest development has survived or is restarting in all the major 
northern cities, but it will surely be a long time before we see ambition again 
on the scale of this century's first seven years. Where next for architects and 
property developers;what advice would you give? Can small be beautiful again?
 