
The lawyer who sent a series of tweets gloating at a tribunal victory over 
parents who were trying to get specialist support for an autistic child has 
been given an official rebuke by the Solicitors’ Regulation Authority.


Mark Small, the director of Baker Small Legal Services, caused outrage in June 
when he celebrated onTwitter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> 
“a great win” over a family seeking educational needs [SEN] support for their 
child. As well as being formally rebuked by the authority, he was ordered to 
pay £600 costs.

In the ruling, the SRA <http://www.sra.org.uk/> noted: “Members of the public 
regarded the tweets as unprofessional and offensive. The publication of the 
tweets received extensive coverage in the media and generated a number of 
complaints to the firm and the SRA … Mr Small admits that the content of the 
tweets was unprofessional and offensive and as such he failed to behave in a 
way that maintains the trust the public places in him and in the provision of 
legal services.”

Fury as law firm boasts of 'great win' over parents of vulnerable children
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jun/13/baker-small-law-firm-parents-tweets-children-special-educational-needs>
One of the tweets said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jun/13/baker-small-law-firm-parents-tweets-children-special-educational-needs>
: “Crikey, had a great ‘win’ last week which sent some parents into a storm!” 
Another message celebrated a tribunal victory over an attempt by parents to get 
funding for Applied Behavioural Analysis (ABA), a widely respected intervention 
that can help autistic children to learn. He said: “Great ABA Trib win this 
week … interesting to see how parents continue to persist with it. Funny thing 
is parents think they won ;)”.

Responding to online outrage at the tone of his posts, Small later posted a 
photograph of a kitten laughing, with the message: “Some great tweets received 
today from people who just see a one-sided argument … just shared them with my 
cat …” The firm later deleted the posts and Small said he had made a donation 
to charity.

However within days he had lost contracts with at least eight local authorities
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/14/councils-cancel-contracts-with-law-firm-tweets>
 worth an estimated total of more than £1m.

Following the formal rebuke, Small has agreed not to act in any way that is 
inconsistent with the agreement.

'Simply inhumane' – the law firm that fights parents seeking help for 
children's special needs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jun/22/simply-inhumane-the-law-firm-that-fights-parents-seeking-help-for-childrens-special-needs>
The extreme anger at the messages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jun/22/simply-inhumane-the-law-firm-that-fights-parents-seeking-help-for-childrens-special-needs>
, which were sent from the firm’s official Twitter account, stemmed in part 
from negative experiences dozens of families had had at the hands of Baker 
Small when trying to get local authority funding for SEN support for their 
children.

Baker Small was the most prominent law firm in this niche area, and its 
success rested largely on its ability to help local authorities cut the costs 
of SEN provision. Small was known among parents as “the Terminator” because of 
his reputation for aggressively fighting to deny or end funding.

In a now-deleted page on the firm’s website, Small advertised his skills at 
helping councils cut costs, stating that he had “experience of advising local 
authority SEN departments on a range of matters including managing and 
terminating ABA programmes [and] parental complaints”.


As well as being contracted to fight cases at tribunal, the firm was also paid 
to provide training courses for council officials, offering strategies on 
managing and ending specialist provision for children with disabilities.


However since the scandal, the firm has attempted to rebrand itself, and is 
now trying to offer services to parents who want to fight councils to secure 
the educational support they feel is right for their children, rather than 
focusing on procuring work from local authorities.
 