
The Guardian Education Centre <https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre> 
funded by the Scott Trust Foundation celebrated its 10th anniversary on 31 May 
2012. During that time 85,000 visitors have participated in its programmes.

Schools have come from as far away as Scotland, the Lake District, Bradford 
and Cornwall, as well as from France, Denmark, Norway and the UAE to take part 
in workshops.

The centre provides a variety of free, whole-day workshops 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/5> where students create their 
own newspaper front page using state-of-the-art technology.

Students interact with that day's news and pictures or archive news material. 
The emphasis is on choice: students have to select their stories, set the news 
agenda for their audience, write and edit stories, choose pictures and produce 
their page â€“ all to a tight deadline. Students get a real sense of what it is 
like to work for a news organisation.

The centre also runs workshops in podcasting and video editing for secondary 
school classes. Bookings are a year in advance, and last year there were more 
than 200 schools on the waiting list.Feedback is excellent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/schools-workshop-feedback>. 

Other activities run by the centre include conferences to support teachers, 
teacher open evenings, and Q&A sessions for universities and institutes of 
higher education. It also provides workshops to support the Guardian's 
community partners, editorial and commercial departments, as well as external 
cultural and media partners.

About 7,500 people visited the centre in the financial year ending March 2012. 

In addition to its core activities, key highlights up to the publication of 
this report have included:

 * Extending scope of Insight into Journalism and Reading for Pleasure 
conferences <https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/2006/may/05/1>. 
 * New feature writing and science and environment workshops. 
 * Annual cartoon and family art day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/cartoon-and-art-family-day-2012?INTCMP=SRCH>
, with Guardian cartoonists and illustrators. 
 * Continuation of partner workshops and activities with Channel 4, Islington 
Business Partnership,British Library <http://www.bl.uk/>, Canal Museum 
<http://www.canalmuseum.org.uk/>, Kings Place Music Foundation 
<http://www.kingsplace.co.uk/about-kings-place/residents/kings-place-music-foundation>
, andOrchestra of the Age of Enlightenment <http://www.oae.co.uk/>. 
 * Family newspaper workshops, with editorial staff as part of Guardian open 
weekend <https://www.theguardian.com/open-weekend>. 
 * Range of workshops to support community partners Bemerton Estates, Global 
Generation <http://globalgeneration.org.uk/>, Age UK 
<http://www.ageuk.org.uk/camden/>, Pentonville prison, Social Mobility 
Foundation <http://www.socialmobility.org.uk/> and Live Magazine 
<http://www.live-magazine.co.uk/>. 
 * Extended its range of teaching resources 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/resources-for-teachers> for 
schools on its website, as well as working with theGNM archive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive> to produce a resource of the month. 
 * Increased staff participation in the Education Centre activities. 
 * A range of activities for its 10th anniversary, including Loxford school 
taking over the Education Centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/may/28/guardian-education-centre-journalism-teaching?INTCMP=SRCH>
 for the day and year-7 pupils fromCoombe girls' school 
<http://www.coombegirlsschool.org/>, the first school ever to visit the centre, 
in 2002, kicking off its 11th year on 1 June by interviewing editor-in-chief
Alan Rusbridger <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/alanrusbridger>. 
The Scott Trust Foundation also funds the GNM archive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive> and the Guardian's exhibitions 
programme <https://www.theguardian.com/gnmexhibitions>. A separate bursary fund 
operated by the foundation was closed at the end of the financial year, in part 
because of financial cutbacks.
 