
When Tony Blair's memoir, A Journey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/sep/05/tony-blair-a-journey-book-review>
, was released last week, columnists and reviewers focused on his fairly 
unrevealing comments about the Iraq war. Less widely reported is Blair's 
account of his other major misjudgment in the Middle East: his stubborn refusal 
to call for a ceasefire during the 2006 Lebanon war.

The conflict, fought for a month between the Israel Defence Forces (IDF) and 
Hezbollah, was estimated to have cost the lives of1,191 Lebanese citizens 
<http://web.archive.org/web/20070630133336/http://www.ohchr.org/english/bodies/hrcouncil/docs/specialsession/A.HRC.3.2.pdf>
 and159 Israelis <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/middle_east/6431637.stm> 
(including 43 civilians). As the Shia militia fired rockets at Israeli cities 
and the IDF responded with massive bombings in Lebanon, Blair was urged by a 
huge swell of public opinion, the media, his cabinet and foreign policy 
advisers to join European leaders in calling for an immediate unconditional 
ceasefire.

Yet the prime minister stubbornly defied this advice and endorsed the Bush 
administration's approach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/aug/14/syria.usa> of foot-dragging on a 
UN ceasefire, allegedly to allow Israel more time to "knock out" Hezbollah.

Previous biographies, such as Anthony Seldon's excellent Blair Unbound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/nov/11/politics>, suggested Blair told 
aides that his attitude in summer 2006 was to retain "leverage" with both the 
US and Israel, fearing that to openly criticise them would lose him clout. 
Indeed, this was a reason often given for sticking with Bush in Iraq: to earn 
the right to guide and influence. Yet his memoir reveals no such pragmatic 
concerns, misguided as they proved to be. Instead, Blair declares a deep 
ideological motivation for opposing a ceasefire. He states: "If I had condemned 
Israel, it would have been more than dishonest; it would have undermined the 
world view I had come to hold passionately."

It is this world view that is most alarming about Blair's account. Through 
this lens, Blair believed: "Lebanon was embroiled in something far bigger and 
more portentous than a temporary fight with Israel." Instead, he sees it as a 
"wider struggle between the strain of religious extremism in Islam and the rest 
of us". He was thus willing to delay a ceasefire in order to win victory in 
this wider struggle, of which he saw Hezbollah as a key combatant, andIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> as one of "us".

From Blair's perspective this religious struggle defines the Middle East. He 
states: "To me, you can't understand Hezbollah unless you understand the role 
of Iran; or understandLebanon <https://www.theguardian.com/world/lebanon> 
unless you understand Syria â€¦ or understand either country in its present state 
unless you understand the history not just of the region but of the religion, 
how it saw itself, how it had developed its own narrative, how it saw its own 
predicament."

This includes a remarkable simplification of the Israel-Palestine conflict, 
which he claims "is used as a potent source of friction and war because of 
religious difference". The impact of other significant forces, notably 
nationalism and imperialism, are conveniently sidelined.

Blair hints that the civilians caught up in this struggle are regrettably 
expendable. Echoing Condoleezza Rice's owndistasteful remarks 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/middle_east/5205164.stm> that the 2006 
violence was the "birth pangs of a new Middle East", Blair remarks that "just 
because we were shocked by the TV footage of the consequences of war, this 
could not blind us to the consequences of peace on the wrong terms".

Yet his peace on the "right" terms seemed to include a form of collective 
punishment of the Lebanese. He articulates: "They [Hezbollah] had to understand 
that if they tried doing it again, there was a price to be paid that the people 
of Lebanon would not allow them to pay, at least not with the lives of their 
civilians."

One wonders if Blair would have been willing to expend the lives of a thousand 
Israeli, or even British, civilians in order to make Hezbollah understand.

The use of force to achieve his goals is a further strand of his world view. 
He states: "The solution to me lay in neither the sole use of hard power nor 
the sole use of soft power but in the combination of the two." Moreover, he was 
willing to overrule all advice and his public to achieve this. He remarks: "It 
wasn't that I didn't get public opinion on Lebanon, nor that I couldn't have 
articulated it. My difficulty was that I didn't agree with it."

Yet there was a high cost to this ideological stubbornness. Blair's book 
dwells on the domestic consequence of his actions, claiming they led to his 
departure from office, but the costs to Lebanon and the Middle East in general 
were far greater. When Hezbollah was still standing after the warit claimed 
<http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/14953453/> a "divine victory" boosting its power 
and influence. At the same time, the Lebanese government that had come to power 
trying to reorientate Beirut into a more western orbit was hugely undermined, 
as its supposed new allies seemed powerless to defend its infrastructure and 
civilians from Israeli attacks. This caused more internal strife before a
Syrian-Saudi-backed stability <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Doha_Agreement> 
emerged in 2008.

The reverse of what Blair intended had occurred: Hezbollah and its allies were 
boosted, Israel was demoralised, the US and Britain were further discredited in 
Arab eyes, and an excessive number of civilians had died in the pursuit of an 
unobtainable ideological goal.

A Journey <https://www.theguardian.com/books/a-journey> thus presents Blair's 
actions in summer 2006 as those of a committed ideologue, not simply Bush's 
poodle as previously charged. Blair seems driven by a world view that, though 
not explicitly neoconservative, certainly has similarities. He sees the Middle 
East through a largely religious lens, frames its complex conflicts though a 
simplified struggle between radical and moderate Islam and is willing to use 
force and sacrifice lives to achieve its aims, irrespective of public and 
expert opinion.

However, what is most alarming about this is not necessarily the ideology 
behind the misjudgment in Lebanon four years ago. It is that Blair retains this 
misguided zeal today and somehowexpects to use it 
<http://www.jpost.com/Israel/Article.aspx?id=186561> to deliver the "right 
peace" between Israelis and Palestinians in his role as quartet envoy.
 