
This week's comedy news

You know you're in trouble when the Daily Express is giving you lessons in 
anti-sexism. It's beenthat kind of week for Lee Mack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/nov/29/lee-mack-comedian>, who went 
on Desert Island Discs and did a bit more vexing on the vexed issue of women in 
standup.Women are less suited to comedy, suggested Mack 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2436939/Women-stand--theyre-offs-Lee-Mack-claims-comedy-suited-male-personalities.html>
, because "when men sit around and talk, they are very competitive. One person 
will tell an anecdote and the next person will try to top that. When you get 
six women together, they share a lot more." Mack, who wrote a thesis on female 
comedians for his degree at Brunel University, added that women are "far more 
interested in what the other person has to say. The conversation is more 
interactive and less about individually showing off." Leaping to the defence of 
funny women,the Express ran the article 
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/showbiz/433226/Are-you-having-a-laugh-Female-comedians-show-the-boys-how-it-s-done>
: "Are you having a laugh? Female comedians show the boys how it's done" – a 
list that included Victoria Wood, Josie Long and Ellen DeGeneres.

David Mitchell has leapt to the defence of TV panel shows 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/tv/news/peep-show-star-david-mitchell-defends-panel-shows-after-attack-by-fast-show-cocreator-charlie-higson-8839444.html>
, which have been much maligned of late,notably by Fast Show creator Charlie 
Higson 
<http://www.radiotimes.com/news/2013-09-11/fast-show-star-charlie-higson-britain-badly-needs-a-top-class-sketch-show>
. Citing an improvised nugget of banter from the filming of his new Channel 4 
panel show Was It Something I Said?, Mitchell claimed that "panel shows can 
produce funny TV in a way you could never write into a sitcom or a sketch show 
and [that] justifies [their] place on screen. I think it is a great form of 
entertainment and we shouldn't lose sight of that." His new show, in which 
comedian-guests answer questions based on quotations, tweets and 
autobiographies, is "jolly and irreverent and funny but also a bit informative 
and interesting. An amusing way of watching some comedians trying to solve a 
quiz about famous people and vaguely impart some interesting information about 
them at the same time." Hmm. He makes those panel shows sound so exciting, 
doesn't he?

Time, then, for something more red-blooded – such as the encounter between 
comic Dan Nainan and journalist Josh Rogin at a Washington DC charity event 
last week 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/8301-504083_162-57605002-504083/dan-nainan-comedian-charged-with-assaulting-journalist-josh-rogin-at-d.c-charity-event/>
. Rogin wastweeting negatively 
<http://mashable.com/2013/09/26/dan-nainan-arrested-twitter/> throughout 
Nainan's gig: "Dan Nainan makes his umpteenth joke about how Asians cant 
distinguish between letters 'L' and 'R'. Election, erection, we get it." And 
so, after his gig, Nainan allegedly punched Rogin in the face. The comedian was 
later arrested on an assault charge, which he denies.Eddie Izzard's been in a 
few scrapes, too, according to this Mirror story 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/3am/celebrity-news/eddie-izzard-beaten-up-both-2315536>
, in which the comic reports he's been beaten up twice in the last year – once 
in New York, once in London – while wearing women's clothes. "I was badly 
injured," says Izzard. "It was horrible, I was very upset and frightened."

Elsewhere in comedy, a trans journalist, Laura Kate Dale, claims she was 
"completely dehumanised" bythe comedian Fraser Millward at a gaming convention 
in London last weekend 
<http://www.pinknews.co.uk/2013/09/30/trans-journalist-says-she-was-completely-dehumanised-by-xbox-one-presenter-at-gaming-convention>
. Dale accused Millward, who was hired by Microsoft to appear at the event, of 
referring to her as "he", "it", "thing" and "this one" throughout his 
presenting stint. Jennifer Saunders has been causing offence, too,accusing some 
cancer survivors of "wearing the disease like a badge … They must be so pissed 
off when their hair grows back," she told the Times 
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/showbiz/433412/Jennifer-Saunders-blasts-sympathy-seeking-cancer-survivors>
. Saunders was diagnosed with breast cancer in 2009, and went into remission in 
2010. Not giving but taking offence, meanwhile, was Kanye West,who unleashed a 
stream of abuse on Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/sep/27/kanye-west-jimmy-kimmel-twitter> 
after the American comedian and talk-show host Jimmy Kimmel screened a sketch 
spoofingWest's self-aggrandising interview on Radio 1 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K2T0fMkZoMo&feature=c4-overview&list=UU-FQUIVQ-bZiefzBiQAa8Fw>
. "Jimmy Kimmel is out of line," tweeted West, "to try and spoof in any way the 
first piece of honest media in years."

In this week's small-screen news, Alan Carr abandons his planned sitcom about 
dog walkers, blaming himself for being too lackadaisical to make it happen 
<http://www.chortle.co.uk/news/2013/09/28/18741/alan_carr_abandons_his_sitcom>; 
London Live, the Evening Standard's new London TV station, hasbought up the hit 
YouTube sitcom All About the Mackenzies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/sep/27/london-live-youtube-comedy-all-about-mackenzies>
; and Peep Show's imminent demisehas been confirmed by Channel 4 head of comedy 
Phil Clarke <http://www.bbc.co.uk/newsbeat/24279948>. Cilla Black and Paul 
O'Grady are teaming up in a sitcom pilot about long-lost siblings, byBirds of a 
Feather writing team Marks & Gran 
<http://www.comedy.co.uk/news/story/000001256/cilla_black_paul_ogrady_marks_gran_led_astray/>
, and Rhod Gilbert istrialling a new comedy format that pries into the internet 
history of special guests 
<http://www.comedy.co.uk/news/story/000001257/rhod_gilbert_delete_delete_delete_chat_pilot_host/>
. The show is called Delete, Delete, Delete!

Best of the Guardian's comedy coverage

• "With sharp writing and a strong sense of what it is to be young, drunk and 
at uni, Fresh Meat doesn't just nail the student experience – it also breathes 
life into the stale house-share sitcom" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/sep/26/fresh-meat-box-set-review>
 – David Renshaw on Your next box set

• "A kind of psychedelic Thatcher …" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/sep/30/dame-edna-audience-comedy-gold> 
– Leo Benedictus pays tribute to Dame Edna Everage in this week's Comedy gold 
slot

• "They might not be the critics' choices, but we're in times now where people 
like to be nostalgic and relive the times when they laughed out loud" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/sep/29/citizen-khan-adil-ray-sitcom> – 
Adil Ray on his sitcom Citizen Khan

• "I always seemed to play a drug addict stealing a baby" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/sep/29/sarah-hadland-interview-miranda> 
– Miranda star Sarah Hadland on her "slog" of a career

• "I really don't like upsetting people, and the fact I do makes me bury my 
head" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/sep/28/tim-minchin-interview-matilda-jesus>
 – Tim Minchin, interviewed by Kate Kellaway in the Observer

Hello Ladies, goodbye Emmys
 'A diverting curiosity': Stephen Merchant in Hello Ladies. 
The reviews are in for Stephen Merchant's new HBO sitcom Hello Ladies 
<http://www.hbo.com/hello-ladies>, based on his standup show of the same name 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/sep/14/stephen-merchant-hello-ladies-review>
. This was Merchant's big moment to step out behind you-know-who's shadow – but 
the opening notices aren't great so far. The New York Timescalled the show "a 
diverting curiosity, nice to look at and good for a few squirmy laughs". 
<http://tv.nytimes.com/2013/09/28/arts/television/hello-ladies-starring-stephen-merchant.html?_r=0>
 But the humour is "mild", it added, and Merchant "doesn't give [his character] 
Stuart much depth or bite." Elsewhere,the Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/review/hello-ladies-tv-review-638865> opined 
that "cringe-worthy comedy is so overdone at this point that even people like 
Merchant, who can milk it like almost no one else, can't make it entertaining 
anymore. Mostly, it's just painful to endure … Going down this same road of 
endless embarrassment and humiliation for sad-sack characters is, at this 
point, well-worn and predictable." Nor can the comedy website Splitsider Elise 
Czajkowskimuster much enthusiasm 
<http://splitsider.com/2013/09/stephen-merchants-hello-ladies-feels-cringe-worthingly-familiar/>
. "The biggest problem with Hello Ladies [is that] Stuart and his friends are 
just not particularly pleasant to be around … Overall, it feels like 
well-trodden ground. The show exists in an outmoded sitcom world and stars an 
oblivious man in his late thirties who should clearly know better."

Best of our readers' comments

This week, Channel 4's The IT Crowd ended – as celebrated on these pages by 
Mark Lawson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/sep/27/it-crowd-finale-great-comedy-ayoade-odowd>
 and ourTV reviewer Sam Wollaston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/sep/28/the-it-crowd-review>. 
Both pieces triggered debates about what constituted "canned laughter", and 
what affect a laughter track had on screened comedy.Here's alanomaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/sep/28/the-it-crowd-review>:

I think it's something to do with the type of comedy. Laugh tracks work in 
things like The IT Crowd where the jokes are big set pieces and the action or 
drama is there to set up the jokes, where the rhythm is JOKE [laugh] set up 
next joke ... JOKE [laugh] set up next joke ... Similar rhythm to standup 
comedy.
They wouldn't work in something like the Simpsons, Curb Your Enthusiasm, Peep 
Show or Spaced which are all about cramming lots of smaller jokes or sustained 
awkward moments in around the story of the week, some of which are subtle 
things or references that only some people will pick up on, where the rhythm is 
like EVENTS joke joke joke joke PLOT TWIST joke joke joke.

And here's Slivka 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27422776>:

It also makes the show feel emotionally warmer, somehow. In a show like I'm 
Alan Partridge, Partridge feels like less of a monster because of the presence 
of the audience. He's still not a sympathetic character, but imagine how the 
tone of the show would have been different without the interaction between the 
audience and the cast. It would have been a lot colder, more acerbic. The 
audience kind of softens the edges.

Further down the thread, TaylorJames used The IT Crowd's finale to muse on why 
UK sitcoms don't endure like American ones do 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27419631>:

Britain never seems to be able to maintain truly great comedy over more than 
one or two seasons. I doubt we'll ever see a British comedy to match 11 seasons 
of Frasier, or 8 seasons of Curb Your Enthusiasm or 9 seasons of Always Sunny 
in Philadelphia. Perhaps we should adopt the 'team of writers' approach …?
… Personally I don't think The Office or Extras for instance needed to end 
where they did. They wrapped up very nicely for sure, but I feel there was 
enough material there to derive more great comedy scenarios from and I wish 
Life Is Short had continued, it ended on a rubbish whimper.

Nishville, however, disagreed: 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27420580>

There's more variation in a single episode of Blackadder than in all 11 
seasons of Frasier … I really struggle to understand where this British complex 
of inferiority to the Americans comes from, your comedy is not about quantity 
but highly compressed inimitable quality.
Britain = quality, and the US = quantity? I think most of us, on this side of 
the Atlantic at least, would settle for that.
 