
Lee Daniels, the Oscar-nominated director of Precious 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/jan/28/precious-review>, The Butler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/14/the-butler-review>, The Paperboy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/mar/14/the-paperboy-review> and TV series
Empire <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/empire>, is to make an 
autobiographical movie musical.Speaking to Billboard 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/news/7525730/lee-daniels-new-show-star-empire-musical>
, Daniels, 59, said he was “in talks about doing a musical film about my life. 
I’ve had a pretty interesting life. I’ve come from the projects. I’ve been 
homeless.”

Daniels’ career began as a receptionist at a nursing agency, which he quit to 
found his own agency; it had 5,000 nurses affiliated with it by the time he was 
21. After selling up he became an actors’ agent, representingWes Bentley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/jan/23/comment.akinojumu> and Michael 
Shannon <https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-shannon> among others. 

Lee Daniels to make true story of 'welfare queen' criminal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/24/lee-daniels-the-welfare-queen-criminal-biopic>
Daniels has been frank about his substance abuse during the period, saying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/15/lee-daniels-early-years-drugs>: 
“Oh, back then, we all did drugs. I lived it up. Are you kidding?” When Halle 
Berry phoned Daniels after winning an Oscar for Monster’s Ball, which he had 
produced, he was “strung out, methed out of his mind” at Los Angeles’ Chateau 
Marmont.

Daniels attended a mostly white school, at which he has said his race and 
relative poverty made him a target for bullying. “I learned to train my bowel 
movements, my piss, so that I wouldn’t have to go to the bathroom all through 
school,” hetold 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/entertainment/gossip/lee-daniels-gay-man-loathed-dad-article-1.1516789>
 Out Magazine. “And then I’d run home.”

Daniels’s police officer father was killed in the line of duty in 1975. 
Daniels has said his father was physically abusive towards him, claiming he 
tried “to beat it [being gay] out of me”. He hasclaimed 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2009/10/25/magazine/25precious-t.html> that his five 
siblings have all served time in prison. Daniels has adopted his niece and 
nephew.

In September 2015, Daniels was sued 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/22/sean-penn-sues-empire-lee-daniels-abuse-comments>
 by Sean Penn for $10m (£7.7m) for defamation after Daniels equated Penn with 
the actor Terence Howard, who had been convicted of domestic violence. In May 
2016, Daniels retracted the statement and apologised, after which Penn dropped 
the lawsuit.

Of the planned movie, Daniels said: “It’ll have original music and sort of be 
likeFellini’s 8 1/2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/1999/apr/22/derekmalcolmscenturyoffilm.derekmalcolm>
 or All That Jazz.”
 