
‘I would advise all our viewers to turn away immediately and watch something 
more pleasant instead,” says the writer and narrator Lemony Snicket (played by 
Patrick Warburton) at the start of – and throughout –A Series of Unfortunate 
Events (Netflix). It’s a fake attempt to put you off, as Snicket does in his 
series of gothic novels about the life of the poor Baudelaire orphansfrom which 
this is adapted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/10/netflix-lemony-snicket-remake>
.

Related: A Series of Unfortunate Events: Netflix lets its freak flag fly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/10/netflix-lemony-snicket-remake>

That’s just the start of the faithfulness. Plot, postmodern suburban 
steampunkery, black comedy, jokes, vocabulary explanations (no, loco parentis 
does not mean you have mad parents), themes of grief and abandonment, the 
wisdom of children compared to grownups who have been corrupted by society, the 
joy of reading and learning and libraries (save them!). Check, check, check – 
all are excellently here, present and correct.

This loyalty is not surprising, given that Daniel Handler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/07/how-old-child-need-be-appreciate-lemony-snicket-daniel-handler-interview>
 (Lemony Snicket’s writer – keep up!) adapted his own work, penned the scripts 
and co-produced the TV series. And a long-form show allows for a more accurate 
and detailed tracing of the original than thebig-screen adaptation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2004/dec/19/philipfrench> with Jim Carrey, 
Billy Connolly and thevery overrated Meryl Streep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/shortcuts/2017/jan/10/meryl-streep-overrated-donald-trump-george-clooney>
. This version gets through the books at a rate of half per episode, so the 
initial batch of eight covers only the first four volumes of 13. Plenty of 
scope for more, then.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
First look at Lemony Snicket’s A Series of Unfortunate Events for Netflix – 
video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/video/2016/nov/17/first-look-at-lemony-snickets-a-series-of-unfortunate-events-for-netflix-video>
If you love the novels, you’ll almost certainly love this. I hadn’t read the 
books (though plenty of adults do, and many references – from James Brown to 
Herman Melville – might sail over a child’s head) until I sped through the 
first, The Bad Beginning, on a loyalty check. Then I binged on all eight 
episodes in Netflix, and, well, quite loved it.

It looks fabulous, very Burtonesque. I enjoyed the big budget sets, the 
colours, the flying lizards and ironic serpents, Lake Lachrymose, inventive 
Violet’s amazing inventions, baby Sunny’s human lathe dental skills, and the 
appearance of Don Johnson (Don Johnson!) from my own childhood, owner of the 
Miserable Mill here. It’s smart and funny and fun. But – and this might have 
something to do with me not exactly being the target audience age – I never 
quite got lost in its world.

There’s a real lack of menace here. Yes, Count Olaf (Neil Patrick Harris), I 
am talking to you: more pantomime villain – you don’t scare me. Without genuine 
evil or danger for the Baudelaire children – Violet, Klaus and Sunny – to 
overcome, I found it harder to feel their pain or care about their fate. And 
then all the gags and the clever self-references begin to get just a tiny bit 
annoying.

So Mr Snicket, careful with all the warnings. Come the next lot, this viewer 
may turn away … but to watch something less pleasant instead.
 