
Len Goodman is to step down as head judge on BBC1’s Strictly Come Dancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/strictly-come-dancing> after the next 
series of the show.


Goodman, who has been a fixture on the show since it began 12 years ago, said 
it was “time to hand the role of head judge to someone else”.

He will be the second high-profile departure from the show after Bruce Forsyth 
stepped down as its regular weekly host two years ago. But the series has 
prospered under its current joint hosts, Tess Daly and Claudia Winkleman.

BBC admits Trainspotting Live gaffe as viewers go loco over old footage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/13/bbc-trainspotting-live-peter-snow>
The BBC’s director of content Charlotte Moore said: “I know we are all going 
to miss him tremendously, but I also know Len’s final series is going to be 
full of unmissable moments and I hope audiences will give him the special 
send-off he so deserves.”

Goodman – catchphrase “seVEN!”–- leads a judging panel comprising Bruno 
Tonioli, Craig Revel Horwood and its most recent addition Darcey Bussell.

Strictly Come Dancing, a celebrity take on BBC1’s ballroom classic of 
yesteryear, Come Dancing, was largely unheralded when it began onBBC1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc1> in 2004 but it has since grown into 
the channel’s biggest entertainment hit.

“In 2004, I was asked to take part in a brand new BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Saturday night show and who would have 
thought me, old Len Goodman, would still be part of this amazing series more 
than 10 years on,” said Goodman.

“This adventure began when I was 60 and now that I’ve reached my 70s, I’ve 
decided after this year it’s time to hand the role of Head Judge to someone 
else.

“It is an honour being part of the wonderful Strictly Come Dancing family and 
I’m looking forward to my last series very much and to whatever comes next.”

The BBC said Goodman was not retiring and would continue to present his shows 
on Radio 2. He has also featured in documentaries on BBC4.

Strictly Come Dancing executive producer Louise Rainbow said: “We are 
absolutely delighted that Tess, Claudia and our judges are all returning for 
another year.

“Whilst we will be sad to say goodbye to Len, as our way of saying thank you, 
we are all determined to make this series the most spectacular, most glittery 
and entertaining yet.”

Strictly Come Dancing dominates the Saturday and Sunday night ratings during 
its traditional end of year run from September to Christmas, regularly beating 
ITV’s The X Factor in the ratings.

However, BBC1 has found other Saturday night hits hard to come by 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/08/bbc1-ratings-war-the-voice-final-prized-apart-tumble>
 andlost its bought-in talent contest, The Voice, to ITV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/nov/23/itv-the-voice-simon-cowell-x-factor>
.

Gary Barlow teams up with BBC for Take That talent show Let It Shine
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/17/gary-barlow-bbc-take-that-let-it-shine-graham-norton-mel-giedroyc>
Other attempts to come up with a winning family format on a Saturday, 
including Prized Apart and Tumble, have come to nothing.

It has now turned to Gary Barlow to front a new talent show to find a cast for 
a stage musical based on the songs of Take That.
 