
Two years ago, I gave a talk at the National Film Theatre and was invited to 
screen something from my back catalogue of television work. I chose a 1979 play 
called The Blacktoft Diaries, made by Yorkshire Television at a time when 
single plays were a regular part of the schedules and celebrities mud-wrestling 
in the jungle would have been regarded as a perverted dream.

The play was directed by Leonard Lewis, who has died suddenly, aged 78. It was 
totally characteristic of his work and of the man: quiet, sensitive, modest and 
mischievous. Discretion, on this occasion, was a sound tactic. Blacktoft is a 
village on the Humber with a jetty, a pub and a cluster of houses. The play was 
presented as a documentary by the great James Cameron, and it purported to 
explain that the Burgess/Maclean cover-up was masterminded by a spy who came 
ashore at Blacktoft in 1955.

The whole piece was a pack of lies. We were deconstructing the genre years 
before those words had become common currency. The NFT audience, most of whom 
were not born in 1979, greeted the piece with great enthusiasm, amusement and 
total bewilderment that such work ever existed as part of the bread and butter 
of popular viewing.

The anecdote is important because it places on record Lewis's talent as a 
director, something frequently overlooked in the context of his achievements as 
a producer of such BBC series as Softly Softly (he was the only one capable of 
cutting the captions to match the music), When the Boat Comes In and Juliet 
Bravo. He later produced The Good Companions and Flambards for Yorkshire 
Television, and EastEnders, in its fledgling days of the mid-80s.

Leonard was born in Tottenham, north London, moved to East Barnet when he was 
about seven, and was educated at the local grammar school (where he met his 
future wife Jean). Like many of his generation of producers and directors, his 
background was in the theatre. After national service in the RAF, he worked in 
rep in Morecambe, Ashton-under-Lyne and at Manchester Library Theatre. He 
joined the BBC on a three-month holiday attachment in 1957, and stayed until 
1976.

After work with BBC Scotland, he moved to London in 1963 and, as a staff 
director, cut his teeth on Z-Cars, when transmissions were live, nerves 
shredded and talents honed. He brought with him a respect for text and for 
writers which brought him both acclaim and a personal and professional crisis 
on the 1976 series of When the Boat Comes In.

He assembled a brilliant team comprising the diverse talents of Sid Chaplin, 
Alex Glasgow and Tom Hadaway - perhaps the only occasion when all the writers 
lived in the area where the series was set. The details of what happened next 
are complex, painful and distant, but essentially Lewis was ordered to scrap 
his writing team for the next series. Unwilling to betray good colleagues and 
good friends, he resigned from the BBC. It was a time when people still 
resigned on matters of principle.

He discovered - perhaps to his surprise, since he was a modest man - that his 
skills as an organiser of shows were in great demand, and he was snapped up by 
Yorkshire Television. Suddenly he had an office in the West End instead of 
Shepherd's Bush. He loved it. "I suddenly feel as if I'm in the entertainment 
business," he said.

Subsequently, fences were fixed and he returned to the BBC as a freelance, 
working on shows ranging from The Chinese Detective to The Prisoner of Zenda. 
In a sometimes cavalier age, he actually believed that his job was to bring a 
show in on time and within budget. This is actually tougher and braver than 
being cavalier.

Lewis's belief in the principles of public service broadcasting remained 
intact, and he left EastEnders when the then controllers demanded an extra 
episode a week. He argued that producing an hour of reasonable quality drama a 
week was the maximum that any broadcasting system could generate without loss 
of integrity. Discuss.

He retired in 1995 and moved to Somerset, where, despite health problems, he 
remained active. He and Jean travelled regularly to strange-sounding places 
with faraway names and we received frequent postcards in his immaculate 
handwriting - calligraphy was one of his many activities as well as ice-cream 
making and involvement in the local community. Three weeks before his death, 
Lewis's production of She Stoops to Conquer for the South Petherton Drama Group 
won rave reviews.

An unfailingly generous man, every time we worked together he gave me books 
that I still treasure. These include a life of Buster Keaton, a History of 
Musical Theatre and Fowler's Modern English Usage; but my knowledge of grammar 
and syntax is the least of the many things I owe Leonard Lewis.

Jean, whom he married in 1950, survives him, as do his daughters, Sian, Tessa 
and Maria.

Â· Leonard Jack Lewis, television director and producer, born November 29 1927; 
died December 2 2005
 