
What got you started?

I had two starts, really. The first was going to the Italia Conti stage school 
<http://www.italiaconti.com>, aged 15. I'd gone to sing, but one day I found 
myself doing an improvisation and thought, "Oh God, I quite like this acting 
thing." The second start was meeting Mike Leigh when I was 22. He showed me I 
could play people that weren't like me. It was like a lightbulb going off.

What was your big breakthrough?

Making a film called Grown Ups with Mike Leigh in 1980. Both of the pieces 
we'd worked on together before that hadn't actually come to anything. First 
tThere was a radio play,Too Much of a Good Thing 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Too_Much_of_a_Good_Thing_(radio_play)>, about a 
girl losing her virginity, which got banned initially by the BBC for its 
realistic-sounding sex scenes. Then And there was a play we did for the RSC 
that never saw the light of day. But Grown Ups opened doors for me in a major 
way – I spent the next 10 years working at the Royal Court.

Do you suffer for your art?

Not any more. But I did when my son was young and I was a single mother. A lot 
of the actors I knew threw in the towel when they became mothers. I couldn't do 
that financially, and I didn't want to – but I was knackered all the time.

What's the biggest myth about being an actor?

People mistake the fact that we have a nice time at work for it being easy. 
I spent last week in the dark, freezing, doing hellishly long days. Then 
there's the fact that people think you're always earning a fortune. That's 
absolutely not the case – especially in subsidised theatre. Actors often have 
to turn down a play because they can't afford it, unless they can do a bit of 
telly either side.

Stage or screen?

Stage is the ultimate test; I like watching established screen actors on stage 
to see if they can really do it. But it's great to have a healthy mixture of 
the two. Film is so technical: there's something very particular about the 
relationship between you and the camera. It took a long time for me to get good 
on film.

What work of art would you most like to own?

I'm a big fan of Edouard Vuillard 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/artists/edouard-vuillard>, so I'd like 
anything by him – particularly a painting calledMadame Hessel on the Sofa 
<http://www.liverpoolmuseums.org.uk/walker/collections/20c/vuillard.aspx>. His 
work is realistic without being literal: I can really imagine what Madame 
Hessel is thinking.

Is there an art form you don't relate to?

I have trouble with sheep in formaldehyde.

What's the worst thing anyone ever said about you?

A director once said to me, "I've got no notes for you, except act better."

Do you care about fame?

No. I'd hate not to be able to travel on the tube. I quite like that people 
tend not to know my name. I remember being at the Cannes film festival for
All or Nothing <http://www.reelz.com/movie/214109/all-or-nothing/>. I looked 
very different in the film – I had a little greasy bob and no makeup. I went to 
a dinner after the screening and everyone completely ignored me. I got a real 
buzz out of that.

In short

Born: Brighton, 1956.

Career: Has worked frequently with Mike Leigh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mikeleigh>, in his films – including High 
Hopes, Secrets & Lies and Another Year – and his stageplays. Has also performed 
at the Royal Court, with the RSC and at the National Theatre; and, most 
recently, in the BBC TV seriesMayday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/mar/09/mayday-broadchurch-parks-recreation-review>
, which is out now on DVD.

High point: "Playing Marlene in Top Girls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/jan/16/how-we-made-top-girls> at the 
Royal Court."

Low point: "After making Turning down all the work I was offered for a year 
around 1980. I was on a mission to go in a new direction."
 