
What else do people need to see before they realize that racism is a vile, 
vicious daily assault that faces black Americans today – in every sphere and on 
every platform, but egregiously so online?

Leslie Jones's site taken down after personal information leaked
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/aug/24/leslie-jones-website-hack-nude-photos-racist-attack>
Actor and comedian Leslie Jones has been attacked again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/aug/24/leslie-jones-website-hack-nude-photos-racist-attack>
 – her website hacked, filled with racist images and stolen nude photos, along 
with pictures of her driver’s license and Harambe, the gorilla killed in an 
Ohio zoo earlier this year. These actions make me think that racism is so 
integral, so regular a thing in this country, like water running from the 
kitchen faucet, that the majority of people see it as merely who and how we 
are. Racism: it’s what we do.

Where is the practical response to this grotesque, debilitatingly 
mean-spirited violence? It’s one thing to offer her digital apologies for 
others’ racism. It’s another to actually take a stand to help eliminate it from 
our society.

Ostensibly, the initial attacks were the apex of ongoing negative reaction to 
Jones starring in the all-female remake of Ghostbusters. Trolls went after her 
looks, her skin, her body – everything that makes her who she is, and makes her 
black. She was called an ape. The attacks were unequivocally racist. Twitter 
issued a bland, cookie-cutterresponse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/20/twitter-vows-act-more-swiftly-banning-leslie-jones-abuser-milo-yiannopoulos>
.

But this all didn’t happen just because she did a movie. It was because she is 
a statuesque dark-skinned black woman, sister in spirit and posture to Nina 
Simone; elegant in her vocal command, towering with a feverish, ebullient 
talent that cannot be contained. It’s asinine to say that the racists who are 
targetingLeslie Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/leslie-jones> are 
Ghostbuster purists, and that’s really what this is all about.

And while the New York Times reported that Jones “and her white cast mates 
have endured months of criticism since the announcement of a reboot of the 
blockbuster franchise,” those same white cast mates were not called a “big 
lipped coon <http://fusion.net/story/327103/leslie-jones-twitter-racism/>”. 
What stopped one or all of these actors from saying during one of the myriad 
talk shows they appeared on: “You know what’s not cool? Racism. You know why? 
Because it targets and maims people we love and respect and live on the planet 
with.”

 The film’s director, Paul Feig, did come to her defense 
<http://www.thewrap.com/paul-feig-sticks-up-for-ghostbusters-star-leslie-jones-after-racist-twitter-attacks/>
, tweeting: “Leslie Jones is one of the greatest people I know. Any personal 
attacks against her are attacks against us all.” But again, if it really were 
an attack against us all – assuming he means himself and the rest of the mostly 
white cast – and it actually felt like an attack in the same way these feel 
like attacks to Leslie Jones, you can be sure he’d be doing more than tweeting 
about it. You’ll note he didn’t mention the R-word.

Leslie Jones's Twitter abuse is a deliberate campaign of hate | Ijeoma Oluo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/19/leslie-jones-twitter-abuse-deliberate-campaign-hate>
Here’s the thing: those who limit their allyship to tweeting their support 
when we’ve been targets of online racism have absolutely no idea how far 
removed they are, and yet how intricately tied they are to this thing that is 
killing us. Racism’s unceasing power lies in the way in which it can weaponise 
words: now, in 140 characters.

By all means up the Twitter support, which is all well and good, but then go 
deeper. Particularly those in positions of power or who have public platforms – 
call your friends, call your state representatives, send group emails and reply 
all to everyone; be vigorous in your accountability and encourage the same in 
those around you, call into radio shows, launch Kickstarter campaigns, think 
about ways you can help dismantle racism all the time. Because it is happening 
all the time.
 