
With a brand new year comes a brand new dilemma: which tawdry shiny-floored 
Saturday evening singing competition should you watch? After all, this Saturday 
sees the launch of two of them; ITV’s land-grab stab at The Voice and BBC1’s 
Gary Barlow-frontedLet It Shine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/03/gary-barlow-let-it-shine-will-avoid-the-nastiness-of-other-tv-talent-shows>
.

OK, fine, you’re probably not going to watch either of them, because why would 
you? If the choice was between Let It Shine,The Voice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-voice> or licking the underside 
of a bus stop bench, every sensible-minded adult in Britain would start licking 
like their lives depended on it. Still, it’s important to go into these things 
knowing as much as possible, so let’s conduct a blow-by-blow comparison of the 
two shows to see which will be most intolerable.

Related: Tom Jones lambasts BBC and The Voice makers for sacking him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/04/tom-jones-lambasts-bbc-and-the-voice-makers-for-sacking-him>

Format

The Voice: If you saw the BBC series, you’ll know exactly what’s in store. 
Some people sing to the back ofwill.i.am <http://Will.i.am>’s head, then 
will.i.am <http://Will.i.am> makes a noise like a robot that’s been dunked in 
milk, then the whole thing goes on for three months longer than it should, then 
the winner disappears from trace the second it finishes.

Let It Shine: If you remember any of those old BBC1 Andrew Lloyd Webber shows, 
where people would compete to be the star of one of his musicals, you’ll know 
how Let It Shine goes. It is basically the exact same idea. Except it’s all 
about Take That, so clearly things are much worse.

Most intolerable: Let It Shine.

Judges

The Voice: will.i.am <http://Will.i.am>, obviously. Plus Tom Jones is back. 
They’re joined by Gavin Rossdale from Bush, who fulfils this year’s role of 
Superficially Alternative Shill now that the shiny-faced I Predict a Riot boy 
has gone elsewhere; and Jennifer Hudson, who won an Oscar and obviously 
deserves much better.

Let It Shine: This entire series was apparently the brainchild of Gary Barlow. 
The same Gary Barlow who took the X Factor’s blazing 2010 pomp and deflated it 
until it was for ever doomed to be a programme about fun-free musical adequacy. 
This whole show is geared aroundGary Barlow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gary-barlow>, so expect a five-minute, 
wonky-eyebrowed, too-sincere royal slurp straight to camera every episode until 
the Queen caves in and begrudgingly gives him a knighthood. Also Martin Kemp 
and Dannii Minogue, as if that matters.

Most intolerable: Let It Shine.

Presenters

Related: Gary Barlow: Let It Shine will avoid the nastiness of other TV talent 
shows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/03/gary-barlow-let-it-shine-will-avoid-the-nastiness-of-other-tv-talent-shows>

The Voice: Like the BBC version, Emma Willis takes the reins here. And, like 
the BBC version, she’ll probably be the best thing about it.

Let It Shine: Ostensibly this is an all-star lineup, combining national 
treasureGraham Norton <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/graham-norton> 
with national treasure Mel Giedroyc. However, let’s remember that Giedroyc’s 
patented brand of zoinks-a-lummy irony has led directly to the UK’s decline at 
Eurovision, so perhaps she shouldn’t be put in charge of anything where people 
get to sing.

Most intolerable: Let It Shine

Prize

The Voice: A record contract with Polydor. Although a record contract was also 
the prize over on the BBC, and look how famous all those winners are now.

Let It Shine: Brace yourself, because this is properly dreadful. The winner 
will get to star in a touring regional theatre production of a musical called 
The Band featuring music by Take That. In essence, then, Gary Barlow gets to 
pick someone with the most overt Gary Barlow qualities to make them sing Gary 
Barlow songs to Gary Barlow fans. This idea should have been thrown in a 
furnace the second it was suggested.

Most intolerable: Let It Shine
 