
Paul Allen writes: Alan Plater was everything Michael Coveney described in his 
fineobituary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/jun/25/alan-plater-obituary> (26 June) 
– and more. Notably, he was the most generous supporter of other writers, 
formally through the Writers' Guild, but also through direct contact.

He was, the dramatist John Godber said, when we heard of his death, "paramount 
in my decision to come to Hull Truck [Theatre Company]". He was a staunch 
supporter of Henry Livings, through thick and thin. When my adaptation of Mark 
Herman's screenplay Brassed Off transferred from Sheffield to the National 
Theatre, Alan came to a preview with his redoubtable Auntie Lil: "Well done, 
Paul – away win," he said, typically finding the simple phrase that said 
precisely what he wanted without drawing attention to itself.

His humanity was such that when Godber commissioned him to write about another 
of Hull's immigrant writers, at a time when the late poet Philip Larkin's 
personal stock was going down, he homed in at once on the characteristic which 
made Larkin likeable to him, and therefore to his audience – Larkin's passion 
for jazz. The play, Sweet Sorrow (1990), combined Alan's professional and human 
qualities perfectly.

Gita Conn writes: Four short playlets, inserted into a BBC1 programme, hardly 
figure in the illustrious list of Alan Plater's dramatic oeuvre. But, as the 
producer of a 90-minute programme, The Family Rules, in the 1980s, I was 
delighted and not a little overwhelmed when Alan agreed to write the dramas 
around which the studio discussion was to revolve.

At each meeting to discuss the scripts, he insisted that it was my job to 
criticise and demand changes. "You are the producer," he would remind me 
reassuringly. The programme sank into obscurity, but I will never forget his 
kindness and modesty.
 