
Steve Hewlett’s comments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/30/steve-hewlett-cancer-diary-ethical-choices-drugs>
 about the refusal of the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence to 
approve an immunotherapy drug represents what I suspect is the tip of a very 
large iceberg of similar refusals in respect of immunotherapy drugs to treat 
various cancers. There is a lack of public awareness of this issue. Individual 
patients become aware of the drug that could help them. In my husband’s case, 
that isnivolumab 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/09/immunotherapy-drug-a-gamechanger-for-head-and-neck-cancer>
, which Nice has to date not approved for the treatment of advanced lung cancer 
despite its use elsewhere, including Scotland.

Oncologists know immunotherapy and gene therapy are the future for cancer 
treatment. However, it seems to be the case that Nice, without either public 
debate about or awareness of the issue, is denying access through the NHS to a 
whole range of new drugs on costs grounds. That means this country will fall 
even further behind the rest of the first world in cancer survival rates than 
it already is. It also means access to what science can now offer to cancer 
patients is effectively already rationed, as only those like Steve Hewlett and 
my husband who can (just about) pay for the drugs, or those with health 
insurance, are able to receive treatment.

There should be a full itemised statement from Nice of all such treatments 
that are not approved. I also believe that, in the face of the rapid advances 
in expensive treatments coupled with all the other pressures on the NHS, there 
needs to be a public debate on the question that politicians avoid: the need to 
look at alternative models of funding the NHS. Otherwise, we will end up with 
the current model offering increasingly developing world treatment to the 
majority, with only those who can afford them having access to modern effective 
drugs.
Anne Braithwaite
Leeds

Proper support for industry

You are right to highlight the importance of Britain’s motor industry to our 
economic future (“Nissan throws UK a Brexit lifeline” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/29/nissan-uk-car-industry-brexit-lifeline-gm-hit-the-road>
, News) but you miss the key point: what matters most is our capacity to design 
world-beating products and dominate major markets. For example, 5,000 people 
still work at Ford of Europe’s design centre at Dunton in Essex, but Ford gave 
up making commercial vehicles to Italy and Turkey and transferred Fiesta 
production to Spain. As part of a global company, it will be concerned with 
attracting and retaining first-class staff and Brexit sends all the wrong 
signals.

When I researched the role of Germany’s Fraunhofer research institutes for the 
bookGood Cities, Better Lives 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/good-cities-better-lives.html>, I discovered 
they are government-funded to support leading German manufacturers, not to keep 
universities going. One of the main centres is in Stuttgart, the home of 
Mercedes. Similarly, the city of Leipzig told me they built a motorway south of 
the city to secure BMW’s new plant.

Until our cities are enabled to support companies that have the capacity to 
design and make high-value products with both research and good housing, we are 
in race to the bottom.
Dr Nicholas Falk
Chair, Urbed Trust, Manchester

Don’t wait to plan your funeral

Angela Neustatter (Comment) wants her ashes to stay with her family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/29/no-grave-for-me-put-me-on-mantelpiece>
 instead of going to a lonely graveyard. I have opted for a natural burial in a 
woodland and to have a rowan tree planted over me so I can indirectly continue 
to feed the birds for some time to come, and for my grave to be a spot of quiet 
reflection for anyone who chooses to visit. I would not wish to impose myself 
as an “ornament” on the mantelpiece of my children’s home, nor would I want my 
remains to be inadvertently spilt and lost in the vacuum cleaner with the rest 
of the dust.

I agree we are all too precious about death these days. Perhaps it’s my age, 
but I am quite enthusiastic about planning my funeral and burial, but was sad 
that sending a photo of my natural burial plot to my sons, to show them what a 
lovely place it was, was met with a shiver of “let’s not think about that now”. 
We all have to face up to reality eventually.
Carol Lincoln
Leicester

Rights of cohabiting parents

Your article headlined “High court to rule on right to a civil partnership” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/29/high-court-to-rule-on-right-to-civil-partnership>
, (News) was not correct in stating: that “Although many people believe that 
people in ‘common law marriages’ have rights over children and property 
protection, there is no such provision in law.” There is such provision in 
Scotland. Since 4 May 2006, fathers named on their children’s birth certificates
here have exactly the same parental rights and responsibilities as mothers 
<http://www.gov.scot/Publications/2008/04/14131410/1>. Equal rights can also be 
conferred by agreement or through a court. From the same date, cohabiting 
couples have the right to make financial claims on separation or on the death 
of their partner. Their rights are not the same as for married couples, or 
those in civil partnerships, but Scots family law has made a significant step 
towards fairness for cohabitants.
Elizabeth Welsh
Elizabeth Welsh Family Law Practice, Ayr

Children and speed-reading

I am uncertain if pupils need to read every word in a book once they become 
proficient (“The real truth about boys and books” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/22/the-truth-about-boys-and-books-they-read-less-and-skip-pages>
, 23 October andLetters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2016/oct/29/letters-banks-imported-debts-vastly-outweigh-exported-services>
). For example, Kenneth Grahame’s classic,The Wind in the Willows contains an 
allegorical chapter titled, The Piper at the Gates of Dawn, which many boys and 
girls might well ignore. John Steinbeck once asserted that if readers 
considered some of his passages or chapters to be either self-indulgent or too 
wordy they should miss them out. He called such writing “hooptedoodle”.
Geoff Fenwick
Southport
 