
Giles Wilkes

Giles Wilkes came to work for Vince Cable after building up a career at the 
liberal thinktankCentre Forum <http://www.centreforum.org/>, where he rose to 
become chief economist. It was there that Wilkes kept a personal blog called the
Freethinking Economist <http://freethinkingeconomist.com/> – subtitled: "A 
voice of reason against illiberal nonsense" – where he outed himself as a Lib 
Dem, reserving the right to disagree with the party on some issues,notably 
their pledge to scrap tuition fees 
<http://freethinkingeconomist.com/2009/09/19/great-news-on-tuition-fees/>.

Before Centre Forum, he spent 10 years working for the financial derivatives 
trading company IG Group after being educated at Oxford, the London School of 
Economics and the London Business School.

Wilkes's Twitter stream <https://twitter.com/#!/gilesyb>, now only very rarely 
updated, reveals a laid-back but no-nonsense style. The same tone was deployed 
in the emails with Michel, when Wilkes repeatedly rebuffs Michel's requests for 
a meeting, joking that it would only be appropriate "when a Google search of 
'Vince Cable', 'News International' and 'Sky' doesn't turn anything up!"This 
tallies with his own description of himself as someone who "generally" prefers 
"polite repartee to melodramatic trollery" 
<http://freethinkingeconomist.com/about/>.

Jon Zeff

Zeff has worked at the Department for Culture, Media and Sport for years. In 
2003, aged 30 and head of the government's broadcasting policy division, he 
made it intoMediaGuardian's Media Top 100 list 
<http://media.theguardian.com/top100_2003/index/0,,1245594,00.html?INTCMP=SRCH>.

The Guardian lauded him then as "one of the civil servants shaping the 
broadcast landscape for the next generation" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2003/jul/07/mediatop100200370>. According to 
hisLinkedIn profile <http://uk.linkedin.com/pub/jon-zeff/18/43b/46b>, in April 
2011 Zeff was promoted to "director" at the DCMS, with membership of the 
executive board, with responsibility for "flexible resourcing and policy 
delivery; broadband, spectrum; mobile telecoms; digital TV switchover; BBC 
issues; oversight of press and communications".

Adam Smith

Adam Smith is a longtime aide to Jeremy Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-hunt>. When the Conservatives were 
still in opposition, in 2009, Smith was working as Hunt's chief of staff. These 
days, his job title is special adviser.

According to one account  
<http://network.civilservicelive.com/pg/special_report/csw/read/609384/the-coalition-special-advisers>
Smith prefers the "sports" part of the brief to the culture.
 