
The two men at the centre of the row over Jeremy Hunt's handling of the News 
Corporation/BSkyB deal – his former special adviser Adam Smith and lobbyist
Frédéric Michel <https://www.theguardian.com/media/frederic-michel> – are to 
give evidence to the Leveson inquiry next week.

Lord Justice Leveson will also be hearing evidence next week from former 
Labour cabinet ministers Tessa Jowell, Alan Johnson, Lord Mandelson, Lord Reid 
and Lord Smith, broadcasters Andrew Marr andJeremy Paxman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/jeremy-paxman>, and phone-hacking campaigner 
Tom Watson MP.

Adam Smith and Michel will appear on Thursday. Adam Smith resigned as culture 
secretary Hunt's special adviser last month, after 163 pages of emails written 
by Michel when he was News Corp's head of European public affairs in 2010 and 
2011 were released by the company to theLeveson inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry>.

Those emails, written over several months, appeared to show that Hunt's office 
was passing information about the minister's BSkyB bid approval process to the 
company during 2010 and 2011. Michel repeatedly described information he had 
obtained to his boss, James Murdoch, as emerging from Hunt himself.

The culture secretary denied there was an inappropriate relationship between 
himself and News Corp.Adam Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/adam-smith> resigned when it emerged that 
the bulk of Michel's contact was with him rather than Hunt directly.

Hunt said that the volume and tone of the Adam Smith/Michel communication 
could not be justified, but insisted that he oversaw the Sky bid correctly in a 
quasi-judicial manner. The culture secretary is also expected to appear at the 
inquiry.

In February Michel was promoted to News Corp's senior vice-president of 
government affairs and public policy for Europe, based on Brussels.

James Murdoch described Michel as the firm's "PO box" for correspondence 
between government ministers and the Murdoch empire during his Leveson inquiry 
evidence in April.

"On various levels, he was the liaison with policymakers," Murdoch said, 
describing Michel as a diligent employee. News Corp insiders saw him as a 
"James Murdoch acolyte".

Former Labour culture secretary Jowell, the MP for Dulwich and West Norwood, 
received £200,000 from News International after settling her civil claim for 
breach of privacy over News of the World phone hacking. Of this, £100,000 was 
paid to a charity of Jowell's choice.

Jowell will be giving evidence to the inquiry on Monday, along with Mandelson, 
who is likely to be asked about his dealings with journalists, editors and 
executives from News International and other national newspaper publishers 
during his time as Labour's director of communications in the 1980s, and from 
1997 as a cabinet minister.

Lord Smith, another former culture secretary, will be appearing on Tuesday 
along with Johnson, the former education, health and home secretary, and 
Watson, the Labour MP who has doggedly pursued Rupert Murdoch andNews 
Corporation <https://www.theguardian.com/media/news-corporation> over the 
scandal.

BBC presenters Marr and Paxman are up on Wednesday, along with Reid, the 
former Labour defence and home secretary, and Stephen Dorrell MP, who oversaw 
media policy as heritage secretary in John Major's Conservative government in 
the mid 1990s.

Also appearing on Thursday with Michel and Smith will be Lord Brooke, another 
former Tory heritage secretary in the early 1990s.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 