
OK everyone, and breathe. This was a super-size series finale with all the 
best and worst elements of Line of Duty on show. Among the best: the two 
incredibly tense and brilliantly scripted interrogation scenes. As for the 
worst: the final 15 minutes, which took a lurch into melodrama that only just 
paid off.


One of the most interesting things about this show is the way it strives so 
hard to create an air of realism – the interrogations, the jargon, the 
integration of real-life events – only to undercut it all in the name of drama. 
The final minutes, featuring gunshots in HQ and an amusingly out-of-puff Kate 
chasing Dot all over an industrial wasteland, were ludicrously over-the-top 
(although admittedly we wouldn’t blink twice if this were the conclusion to an 
American cop show). Yet I can’t deny I thoroughly enjoyed the adrenaline shot 
they provided – and therein lies the Line of Duty conundrum. It’s clever and 
tightly plotted, but it’s also addicted to twists and has a tendency to go 
overboard at the last.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fline-of-duty-recap-series-three-finale-urgent-exit-required%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F413d0073427066a7ad1f078119b0850179e4b216%2F0_98_4336_2602%2F4336.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Line%20of%20Duty%20recap%3A%20series%20three%20finale%20%E2%80%93%20urgent%20exit%20required!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fline-of-duty-recap-series-three-finale-urgent-exit-required%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Line%20of%20Duty%20recap%3A%20series%20three%20finale%20%E2%80%93%20urgent%20exit%20required%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fline-of-duty-recap-series-three-finale-urgent-exit-required%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F413d0073427066a7ad1f078119b0850179e4b216%2F0_98_4336_2602%2F4336.jpg>
 Amusingly out of puff … Kate Fleming giving chase. Photograph: BBC 
That said, I did like the fact that Danny Waldron turned out to be a red 
herring. Yes, his death sparked the whole investigation and brought Dot down 
but the story ultimately told was very different from the one suggested at the 
start.

I’m also interested to see where they go from here. One of the best things 
about this season has been the way it slowly revealed that everything tied 
together, that there was a wider conspiracy at play. A standalone fourth season 
would feel slightly out of place given those circumstances. I still have faith 
in Jed Mercurio, though: after all, he has kept me on the edge of my seat for 
the past six weeks.

The bad guys

Line of Duty's Craig Parkinson on playing TV's nastiest man: 'I'm a master at 
lurking'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/26/line-of-duty-craig-parkinson-on-playing-tvs-nastiest-man>
Farewell to DI Matthew “Dot” Cottan: the weasel’s weasel and a man who I 
always managed to feel slightly sorry for despite his villainy. He started out 
on top of his game, framing Steve for the murder of Lindsay Denton, slipping in 
endless snide taunts (“See, it’s what these coppers do when you’ve got them 
bang to rights”; “Steve Arnott, golf tee – I think Danny Waldron was trying to 
tell us something”) and even having the foresight to get the file he doctored 
from Steve’s ex-girlfriend Nicola Rogerson, thus further undermining young 
Arnott. He ended the episode a paranoid mess, haunted by Denton’s ghost, on the 
run and eventually sacrificing his life to save Kate. Urgent exit required 
indeed (whatever I might think about the series end, that text was pure 
genius). Was Dot’s act of sacrifice plausible given how self-serving he’s 
always appeared? On balance I’d say yes. There’s always been a sense that, like 
Denton, Dot is as much victim as villain, desperate to escape the world he’s 
been trapped in since he was a boy.

It’s also true that he has made numerous attempts this series to reach out to 
Kate, as though he saw her as his last chance for an ordinary life. The small 
moment where she admitted she did want to sleep with him was fascinating, 
zeroing in as it did on Dot’s surprising air of vulnerability, as was her final 
speech to him, which suggested that she differentiated between Dot and the 
“monsters” he protected. Speaking of monsters, will we ever know who they 
really are? I kept expecting Dot’s getaway driver to be a big reveal, but in 
the end he was just another anonymous bad guy. Perhaps that’s Mercurio’s wider 
point: it’s easy to trap one bad apple, but bringing down the whole barrel is a 
different, far more difficult game.


The good guys
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fline-of-duty-recap-series-three-finale-urgent-exit-required%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ed4565d7ad921bcb10c62fdc6be0ca925a91b0b%2F0_54_4242_2545%2F4242.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Line%20of%20Duty%20recap%3A%20series%20three%20finale%20%E2%80%93%20urgent%20exit%20required!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fline-of-duty-recap-series-three-finale-urgent-exit-required%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Line%20of%20Duty%20recap%3A%20series%20three%20finale%20%E2%80%93%20urgent%20exit%20required%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fline-of-duty-recap-series-three-finale-urgent-exit-required%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ed4565d7ad921bcb10c62fdc6be0ca925a91b0b%2F0_54_4242_2545%2F4242.jpg>
 Steve Arnott and superintendent Ted Hastings. Photograph: BBC 
Still, if anyone can do it it’s AC-12. With an increasingly distraught Steve 
under arrest for much of the episode the night belonged to Fleming and 
Hastings. Kate finally showed her undercover skills, successfully trailing Dot 
(well done to all the commenters who said she’d save the day) and collecting 
evidence against him. In truth, it was pretty obvious from early on that she 
was on Dot’s case – all that note taking during the first interview, plus the 
fact that Hastings ordered the trail on Arnott – but that didn’t make the 
subsequent night of chasing the paper trail any less enjoyable (then again, I 
am a sucker forstories where people sift through evidence 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vLt6djxhNe8> to catch their man).

It was especially great to see the excellent Vicky McClure given more to do – 
I loved it when she turned down Dot’s advice to get away with the pragmatic 
response: “I’m too knackered to run” – and by the end I felt quite warmly 
towards DC now DS Fleming, dubious undercover skills and all. Not as warmly as 
I felt towards superintendent Ted Hastings. From his weary despair over Steve’s 
arrest – “God help me if I ever get a good night’s sleep again” – to his 
increasing irritation with the slippery Gill (“Even after the time we’ve spent 
together, you really don’t know me at all”) Hastings dominated much of the 
first hour. In a show like this, it’s always useful to have one character that 
you entirely believe will do the right thing no matter the circumstances. 
Hastings is that man.

Notes and observations

Maneet remains the most awesome person on the show, possessing not only 
backbone and good policing skills but also demonstrating the ability to 
multi-task late at night with a small baby. Promote her to AC-12 ASAP please.

The reveal that Steve had canoodled with Lindsay was one of the few things 
that bothered me – would Hastings really allow Steve back to AC-12 when he 
knows he behaved improperly? I know he has a soft spot for him, but wouldn’t 
that mean he’d buried evidence? I can’t see Hastings doing that at all.


I did, however, feel sorry for Lindsay, her posthumous validation and her 
bleak funeral no one attended.

I even managed to feel sympathy for Steve and his eyebrows thanks to Martin 
Compston’s emotional turn when Sam dumped him.

Did we already know Hari had a gambling problem? I wasn’t sure if Dot just 
suggested that because it’s his own history or if he appropriated Hari’s story 
when talking to Kate about his dodgy past.

Ted Hastings said “Mother of God” twice this week, so I’m calling it: he’s 
definitely Catholic. No, I have no idea why he joined the freemasons … perhaps 
he didn’t, but just refuses to answer any questions about his personal life.

I enjoy imagining how many times a day Hastings has to say “like the battle”. 

There was something splendid about the fact that Nige survived to draw his 
pension. His survival skills are cockroach-levels of good.

Weasel of the week

I’m giving it to the fantastically patronising Gill Bigelow, a woman who 
managed to make the phrase “of course you care” sound like it was coated in 
poison.

Quote of the week

“There’s a line. It’s called right and wrong and I know which side my duty 
lies, so why don’t you write a nice letter of resignation to the PCC or I swear 
to god I will drag you down with the rest of them.” Superintendent Ted Hastings 
lays claim to the last part of my heart.

What did you think? Was it a satisfying conclusion or did Mercurio drop the 
ball? Did Dot’s ending satisfy you or are you picking at loose ends. Finally, 
thank you to everyone who posted theories, crazy or otherwise, week after week. 
You’ve made this a joy to write and hopefully see you all back here next time …
 