
Tired of music on your morning commute? Need something to complement your 
Candy Crush game? Or are you a This American Lifer seeking some audial 
diversity? You’re in luck. Welcome to our new podcast series, where for the 
next few weeks we’ll share our favourite shows, tell you why they’re great, 
recommend episodes, and sometimes even interview the hosts.

If you're already a podcast fan, share your go-to shows in the comments below 
– we’ll feature some of those, too.

You Made it Weird with Pete Holmes

The podcast world is crawling with comedians hanging out with their comedian 
friends – Joe Rogan, Chris Hardwick, Comedy Bang! Bang! – but standing out of 
the crowd is the loud, sensitive voice of comedian Pete Holmes. On his podcast
You Made it Weird 
<http://www.nerdist.com/podcast_channel/you-made-it-weird-channel/> on the 
Nerdist <http://www.nerdist.com/> network, Pete speaks with comedians, actors, 
musicians, scientists, and other weirdos about things that are usually 
off-limits: religion, sex and embarrassing habits. The guests vary from the 
very famous (Jon Hamm, Sarah Silverman) to the up-and-coming (Duncan Trussell, 
Tig Notaro). The episodes are always longer than an hour, often flirting with 
three. First, we'll tell you why we think the show matters – then we'll turn it 
over to Pete.


When you're ready to dig in, you can download episodes on iTunes here 
<https://itunes.apple.com/us/podcast/you-made-it-weird-pete-holmes/id475878118?mt=2>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2014%2Fjun%2F24%2Flisten-to-this-you-made-it-weird-with-pete-holmes-podcast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F23%2F1403543184706%2F9af38f9c-4a36-40d9-b88f-7af592ef41f1-1020x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Listen%20to%20this%3A%20You%20Made%20it%20Weird%20with%20Pete%20Holmes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2014%2Fjun%2F24%2Flisten-to-this-you-made-it-weird-with-pete-holmes-podcast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Listen%20to%20this%3A%20You%20Made%20it%20Weird%20with%20Pete%20Holmes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2014%2Fjun%2F24%2Flisten-to-this-you-made-it-weird-with-pete-holmes-podcast%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F23%2F1403543184706%2F9af38f9c-4a36-40d9-b88f-7af592ef41f1-1020x1020.jpeg>
 You Made it Weird, with Pete Holmes. 
Why it’s great

Pete is deeply earnest and that energy disarms even the brashest or most 
ironic comedians. In his episode withZach Galifianakis 
<http://www.nerdist.com/2012/10/you-made-it-weird-96-zach-galifianakis/>, a man 
rarely out of character, Pete got Zach chatting about his relationship with 
fame, the dangers of show business, and when his mom told his dad to stop 
reading him the Bible.

 Pete makes conversations real by opening up aggressively about his own life. 
If you're a regular listener, you'll know his therapist's name and the details 
of his divorce. His comedy is goofy and endearing. AsMark Maron put it 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1BPfNBil-Gk>: "You are so open hearted, you 
exhaust other people."


What you should know

Prepare yourself for Pete’s massive, voluptuous waterfall of a laugh.

 Comedian John Mulaney roasts Pete, and Pete laughs...loudly. Pete Holmes' 
late-night post-Conan O'Brien talk show on TBS was just cancelled after two 
seasons. This means more time for his podcast. 
Where you should start

Start with the names you know and make your way into other episodes. Dane Cook 
<http://www.nerdist.com/pepisode/you-made-it-weird-135-dane-cook/> speaks to 
his tense relationship with the comedy world. ComedianIliza Shlesinger 
<http://www.nerdist.com/pepisode/you-made-it-weird-125-iliza-shlesinger/> gives 
a great description of the importance of honesty on stage, especially as a 
woman. "A lot of girls get on stage, and their jokes revolve around how fucked 
up they are, whether or not they are," she says. "When I was sick this week, I 
ate an entire box of graham crackers, I played with my hair for 30 minutes, I 
didn't wear a shirt, I kissed my dog on the mouth. The more honest you get, the 
more the audience resonates with it. You can smell it."

One tip: before you start an episode with a comedian you don’t know, look them 
up and watch a bit of their stand-up. It makes their story more compelling.

Pete says:

We asked Pete to fill in the blank about his own show, Mad Libs style:

The best compliment I ever received about You Made it Weird was: your podcast 
helped me through a tough time. We get this one fairly regularly, actually, and 
I'm always blown away. A break-up, a divorce, crisis of faith, you name it. 
People love the laughs, and laughing is therapeutic, of course, but the genuine 
conversations are what people take away and make the episodes stick.


This is why I laugh so loud: it's my laugh.

This is why my listeners spend 2+ hours per episode listening to people they 
don't know talk about their lives:we are starving for connection and community 
and comedy. A great You Made it Weird gives you all three. A phenomenal one may 
cover just one. Stuff comes out when you talk for more that just the allotted, 
unofficial 60-minute self-imposed time limit a lot of shows use. Around that 
90-minute mark, the conversation can become something less guarded and very 
special. Especially when you're talking about comedy, sex, and God. I mean, 
what else is there?

If I had never heard the show, I'd start with: the Ben Schwartz 
<http://www.nerdist.com/pepisode/you-made-it-weird-198-ben-schwartz/> episode, 
because man oh man is he a funny dude. Other hilarious ones includeJenny Slate 
<http://www.nerdist.com/pepisode/you-made-it-weird-55-jenny-slate/>, Bert 
Kreischer 
<http://www.nerdist.com/pepisode/you-made-it-weird-139-bert-kreischer/comment-page-1/>
 andJosh Ruben 
<http://www.nerdist.com/pepisode/you-made-it-weird-210-josh-ruben/>. Going 
through a break-up?Matt Mira 
<http://www.nerdist.com/pepisode/you-made-it-weird-131-matt-mira/> or Emily 
Gordon <http://www.nerdist.com/pepisode/you-made-it-weird-22-emily-gordon/>. 
Feeling lost in the universe or disillusioned with organized Christianity?Brian 
Greene 
<http://www.nerdist.com/pepisode/you-made-it-weird-206-brian-greene-theoretical-physicist/>
 andRob Bell <http://www.nerdist.com/pepisode/you-made-it-weird-152-rob-bell/>. 
Horny?Moshe Kasher 
<http://www.nerdist.com/pepisode/you-made-it-weird-197-moshe-kasher-returns/> 
has sex stories that will amaze. And his second appearance one the show was one 
of the hardest times I've ever laughed. Medium soup.

 Moshe Kasher discusses medium soup on You Made it Weird 
Your turn

Now it's time for you to let us know: what's your favorite podcast? Tell us in 
the comments below, and the best suggestions will be included on Listen to 
This. Don't forget to explain why it's great and what episodes to start with.

Keep it weird, folks.
 