
In the long-running history of peanut butter and chocolate and other great 
things that are even better together,The Talkhouse Film podcast 
<http://thetalkhouse.com/kid-cudi-talks-paul-reubens-pee-wees-big-holiday-talkhouse-film-podcast/>
 paired upPee Wee’s Big Holiday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/18/pee-wees-big-holiday-netflix-review>
 star Paul Reubens with Kid Cudi. They talked fandom and foiled creative 
endeavors in a wide-ranging conversation sure to please fans of both artists.

To celebrate Marc Maron’s 700th episode of WTF podcast 
<http://www.wtfpod.com/podcast/episode-700-pt-1-2-julia-louis-dreyfus-louis-ck>
, he released a two-hour long double episode with interviews with both Veep star
Julia Louis Dreyfus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/02/julia-louis-dreyfus-disgraceful-genius-veep-seinfeld>
 andLouis CK <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/louis-ck>. While Maron 
and Dreyfus had never met before their interview, Maron and CK have a long and 
well-documented history. Now that they have worked through (most of) their 
issues, their friendship gives fans the chance to hear CK take an emotional and 
comprehensive deep dive into his latest project,Horace and Pete 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/feb/01/louis-ck-horace-pete-top-secret-tv-event-of-the-year>
.

Speaking of forgiveness and moving on, Reply All 
<https://gimletmedia.com/show/reply-all/> celebrated the second anniversary of 
Email Debt Forgiveness Day with a nearly unbelievable story of a romance that 
started on a desktop. Aconversation 
<http://99percentinvisible.org/episode/unseen-city-wonders-urban-wilderness/> 
between Unseen City author Nathanael Johnson and 99% Invisible host Roman Mars 
managed to make it impossible to ignore the pigeons that crowd the city streets.

As election season rolls on, Buzzfeed launched a new political podcast, 
appropriately calledNo One Knows Anything, 
<https://itunes.apple.com/us/podcast/no-one-knows-anything/id1106215850?mt=2> 
and hosted by politics reporter Evan McMorris-Santoro. Two episodes in and the 
show is proving itself to be essential listening for anyone with a stomach for 
politics.

In other new podcast news, MTV announced 
<https://itunes.apple.com/us/podcast/mtv/id1108227759?mt=2> five new shows that 
will roll out over the next week as part of the network’s efforts to 
retro-brand MTV News as the source for cultural intel. They’ve brought in an 
incredible team of talent to help, too, including film critic, Amy Nicholson 
who hostedThe Canon <http://thecanon.wolfpop.com/audio/playlists/3968> on 
Earwolf, Molly Lambert of Grantland and This Recording, writers Ira Madison III 
and Doreen St Félix, and theMemory Palace’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/feb/14/the-memory-palace-podcast-hardcore-history-built-on-small-moments>
 Nate DiMeo.

The shows will focus on film, politics, pop culture and, naturally, music, 
including a show called No Requests Live, a music and pop culture roundtable 
podcast that shows how far the network has come from its TRL days.

The big news in podcasting this week is that two of the most popular horror 
podcasts – Limetown and Lore – are in development to become TV shows, following 
in the footsteps of Throwing Shade, which is being turned into a late-night 
talkshow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/apr/25/l-podcast-ta-nehisi-coates-startup-radio-diaries-the-truth-throwing-shade>
 and Serial, which is currently in development 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/live-feed/serial-podcast-tv-version-phil-828409>
.

The Walking Dead’s executive producer Gale Anne Hurd has teamed up with a 
production company to turnLore 
<https://itunes.apple.com/us/podcast/lore/id978052928?mt=2>, the spooky history 
show created by Aaron Mahnke, into a television series,according 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/live-feed/gale-anne-hurd-ben-silverman-886080>
 to the Hollywood Reporter. Lore seems like a natural fit for The Walking 
Dead’s fan base, although Mahnke isn’t a fan of carnage, per se. “I don’t want 
to glorify the gore,” hetold the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/nov/01/aaron-mahnke-lore-history-podcast>
 in November 2015. “I want to put a spotlight on the behavior and motives, and 
show how it contributed to superstitions and fears that are common to us today.”

Since the show started, Mahnke has built a solid community of fans with over 
two million listeners tuning in each month, eager to hear the latest chapter in 
humanity’s dark history. It seems likely that those fans will tune in to a TV 
show based on the same, which the Hollywood Reporter says will “offer a blend 
of narration, historical mixed media and cinematically shot scripted scenes 
featuring top talent”.

It’s less surprising that Limetown is being developed for television, as 
creators Zack Akers and Skip Bronkie met in film school. They approached 
Limetown as a feature film, using special effects to design an audio 
blockbuster. The result was a captivating show that kept listeners tuning in 
and pushed the show up the iTunes chart. Now, according toan update 
<http://us11.campaign-archive2.com/?u=f05217702ac3a1923fcc1e9b5&id=76dad5af93> 
sent out by Akers and Bronkie, they are leveraging their podcast’s success in 
several ways, including writing a prequel novel for Simon & Schuster and 
returning to their film roots to write a pilot based on Limetown. As theytold 
the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/oct/25/limetown-podcast-fictional-town-x-files-serial>
 in October 2015, they have learned to love the podcasting format, though. In 
addition to their other pursuits, they are also working on more Limetown 
episodes, and developing a wholly new podcast series.
 