
Inside the offices that nestle within the old warehouse buildings of 
Liverpool’s Baltic Triangle, which house many of the city’s nascent digital 
technology companies, there’s a sense of purpose and industry.

Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool> is classed as having a 
tech cluster, which means, according to a report out this Thursday, its digital 
industries stand a good chance of growing faster and generating higher salaries 
than in much of the rest of the country.

“There’s money here,” says Leo Cubbin, co-founder of Liverpool-based Ripstone 
<http://www.ripstone.com/>, the creator of computer games such as Pure Chess 
<http://www.purechess.com/> and Ironcast 
<http://store.steampowered.com/app/327670/>. Fellow founder, Phil Gaskell, nods 
in agreement.

The pair are talking in a small meeting room about the 14 or so private 
shareholders who have backed his company. Many of them are high net worth 
individuals based locally and a well-known figure from the football industry is 
advising on future finance.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fliverpool-tech-cluster-merseyside-miracle-digital-sector-london-tech-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F916d5dd8d16a3d1cd2c3392dd02ad0124d311fea%2F0_168_5642_3385%2F5642.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Liverpool%20tech%20startups%20out%20to%20prove%20there's%20life%20outside%20of%20Shoreditch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fliverpool-tech-cluster-merseyside-miracle-digital-sector-london-tech-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Liverpool%20tech%20startups%20out%20to%20prove%20there%27s%20life%20outside%20of%20Shoreditch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fliverpool-tech-cluster-merseyside-miracle-digital-sector-london-tech-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F916d5dd8d16a3d1cd2c3392dd02ad0124d311fea%2F0_168_5642_3385%2F5642.jpg>
 Tech entrepreneurs clustered together (from left): Jonathan Holmes, founder 
and managing director of Milky Tea; Phil Gaskell, creative director of 
Ripstone; Leo Cubbin, managing director of Ripstone; Clemens Wangerin, managing 
director of Starship Group. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
Ripstone, which seeks £2m for further growth, is located in the heart of the 
Triangle, a development area overlooking the river Mersey with a skyline on one 
side dominated by the city’s imposing Anglican cathedral.


Liverpool has a history of video game making, dating to the studios owned by 
Sony, Bizarre Creations and Evolution. However, Studio Liverpool, famous for 
its Wipeout series of racing games, closed in 2012, leaving about 100 games 
experts looking for jobs or companies to found.

Now it is home to a cluster of games companies that feature prominently in the 
narrative of the state of Britain’s digital economy as portrayed in theTech 
Nation <http://www.techcityuk.com/technation/> report by Tech City UK, the 
government-backed initiative.

This is what the London-focused Tech City has broadened into now the 
government has decided to promote the growth of digital startups around the 
country, rather than just in Shoreditch and surrounding areas in the east of 
the capital.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fliverpool-tech-cluster-merseyside-miracle-digital-sector-london-tech-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1908e7eb7932fcc1568b350b1d1ac3af42f7aba9%2F32_155_4850_2910%2F4850.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Liverpool%20tech%20startups%20out%20to%20prove%20there's%20life%20outside%20of%20Shoreditch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fliverpool-tech-cluster-merseyside-miracle-digital-sector-london-tech-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Liverpool%20tech%20startups%20out%20to%20prove%20there%27s%20life%20outside%20of%20Shoreditch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fliverpool-tech-cluster-merseyside-miracle-digital-sector-london-tech-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1908e7eb7932fcc1568b350b1d1ac3af42f7aba9%2F32_155_4850_2910%2F4850.jpg>
 Liverpool is home to a cluster of games companies. Photograph: Alamy 
In his new year’s message, the digital economy minister said the industry was 
expanding around the UK. “Digital fever has exploded from the cluster in east 
London, and has spread to every part of the country, making the UK truly a Tech 
Nation with more than 70% of digital businesses now based outside of the 
capital,” Ed Vaizey said.

Doubts about the government’s commitment to Tech North, the northern offshoot, 
were raised recently, when Claire Braithwaite, its passionate chief executive, 
resigned after less than a year in the job. Herb Kim, the executive chairman 
who is filling in during the interim, promises that the commitment to spreading 
the digital economy outside London remains as strong as ever.

For all its efforts at regeneration, Liverpool remains an embodiment of the 
north-south divide in terms of pure economics statistics. The employment rate 
is 61.2% compared with an average in UK cities of 71%. Output per person in 
terms of gross value added is £22,092, compared with £42,666 in London. House 
prices in the north-west average £183,000 compared with £531,000 in the 
south-east.

Employment UK cities 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/02/employment-zip/giv-27167Bba5uvz6FVNc>
With such disparities in wealth and income, some believe the government should 
be doing more to encourage digital firms in order to help bridge the gaping 
north-south divide.The latest Centre for Cities study  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jan/19/north-south-divide-widen-thinktank-data>
classifies 29 of 63 cities in the UK as having low-wage, high-welfare economies 
– including Liverpool.

The urban policy thinktank’s chief executive, Alexandra Jones, applauds the 
focus on the digital sector in northern cities such as Liverpool, but says 
education and training also need to be addressed if such initiatives are to 
contribute a real increase in long-term economic growth.

“Rather than artificially encouraging businesses to move – a policy that has 
historically had low success rates – the first priority should be addressing 
skills-gaps across the north,” she says. “Liverpool, for example, has one of 
the highest proportions of residents with no formal qualifications in the UK, 
and also has very low rates of GCSE attainment. Improving skills levels should 
be a central part of the government’s ’northern powerhouse’ initiative and 
should also be a key concern for local policymakers.”

Gaskell also thinks more could be done in terms of incentives. “The government 
is great at subsidising plant and machinery and other tangibles but in gaming 
we’re just talking about people,” he says.

Jonathan Holmes, founder ofMilky Tea <http://milkytea.com/>, a rival games 
maker based a few doors from Gaskell’s office in the Baltic Triangle, tried 
working in London a few years ago but has since returned.

The 37-year-old is positive about being back in his hometown. “There’s a lot 
of games talent that is on the doorstep,” he says.‎ “People realise they can 
not be everything on their own ... I have loaned a coder and in return I have 
given up one of my animators for a period.” Milky Tea’s latest game,Coffin 
Dodgers <http://store.steampowered.com/app/320540/>, has just launched.

Mike Humphrey is the design director of Starship 
<http://www.starship-group.com/>. When the virtual reality social media company 
was set up by former Evolution founder Martin Kenwright in 2014 there was a 
great support network, he says. “People lent us furniture, the [universities] 
lent us equipment. It’s a really nice atmosphere.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fliverpool-tech-cluster-merseyside-miracle-digital-sector-london-tech-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febcf77472d4d76631b4aea9a46ddf4e621346fd6%2F0_124_5760_3455%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Liverpool%20tech%20startups%20out%20to%20prove%20there's%20life%20outside%20of%20Shoreditch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fliverpool-tech-cluster-merseyside-miracle-digital-sector-london-tech-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Liverpool%20tech%20startups%20out%20to%20prove%20there%27s%20life%20outside%20of%20Shoreditch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fliverpool-tech-cluster-merseyside-miracle-digital-sector-london-tech-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febcf77472d4d76631b4aea9a46ddf4e621346fd6%2F0_124_5760_3455%2F5760.jpg>
 Sri Perangur, a data scientist at Skyscanner. The Edinburgh-based travel firm 
recently achieved ‘unicorn’ status. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
Humphrey and the others say they have a good relationship with the local 
Studio School, where students are taught video game making and are often 
mentored by local entrepreneurs.

A tech sector with notable big names outside London has been a feature of the 
UK scene for many years. Sage, the FTSE 100 tech group, is based just outside 
Newcastle upon Tyne and, according to Tech Nation, 74% of technology companies 
are located outside the capital.
Tech firms' growth 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/02/digital_companies-zip/giv-27167JRDruo8D40jj>
Liverpool stands ahead of inner London in terms of the growth of newly formed 
digital companies, with a 119% rate compared with 92%. Bournemouth leads the 
country, with a growth rate of 212%, according to last year’s Tech Nation 
report.

Last month the Edinburgh-based travel website Skyscanner 
<http://www.skyscanner.net/> and the North Yorkshire-based Anaplan 
<https://www.anaplan.com/> became the latest UK unicorns – privately owned tech 
companies valued at $1bn (£700m) or more – when they raised $192m and $90m 
respectively.

Suranga Chandratillake, a venture capital partner at Balderton, says: “There 
are extremely strong clusters outside London. It is the right thing to promote 
these clusters.”

Balderton, whose past investments included Betfair and Bebo, has a stake in 
online retailerThe Hut <http://www.thehutgroup.com/>, based in the north-west 
and in the Exeter-based crowdfunding investment firmCrowdcube 
<https://www.crowdcube.com/>. “There’s always going to be a natural 
gravitational pull towards London but that doesn’t mean there won’t be other 
clusters that might thrive. As an investor you need to get out to see 
companies,” says Chandratillake.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fliverpool-tech-cluster-merseyside-miracle-digital-sector-london-tech-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9fda8355a48b6c7a5f73100fb081fc6a5f62b5a1%2F0_133_5066_3040%2F5066.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Liverpool%20tech%20startups%20out%20to%20prove%20there's%20life%20outside%20of%20Shoreditch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fliverpool-tech-cluster-merseyside-miracle-digital-sector-london-tech-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Liverpool%20tech%20startups%20out%20to%20prove%20there%27s%20life%20outside%20of%20Shoreditch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fliverpool-tech-cluster-merseyside-miracle-digital-sector-london-tech-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9fda8355a48b6c7a5f73100fb081fc6a5f62b5a1%2F0_133_5066_3040%2F5066.jpg>
 Old Street roundabout (or Silicon Roundabout) in London has a new upstart in 
Liverpool’s Baltic Triangle. Photograph: Alamy 
There is clearly an advantage in having lots of creative people based in a 
convivial low-cost region, with access to a decent sized talent pool. But to 
grow, fledgling companies also need an ecosystem including lawyers, financiers 
and media coverage.

Holmes says that access to finance in Liverpool is tricky. “Instead of running 
to London I am going over to the US. It seems to be easier to access finance 
there. British investors tend to like tangible products,” he says. “We need to 
put companies in the spotlight globally. We’re terrible at shouting about what 
we do.”

Not everybody, however, supports a policy of actively encouraging the spread 
of digital startups around the country. Nic Brisbourne, managing partner of 
London-based technology investor Forward Partners, argues that it makes more 
sense to focus on the capital.

“Too much wealth inequality is unequivocally a bad thing and we desperately 
need to revive the less prosperous regions in the UK, but conflating regional 
development policy and startup ecosystem policy is a mistake that puts both at 
risk,” he says.


“Startup ecosystems need a significant minimum scale to operate effectively 
and the London area ecosystem is now only approaching critical mass while other 
hubs are a long way off and unlikely to become sustainable in the short to 
medium term.”

There is also a word of warning from Stephen Nicol, a regional economics 
expert from Regeneris Consulting: “It’s simply not realistic to expect every 
city in the UK to develop a genuine internationally competitive location for 
digital industries.”

Games <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games> creators such as Milky 
Tea’s Holmes are not going to let any such scepticism stand in their way. “I’m 
determined to make it work here,” he says.

When Cubbin talks of money being around in Liverpool he is speaking in the 
context of the rather modest £2m needed to fund his company’s next stage. If 
Liverpool and the Baltic Triangle is ever going to be taken seriously as a 
globally competitive tech cluster it might need to create a couple of unicorns.

“The key is to build resilience into the ecosystem,” says Starship’s chief 
operating officer, Clemens Wangerin, a veteran of the city’s tech scene since 
his days at Studio Liverpool. “It’s a question of time, money and resources but 
mainly time. One thing’s for sure, you need to be in the water to catch the 
wave.”

● This article was amended on Tuesday 9 February 2016. It originally stated 
incorrectly that Tech Nation was the government-backed initiative to promote 
technology startups. This body is called Tech City UK, which is publishing a 
report entitled Tech Nation.
 