
Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> are monitoring Alex 
Oxlade-Chamberlain’s potential availability at Arsenal as Jürgen Klopp 
considers ways to assemble a squad with extra depth and durability to sustain a 
challenge for the Premier League title.

Liverpool v Manchester City: a game that threatens to live up to the hype | 
Sachin Nakrani
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/28/liverpool-v-manchester-city-new-years-eve-lallana-firmino>
Oxlade-Chamberlain is one of the players Liverpool have identified but there 
is also an awareness at Anfield that turning that interest into something 
concrete will not be straightforward bearing in mind the various politics 
between the two clubs and the current state of the Premier League table.

Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> are fourth, nine points 
off Chelsea at the top and three behind second-placed Liverpool, and would have 
obvious reservations about allowing any of their players to join a direct title 
rival in the January transfer window.

To complicate matters further, the relationship between Liverpool and Arsenal 
was undoubtedly harmed during the 2013 transfer saga involving Luis Suárez and 
the infamous attempt by the London club to trigger a buyout clause that turned 
out not to exist. Liverpool were incensed thatArsenal bid £40m plus £1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jul/23/arsenal-luis-suarez-liverpool-transfer>
 for the Uruguayan and, three and a half years on, the damage to the clubs’ 
relations is still to be fully repaired.

The interest from Liverpool, however, is genuine and there is hope at Anfield 
that Oxlade-Chamberlain might be tempted by the vibrant side Klopp is building 
at a time when the player’s valuation is starting to recede because he is 
within 18 months of his contract expiring.

Oxlade-Chamberlain has scored six times in all competitions this season but 
has become frustrated by his inability to pin down a regular position in Arsène 
Wenger’s team, starting only eight Premier League matches and lasting the full 
90 minutes on only one occasion, whenWest Ham were beaten 5-1 in early December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/west-ham-united-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
.

At 23, however, he is still young in football terms and a player who joined 
Arsenal from Southamptonfor £12m in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/aug/08/alex-oxlade-chamberlain-arsenal>
, shortly before his 18th birthday, would still be a relatively expensive 
acquisition, with a valuation in today’s market in the region of £20m-£25m.

Arsenal were open to the idea of selling him in the summer but Wenger stated 
recently that he wanted the player to sign a new contract and remain at the 
club for what should be the best years of his career. Arsenal, however, have 
not shown any great desire to instigate talks even though a number of clubs, 
including Manchester City, Leicester City and Southampton have persistently 
been linked with a player who has 24 England caps.
 