
I can’t say I was surprised that last week was when many people seemed to turn 
on the series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/shortcuts/2015/dec/07/is-the-final-episode-of-london-spy-doomed-to-let-us-down>
. I still feel very equivocal about this show now it’s over, but, even in this 
final episode, which ended so daftly and implausibly, there was much to enjoy. 
Most of it came from the brilliant Ben Whishaw, who had to carry so much of the 
emotional weight of the show. Danny’s personal story was impeccably written and 
performed, certainly in comparison to those of certain other characters. If spy 
stories are ultimately about subtext rather than plot, about human 
relationships rather than codes and algorithms, about outsiders and the trials 
of integration, then London Spy has succeeded handsomely.

Is the final episode of London Spy doomed to let us down?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/shortcuts/2015/dec/07/is-the-final-episode-of-london-spy-doomed-to-let-us-down>
‘Wouldn’t it have been easier to have loved me?’ – Danny

“I can’t say why we never did.” This awkward scene explained in abundance 
Danny’s rootlessness, his yearning for affection and protection. His “dying” 
dad and defeated mum were, it seems, menaced into a slightly elaborate scheme 
to wipe the cylinder of information by taking a photo with a rigged camera. The 
saddest thing was that Danny wasn’t remotely surprised that they had betrayed 
him.

The HIV support group was another powerful sequence with Danny finally able to 
tell the truth, albeit in a room of total strangers. God knows what they really 
made of this utterly implausible yarn, but at least they sat and listened.


It’s a shame that, with the emotional side of Danny’s story so well handled, 
the intricacies of the plotting couldn’t compete. How did “they” know Danny 
carried the cylinder on him? There must have been easier ways to swipe/wipe the 
information, but then you could say that of almost every attempt to thwart 
Danny throughout the series. The method of his infection with HIV – corrupt 
copper taking blood test – was handled rather as an afterthought. And although 
Danny’s efforts to spread the word started promisingly – first by post and then 
email – wasn’t it worth asking his old flatmates to send something on his 
behalf? Or giving social media a shot? The internet is full of people willing 
to promote conspiracy theories if you know where to look.


‘No child can redeem their parents’ – Alex

Finally, the full story. Initially brought up by a single mum (no word on the 
father) with ruinous addictions, then raised by an embittered, vengeful adopted 
mother to redeem the failures of her and her husband. I think we would all have 
a few issues with an upbringing like that. He was anything but “a stupid boy”, 
though. That room was given the fullBeautiful Mind 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tvO_78fajxY> treatment of blackboards and 
floor-to-ceiling equations.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F07%2Flondon-spy-recap-episode-five-the-end-of-lying%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd524c01003c48b412a804be5fd6a6f153d227510%2F0_0_4366_2623%2F4366.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20Spy%20recap%3A%20episode%20five%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0the%20end%20of%20lying&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F07%2Flondon-spy-recap-episode-five-the-end-of-lying%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20Spy%20recap%3A%20episode%20five%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0the%20end%20of%20lying&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F07%2Flondon-spy-recap-episode-five-the-end-of-lying%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd524c01003c48b412a804be5fd6a6f153d227510%2F0_0_4366_2623%2F4366.jpg>
 Danny’s beautiful mind. Photograph: WTTV Limited/BBC 
The idea that he could have been spirited out of the country had been floated 
by some of you, and, at one point, I did dare to believe it was possible. As it 
was, he died a uniquely horrible death, condemned by his own invention and his 
mother’s trickery and belated sense of responsibility. Funnily enough, I was 
far more inclined to buy the whole “end of lying” thing after it was used 
against its creator – a vicious, delicious dramatic irony that more than 
compensated for the sheer implausibility of the concept in reality. How easy it 
is for Frances to dismiss his discovery as “a sentimental, ridiculous notion” 
when it exposed such unpleasant truths. Bravo to Edward Holcroft for making 
that scene count.

 “Alex was your step back [from the abyss],” Frances tells Danny. ”He was 
mine, too.” Who knows what Alex could have become, had Frances not tried to 
carve him in her own image? Happy, I’d wager. And if Danny hadn’t tried to save 
him? Alive, probably. Alex was never allowed to be his own man.

‘How do we live without the people we love?’ – Scottie

Little more was revealed about Scottie here, other than the fact that he 
didn’t have many friends (that funeral was somewhat sparsely attended) and that 
he and Danny were as close as they always seemed (nice of him to pass on his 
house and car). Danny’s eulogy was charming and heartfelt. How appropriate 
that, after their conversation on Hampstead Heath, Danny got to say goodbye to 
someone in a place where people actually cared.

I suppose we’ll never know which side Scottie was really on, which is probably 
appropriate for a career spook. But if he wasn’t the bad guy, either Marcus or 
Claire must have spilt the beans about the cracked cylinder, neither of which I 
really buy.

And what of those boffins? Marcus was logical to the end, destroying his copy 
of the files, but lacked class in crashing a funeral. Claire seemed to be 
playing a slightly different game, warning Danny off the case before returning 
his journal and, I think, the cylinder. Or, at least, that’s what I assume she 
meant when she said, “I’ll be here when you’re ready,” with a knowing smile. 
Anyone else got any theories?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F07%2Flondon-spy-recap-episode-five-the-end-of-lying%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1196d6122381be8528466a2b7d71d2c5ae06539%2F0_0_4284_2570%2F4284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20Spy%20recap%3A%20episode%20five%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0the%20end%20of%20lying&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F07%2Flondon-spy-recap-episode-five-the-end-of-lying%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20Spy%20recap%3A%20episode%20five%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0the%20end%20of%20lying&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F07%2Flondon-spy-recap-episode-five-the-end-of-lying%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1196d6122381be8528466a2b7d71d2c5ae06539%2F0_0_4284_2570%2F4284.jpg>
 Frances (Charlotte Rampling). Photograph: Joss Barratt/BBC/WTTV Limited 
‘Let’s burn them down for real.’ – Frances

Aargh! Really? The last scene played out like a Home Counties Thelma and Louise
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=66CP-pq7Cx0>. Frankly, I would have preferred 
it if Danny had driven off a beaten man: downbeat, to be sure, but less 
howlingly bizarre.

My real issue was that I never accepted Frances’s decision to go all Darth 
Vader and turn from monster to white knight. The biological Mrs Turner (I’m 
guessing her “husband” was the secret-service guard placed there to make sure 
they toed the line) burning down the maze was quite the statement, but hardly a 
compelling argument for Frances to throw her lot in with Danny. Nor was I was 
convinced that she really loved Alex. Wearing his key around her neck was 
visual evidence, I suppose, but hardly enough to counter all the wrong she had 
done him; this fish was too cold to be warmed up by a mere fire.


Charlotte Rampling did her considerable best, but this was a wodge of 
exposition too far for me and, I think, for her. I can’t imagine how she 
described to Danny the scenes we witnessed in flashback.Ben Whishaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/ben-whishaw> had much less to say and, as 
a result, acted her off the screen here.

Having said that, I enjoyed her story up until her bizarre volte-face. Being 
the frustrated, unappreciated wife of an incompetent spy “with a second-rate 
mind” who apparently let the Cambridge spy ring operate under his nose? That 
would send anyone a bit potty.

Well done, by the way, to those who thought Frances was the fag-smoking 
surveillance spook in the van and the flat opposite Danny’s. Perceiving that 
from her smoking habit alone was impressive supposition. That said, if her 
behaviour was clandestine, I couldn’t imagine someone as haughty as Frances 
actually getting her hands dirty like that. If it was authorised, why would MI6 
entrust someone so potentially compromised and personally invested with such a 
mission?

London

Largely familiar locations this week, imaginatively and evocatively shot as 
always – although where was Scottie’s funeral held? The same church where he 
and Danny met last week, I know, but I couldn’t identify it.

I loved the shot of Danny standing in the Thames after Scottie’s funeral. Made 
him look like a Gormley sculpture.

Danny’s folks live on the Alexandra Road estate, where I don’t recall a single 
story ending happily in television drama. Another striking location, though.

Notes and observations

 * I can’t see how another series can possibly be wrung out of this.

 * Thanks everyone for pointing out last week’s Child 44 reference. For those 
who have admired the direction and camerawork of the series, can I recommend
this blog <http://cinematic-literature.tumblr.com/> for in-depth analysis of 
recurring visual themes.

 * Always back up those important files, kids.

 * So, Clarke, what’s been your most memorable role? “I’d have to say it was 
the one where I sucked a sweet, delivered a speech, handed over a business card 
and then strolled off. Just don’t ask me what it was about.”

 * Just as there was the Broadchurch slug 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JhLw4Vv412E>, callously crushed under Olivia 
Colman’s boot, so too did the London Spy fly serve nobly before its graphic 
electrocution.

 * Alex certainly had some discreet neighbours.

 * Loved/hated the big red “LIE” sign coming up by each test of Alex’s 
honesty. Like something fromWar Games 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NHWjlCaIrQo>. Gloriously clunky.

 * For a story about spying, it was striking how all the physical violence was 
implied. The emotional violence, of course, was explicit throughout.

 * Can we all agree that David Holmes and Keefus Ciancia’s soundtrack was a 
knockout? The closing credits had another perfect fit with M83’sMy Tears Are 
Becoming a Sea <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uE8EhJ9gS28>: grandiose, ornate 
and nakedly emotional.

 * The end of lies: “nice idea” or “sentimental, ridiculous notion”? The 
debate continues. Somewhere.

 * Finally, thank you all for your contributions, speculations and inspired 
detective work. If nothing else, it’s done what all ambitious television drama 
should and incited debate. And who was Steve Fields, anyway?  