
A British gay men’s choir is to release a cover of Bridge Over Troubled Water 
for victims of theOrlando shooting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/18/orlando-nightlcub-shooting-pulse-florida-attack-timeline>
.

The London Gay Men’s Chorus (LGMC) will release its version of Simon & 
Garfunkel’s hit on Friday, with proceeds to be split equally between the Pulse 
Victims Fund, organised byEquality Florida <http://www.eqfl.org/>, and Galop 
<http://www.galop.org.uk/>, a London-­based charity that works to reduce LGBT 
hate crime in the UK.

Forty-nine people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/jun/13/orlando-terror-attack-victims-pulse-nightclub>
 were killed and 53 were injured during the attack at the Pulse nightclub in 
Orlando, Florida on 11 June – the worst mass shooting in American history. The 
gunman, Omar Mateen, was killed by police during a shootout.

The release of the charity single follows a performance of the song by the 
chorus atthe London vigil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/13/orlando-nightclub-shooting-world-in-mourning-for-victims>
 to honour Orlando’s victims. Footage of the LGMC singing in a packed Old 
Compton Street in Soho was shared on social media and by news outlets around 
the world, receiving millions of views.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjzNbtRPTQos&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjzNbtRPTQos>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjzNbtRPTQos&media=>
 The London Gay Men’s Chorus singing at the London vigil for Orlando victims. 
Speaking about the release, Simon Sharp, the artistic director of LGMC 
<http://www.lgmc.org.uk/>, said: “The attack on the Pulse nightclub in Orlando 
sent shockwaves through the whole LGBT community. The LGMC responded in the 
only way we could: through song.”

The chorus’s version of the track, from its forthcoming album, was actually 
recorded hours before the shooting. Following the unprecedented response to its 
performance at the vigil, the LGMC – which is Europe’s largest male voice choir 
– decided to release the track early in honour of the victims of the tragedy.

Sharp said: “We were truly overwhelmed by the public response to our 
performance at the Soho vigil and want to do everything we can to raise money 
for the victims of the Orlando attack and for victims of LGBT hate crime in the 
UK.”

In the footage, members of the chorus can be seen wiping tears away as the 
gathered crowd cheers at the end of the emotional performance. “It’s a song 
that has taken on new meaning for us as a chorus but we hope it sends out a 
message of love and support to all of our LGBT brothers and sisters and our 
straight allies across the world,” Sharp said.

The chairman of the LGMC, John D Carrion, added: “The LGMC believes 
passionately that music has the power to heal and to inspire, to lift souls and 
to unite people in times of joy and sorrow.

“The Orlando attack was an act of hatred directed towards the LGBT community 
and we want to combat this hate with a message of love, hope and solidarity. 
The response to our performance at the vigil has been incredibly overwhelming 
and humbling for all of our members.”

This digital­-only release will be available to purchase or stream on all 
major platforms including iTunes, Amazon Music, Google Play, Spotify, Deezer 
and Tidal.
 