 When Quintin Hogg, the eldest son of a lord chancellor, won Oxford City for 
the Conservatives in 1938, the Daily Mail predicted that Britain was witnessing 
the arrival of a future lord chancellor. The prediction was wholly accurate; 
just like his father, Lord Hailsham, who has died aged 94, served two terms, 
totalling 11 years nine months - from June 1970-March 1974 and May 1979-June 
1987 - making him the country's longest serving lord chancellor of the 20th 
century.
What the Mail could not predict, in the light of his disclaiming his father's 
peerage, was the postwar struggle between Hailsham's aspiration to the 
political heights and to the headship of the judiciary.

Hailsham all but succeeded Harold Macmillan as Conservative party leader in 
1963; asked once whether he would have made a good prime minister, he ruefully 
commented that no one would ever know. The observation was accompanied by the 
characteristic laugh, a kind of boyish wheeze, that reflected his divided 
personality. It detracted from the sound political judgment expected by an 
electorate looking for reassurance.

There was a blustering style about his advocacy in the courts; his impetuosity 
- often identified as arrogance - was not infrequently the cause of a lost 
argument. A famous incident at the 1957 Conservative conference, when, as party 
chairman, he rang a hand-bell "to play it short, play it up, play it noisy" was 
the advocate in him, stirring the faithful to superhuman efforts. Having, in 
1963, become the first Conservative to renounce his peerage, he took, in 1970, 
a title linking him to the parliamentary constituency of St Marylebone, which 
he had represented from 1963-1970.

Hailsham's mother came from Nashville, Tennessee; she was the daughter of a 
judge and Hailsham adored her. In 1928, when his father, Sir Douglas Hogg, 
accepted a peerage, he stood in Peckwater Quad at Christ Church, Oxford, and, 
with tears of exasperation welling up in his eyes, cried: "He's done it without 
consulting me. It will interfere with my political career."

Hailsham was then an undergraduate at Christ Church. After a brilliant Eton 
career, he had been president of the Oxford Union, obtained a first in Mods 
after five terms and was on his way to a first in Greats. From 1931-38, and 
again after 1961, he was a fellow of All Souls. He was called to the bar in 
1932, and became a QC in 1953.

His entry into the Commons was famously controversial. He ran as a pro-Neville 
Chamberlain Conservative against the then Master of Balliol College AD Lindsay, 
standing as an all-party candidate against the Munich agreement. Much later, 
Hailsham reiterated his support for Munich as "an absolutely legitimate step in 
the circumstances of 1938".

In September 1939, Hailsham was commissioned into the Rifle Brigade, and, in 
1941, was wounded while fighting in the western desert. He served in Egypt, 
Palestine and Syria. Back in the Commons, he became a leading figure in the 
Tory reform group.

He was, briefly, a junior minister in the 1945 interim administration between 
the wartime coalition and Clement Attlee's Labour government. In 1946, he 
published The Purpose Of Parliament, and in 1947, what became an influential 
book in the revival of his party, The Case For Conservatism. His first career 
in the Commons ended in 1950 with his father's death, and his accession to the 
Lords.

Then, in 1956 Prime Minister Anthony Eden - after Hailsham had turned down the 
job of postmaster general - appointed him first lord of the admiralty, from 
which position he staunchly defended Eden's Suez policy. A year later, he 
became education minister, then deputy leader of the Lords and, in 1960, leader 
of that house. As Conservative chairman from 1957-1959, he was a central figure 
in the party's third successive election victory. From 1959-62 he was rector of 
Glasgow University. He was lord privy seal (1959-60), lord president of the 
council - with a short break - from 1957-1964, and minister for science and 
technology (1960-64), adding education in 1964.

It was Hailsham who oversaw the nuclear test ban treaty final negotiations in 
Moscow in 1963; that same year, it was Hailsham who donned a flat cap to tour 
the north-east while examining unemployment.

There were thus two halves to an astonishingly successful career in public 
service, broken by those events of the early 1960s. Hailsham had been 
Macmillan's choice to succeed him in 1963, and, on the basis of Macmillan's 
private preference, he had declared he would renounce his peerage to return to 
the Commons. In the event, however, Sir Alec Douglas-Home "emerged", as Tory 
leaders did in those days.

Six years later, Prime Minister Edward Heath offered Hailsham the Woolsack, 
and, throughout his two lord chancellorships, he retained the political touch 
that had nearly taken him to No 10. His patrician manner - he signed personal 
letters with the flourishing letter "Q" - could not conceal his humorous, 
occasionally unpretentious and self-mocking qualities. His demeanour led some 
people to regard him as smug and silly, but he was inherently a nice man - his 
most endearing quality was unswerving loyalty to friends and colleagues.

When he heard that the IRA had bombed the Old Bailey in March 1973, Hailsham 
instantly decided it was his duty, as head of the judiciary, to visit the 
scene. Mindful that his official car would cause further difficulties for the 
police, he sent for his collapsible bicycle, and pedalled off from Westminster 
on his own. Asked whether this sight of the lord chancellor might not be 
undignified, he replied: "Not at all. It does no harm at all for the lord 
chancellor to appear a little ridiculous from time to time - so long as it is 
not all the time."

When he finally retired in 1987, Hailsham did not remain silent. He was 
outspoken in his opposition to the reforms proposed by his successor, Lord 
Mackay, in the Courts and Legal Services Bill. He sided with the judiciary in 
its 1996 battle with the then Home Secretary, Michael Howard, over the 
restriction of judicial powers in sentencing serious offenders.

He also opposed the Conservative government's legislation to try war criminals 
50 years after the events. As always, he was a vigorous and invigorating 
spokesman for rational judgment and the basic liberties of the English common 
law.

 As lord chancellor from 1970-74, Hailsham made four outstanding appointments 
as lords of appeal in ordinary. They were Lord Simon of Glaisdale, a political 
colleague who brought exceptional talents often directed to literary exposition 
of judicial strategy; Lord Kilbrandon, a Scottish liberal judge; likewise Lord 
Salmon and Lord Cross. Together with their seniors, Lords Reid, Wilberforce and 
Diplock, they provided the powerhouse of a revitalised House of Lords during 
the1970s.

The appointments of his second round did not match the earlier ones, save for 
the inspired choice of Lord Lane in 1979 to the Lords, and to the lord chief 
justice in April 1980 - Hailsham's previous choice of Lord Widgery, in 1971, 
had not been a resounding success.

But what distinguished Hailsham from most lord chancellors of the last century 
were his attitudes to judicial work and law reform. On taking office, he 
immediately appointed a series of deputy speakers so that he could be released 
to sit judicially. While not adopting an activist posture, he was not unhappy 
to be seen making law, at least in the area of civil law.

In crime, he seemed committed to a law-and-order philosophy, leaving reform to 
parliament. In a leading murder case in 1974, he refused to reverse a 
discredited decision that had promoted an objective test of intent in murder. 
At the same time, however, he sought to restrict the intention test in a way 
that gave some satisfaction to the critics.

On legal change, he was always a malleable Conservative. He seemed generally 
to view change as either undesirable or impossible - though in his writings, he 
disclosed an awareness of what could and should be altered or improved. On 
individual civil liberties, he was not always a supporter of traditional 
values; he was a strong critic of the right to silence, and even envisaged the 
admissibility in a criminal trial of an accused's previous convictions in 
certain circumstances.

But, in other ways, he was curiously impervious to anything that might 
undermine moral values of a bygone age. He was appalled by student protesters. 
He was convinced that the permissive society, rather than legitimate social 
grievances, had lead to the supposed rise in crime.

He was unyielding in his insistence on judicial independence, which he 
interpreted as requiring protection of the judges from the impact of public 
criticism. He stoutly maintained the Kilmuir rules of 1955 prohibiting judicial 
participation on radio and television.

 His politician's instincts never deserted him. In 1978, he published The 
Dilemma Of Democracy, in which he enunciated the doctrine of elective 
dictatorship. In the wake of the rise of Tony Blair, Hailsham's implied 
conclusion - that Labour was destined to permanent opposition - is not 
sustainable, but for many years it seemed credible. His other books included 
The Conservative Case (1959) and his autobiography, A Sparrow's Flight (1990).

Hailsham's first marriage, in 1931, ended in divorce, but in 1944 he was 
married again, to Mary Martin, by whom he had two sons and three daughters, one 
of whom became, in 1992, a high court judge. His elder son, Douglas, is a QC 
and was a minister in the last Conservative government. In 1978, Lady Hailsham 
was tragically killed in a riding accident, and, in 1986, Hailsham married 
Deirdre Shannon, who died in 1998.

He is survived by his two sons and three daughters. 

Â· Quintin McGarel Hogg, Lord Hailsham of St Marylebone, politician and lawyer, 
born October 9 1907; died October 12 2001
 