
In 1840, when an eight-year-old Louisa May Alcott moved with her family to the 
little town of Concord in Massachusetts, a fresh-faced idealism reigned over 
its bucolic lanes. A youngHenry David Thoreau <https://www.walden.org/Thoreau/> 
led a gaggle of the town’s schoolchildren, Louisa included, into the woods. 
There he beguiled his audience with tiny insects and playful chipmunks, 
introducing them, per histranscendentalist <http://www.ushistory.org/us/26f.asp>
 philosophy, to the wonders of the natural world.Ralph Waldo Emerson 
<https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poet/ralph-waldo-emerson> lived in a stately 
white house just down the way, often hosting the glamorousMargaret Fuller 
<http://archive.vcu.edu/english/engweb/transcendentalism/authors/fuller/> and 
chatting up newly arrivedNathaniel Hawthorne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/jul/05/featuresreviews.guardianreview29>
. Louisa’s father, Amos Bronson Alcott, had himself come to Concord at 
Emerson’s invitation. This band of thinkers, united by their faith that all men 
were inherently good and that nature could enrich the soul and intellect, 
together formed the principal characters in the childhood of one of America’s 
most loved female authors.

The community at Concord would not endure. By 1863, as Louisa entered the 
third decade of her life, the transcendentalist faith in an imminent new era 
unshackled by the strictures of the past had dissipated, both in Concord and 
elsewhere. In its place came the bloody realities of the civil war and a 
country divided between those who believed in equality for all men and those 
committed to the enslavement of blacks. The transcendentalist vision of a 
better world, where all men were free and nature was a source of spiritual 
replenishment, would never exist again. Depleted perhaps by this very 
realisation, Thoreau died in 1862; by 1864, Hawthorne was also buried.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Flouisa-may-alcott-a-practical-utopian-from-a-divided-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03eca1771e3b6dd32c7509be31fe83e7733e8abd%2F0_0_2112_3228%2F2112.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Louisa%20May%20Alcott%3A%20a%20practical%20utopian%20from%20a%20divided%20US&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Flouisa-may-alcott-a-practical-utopian-from-a-divided-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Louisa%20May%20Alcott%3A%20a%20practical%20utopian%20from%20a%20divided%20US&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Flouisa-may-alcott-a-practical-utopian-from-a-divided-us%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03eca1771e3b6dd32c7509be31fe83e7733e8abd%2F0_0_2112_3228%2F2112.jpg>
 Amos Bronson Alcott, Louisa’s father, pictured in 1882. Photograph: Hulton 
Archive/Getty Images 
Louisa May Alcott may have seen the chasm between ideal and real worlds far 
earlier than that. Her father Amos, with whom she shared her November birthday, 
had come to Concord after the failure ofthe Temple school 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Temple_School_(Massachusetts)>, an institution 
he had founded to instil the principles of transcendentalist thought into the 
young. By 1843, Alcott was ready for his next utopian experiment, and he carted 
the young Louisa along with her mother and sisters toFruitlands 
<http://www.fruitlands.org/>, a utopian community whose members lived on a 
farm, ate only vegetables they grew and shunned any kind of commerce. Days 
began with icy cold showers, followed by paltry meals that could not include 
even milk or honey. Amos believed that no one and nothing, not even animals, 
could be exploited. In the meantime, his daughters froze in their threadbare 
clothes, living out the dicta of their father’s utopian programme.

It is no small irony, then, that it was an idealised and sanitised version of 
this hardscrabble childhood that would become Louisa’s most successful and 
enduring literary effort. The work of a dutiful daughter to please an 
ever-exacting father, Little Women was written after Amos met with a publisher 
who had likedHospital Sketches <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hospital_Sketches>
, one of Louisa’s earlier (and rarely read) works. A deal was struck between 
the two men: if Louisa would write a novel about girls, the publisher would 
provide Amos with a contract for his own work.

Louisa was reticent. “I don’t enjoy this sort of thing,” she wrote, adding 
that she “never liked girls or knew many except my sisters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/mar/01/featuresreviews.guardianreview27>
”. Eventually though, she capitulated to her father and wrote Little Women in 
just 10 weeks. The book was published in 1868 and the fame and fortune it 
brought her finally permitted the family to lift itself up from poverty. At 36, 
Louisa had done what her father had never been able to: provide some stability 
for her long-struggling family.

Had actual (not simply literary) immortality been available to writers, she 
would have turned 184 years old on 29 November 2016. While she may have balked 
at or been baffled by many of the conventions of today’s America –being the 
subject of a Google Doodle might have surprised her 
<https://www.google.com/doodles/louisa-may-alcotts-184th-birthday> – the 
divisions of its politics dominated once again by race and inequality would not 
have surprised her. The postbellum US into which Little Women was released had 
been racked by its disagreements over slavery, the southern half couching its 
support for slavery in the language of economic survival. This year’s 
presidential election, coming more than 150 years after the end of the civil 
war, pivoted once again on the maintenance of white privilege, cast now in the 
coded vocabulary of lost manufacturing jobs.

The 100 best novels: No 20 – Little Women by Louisa May Alcott (1868-9)
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/feb/03/100-best-novels-little-women-louisa-may-alcott>
It is perhaps no surprise, then, that a few days after the polls, I saw Little 
Women appear in a list of titles to read “for comfort” amid the post-election 
recrimination. The book’s fictive construction of a girlhood idyll, its retreat 
from a harsh world into the cosiness of hearth and home, can serve up solace, 
even succour, against political quagmires past and present. If there is any 
tragedy in the tale, it is that its female author had never wanted to write it, 
that it was a response to what was needed, expected and even demanded of her by 
the men in her life; her father and her publisher. This last fact is one often 
forgotten, laid by the wayside for those who want to preserve the hope of 
realising the book’s ideals. Whether this taints Little Women is a thought 
likely to leave readers as divided as postbellum America – whether a writer’s 
greatest truth lies in her literary creation, or in the literal conditions that 
goaded its production.
 