
Lucian Msamati 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/features/featurepages/0,,2267195,00.html> 
cuts a swaggering figure inGame of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/game-of-thrones-episode-by-episode>
 as the pirate Salladhor Saan. Debonair with a whiff of debauchery, all jerkins 
and billowing shirts, he prowls the screen issuing frightful declarations like: 
“The one true God is what’s between a woman’s legs!”

Today, the 38-year-old, born in London but raised in Tanzania and Zimbabwe, 
has crossed over to the other side: directing. He sits behind a desk in a 
bright rehearsal room, watching intently as two women, scripts open in their 
laps, discuss a jazz trumpeter with whom they have both enjoyed a dalliance. 
Msamati rises sharply from his seat and leans across the table, torso straining 
against his checked shirt – at 5ft 5in, he is a small man but solid. “Pause,” 
he tells them calmly but insistently. “Remember, this isn’t Sunday teatime 
chit-chat. This is the elephant in the room.” The actors, Lynette Clarke and 
Angela Wynter, nod and have another crack at the scene in Boi Boi Is Dead, the 
first full-length play by the Zimbabwean-born poet and playwright Zodwa Nyoni.

As the play’s title suggests, the object of the women’s affections is 
otherwise detained. “It’s about grief,” Msamati tells me during lunchbreak. 
“This is a dysfunctional family coming to terms with death, but lacking the 
infrastructure to deal with it. Boi Boi was a proper superstar. But that has 
long since passed, and he hasn’t left much behind. We realise that he was 
actually quite selfish.” He grins. “He was a bit of a dick.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjan%2F28%2Flucian-msamati-othello-game-of-thrones-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F28%2F1422465438638%2F743d7acb-53e2-4b1a-a5db-83fc8c5fb2b4-1358x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lucian%20Msamati%3A%20danger%20zone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjan%2F28%2Flucian-msamati-othello-game-of-thrones-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lucian%20Msamati%3A%20danger%20zone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjan%2F28%2Flucian-msamati-othello-game-of-thrones-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F28%2F1422465438638%2F743d7acb-53e2-4b1a-a5db-83fc8c5fb2b4-1358x2040.jpeg>
 As Salladhor Saan in Game of Thrones Photograph: PR 
Msamati has had a few surprises thrown at him by his cast. “You can do all the 
preparation in the world,” he says, “but on the first day, you can guarantee an 
actor will come up with something unforeseen.” He mentions cast member Andrew 
French’s approach to a moment of violence. “We were plotting our way and Andrew 
said, ‘I feel like when I’ve got the envelope in my hand, I just want to stuff 
it in her face!’” Msamati’s mouth falls open, startled. “I told him, ‘That’s 
it! Do that.’”

Soon it will be time for Msamati to concentrate on what will be his most 
taxing acting role yet: when he takes to the stage this summer inOthello 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/sep/03/rsc-cast-first-black-iago-in-next-years-othello-stratford>
, he will be the first black performer in the history of the RSC to play Iago. 
It’s a casting choice that adds a dangerous frisson to the character’s racist 
jibes about Barbary horses and black rams. Msamati has always maintained that 
he wants to be thought of as an actor, rather than a black actor, but he 
concedes that race will complicate this part.

“We were kicking ideas around in the workshop and something changed with me as 
Iago. Everyone said, ‘That works.’ The idea was to play with the discomfort of 
that. It is partly about race, but also about how people behave in the grip of 
jealousy. I’ve seen it happen in my own life. Certain words come out, even from 
friends’ mouths.You think, ‘Oh, so is that what I am? Where did that come from? 
I know that’s not you. But it must come from somewhere.’” Is he talking about 
racism? “Racism, yes. Or anything bubbling just below the surface.” He lifts 
his hand to his mouth and mimes the zipping and padlocking of his lips. “The 
important thing is we’re discovering new things. We’re going to get in a room 
and see what happens.”

Msamati spent four years as artistic director of Tiata Fahodzi 
<http://afridiziak.com/theatrenews/news/september2014/tiata-fahodzis-announces-departure-of-lucian-msamati-as-artistic-director.html#>
, the British-African company (the name means Theatre of the Emancipated) that 
is co-producing Boi Boi Is Dead. Before that, he was with Over the Edge, the 
troupe he co-founded in Harare in the mid-90s, leading them around the world in 
productions he now characterises as “wild and passionate and full of mistakes – 
we did everything the hard way”. It was after the group’s 2001 Edinburgh fringe 
run that he stayed on in Britain, working as a cleaner while trying to forge an 
acting career.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjan%2F28%2Flucian-msamati-othello-game-of-thrones-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F28%2F1422470174728%2F0acffc75-ea38-4d79-9c66-71b5c06e6d08-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lucian%20Msamati%3A%20danger%20zone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjan%2F28%2Flucian-msamati-othello-game-of-thrones-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lucian%20Msamati%3A%20danger%20zone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjan%2F28%2Flucian-msamati-othello-game-of-thrones-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F28%2F1422470174728%2F0acffc75-ea38-4d79-9c66-71b5c06e6d08-2060x1236.jpeg>
 On right, in Clybourne Park. Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
While his stage work includes Clybourne Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/sep/03/clybourne-park-review> and the 
London riots playLittle Revolution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/sep/04/little-revolution-review-verbatim-theatre-alecky-blythe-captures-rifts-rage-riots>
, and his TV credits include The No 1 Ladies’ Detective Agency andDoctor Who 
<http:>, the phenomenon that is Game of Thrones tends to eclipse everything 
else. He is well aware of the ardour of fans. “But it’s the work that’s fun. 
The freedom we are given to go for it, to dare. That’s the stuff that’s 
exciting. Not ‘Where’s my cappuccino?’ or ‘Why haven’t I got a bigger 
trailer?’” He releases a throaty chuckle. “The stories I could tell!”

• Boi Boi Is Dead is at West Yorkshire Playhouse, Leeds, 14 February-7 March, 
then Watford Palace theatre, 18-28 March
 