
Mr Ludovic Kennedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/oct/19/sir-ludovic-kennedy-obituary>, a 
newscaster for Independent Television News, has accepted the invitation to be 
nominated as Liberal candidate in the by-election at Rochdale. The selection 
committee’s choice has yet to be approved by the Executive of the Rochdale 
Reform Association, which meets on Monday.

The by-election has been caused by the death of the Conservative member, 
Lieutenant-Colonel Wentworth Schofield.

Mr Kennedy has been released from his television contract and gave his last 
newscast for the time being at 6 30 last night. IndependentTelevision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television> News will not allow an active 
politician to work as a newscaster, and Mr Kennedy’s acceptance of the 
invitation makes him an active politician.

Return to ITV?

Whether he will return to Independent Television depends on events. It would, 
of course, be open to I.T.N. to consider at some future date the degree of 
activity of Mr Kennedy’s politics. For the present, however, he hopes that his 
adoption by the Rochdale Liberals will go forward on Monday, when he will be in 
the constituency and that he will be elected.

Mr Kennedy said last night that he did not wish to publish any statement of 
his views before he had expressed them to the Rochdale Liberals. He has not 
previously taken part in Liberal campaigning, either in parliamentary or local 
elections, and has not, indeed, formally joined the Liberal party, but as he 
explained last night: “I have been growing Liberal now for two or three years.”

The entry of a Liberal candidate 
<http://self.gutenberg.org/articles/rochdale_by-election,_1958> should bring 
vitality to the by-election campaign. Lieutenant-Colonel Schofield held the 
seat in a straight fight with Labour in 1955 with a majority of 1,590. His 
opponent, Mr J. McCann, is standing for Labour again. The Liberals last 
contested the seat in 1950 when their candidate, Mr Roger Fulford, polled 
10,042 votes and the Labour and Conservative totals were 25,484 and 21,208 
respectively.

This is an edited extract, read the full article 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2015/12/22/1450802190178/2-January-1958-011.jpg>




 