
Italy’s anti-establishment Five Star Movement has called for immediate 
elections after the outgoing prime ministerMatteo Renzi’s defeat in a 
constitutional referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/matteo-renzi-due-to-formally-submit-resignation-as-italy-ponders-what-next>
, saying it was prepared to put forward a new government that could immediately 
assume power.

While it appears unlikely that Beppe Grillo, a former comedian and co-founder 
of the populist party, will get his general election wish, the bold demand 
showed his Movimento Cinque Stelle (M5S) now has its sights on an even greater 
electoral victory: one that would eventually land it in the prime minster’s 
residence in Palazzo Chigi. The decision to call immediate elections ultimately 
falls with Italy’s president, Sergio Mattarella.

What happens now after Matteo Renzi's referendum defeat?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/what-happens-now-after-matteo-renzis-referendum-defeat>
On Monday, Grillo tweeted that the referendum contained a lesson for everyone: 
“You cannot keep lying to the people without suffering consequences.”
Beppe Grillo (@beppe_grillo) 
Una lezione per tutti: non si può mentire per sempre al popolo senza subire 
conseguenze
 <https://twitter.com/beppe_grillo/status/805579346874368000> December 5, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/beppe_grillo/status/805579346874368000> 
Many analysts were quick to point out that M5S still faces considerable 
obstacles, including probable reforms of electoral law that will make it 
difficult for the party to get a majority.

But even if such manoeuvres keep it at bay temporarily, one thing is clear: 
the party is now the second most powerful force inItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> behind Renzi’s diminished Democratic 
party.

Vincenzo Scarpetta, a senior policy analyst at the thinktank Open Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, said M5S would have a fair 
chance of winning the next general election under current electoral rules, but 
those rules are likely to change in coming months under the current 
Democratic-controlled parliament.

Nevertheless, Scarpetta said M5S would be bolstered by the referendum result: 
“I think what has emboldened them so far is the economic situation, if the 
condition does not improve, in the context of Italy’s slow decline and 
stagnation.” But he said the current political situation and any appearance 
that more established parties were hatching a plan to keep M5S out of power – 
“an establishment stitch-up”, as he put it – would also play into the party’s 
hands.

Italian referendum result is unhelpful for EU, but not a fatal blow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/italian-referendum-result-eu-eurosceptics-far-right-austria-matteo-renzi>
M5S has remained popular and connects with voters, especially the young, 
despite problems within the party and questions about its governing and 
leadership abilities in office. It tends to draw on conspiracy theories – such 
as the assertion that Renzi’s push for a constitutional referendum was a 
capitalist plot hatched by US banks, and that Americans never really landed on 
the moon. It also rails against the euro, the EU and big business.


One of the drivers of M5S’s success – its use of the internet as a means of 
directly communicating with supporters – is facing unprecedented scrutiny by 
some media outlets, led by La Stampa andBuzzfeed 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/albertonardelli/italys-most-popular-political-party-is-leading-europe-in-fak?utm_term=.ogQy7JAb#.luYRbxrV>
. They have accused it of using its vast social network, including websites 
that are allegedly secretly linked to the party, to propagate outlandish and 
unfair attacks on political rivals. M5S has denied those claims, saying it only 
has its official social media accounts and blog.

“Other sites or social media accounts are not attributable to the M5S,” Grillo 
said.


The group is also one of a handful of Renzi’s political rivals to have 
benefited from the spread of blatantly false news stories by RT, an 
English-language Russian news channel. During the heated referendum campaign, 
the RT website at one point reported that a big pro-Renzi and pro-reform rally 
that was being held in Rome was in fact a rally against the referendum.

La Stampa has noted pro-Russian remarks by two M5S officials, Alessandro Di 
Battista and Manlio Di Stefano 
<http://www.lastampa.it/2016/11/05/italia/politica/labbraccio-dei-cinquestelle-con-i-due-emissari-di-putin-l7G0E54oaCbpgn9gUqrjtN/pagina.html>
, who have both made trips to Moscow and railed against “growing Russophobia” 
in the west.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fm5s-calls-for-elections-after-matteo-renzi-loses-referendum-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ac3bf939d42f6dd79f2be617e2849b9f8cadb39%2F0_142_3072_1844%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=M5S%20calls%20for%20elections%20after%20PM%20Matteo%20Renzi%20loses%20Italian%20referendum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fm5s-calls-for-elections-after-matteo-renzi-loses-referendum-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=M5S%20calls%20for%20elections%20after%20PM%20Matteo%20Renzi%20loses%20Italian%20referendum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fm5s-calls-for-elections-after-matteo-renzi-loses-referendum-italy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ac3bf939d42f6dd79f2be617e2849b9f8cadb39%2F0_142_3072_1844%2F3072.jpg>
 M5S’s Alessandro Di Battista at a press conference on Monday following the 
news of Matteo Renzi’s resignation. Photograph: Angelo Carconi/AP 
Part of M5S’s appeal to ordinary Italian voters is that it claims to be 
“post-ideological”: it is a virulent critic of Italian political corruption and 
organised crime at a time when many mainstream politicians, including Renzi, 
avoid the topic. According to analysts who have studied the party, M5S has not 
only been able to capture the dissatisfaction and disillusionment of voters who 
feel abandoned by establishment politicians but has the ability to be forgiven 
by voters for its own blunders.

While Renzi always sought to play up Italy’s promising future, going so far as 
to bid for Rome to host the 2024 Olympics, M5S tends to focus its political 
message on its opposition. Shortly afterher mayoral election in Rome in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/19/rome-likely-to-have-elected-its-first-female-mayor>
, M5S’s Virginia Raggi effectively killed the city’s bid, saying it would be 
too costly. At a glitzy opening for the biggest building to be built in Rome in 
decades – a €363m (£307m) colossus in the EUR neighbourhood that took almost 20 
years to build – Raggi took to the stage to express her disapproval for the 
work as a symbol of waste and extravagance.

At the same time, however, the M5S mayor has faced accusations of inept 
management of Rome. While she promised to – literally and figuratively – clean 
up the city, Raggi’s tenure so far has prompted complaints that Rome is just as 
dirty as ever, and with even less reliable public transportation.
 