
The family of a man shot dead by police on the M62 motorway have said they are 
“shocked and distraught” because detectives believe he may have been carrying 
an illegal firearm.

Mohammed Yassar Yaqub, 28, was shot dead through his windscreen when armed 
police swooped on his white Audi sports car on a slip road of the busy motorway 
in Huddersfield on Monday night.

As the Independent Police Complaints Commission (IPCC) launched an 
investigation into the shooting, friends paid tribute to the young father they 
described as “no angel”. His family’s lawyer released a statement saying: “Mr 
Yaqub’s family are in shock and are distraught. They would ask the media to 
respect their privacy at this difficult time.

“The family are fully aware that the incident that led to the death of Mr 
Yaqub is currently being investigated by the IPCC and they do not wish to make 
any further comment at this stage.”

Police said the incident was “related to information received about criminal 
possession of a firearm” and was not terror related. There were five arrests – 
three at the scene and two in a simultaneous “related stop” of another vehicle 
in Bradford, police said.

IPCC investigators said “what appears to be a non-police issue firearm” was 
found in Yaqub’s vehicle after he was shot. A postmortem examination is due to 
take place on Wednesday and the coroner has been informed, the watchdog said.

IPCC commissioner Derrick Campbell added: “My thoughts are with Mr Yaqub’s 
family and all those affected at this difficult time. Though in its early 
stages, this investigation is making good progress but will be complex. We will 
be working hard to establish exactly what happened and would ask for patience 
while our investigation continues.”

The shooting sparked protests by a group of demonstrators on Tuesday night, 
closing off a busy road in Bradford.

Police vans were called when protesters, many wearing scarves or balaclavas to 
hide their faces, hurled abuse at officers. One demonstrator said: “We are here 
to let people know what goes on and to show we are upset about yesterday’s 
killing by the police.”


A few missiles were thrown at the dozen or so police vehicles that had blocked 
the roads around Leeds Road. Officers in riot gear were called as the protest 
moved towards Bradford city centre.

A spokesman for West Yorkshire police said the protest began to
 disperse at about 10.30pm, adding that there was “minimal disorder” and no 
arrests.

The force added in a statement: “Police empathise with the heightened tensions 
and engaged with protesters to appeal for calm. They are continuing working 
with members of the community, partners and local officers to maintain 
community cohesion and police relations.”

The shooting follows a recent surge in gun crime in West Yorkshire, including 
an incident on Christmas Day when a police officer was fired upon while taking 
a witness statement outside a nightclub in Bradford. The officer was not 
injured in the incident, which is not believed to be connected to the shooting 
of Yaqub.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fman-shot-dead-by-police-on-m62-during-planned-operation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34eefbcb95f19c9fca7850e45c9ca9382a2709f5%2F0_90_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=M62%20shooting%3A%20man%20killed%20by%20police%20during%20planned%20operation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fman-shot-dead-by-police-on-m62-during-planned-operation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=M62%20shooting%3A%20man%20killed%20by%20police%20during%20planned%20operation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fman-shot-dead-by-police-on-m62-during-planned-operation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34eefbcb95f19c9fca7850e45c9ca9382a2709f5%2F0_90_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 Scene on the M62 on Tuesday morning. Photograph: Josh Halliday for the Guardian
Witnesses described an “absolute hive of police activity” as armed officers 
swooped on the white Audi near junction 24 of the motorway at about 6pm on 
Monday, boxing in Yaqub’s vehicle before firing at least three shots through 
his windscreen.

The police investigation continued on Tuesday as armed officers searched a 
number of properties across Bradford and Huddersfield, including Yaqub’s family 
home where about 20 grieving relatives and friends had gathered to pay their 
respects.

At least five police vehicles arrived in the surrounding streets, including a 
dog van, and officers with guns were positioned at the front and back of the 
house before leaving about 30 minutes later.

The force said it was cooperating with an IPPC investigation into the shooting.

Two neighbours said Yaqub’s house had been shot at in a drive-by incident last 
year. A family friend said he had been targeted two or three years ago with 
shotgun pellets.

“It’s a bit of a shock, really,” said Melanie Heyer, who said she had CCTV 
installed outside her front door after the incident. “Two men with shotguns 
came to his house to try to shoot him last year. It was after school and there 
was kids everywhere.”

Another neighbour, who declined to be named for fear of reprisals, said there 
had been a “load of police” on the street after the alleged shooting last year. 
“It’s all drugs related,” he said. “It’s getting commoner and commoner 
unfortunately.”

 Mohammed Yassar Yaqub. Photograph: Facebook 
Yaqub, who was regularly seen with high-performance sports cars outside his 
family home, was acquitted seven years ago of attempted murder in the 
Huddersfield suburb of Birkby. Aged 21 at the time, he was accused of being one 
of the gunmen in a drive-by shooting in September 2009. The case against him at 
Bradford crown court was dropped in May 2010 due to a lack of evidence.

Friends paid tribute to the father of two on social media on Tuesday. Saima 
Khan said: “So sad, my heart goes out to his parents.” Brigid Harbour said: 
“Very sad for his family.” Another friend wrote: “You were no angel but you 
were still one of the good guys and did not deserve this.”

Sam King posted on Facebook: “May Allah grant him the highest rank in 
Jannat-Al Firdous, Ameen Mohammed Yassar Yaqub, 27, from Huddersfield was 
killed by the police yesterday, whatever the reason, this was wrong to do, and 
didn’t deserve, leaves behind his family and friends. Sad news.”

Pictures from the scene of the shooting appeared to show a silver Audi that 
had been boxed in by a silver Mercedes E-class on the junction 24 slip road. 
The Audi appeared to have three distinct gunshot marks on the driver’s side of 
the windscreen.

Gemma Wilson, a Conservative councillor who was in the area at the time, said 
five or six police cars appeared to be acting as a barricade on Ainley Top 
roundabout, off the M62.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fman-shot-dead-by-police-on-m62-during-planned-operation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a2a6e75376fba641e304ca166aa369682f1667d%2F0_159_2468_1480%2F2468.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=M62%20shooting%3A%20man%20killed%20by%20police%20during%20planned%20operation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fman-shot-dead-by-police-on-m62-during-planned-operation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=M62%20shooting%3A%20man%20killed%20by%20police%20during%20planned%20operation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fman-shot-dead-by-police-on-m62-during-planned-operation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a2a6e75376fba641e304ca166aa369682f1667d%2F0_159_2468_1480%2F2468.jpg>
 A silver Audi at the scene with bullet holes in its windscreen and several 
sets of keys on its bonnet. Photograph: Peter Byrne/PA 
“I was coming back at 6.15pm from the cinema with the kids and you could hear 
the police cars’ sirens as you approached,” she said. “The police cars on the 
roundabout seemed to be being used as a barricade but I’m not sure … There 
seemed to be some other unmarked cars as well, parked up, but I’m not sure 
whether they were involved in the operation or not. It was an absolute hive of 
police activity.”

People had initially believed the incident was a lorry or bus crash, Wilson 
said, but she added: “It didn’t look like a normal car crash. We just had a gut 
feeling that something was wrong.

“An hour later I walked to the supermarket and the traffic was absolutely 
awful, you could see a sea of blue flashing lights. The traffic this morning is 
getting quite bad on the first working day after Christmas as well, so it’s 
going to hit the area quite badly.”

Shahnaz Malik, 54, a foster carer whose house overlooks the scene, said she 
was “absolutely petrified, terrified” because the incident had taken place so 
close to her home.


“It was like time stood still, everyone was just stood in shock. The police 
and the cars had come to an absolute stop,” she said. “Police were looking into 
the car and then the ambulance arrived in a matter of minutes. I didn’t hear 
the gunshots. It looks like there’s some things dragged out of the car, like a 
bag that’s been emptied.”
Map of location where man was shot dead by police 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2017/01/m62_shooting-zip/giv-39022ECuixTwcgVf/>
She added: “It’s a little village and a very tightknit community, but we 
haven’t had a chance to speak about it yet.”

Rahul Tandon, from Halifax, told BBC Radio Leeds he was stopped by police on 
the exit slip road of junction 24. “As we pulled off the motorway we could see 
a lot of police vehicles, a lot of flashing lights,” he said. “We were 
basically the first car that was stopped by police and we just waited and 
waited.

“Over the next 10 to 15 minutes there was frenetic activity as more and more 
police vehicles arrived. At about 6.15pm to 6.20pm policemen were running up 
the slope to an ambulance and beckoning them to come quickly.”

The incident was the fifth fatal police shooting in England and Wales in the 
past nine months and the first involving West Yorkshire police since December 
2010.

A spokesman for the force said on Monday night: “Around 6pm this evening 
during a pre-planned policing operation near to the M62 in Huddersfield, a 
police firearm was discharged and a man has died.

“The slip roads east- and westbound at junction 24 of the M62 remain closed. 
An immediate referral has been made to the Independent Police Complaints 
Commission, who are in attendance in West Yorkshire, and West Yorkshire police 
are fully cooperating with their investigation.”

Mark Burns-Williamson, the West Yorkshire police and crime commissioner, said 
he was being kept updated by the chief constable.

“The Independent Police Complaints Commission have now launched an 
investigation following a mandatory referral to them and it would be 
inappropriate to comment further at this stage until more details are known,” 
he said.

 