
Macklemore, who in a memorable, achingly awkward display of white privilege 
publicly patronised Kendrick Lamar 
<http://www.eonline.com/news/503979/macklemore-texts-kendrick-lamar-sorry-i-robbed-you-at-the-grammys>
 after his 2014 Grammy win for Best Album, has released a new song. It’s called 
White Privilege II. In the nine-minute number, Macklemore raps: “Want people to 
like you, want to be accepted/That’s probably why you are out here 
protesting/Don’t think for a second you don’t have incentive/Is this about you, 
well, then what’s your intention?/What’s the intention?”

The obvious reconnoiter to this is, what in fact is your intention? In the 
tune,Macklemore <https://www.theguardian.com/music/macklemore> can criticise 
the cultural appropriation by his industry peers – “You’re Miley, you’re Elvis, 
you’re Iggy Azalea/ Fake and so plastic, you’ve heisted the magic” – but then 
turn around and “book a whole tour and sell out tickets” by doing essentially 
the same thing. What if his tour targeted predominantly black cities, and the 
concerts were free? See who shows up and then meditate on that on your next 
record.

Macklemore’s release falls on the heels of a couple other public come to Jesus 
moments. Immediately afterStephen Colbert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/stephen-colbert> acknowledged his 
white privilege in a guest segment with Black Lives Matter and civil rights 
activist Deray McKesson this week, the media went wild and white people 
everywhere felt disburdened of their own personal ignorance.

A few of my white Facebook friends posted without comment online stories about 
Colbert’s“radical vulnerability” 
<http://www.salon.com/2016/01/19/stephen_colberts_radical_vulnerability_talking_frankly_about_race_could_be_a_game_changer_for_his_moderate_white_audience/>
 as if his admission of whiteness and the power therein warranted no further 
explanation – not to the world, not to any black people, and certainly not any 
they would offer themselves: “Free! We are free at last! Free from this 
unwanton, wrongly assigned punishment of not being able to own and articulate 
our white privilege!”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqffCO1b-7Js&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqffCO1b-7Js>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqffCO1b-7Js&media=>
Similarly, following the announcement of the Oscar nominations and the media 
attention surrounding the #OscarsSoWhite hashtag, Jada Pinkett Smith, and 
subsequently a handful of other black actors, announced she would be boycotting 
the ceremony. Then it was reported that in an interview with the BBC, Mark 
Ruffalo, nominated for his turn in Spotlight,suggested that he would also 
boycott the Oscars 
<http://www.ew.com/article/2016/01/21/mark-ruffalo-oscar-boycott>: “I’m 
weighing it, yes. That’s where I’m at right now,” Ruffalo said. “I woke up in 
the morning thinking, ‘What is the right way to do this?’ Because if you look 
at Martin Luther King’s legacy, what he was saying was, the good people who 
don’t act are much worse than the people, the wrongdoers, who are purposely not 
acting and don’t know the right way.”

Twitter was pleased, and Ruffalo was suddenly anointed one of the most “woke 
white actors” in the industry. But then he quickly tweeted a statement to 
“clear up any confusion” – he’s going to the Oscars after all.

“I will be going to the Oscars in support of the victims of clergy Sexual 
Abuse and good journalism. #Spotlight 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Spotlight?src=hash>”, he tweeted. That seems less 
like “weighing it” and more like choosing to play it safe.

While supporting victims of clergy sexual abuse and good journalism are good, 
worthy things to support, they are also likely about 10 times more appealing as 
cause celebres than fighting against the white privilege racism that feeds your 
family and pays your bills.

Macklemore, Colbert and Ruffalo’s deeds are all legitimate first-step efforts 
– and, as the saying (which now goes almost hand in hand with white liberal 
microaggression racism) goes, well-intentioned. Alas, it’s still white liberal 
microaggression racism, vis-a-vis an extreme lack of racial conversancy – a 
language that reflects white privilege as culturally inherent, not novel 
discovery that warrants praise and a membership card to the Down White People 
Club.

Racism is about power. It is a social construct that relies entirely on white 
people actively living in the legacy of their perceived (or made-up) notions of 
white supremacy. And so, Stephen Colbert, the way to turn this around is not by 
living deeper in that legacy by giving your host seat to a black guest for five 
minutes in front of three million viewers, but by establishing a recurring 
segment in which you talk with all of your guests about white privilege and how 
it is perpetuating systemic racism nationwide - in our economy, in our 
neighborhoods, and in our everyday lives.

I recognise and applaud the endeavor of white male celebrities to “get it” – 
but I also maintain that their path to get there is, by definition, preceded by 
their privilege.
 