
Imagine a time when Oprah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/oprah-winfrey> had to spell out her 
name. Or even use her surname. It is 30 years since the debut of The Oprah 
Winfrey Show, and an engrossing new podcast from WBEZ Chicago tracks how she 
changed the face of daytime TV.Making Oprah (iTunes) has contributions from the 
woman herself, as well as people who worked with her. In one early audition 
tape, she spells out her name, and there are tales of pre-big-break times when 
her co-host would tap her on the leg when she was allowed to speak.

But when US TV network ABC was searching for a rival for The Phil Donahue Show 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Phil_Donahue_Show>, general manager Dennis 
Swanson hired her for what would eventually become The Oprah Winfrey Show. He 
had to break the then controversial news to his bosses that he had signed up a 
black woman. “She became a billionaire and I got promoted, so it worked out 
good for both of us,” he says.

The people who worked with Oprah tell a story of female-led, inspiring TV. 
When podcast host Jenn White gets her moment with Oprah, her excitement is 
palpable: she collapses in giggles, gets a pedicure and buys a new dress. Oprah 
is worth it, of course. When asked about her first show, she says: “I had no 
fear. I knew I was stepping into destiny.” She is less enthusiastic about the 
infamous 1988“wagon of fat” episode 
<http://www.today.com/popculture/oprahs-biggest-air-mistake-wagon-fat-1C9380370>
 when Oprah revealed she had lost 67lb by rolling out a toy wagon containing 
the same amount of lard. It’s a show she regrets. “Looking back it’s really 
hard for me to watch,” she says. “Because you can see my ego is on flamboyant 
display.”

That dip aside, the Oprah spirit is as infectious today as all those years ago 
when she told her audience to live their best life. “The secret to being good 
on TV is finding a way to find the truth of yourself, because what people are 
relating to is what they see in themselves,” she says. “I feel as comfortable 
being in front of that audience as I do in my own living room with my pyjamas 
and socks on. I felt empowered by the viewers.” With two more episodes about to 
drop, there’s more Oprah magic on its way.

If you like this, try … How I Built This (NPR) 
<http://www.npr.org/podcasts/510313/how-i-built-this>.
 