
Monday 22nd February

• Man of the day: Gianni Infantino, flying to South Africa for short-notice 
talks with Tokyo Sexwale. Infantino denies he’s there for a deal – “I have 
nothing to hide”; Sexwale tells reporters: “I’m open to deals … it’s a 
secretive process.” Sexwale says he’s enjoying himself. “It’s like the Vatican. 
You never know what will come out.”

• Most off-message: Prince Ali, shipping a set of transparent voting booths to 
Zurich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/22/prince-ali-transparent-fifa-voting-booths>
. The brother of Jordan’s semi-absolute monarch says the booths will safeguard 
democratic integrity; Fifa reject them. Elsewhere, HSBC confirms US agents have 
been in touch about “certain individuals and entities which are, or may be, 
linked to Fifa”.

• Keeping the mood light: A Transparency International poll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/22/fifa-presidential-vote-gianni-infantino>
 showing three in 10 fansstill have confidence in Fifa. Fans in Thailand, 
Japan, Russia, South Africa and Qatar were “most likely to be in favour”.

• Quote of the day: Interim president Issa Hayatou – Sepp’s vice-president 
since 1992,disciplined for taking kickbacks in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/dec/08/lamine-diack-issa-hayatou-ioc> 
while denying unrelated links to alleged Qatari bribes – setting the week’s 
tone: “Let us embrace this new dawn. I look forward to playing my part.”

Tuesday 23rd February

• Man of the day: Sheikh Salman, stung by Infantino’s Africa trip, going on 
the offensive. He warns voters that hisrival would bankrupt Fifa 
<http://www.nytimes.com/aponline/2016/02/23/world/ap-soc-fifa-election-salman.html?_r=0>
; tells federations to stop repeating loose press talk about human rights; says 
any FBI plans for more set-piece Zurich raids this week should be dropped: “We 
don’t want a PR stunt again”; and denies new allegations about a2009 cash for 
votes scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/23/sheikh-salman-fifa-football-development-money>
. His lawyers call it more evidence of “the campaign of misinformation against 
him”.

Sepp Blatter to release book entitled Mission Football about his time at Fifa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/23/sepp-blatter-book-mission-football-fifa>
• Most off-message: Prince Ali’s transparent booths campaign reaches the Court 
of Arbitration in Sport, while rivalJérôme Champagne says he’s “stupified 
<http://www.insideworldfootball.com/fifa/18908-champagne-questions-fifa-favours-for-uefa-and-afc-election-day-observers>
” after Fifa officials hand out multiple congress accreditations to Infantino 
and Sheikh Salman – allowing their staff direct access to voters in the hall on 
Friday. “This betrays a gross violation... I hereby lodge an official 
complaint.” Fifa reject it.

• Keeping the mood light: Upbeat news from publishers about Sepp Blatter’s 
forthcoming book 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-soccer-fifa-blatter-books-idUSKCN0VX16K>. 
“It’s not judicially edited or sanitised at all. It’s his very own opinion.” 
Out in April, retail price £30.

• Question of the day: “What kind of democracy should be run by one man?” – 
leading the calls for an end to Fifa’s opaque autocratic open-to-abuse 
structure, Bahrain’sSheikh Salman.

Wednesday 24th February

• Man of the day: Infantino, railing against Sheikh Salman’s “bankrupt” 
claims. He denies he’s using his policies to buy support, and says he can make 
Fifa “financially stable as never before” – even whiledoubling grants to voters 
<http://www.fifaforward2016.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/40_MANIFESTO_EN.pdf> 
to $5m each (plus $1m for travel expenses, “if required”).

• Most off-message: With Fifa’s PR team still pushing the week’s theme - 
transparency and reform –Fifa’s ethics committee cut the corruption bans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/24/sepp-blatter-michel-platini-bans-cut-fifa>
 handed to Sepp and Michel Platini: reward for “their services to football”. 
Meanwhile, leaked emails show all five candidates have been handed “messaging 
toolkits 
<http://bigstory.ap.org/article/9b7e9a4ea51345dcb2c2ca6990873ba2/fifa-asks-details-victory-speeches-ahead-election>
” by Fifa to keep their post-vote press conferences tidy. Among the approved 
lines for them to repeat:a) If asked about allegations around the vote: “I am 
confident that the election was a fair and transparent process”; andb) If asked 
about the FBI: “I have no further comment.”

Fifa’s new museum: a nerds’ nirvana untouched by its grubby reality
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/24/fifa-new-museum> 
• Keeping the mood light: A press preview tour of Fifa’s new museum – Sepp’s 
£100m project, featuring agiant photo of Sepp 
<https://twitter.com/owen_g/status/702407879391846400?lang=en-gb>. Staff say it 
will “probably never break even”.

• Quote of the day: “I fought for transparent booths at Fifa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa> and at CAS, I brought them to 
Zurich to eliminate any excuse for not using them. I have done all I can. The 
system let us down” –Prince Ali, moving on.

Thursday 25th February

• Man of the day: Infantino, performing best again as candidates make their 
final pitches. Visiting Concacaf, whosepast three presidents were all arrested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/06/said-and-done-fifa-concacaf-arrests-jeffrey-webb>
, Infantino reassures delegates he can “easily” up their grants to $5m each, 
“just by looking at the cost structure of Fifa”.

• Most off-message:  Liberia’s Musa Bility – barred from standing after 
failing an ethics test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/12/fifa-excludes-musa-bility-presidency>
 - urging colleagues to vote down reforms. Bility says the changes would neuter 
the new president: “These reforms just send the wrong signal.”

• Keeping the mood light: Delegates wake to an early morning scare at the Baur 
au Lachotel – police sirens in the streets outside at 6am. It’s a false alarm.

• Quote of the day: Tokyo Sexwale – hitting out at press claims 
<http://www.sport24.co.za/Soccer/International/sexwale-stays-in-fifa-race-20160225>
 that he plans to pull out before Friday’s vote: “No. I am still here. I am a 
fighter. I am somebody who dies wearing his boots.”

Friday 26th February: Congress

Sexwale pulls out before the vote: “My candidacy ends today, it’s your problem 
now”;28 delegates vote against Fifa’s reforms; two delegates vote against 
removing Cayman Islands executive Canover Watson from Fifa’s internal financial 
watchdog committeedespite him being in prison for fraud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/14/said-and-done-jerome-valcke-beyond-reproach>
; andInfantino takes the presidency in the second round, having earned an 
ovation by reminding delegates about his $5m grants plan. He tells the hall: 
“The money of Fifa is your money.”

Gianni Infantino’s ‘new dawn’ hit as police study Fifa ticket deals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/27/gianni-infantino-police-study-fifa-ticket-deals>
• Moment of the day: Pre-vote, 25 pro-Sheikh Salman demonstrators with placards
arriving outside the hall in a coach 
<https://twitter.com/richard_conway/status/703108021262508033> with a minder, 
to aid the democratic process.

• Best reflection: Infantino, looking back on the week: “It was a sporting 
contest, and a great sign of democracy.”

• Best tribute: Infantino on his banned mentor: “I thank him for everything he 
has given and taught me. I have strong, dear thoughts for Mr Platini right now.”

• And the best endorsement: Sepp, giving his nod 
<https://twitter.com/MarkusHarm/status/703271023098073090>: “I’m glad Gianni is 
president, he has all the qualities to continue my work. I had mulled wine with 
him at Christmas. I gave him tips.”
 