
Authorities in the Maldives <https://www.theguardian.com/world/maldives> have 
raided the offices of a newspaper and a human rights NGO and cancelled the 
passports of fugitive opposition figures after an al-Jazeera documentary aired 
corruption allegations against the country’s president, Abdulla Yameen.

Local journalists involved with the documentary, broadcast by the Qatari news 
network on Wednesday evening, had already left the country in anticipation of a 
backlash, amid warnings by senior MPs that contributors risked jail under 
defamation laws.

Maldives government issues warning over al-Jazeera documentary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/07/maldives-government-issues-warning-over-al-jazeera-documentary>
Hours after the documentary was posted online on Wednesday, police raided a 
building in the capital, Malé, housing the Maldivian Independent, a newspaper 
accused of links to the former president Mohamed Nasheed’s Maldivian Democratic 
party (MDP).

Nasheed was ousted in what supporters say was a coup in 2012 and is now living 
in exile in Britain, a13-year jail sentence hanging over him at home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/27/maldives-court-upholds-jail-sentence-former-president-nasheed>
.

Also in the seven-floor building were offices belonging to an MDP-linked law 
firm, a travel agency and a human rights NGO.


The Guardian understands that two men, neither of them employed by the 
newspaper, were arrested and accused of terrorism and plotting to the topple 
the government. They were released but will be questioned on Thursday. The 
police warrant also listed possible charges of inciting discord and threatening 
public order.

The Maldivian Independent, whose former editor Will Jordan led the al-Jazeera 
report, reported that a number of floors in the building were searched. It said 
seven officers spent 15 minutes searching its bureau, but left without 
confiscating anything.

The newspaper’s current editor, Zaheena Rasheed, was interviewed for the 
documentary and fled to Colombo before its broadcast. She told the Guardian she 
believed the raids were a form of harassment and “aimed at us”.

She said: “We’ve had one of our journalists disappear, a machete attack on our 
door, and our security cameras vandalised, so we’ve had to relocate once 
before. It’s not a safe place for journalists at all.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fmaldives-newspaper-raided-after-corruption-claims-against-president%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc710a342a261782573bdbfb38e8393a3d8ea9c72%2F0_92_4119_2472%2F4119.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Maldives%20newspaper%20raided%20after%20corruption%20claims%20against%20president&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fmaldives-newspaper-raided-after-corruption-claims-against-president%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Maldives%20newspaper%20raided%20after%20corruption%20claims%20against%20president&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fmaldives-newspaper-raided-after-corruption-claims-against-president%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc710a342a261782573bdbfb38e8393a3d8ea9c72%2F0_92_4119_2472%2F4119.jpg>
 Former Maldivian president Mohamed Nasheed was ousted in what supporters say 
was a coup in 2012. Photograph: Ishara S.kodikara/AFP/Getty Images 
The Maldives broadcasting commission released a statement on Wednesday 
claiming it had received complaints about the documentary and warning that 
those who broadcast its allegations were liable for defamation.

A month ago the Maldives introduced strict laws making defamation a criminal 
as well as a civil offence, meaning those found guilty could be jailed for up 
to six months.

The move was criticised by David Kaye, the UN special rapporteur on freedom of 
expression, as a “direct attack on the exercise of the right to freedom of 
expression in the Maldives” that “will have a strong chilling effect on media 
and civil society, making reporting and criticism truly risky”.

Ahmed Nihan Hussain Manik, the majority leader of the governing party, warned 
on state TV last month that citizens who assisted in spreading “falsities” in 
the report would have to “bear responsibility for it”.

Rasheed said local media outlets were unsure whether they would be penalised 
for reporting the allegations in the documentary. “A lot is up in the air right 
now,” she said. “My reporters are worried about my safety, so we’ll wait and 
see what kind of reaction there is before I go back.”

A spokesman for the president told local media 
<http://en.mihaaru.com/no-evidence-against-pres-yameen-maldives-govt-spurns-al-jazeera-expose/>
 that al-Jazeera’s allegations were baseless, while a member of Yameen’s 
Progressive Party of the Maldives described the documentary as “a camel’s 
fart”. Anothersaid its claims 
<https://twitter.com/abkhaleel/status/773443529569865728> were “nothing new”.

A formal statement from the president’s office said the government was 
“saddened” by the allegations made by al-Jazeera and “gravely concerned by the 
manner in which this film’s reporters acted in obtaining information”.

Al-Jazeera <https://www.theguardian.com/media/al-jazeera> had broadcast the 
documentary despite requests for more time to respond to the allegations, it 
said. “[This] is evidence that this report was aimed at bringing the government 
into disrepute, to defame senior government officials, and to pressure the 
government to act in a manner wanted by a certain group of people.”

It said a number of the allegations had been previously investigated by the 
country’s auditor-general, and there were ongoing investigations into others.

Former Maldives president warns of return to dictatorship on UK trip
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/25/former-maldives-president-mohamed-nasheed-warns-return-dictatorship-uk-trip>
The government also announced on Wednesday that it was cancelling Nasheed’s 
passport and those of other opposition party members.


Nasheed, who was granted political asylum 
<https://www.google.co.in/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0ahUKEwj9wrCEv_3OAhUBKo8KHbQsB98QFggbMAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fex-president-of-the-maldives-granted-asylum-in-uk-mohammed-nasheed&usg=AFQjCNFQ4zQU8GIINsPrCoSmhnqbjWoACA&sig2=ZaX0CsYt9AWQeGPcIcu5aA&bvm=bv.131783435,d.c2I>
 in the UK in May, was accused last week by the finance ministry of “misusing” 
state funds while in office.He said 
<https://twitter.com/MohamedNasheed/status/773473985497600000> the loss of his 
passport was a “ridiculous and politically motivated” attempt to distract from 
the corruption accusations aired against Yameen on Wednesday.

The Indian Ocean archipelago, known to most outside south Asia as a luxury 
tourist resort, transitioned to democracy in 2008 after the end of 30-year 
autocratic rule by Maumoon Abdul Gayoom.

Nasheed, a respected climate change and human rights campaigner, was elected 
president that year, but says he was forced out of office at gunpoint in 2012, 
triggering massive protests and four years of political crises.

He was convicted of terrorism last year in a trial that Amnesty International 
said was politically motivated.

Yameen, Gayoom’s half-brother, became president in disputed elections in 2013 
but has struggled to fend off persistent rumours of an imminent coup, most 
recently aired in the last fortnight, when opposition groups in exilemet in 
Colombo 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/world/world-news/maldives-opposition-meet-in-sri-lanka-to-hatch-plan-against-president-2997861/>
 to discuss how he might be removed.


His former vice-president Ahmed Adeeb, whose leaked phone data reportedly 
provided the basis for Wednesday’s al-Jazeera report, wasconvicted in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/09/maldives-court-convicts-politician-of-bomb-attack-on-president>
 of trying to assassinate Yameen by planting a bomb on his speedboat.

Gayoom, the former leader, has fallen out with his half-brother and formed a 
breakaway faction of their party, making for bitter politics in Malé, at odds 
with the idyllic resorts a speedboat ride away.
 