
Pink Floyd bassist Roger Waters is due at Marc Maron’s studio soon, and 
despite the fact that Maron grew up listening to Pink Floyd’s albums, he’s not 
anxious about the forthcoming interview. After you’ve hosted the president of 
the United States in your garage, it’s hard to be nervous about much else.


WTF? Marc Maron, the podcaster with presidential approval
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/aug/16/wtf-marc-maron-podcaster-with-presidential-approval>
Back in July 2015, as secret service officers patrolled the streets outside of 
Maron’s Highland Park home, Barack Obama joined Maron on his WTF podcast for a 
discussion about race relations, fatherhood, gun violence, and overcoming fear. 
While such a high-profile interview could be a dream come true and a turning 
point for many shows, for Maron, it was just another day on the job. “That was 
an exciting day and an exciting week and then we got back to doing what we do,” 
says Maron. “The podcast moved on and kept going. My TV show kept going. It was 
an amazing day and an amazing event. But then we just got back to work.”


Hosting the president didn’t spark a newfound love of politics or politicians 
in Maron, though, and don’t expect other officeholders to appear on WTF anytime 
soon. “I’m not a political show. I saw it as an American given the opportunity 
to talk to his president, and who’s not going to do that?” Maron says. Maron 
will always jump at the opportunity to speak directly with the 
commander-in-chief – even if the next president is Donald Trump, who sits on 
the opposite side of the political spectrum from Maron. “I am wary of talking 
to people like that in general because in order to have a successful 
conversation, it has to be aconversation, and I’m not sure he does that,” says 
Maron. “There are certain personalities that will steamroll you. That happens 
in all lines of work – where it becomes a very one-sided conversation, and 
that’s not very interesting for me.”


Working past the facade of public figures and getting them to open up about 
their private lives is Maron’s stock in trade, whether he’s talking to Robin 
Williams, Louis CK, Kristen Wiig, or Obama, but many stars and certainly many 
politicians aren’t willing to open up in an interview. “Some people expect to 
be interviewed, but that’s not what I do. I try to engage in a conversation,” 
Maron says. “People who have a very ingrained public narrative can be tricky. 
The challenge of me talking to a president was to see if I could find those 
candid moments. [Obama] was thoroughly present, very present, very available, 
he listened. He said some things that he had said before, but there were 
definitely a lot of extended moments that were genuine conversation and levity 
and some personal, emotional things came up. He showed up for what I do and I 
was excited about that. That’s important to me.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmarc-maron-wtf-podcast-standup-new-york-comedy-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8aeee2d9955d905c430b94116160d3c3611f6c03%2F0_0_1020_612%2F1020.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Marc%20Maron%20talks%20stand%20up%3A%20'I%20think%20I%20am%20funnier%20than%20I%20have%20ever%20been'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmarc-maron-wtf-podcast-standup-new-york-comedy-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Marc%20Maron%20talks%20stand%20up%3A%20%27I%20think%20I%20am%20funnier%20than%20I%20have%20ever%20been%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmarc-maron-wtf-podcast-standup-new-york-comedy-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8aeee2d9955d905c430b94116160d3c3611f6c03%2F0_0_1020_612%2F1020.jpg>
 Marc Maron and Barack Obama on WTF Photograph: Pete Souza/The White House 
Maron has simply worked too hard on his show to allow his podcast to be turned 
into a tool for someone else’s political agenda. “It’s a question of how do you 
want to be used and are you OK with that? Because all you’re going to be is 
used. I don’t do that,” he says.

How to make a great podcast – a beginner's guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/28/how-to-make-podcast-now-hear-this-marc-maron-lauren-lapkus>
Maron’s struggles to reach the point in his career where he’s able to take 
principled stands and turn down interviews has been well documented on his 
podcast, on his television show, Maron, in his memoir, Attempting Normal, and 
in his standup routines. “My creative journey has always been somewhat genuine 
and as true to myself as best as I can,” he says. For Maron, staying true to 
himself has frequently resulted in a blurred line between his business life and 
his personal life, and he’s had few qualms about mining his personal life for 
comedic material. That may be changing, though. “I have begun to keep more 
things to myself,” says Maron. “I’ve learned that out of respect for other 
people, there are some things you don’t need to talk about. I don’t need to 
throw someone under the bus or reveal things about my relationship with 
somebody. It’s about being respectful of others, mostly. There’s about 80% 
transparency with me.”


While Maron started out as a standup comic and originally used the WTF podcast 
to connect with other comics and as a platform for bits, the podcast and the 
hours and hours of interviews he does for the show are now affecting his 
standup. “From the podcast and moving through conversations and thinking out 
loud, I have gotten a lot more comfortable with myself and as a standup,” he 
says. “I think I am funnier than I have ever been, because I feel confident 
about it in a real way. Thinking out loud and improvising and thinking in the 
moment – that was all strengthened by the podcast. It also strengthened the 
fact that people actually want to see me.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfSYxEAtXnpw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfSYxEAtXnpw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfSYxEAtXnpw&media=>
When Maron takes the stage at Carnegie Hall as part of the New York comedy 
festival <http://nycomedyfestival.com/event/marc-maron-2016/>, he will stand in 
front of a packed house for a well-rehearsed set, featuring material that many 
of his fans will never have heard before, even if they are regular listeners to 
WTF. “There are some ideas that I work through when I’m thinking out loud at 
the beginning of the podcast that evolve into bits, but by the time they’re 
onstage, they’re very different,” says Maron. “Improvising is what I do on a 
podcast and craft it into a bit. That takes time and timing and other elements 
need to be balanced. I have been trying to keep some stuff to myself. Most of 
the time people listen to a podcast sort of passively, once. So if they’re sort 
of familiar with what I’m talking about, they will not have heardhow I’m 
talking about it.”


He is still working on the set, honing his material into something resembling 
a routine, because despite his decades in the business, meticulously planning a 
solid 85-minute set is hard work, especially when you’re prone to improv. “I 
don’t always know exactly how the pieces are going to fall into place on any 
given night. It’s hard for me to think in terms of a routine,” he says.


Fine-tuning the routine will have to wait, though, because for now it’s back 
to work on WTF, and Roger Waters is on his way over.


 * Marc Maron performs at the New York comedy festival on Friday 4 November. 
Get ticketshere <http://nycomedyfestival.com/event/marc-maron-2016/>.
 