
We are often told that in earlier times all cultures had a concept of the 
afterlife – that “everybody” believed in some form of life after death, be it a 
journey over a river to a dark land, an eternity of hellfire and torment, a 
paradise with angels and ambrosia, or a reunion with loved ones. We have 
created many metaphors to carry us across the Styx. Some cultures believed, and 
believe, in rebirth and the migration of souls. In 21st-century Christian 
countries, orthodox religious services still routinely profess faith in the 
resurrection of the body. Painting and poetry and mythology offer usvisions of 
heaven and hell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/apr/24/ten-best-visions-hill-literature>
, some horrific, and some, like Stanley Spencer’s, reassuring and comforting. 
But I’ve always suspected that most of us, even in the pious, priest-dominated 
Middle Ages, didn’t really believe what we said we believed. Most of us knew 
that when we were dead, we were gone. We went nowhere. We ceased to be. That’s 
what we didn’t like about death – not fear of hell, but fear of nothingness.

This is, historically, anthropologically, a heretical position to hold, and 
when I try to argue it I am usually shouted down. I’ve got no historical 
imagination, I am told. Things were different then, scholars insist. Human 
nature was different then.

Anita Brookner’s rare and welcome take on old age
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/21/rachel-cooke-shelf-life-anita-brookner>
And maybe it was. Even in my lifetime, I have known a few people of faith, 
true believers, who would certainly have gone to heaven, if there were one. 
More than a century ago,Robert Browning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/feb/14/love-letters-barrett-browning-valentines>
 may well have expected to meet his wife Elizabeth Barrett Browning in the 
hereafter, as he wrote in his great death-defying poem“Prospice” 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/43773>, one of 
the first works I ever learnt by heart. “O thou soul of my soul! I shall clasp 
thee again, and with God be the rest!” Their lives together on Earth had been 
so miraculous that one miracle more would not have been surprising.

The delusion of an afterlife also seems to have a grim hold on modern-day 
martyrs, if we can believe all that we are told. But that’s another story, 
another subject, and so alien to most of us that it is hard to contemplate.

I would contend that in the largely secular west we now live in a 
post-religious era, where true faith in survival after death, pleasant or 
unpleasant, is restricted to a small minority. That’s not a contentious 
position, but it leaves the rest of us to struggle with the meaning of death, 
as we can no longer see it as a staging post to somewhere else, or as a great 
adventure, or even, in the alleged last words of Henry James,as “the 
distinguished thing” 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/past/docs/unbound/flashbks/james/jnote.htm>. Death 
is becoming less and less distinguished.

One of the problems with death in our time is that it becomes increasingly 
avoidable, or at least postponable. We are materialists, and we don’t believe 
in the soul. There is no ghost in the machine. We find medical solutions to 
medical problems, we dutifully take our statins, and our financial advisers and 
their actuaries declare that our life expectancy is increasing day by day, hour 
by hour. This is meant to be a good thing, like the ever-rising price of 
property, but on one level we all know it is not. When more good news about 
longevity is proclaimed on radio bulletins, there is usually a curiously sombre 
note of foreboding in the announcer’s voice. For it is not a sustainable 
trajectory.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fmargaret-drabble-not-afraid-death-worry-about-living%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5545a526241e1654f6af18501fb8f1d3201dbe5c%2F269_536_5347_3208%2F5347.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Margaret%20Drabble%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20am%20not%20afraid%20of%20death.%20I%20worry%20about%20living%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fmargaret-drabble-not-afraid-death-worry-about-living%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Margaret%20Drabble%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20am%20not%20afraid%20of%20death.%20I%20worry%20about%20living%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fmargaret-drabble-not-afraid-death-worry-about-living%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5545a526241e1654f6af18501fb8f1d3201dbe5c%2F269_536_5347_3208%2F5347.jpg>
 A production ofGulliver’s Travels: After Jonathan Swift by Radu Stanca 
National Theatre of Sibiu, Romania. Photograph: Murdo MacLeod for the Guardian 
Popular science and even academic conferences discuss the possibilities of 
human beings living for hundreds of years or longer, but some of us remember 
the terrible fate of Jonathan Swift’s immortalstruldbrugs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/14/death-end-of-life-care-differently-bma-report>
 on the island of Luggnagg, inGulliver’s Travels, condemned to live on with 
diminished faculties into extreme old age. Swift does not mince his words: his 
immortals (of whom the women are of course more “horrible” than the men) “had 
not only the follies and infirmities of other old men, but many more which 
arose from the dreadful prospect of never dying. They were not only 
opinionative, peevish, covetous, morose, vain, talkative, but incapable of 
friendship, and dead to all natural affection, which never descended below 
their grand-children. Envy and impotent desires are their prevailing passions … 
they forget the common appellation of things, and the names of persons, even of 
those who are their nearest friends and relations. For the same reason, they 
never can amuse themselves with reading, because their memory will not serve to 
carry them from the beginning of a sentence to the end …” He might have been 
describing the inmates of a 21st-century care home for the elderly.

Even those egomaniac plutocrats who have had their heads or their body parts 
frozen in hope of the discovery of techniques to revive them in a distant 
future must have some doubts about the quality of life they can expect when 
they are brought back from the icebox. Oh, the boredom of immortality! The 
dullness of a death in life, frozen through aeons in a test tube! The ghastly 
awakening! The gruesome pseudo-science ofcryonics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/sep/20/cryonics-death-insurance-policies>
 is, of course, speculative, but that hasn’t stopped a few hundred people going 
for it already, with more queueing up behind them. As we know fromKazuo 
Ishiguro’s poignant novel,Never Let Me Go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jan/29/never-let-me-go-kazuo-ishiguro>, 
some people will stop at nothing in their efforts to extend their lifespan. 
Awareness of our mortality is Ishiguro’s subject. We can trust him on that.

Through our own mortal ingenuity, we are reaching a historical phase when we 
are beginning to fear old age and longevity more than we fear death. We can no 
longer look forward to the possibility of a sudden, unexpected, merciful 
release, or falling asleep in bed while reading a book (as my mother did), or 
ceasing on the midnight with no pain. Nor can we make plans to celebrate our 
departure as a grand culmination of our life’s endeavours, with a gracious and 
grateful and possibly public farewell. That’s because we know that officious 
folk are going to strive to keep us alive for as long as they possibly can, 
until we can no longer enjoy anything. Just to prove that they can.

A bureaucracy of cruelty and fear, with diminishing returns, surrounds 
end-of-life care and possible pathways to the grave. It will drag us back from 
the brink, again and again if we’re not careful, until life has become so 
intolerable and undignified that we pray to be gone.

I sometimes ask myself, as I approach the bourn from which no traveller returns
 
<http://www.opensourceshakespeare.org/views/plays/play_view.php?WorkID=hamlet&Act=3&Scene=1&Scope=scene>
, if I am afraid of death. There’s nothing wrong with being afraid to die.Dr 
Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2003/sep/16/education.arts>, that 
generous spirit and devout but tormented Christian, was greatly afraid. But I 
can more or less honestly say that I’m not. It’s not that I don’t think about 
it – I think about it every day, as I have done ever since I first had 
children, those hostages to fortune. But I don’t waste what time is left to me 
worrying about it. What I do worry about is living.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fmargaret-drabble-not-afraid-death-worry-about-living%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ae80af2fd90570931ac467188c4d87d1ddb638a%2F0_191_3216_1930%2F3216.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Margaret%20Drabble%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20am%20not%20afraid%20of%20death.%20I%20worry%20about%20living%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fmargaret-drabble-not-afraid-death-worry-about-living%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Margaret%20Drabble%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20am%20not%20afraid%20of%20death.%20I%20worry%20about%20living%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fmargaret-drabble-not-afraid-death-worry-about-living%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ae80af2fd90570931ac467188c4d87d1ddb638a%2F0_191_3216_1930%2F3216.jpg>
 From left: Keira Knightley, Carey Mulligan and Andrew Garfield in the 2010 
film of Kazuo Ishiguro’sNever Let Me Go. Photograph: © FoxSearch/Everett/Rex 
Features 
How long do we want to live? This is not a simple question. The brain-freezers 
and person-cloners and perhaps theZuckerbergs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/01/mark-zuckerberg-daughter-charity-internet-reaction>
 would presumably reply “for ever”, which is a very stupid answer, as Swift 
pointed out long ago. But if you don’t glibly say “for ever”, what kind of term 
are you going to allot yourself? I went to a philosophy conference at Nuffield 
College in Oxford recently, at which questions of ageing were being addressed, 
with special reference to public policy on pension distribution and 
intergenerational justice. We were asked to adjudicate between various 
scenarios involving, for example, short and painful lives, or longer active 
lives ending in later years of protracted illness and incapacity. How should 
goods be distributed and wealth taxed in the future, in view of the evolving 
demographic of an ageing population? We were asked to consider the age at which 
we would opt to die, had we the choice, and it was suggested that these days we 
would think 70 too young, 80 about right, and 100 too old.

The most startling moment came in a Q&A session, when a normal, healthy 
looking middle-aged woman volunteered the information that she had been given a 
life expectancy of 100. Apparently this is now not unusual. She did not seem 
wholly happy about it, understandably: the prospect seemed more of a burden 
than a blessing. She did not want to be a struldbrug. Maybe in some circles it 
is normal to have one’s life expectancy tested before, say, downsizing one’s 
housing requirements or adjusting one’s annuity. I can see the practicality of 
that. And I remember, bizarrely, a GP saying to my aunt: “I can guarantee you 
until you’re 90, but not much after that.” GPs aren’t often so forthcoming. And 
the doctor was right: my aunt lived on, independently, in her own much-loved 
though increasingly untidy home, then spent two unhappy years in care, and died 
aged 92.

Not long ago, in 2014, I was asked to take part in a debate about the optimum 
age to die, which had been proposed as 75 by bioethicist Ezekiel Emanuel in a
provocative article 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2014/10/why-i-hope-to-die-at-75/379329/>
 in the Atlantic. I remember the slight sense of shock when I opened this 
invitation in my BlackBerry as I sat innocently unaware in a Little Chef just 
off the A303 in Somerset. I knew why I’d been asked: I’d recently published a
piece in favour of the right to assisted dying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/02/die-with-dignity-margaret-drabble>
 (which Emanuel, perhaps surprisingly, opposes) and I was, at that date, 
precisely 75 years old. Time for me to go, obviously, other people were 
thinking. I declined, instantly: I didn’t want to engage with this topic at 
all. And then I went back to the enjoyment of my cholesterol-packed, 
statin-moderated indulgence of scampi and chips. From big questions to small 
pleasures. That’s how we keep going.

I’ve thought a good deal since then about the question of the fixed term. 
Emanuel didn’t say you had to sign off at 75, he merely recommended that after 
that date you should refuse intrusive or expensive medical aid aimed to extend 
your life. You shouldn’t use up other people’s resources. (I have some sympathy 
with this position.) The novelist Anthony Trollope went much further, in his 
satirical novelThe Fixed Period 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/dec/14/david-lodge-rereading-anthony-trollope>
, set in 1980, and published in 1882, in the last year of his life: in this he 
invents a utopian (or dystopian) antipodean island society which has recently 
passed a law decreeing that, for the common good, euthanasia will be compulsory 
for all its citizens between the ages of 67 and 68. Naturally the inhabitants 
of Britannula, as they draw near that marker, become decreasingly convinced of 
the merits of the law, and all ends as one might expect. It’s a grim little 
novel, and it depressed me.

Every day we read or hear distressing testimony from those who have had to 
make painful life-or-death decisions

We should never be made to know, by external factors, the exact date of our 
death. It is too much knowledge to bear. The state should never impose a fixed 
death. It has not the right. Trollope’s Britannula was as opposed to capital 
punishment as I am and, unlike Britain at the time, had abolished it: clearly 
the concept of a fixed period of life and of a state death sentence were 
some-how connected in Trollope’s mind, and both seemed to him to be wrong. It 
should not be possible for some human beings to say to another human being “on 
such a day you shall die”. We may choose our own date, and we may take 
ourselves to Dignitas in Switzerland to keep faith with it, but it may not be 
chosen for us. Autonomy in death is a basic human right.

I don’t mean to make light of the newly created ethical difficulties facing 
doctors, paramedics, bishops and legislators. The problems are real. Every day 
we read or hear distressing testimony from those who have had to make painful 
life-or-death decisions about removing pacemakers or turning off life-support 
machines. The issues are usually explored with scrupulous care, and we can hear 
them discussed in depth on Joan Bakewell’s Radio 4 seriesInside the Ethics 
Committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/jul/14/inside-ethics-committee-review>
. This doesn’t prevent cruel miscarriages of justice, caused more often by 
bureaucratic and legal confusion than by bigotry or self-protection. We are in 
unmapped terrain.

Bakewell, in her early 80s, personifies the cheering possibility of a useful 
and happy old age. But not everybody can grow old as successfully as she has, 
and remain articulate, beautiful, energetic, adventurous. More of us will 
dwindle away, and succumb to dementia, incontinence, loss of mobility and 
chronic or acute pain. Our bodies become our enemies, in the long run, and do 
not want us to go on for ever. There will come a point when we won’t like 
looking in the mirror any more. We don’t like to admit that there is anything 
repulsive about extreme old age, but I can remember, if I am honest, that as a 
child I found the spectacle of some of the very old alarming and frightening. 
We don’t want to be kept alive as a memento mori to others. Let’s go before 
that happens.

But let’s end on the brighter side of death. Many people have fun organising 
their own funerals or memorials, and of course you can’t have a funeral unless 
you pay the price of dying first. Some I know have planned (and even paid for) 
everything in advance – the casket, the churchyard or the woodland plot, the 
hymns, the music. They have seized control. I haven’t got that far, but I’ve 
made it clear I want to be cremated, not buried in the cold earth. I wouldn’t 
mind a sea burial, as the thought of being devoured underwater is strangely 
attractive to me, but I think it’s hard to arrange, and I won’t want to be a 
nuisance. I’d like everyone to sing one of my favourite hymns, “Turn back, O 
man, foreswear thy foolish ways 
<http://www.hymnary.org/text/turn_back_o_man_forswear_thy_foolish_way>”, 
because it is full of an indestructible hope of a better world, even though I 
won’t be there to see it. But most of all, what really cheers me up is the 
thought that my grandson Danny has promised to sing at my funeral.

I smile every time I think of this. I don’t mind what he sings; in fact I 
don’t mind whether he breaks his promise and doesn’t sing at all, as I won’t 
know about it, will I? If he happens to be in Australia at the time and doesn’t 
want to fly back, that will be all right with me. But the idea of it, here and 
now, is wonderful to me. None of the Drabbles on my side of the family can sing 
at all, we are hopelessly unmusical, but he has a truly beautiful voice, with 
the help of which he and hisa cappella choir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jul/28/oxford-students-a-cappella-cover-draws-praise-shakira>
 reached the 2011 semi-finals ofBritain’s Got Talent. You can’t get better than 
that. I am smiling as I write this. Things will go on fine when I am gone.

• The Dark Flood Rises is published by Canongate on 3 November. To order a 
copy for £13.93 (RRP £16.99) go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/dark-flood-rises.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 