
At a time when the foundations of the European Union have never looked shakier,
Margrethe Vestager <https://www.theguardian.com/world/margrethe-vestager> is a 
powerful reminder that Brussels, when it works as it should, has clout.

The EU competition commissioner’s threat to investigate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/28/google-tax-deal-eu-commissioner-investigation>
 the British government’s controversial tax settlement with Google and take 
action if she deems it necessary is no empty one, as multinationals such as 
Fiat, Starbucks, Gazprom and – in a separate case – Google can attest.

In her continuing fight against anti-competitive behaviour by global 
corporations and the unfair aid given to them by member states, Vestager is 
aided by robust European legislation that allows her, for example, to fine 
guilty firms up to 10% of their global turnover.

EU ready to scrutinise UK Google tax deal in avoidance crackdown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/28/eu-ready-scrutinise-uk-google-tax-deal-avoidance-crackdown>
But she also brings to the job a determined, no-nonsense personality seen as 
tough even by Danish standards; an actual, working sense of humour – 
unconventional in Brussels – and a quirky charm best exemplified by her 
longstandinghabit of knitting during meetings 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/16/business/international/margrethe-vestager-the-danish-politician-who-brought-antitrust-charges-against-google.html?_r=0>
, especially elephants.

Vestager, a member of the Social Liberal party, was appointed competition 
commissioner in 2014 after a stellar career in Danish politics, a world of 
minority governments, fragile coalitions, consensus and compromise.

In that setting, she appeared steely and cold-blooded almost to the point of 
callousness. Vestager pushed through swingeing cuts to the country’s 
once-sacrosanct unemployment and early retirement benefits while economic 
affairs minister in the unstable three-party leftist coalition headed by the 
former Social Democrat prime minister, Helle Thorning-Schmidt.

Then widely considered by Danish media and pollsters to be the most powerful 
politician in the country, before even Thorning-Schmidt, Vestager won 
recognition on the European stage during Denmark’s 2012 presidency of the EU 
council, chairing the Ecofin finance ministers’ meetings.

Her coolness has at times been startling. Asked about the misery likely to be 
endured by people losing their benefits, Vestager, who has an economics degree 
from Copenhagen University and has also served as education minister and deputy 
prime minister, replied: “Well, that’s the way it goes.”

But a similar single-mindedness has been evident in Brussels. Since her 
arrival,Vestager has already tackled Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/15/google-faces-antitrust-action-from-eu-competition-watchdog>
, launching formal antitrust proceedings against the company in April last year 
over accusations that it uses its dominance as a search engine to unfairly 
privilege Google’s online shopping service over those of its rivals.

Sweetheart deals and sister companies: how top firms pay less tax
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/27/sweetheart-deals-and-sister-companies-how-top-firms-pay-less-tax>
She also has the mostly state-owned Russian gas company Gazprom firmly in her 
sights, whichshe suspects of unfair pricing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/22/brussels-accuses-gazprom-unfair-pricing-gas-eastern-europe>
 and illegally interfering with the energy markets in at least eight European 
countries. Vestager is also looking at the subsidies paid by some European 
governments to their electricity utilities, arguing that they may amount to 
illegal state aid.

Despite the fact that her boss, the European commission president, Jean-Claude 
Juncker, is a former prime minister of Luxembourg, she has not shied away from
pursuing watershed test cases 
<http://www.politico.eu/article/danish-tax-reaper-fiat-starbucks-ruling-competition-commissioner/>
 against the preferential tax treatment allegedly and variously granted to 
multinationals Amazon, Apple, Starbucks and Fiat by Ireland, the Netherlands 
and Luxembourg.Fiat and Starbucks have already been ordered to pay tens of 
millions of euros 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/21/starbucks-and-fiat-tax-deals-with-eu-nations-ruled-unlawful>
; verdicts on Amazon and Apple await.

Vestager insists she is not opposed to ultra-low taxes in principle, as long 
as they are available to everyone and not just a select multinational few.

“I was brought up with a very strong value that you should always protect the 
small and the few against those who want to misuse their muscle and weight in 
order to get what they weren’t supposed to,” she told Reuters just before her 
appointment.

In another interview, Vestager said: “If you as a company can get a deal that 
I as a company cannot get, you can compete with me but not on the merits, 
because your tax burden is not the same as mine.”

An intern in the European parliament and a senior civil servant before being 
elected to the Danish parliament in 2001, Vestager, 47, is married to a 
secondary school maths and philosophy teacher with whom she has three daughters.

Cameron too close to Google, say critics, after £130m tax deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/27/cameron-too-close-to-google-say-critics-130m-tax-deal>
Her admission that Sidse Babett Knudsen, who plays Denmark’s fictional prime 
minister in Borgen, “followed me around when I was economic affairs minister, 
to see how it works,” prompted speculation she was one of the main inspirations 
for Knudsen’s character, Birgitte Nyborg, in the hit TV drama.


But perhaps the most revealing revelation 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/7d8916e6-3dc4-11e4-b175-00144feabdc0.html#axzz3yS4XvqE7>
 about the straight-talking, tough-acting commissioner is that when she headed 
off for Brussels in 2014, she left her successor as Denmark’s economic affairs 
minister a handknitted elephant – reportedly by no means the first she has 
produced – along with a note.

“I have knitted a friend for you,” the note said. “It is an elephant. 
Elephants are social, thoughtful animals. They live in communities and – I have 
to say it – in matriarchal societies. They bear no grudge, but they remember 
well.”


Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> might take that as a 
warning.
 