
The two most powerful central bankers have warned that they are on high alert 
for financial and economic fallout from the EU referendum, amid signs that the 
result of Thursday’s vote still hangs in the balance.

On a day that saw Monday’s big rises in shares and the pound halted by polls 
showing the race too close to call, Mario Draghi, the president of theEuropean 
Central Bank <https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank>, said 
he was prepared to use every available tool to protect the eurozone if the UK 
decides to leave.

Draghi said: “We will closely monitor the evolution of the outlook for price 
stability. We stand ready to act by using all the instruments available within 
our mandate, if necessary, to achieve our objective. In particular, the ECB is 
ready for all contingencies following the UK’sEU referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>.”

Janet Yellen, the chair of the US Federal Reserve, told Congress  
<http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/testimony/yellen20160621a.htm>that in 
a world marked by sluggish growth, weak inflation and low interest rates 
investors could quickly become more risk averse.

“One development that could shift investor sentiment is the upcoming 
referendum in the United Kingdom. A UK vote to exit theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> could have significant economic 
repercussions,” Yellen said. “It could launch a period of uncertainty [with] 
negative economic consequences for the UK spilling over into Europe.”

As the referendum campaign reached its closing stages, the FTSE 100 marked 
time – closing 23 points higher at 6,227. The pound reached its highest level 
against the dollar since January during early trading on the foreign exchanges, 
but later slipped back to close slightly lower at just under $1.47.


George Soros, the speculator who drove Britain out of the exchange rate 
mechanism, has warnedthat the UK markets faced a Black Friday in the event of a 
Brexit vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/20/brexit-would-trigger-sterling-fall-worse-than-black-wednesday>
. This prompted a response from Norman Lamont, who was running the Treasury on 
Black Wednesday 24 years ago. He said: “The devaluation of sterling in 
September 1992 didn’t do the UK economy any harm, far from it. Nor would a fall 
in the pound this time necessarily be a disaster. The key difference between 
now and 1992 is that today the pound is floating and any devaluation could be 
self-correcting and temporary.”

But other international economists backed Soros’s view that there would be 
serious market turmoil in the event of a vote to leave.

Larry Summers, the former US Treasury secretary, wrote in a blogpost 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2016/06/21/why-brexit-would-be-a-history-defining-and-irreversible-mistake/?postshare=431466509641044&tid=ss_tw>
: “A Black Friday could follow referendum Thursday. It is likely that foreign 
investors in British stocks would lose 15% off the bat, adding together market 
declines and currency losses.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fmario-draghi-janet-yellen-poised-eu-referendum-fallout%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a67284b6f5450a69ac150999e4095448070e11b%2F0_137_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mario%20Draghi%20and%20Janet%20Yellen%20poised%20for%20EU%20referendum%20fallout&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fmario-draghi-janet-yellen-poised-eu-referendum-fallout%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mario%20Draghi%20and%20Janet%20Yellen%20poised%20for%20EU%20referendum%20fallout&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fmario-draghi-janet-yellen-poised-eu-referendum-fallout%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a67284b6f5450a69ac150999e4095448070e11b%2F0_137_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Janet Yellen, the chair of the US Federal Reserve, said the EU referendum 
could shift investor sentiment. Photograph: Jim Lo Scalzo/EPA 
He added that despite attempts to improve supervision of the financial system 
since the near-meltdown prompted by the Lehman Brothers collapse in September 
2008, it was impossible to say how the system would respond to a Brexit vote.

“A return of systemic risk as large losses lead to cascading liquidations 
cannot be ruled out. At a time when central banks have far less ammunition than 
they did in 2008, the consequences could be grave,” he said.

Nouriel Roubini, the economist nicknamed Dr Doom after accurately predicting 
the 2008 crisis, supported David Cameron’s view that Brexit would leave Britons 
worse off.

“Brexit could stall the UK economy and tip it into a recession as the shock to 
business and consumer confidence could be severe,” said Roubini, who teaches at 
New York University’s Stern school of business.


While giving evidence to the European parliament, Draghi said: “We monitor all 
economic, political and legal developments so we can assess and manage the 
ensuing risks. We have existing swap lines with other central banks. The 
agreements are there, we want to make sure they are useable, active and 
adequate.

“The event will have short and long-term effects. It is hard to say what sort 
of action we would take in each contingency.”

But Mark Weisbrot, co-director of the Washington-based thinktank, the Center 
for Economic Policy Research, said 
<http://thehill.com/blogs/pundits-blog/international/284220-brexit-might-be-the-wake-up-call-europe-needs>
: “There is a Mafia-like quality to the threats emanating from EU officials, 
who are acknowledged to be contemplating how much punishment they can mete out 
to the UK if the people should dare to vote the wrong way.”

He added that the message was: “Vote remain and nobody gets hurt.” 
 