
Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, has said coping with 
the refugee crisis will be a boost for growth and brushed aside fears that the 
turmoil in global markets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/22/world-stock-markets-bounce-back-nikkei-ecb-draghi>
 heralds the start of a recession.

Draghi said it was important that Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> worked together to turn the 
challenge of coping with refugees into an opportunity and said one knock-on 
impact would be higher public spending.

Speaking in Davos <https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos-2016>, the ECB 
president said 2016 had begun with “market gyrations” and “heightened 
sensitivity to risk” but said it was too early to say that the economic 
fundamentals had changed for the worse.

He added that the eurozone was continuing to recover at a modest pace due to 
the ECB stimulus, lower oil prices and an easing of austerity programmes. A 
fourth driver of growth, which had yet to have an effect, would be “the 
increase in government expenditure that will be necessary to cope with the 
refugees”.

Draghi eased the jitters in financial markets on Thursday when he signalled 
that the ECB would provide more stimulus in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/21/ecb-interest-rate-hold-steadies-markets>
 to raise the eurozone’s inflation level closer to its target of close to, but 
below, 2%.

Davos 2016: Refugee crisis will change Europe, says Draghi - live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/jan/22/davos-2016-imf-lagarde-draghi-kerry-live>
In Davos <https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos>, he again sought to 
reassure nervous investors. “We have plenty of instruments, especially the 
determination and the willingness of the [ECB] governing council to act and 
deploy these instruments.”

The annual World Economic Forum gathering has been marked by warnings from 
European politicians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/22/french-pm-manuel-valls-says-refugee-crisis-is-destabilising-europe>
 that the arrival of more than 1 million refugees last year, and the 
expectation of a similar number in 2016, is putting immense strain on the EU.

Draghi said: “Our society will be changed by this. In which direction, we can 
only guess. It is also premature to know how long it will take to transform 
this challenge into an opportunity.”

The ECB president said Europe needed to show determination, confidence and a 
willingness to cooperate, “because the size of the challenge could actually 
undermine the confidence and make fear prevail over any other consideration. 
And the challenge is lost.”
 