
The European Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank> president has 
launched a robust defence of the institution’s independence after criticism 
from Germany that rock-bottom euro interest rates are hurting savers and 
fuelling rightwing nationalism.

Mario Draghi used his latest press conference on Thursday to counter an attack 
from Germany’s finance minister, Wolfgang Schäuble, who had saidrecord low 
rates were causing “extraordinary problems” for German banks and pensioners 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-germany-economy-schaeuble-idUKKCN0X91LK> and 
risked fuelling the rise of Eurosceptics in Germany.

After leaving eurozone interest rates at zero at the ECB’s latest meeting, 
Draghi sought to stress loose policy was needed to get inflation back to the 
central bank’s target of “below but close to” 2%. For now inflation remains 
well short of that and could turn negative again in coming months, he added.

Draghi warned that those who threatened ECB independence with “criticisms of a 
certain type”were making Europe’s economic problems worse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/apr/21/european-central-bank-mario-draghi-rates-qe-markets-live?page=with:block-5718d440e4b0e0f78acde550#block-5718d440e4b0e0f78acde550>
.

“We have a mandate to pursue price stability for the whole of the eurozone not 
only forGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>,” he said. “We obey 
the law, not the politicians, because we are independent as stated by the law.”

Angela Merkel countered that it was legitimate for Germans to discuss how far 
interest rates had fallen, but “that shouldn’t be confused with interference in 
the independent policy of the ECB, which I support.

“The ECB is independent in its policies,” the German chancellor told reporters 
while on a visit to the Netherlands.

At Thursday’s ECB news conference in Frankfurt Draghi said a range of 
initiatives announced in March would need time to bear fruit but he insisted 
the bank’s stance was working. In last month’sunprecedented package of 
growth-bolstering measures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/10/european-central-bank-cuts-interest-rates-zero-mario-draghi>
, the ECB cut interest rates to an all-time low, expanded its money-printing 
programme and reduced a key bank deposit rate further into negative territory.

There had been some speculation in financial markets before Thursday that 
faced with global uncertainties and an ongoing threat of deflation, the ECB 
could cut rates further still and launch “helicopter money” –whereby central 
banks print money so finance ministries can hand it out to citizens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2016/apr/07/helicopter-money-is-closer-than-you-think>
 to spend.

But Draghi was swift to snuff out speculation and said the ECB had not 
discussed helicopter money. He did emphasise, however, that borrowing costs 
would stay low and he hinted they could possibly be cut even further.

“We continue to expect them to remain at present or lower levels for an 
extended period of time,” the ECB chief said inhis opening statement to the 
press conference 
<https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pressconf/2016/html/is160421.en.html>.

That outlook will infuriate many German savers, frustrated by years of low 
returns on their pension pots. But Draghi rejected implications that the ECB 
was responsible for all the problems of pension funds.

“It is clear that pension funds and others, insurance companies, are seriously 
affected by the low interest rates. I would caution them not to blame on low 
rates everything that has gone wrong in the sector,” he said.

Draghi also renewed the pressure on governments to play a role in shoring up 
growth in the eurozone, echoing recent comments by the International Monetary 
Fund’s Christine Lagarde thatcentral banks alone cannot fuel the recovery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/05/imf-director-christine-lagarde-growth-global-economy>
.

“Low interest rates are a symptom of low growth and low inflation. If we want 
to return to higher interest rates we need to return to higher growth and 
higher inflation,” he said.

Asked about the UK’s June referendum on EU membership, Draghi said: “The 
participation of Britain in the EU is welcome,. As for the risk of [Brexit] 
affecting the stability of the eurozone, the assessment our staff is that the 
effect will be limited.”
 