
With the resignation of Dominique Strauss-Kahn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/may/19/dominique-strauss-kahn-resigns-imf>
, the eurozone this week lost one of its most ardent advocates. This time last 
year, he was instrumental in persuading a reluctant Angela Merkel to back an 
unprecedented €110bn (£95bn) bailout of Greece with significant assistance by 
the IMF, both technical and financial.Unless a European is appointed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/may/16/imf-dominique-strauss-kahn>
, the next managing director is likely to scale back the IMF's political and 
practical support for the eurozone's rescue mission. Coupled with a return to
market fundamentalism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/may/18/imf-warns-greece>, the fund's 
retreat from Europe's mess would spark contagion from the eurozone's banking 
and sovereign debt crisis to the global financial system.

One person who won't succeed Strauss-Kahn is Mario Draghi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/apr/26/ecb-mario-draghi-nicolas-sarkozy?INTCMP=SRCH>
, the governor of the Bank of Italy. The eurozone's finance ministers are 
expected to nominate him today as the next president of theEuropean Central Bank
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank> (ECB) when the 
incumbentJean-Claude Trichet  
<http://www.ecb.int/ecb/orga/decisions/html/cvtrichet.en.html>retires in 
October.

The timing of Draghi's nomination for the ECB's top job could hardly be 
better. It will help calm down global financial markets and stabilise the euro 
amid economic uncertainty and a lack of political leadership in Europe. 
Yesterday EU finance ministers signed off a €78bn bailout forPortugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/portugal> and a permanent euro rescue 
mechanism from 2013, but neither addresses the growing divergence between the 
eurozone's core and periphery countries. As governments dither over greater 
fiscal co-ordination and common eurobonds, the ECB's key monetary policy 
decisions such as interest rates will be key in ensuring the euro's survival.

Draghi's appointment goes against two recent European trends. First of all, a 
drawn-out process of horse trading that ends in choosing second – or even 
third-rate – candidates such as Catherine Ashton, the EU's hapless high 
representative for foreign affairs and security policy, who has failed to raise 
the union's global profile. Similarly, the various successors to Jacques Delors 
as European commission president have not distinguished themselves, except by 
their mediocrity and subservience to the narrow interests of national leaders.

By contrast, Draghi is highly qualified and widely respected. Educated at the 
prestigious US university MIT, he has taught at Harvard and is one of Europe's 
best economic minds. Despite being a former Goldman Sachs banker, he has 
impressed as chair of the G20's financial stability board that drafted the 
Basel III agreement – the new regulatory framework for banks and other 
financial institutions. Together with the Italian finance minister, Giulio 
Tremonti, he is also credited with steering Italy's debt-ridden economy through 
the crisis without requiring financial assistance.

By nominating Draghi, EU leaders have also broken with a second trend – to 
give in to populist pressure and make decisions according to national 
calculations. That tactic backfired twice when Merkel delayed decisive action 
on the eurozone's sovereign debt crisis. Her party was nevertheless defeated in 
two key regional polls.

This time she has not caved in to pressure from a hostile public and press. 
Bild, Germany's equivalent of the Sun, recently ran a headline saying that 
"inflation and Italians" go together "like tomato sauce and spaghetti". In an 
interview last week withDie Zeit <http://www.zeit.de/index> – a respected 
weekly more comparable to the Observer – Merkel said of Draghi that "He is very 
much in line with our ideas about stability and economic solidity."

This raises questions about the ECB's independence and mandate. Unlike Jens 
Weidman – the president of Germany's Bundesbank, who served as economic adviser 
to Merkel – Draghi will be his own man. As such, he will protect the ECB's main 
mandate of securing price stability. If energy and commodity prices continue to 
soar, then the core countries of the eurozone won't countenance a rising 
inflation rate for very long.

But contrary to the all the arch-monetarists who see the spectre of inflation 
everywhere, Draghi must be pragmatic and continue to fight the forces of 
stagnation or even economic slump. After all, the mandate of price stability 
gives the ECB licence to prevent deflation, as falling real prices raise the 
value of debt and threaten depression – exactly the predicament of Greece,
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> and Portugal that have 
received bailouts.

Beyond price stability, Draghi must quietly help create the conditions for 
stronger economic growth. That is the only sensible way out of the sovereign 
debt crisis and the social recession that is upon the eurozone's periphery.
 