
Maria Balshaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2017/jan/13/maria-balshaw-tates-director-elect-dares-artists-different>
 is to become one of the the most important figures in British arts after her 
appointment as the new director of Tate was approved by the prime minister.

She is the first woman to be appointed director of Tate and starts on 1 June. 
Balshaw said: “I am honoured to be asked by the trustees of Tate to become the 
new director. Under Nicholas Serota’s leadership, Tate has changed forever how 
we all think about art and artists and has made visual art a central part of a 
vibrant cultural life in the UK.

“I am tremendously excited to be leading Tate in the next chapter of its life. 
I look forward to developing Tate’s reputation as the most artistically 
adventurous and culturally inclusive gallery in the world.”

News that Tate trustees had chosen Balshaw, currently in charge of 
Manchester’s galleries, broke last week, but it still had to get the agreement 
of Theresa May.

On Tuesday, Tate confirmed that Balshaw will succeed Sir Nicholas Serota 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2017/jan/11/tate-to-name-maria-balshaw-as-new-director-replacing-nicholas-serota>
, who is standing down after almost 30 years.

Related: Maria Balshaw: the Tate's new director-elect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2017/jan/11/maria-balshaw-the-tates-new-director-elect>

Her appointment will be cheered loudly in the arts world. She has been a 
pivotal figure in the continuing cultural rejuvenation of Manchester,overseeing 
the £15m redevelopment of the Whitworth gallery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2017/jan/11/maria-balshaw-the-tates-new-director-elect>
 and credited with persuading the former chancellor George Osborne to invest 
£78m in the new Factory arts hub on the site of the old Granada Studios.

Balshaw has been director of the Whitworth since 2006. She became joint 
director of the Whitworth and the ManchesterArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Gallery in 2011. In 2014, she in 
effect became Manchester’s cultural attache when she took on the role of 
strategic lead for culture at the city council.

She has been frontrunner for Tate ever since Serota announced he was stepping 
down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/08/sir-nicholas-serota-appointed-chairman-arts-council-england-tate>
. The Whitworth redevelopment is regarded as a triumph, one that helped it win 
UK museum of the year in 2015 and double visitor numbers. Apollo magazine also 
gave Balshaw that year’s personality of the year award.

Balshaw was born in Birmingham, spent her childhood in Leicester and 
Northampton, studied English at Liverpool University then went to Sussex to do 
an MA in critical theory, followed by a doctorate.

Following time as a lecturer and then a research fellow, Balshaw’s first job 
in the arts was as director of Creative Partnerships in 2002. This was followed 
by a senior job for Arts Council England in the West Midlands before her 
appointment at the Whitworth in 2006.

She gets on with artists, but, unlike previous Tate directors, she is not a 
curator. Trustees have clearly decided that is not an issue, safe in the 
knowledge that all four galleries are run by people who do have those skills: 
Frances Morris at Tate Modern, Alex Farquharson at Tate Britain, Francesco 
Manacorda atTate Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tate-liverpool> and the soon-to-start 
Anne Barlow at Tate St Ives.

Lord Browne, the chair of trustees at Tate, said he was delighted to announce 
the appointment. “The trustees and I know that Maria has the vision, drive and 
stature to lead Tate into its next phase of development. We enthusiastically 
look forward to working with her as she does so.”

After the news broke, her appointment was welcomed by many people in the arts 
world. The artist Cornelia Parker said Balshaw was “brilliant”, someone who 
allows people to play to their strengths. “She’s very astute about art and she 
encourages you as an artist to be as bold as you want to be. As an artist, you 
want somebody who is brave rather than cautious,” she said.

The writer Jeanette Winterson said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2017/jan/11/tate-to-name-maria-balshaw-as-new-director-replacing-nicholas-serota>
: “She is high art, but she’s democratic. There’s no dumbing down, there’s no 
apologies, but she is also saying this is for everybody. That’s why I love her 
… it’s that all-inclusive, forward-thinking but no compromises.”

Balshaw’s move to London will leave a big hole in Manchester and the most 
likely scenario would be the jobs of the city art gallery and the Whitworth 
being split back in two.

 