
The governor of the Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> has warned that 
European economies could be damaged if their access to the City of London is 
disrupted after Britain leaves the EU.

Speaking as the Bank issued its half-yearly assessment of risks to the 
financial markets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/30/rbs-fails-bank-of-england-stress-test>
, Mark Carney said: “The UK is effectively the investment banker for Europe. 
More than half the equity and debt raised (for European governments and 
business) is raised in the UK, quite often from investors based in the United 
Kingdom.”


His remarks were in contrast to those earlier this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/28/ecbs-mario-draghi-urges-uk-to-disclose-brexit-plans>
 by Mario Draghi, the president of theEuropean Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank>, who said Britain 
would bear the brunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/28/hard-brexit-would-damage-almost-every-sector-of-uk-economy>
 of the economic damage if Brexit created a UK economy with lower migration and 
weaker growth in trade and investment.

Among the risks listed in the Bank’s financial stability report were those 
posed by the uncertainties created by Brexit, which Carney said needed to be as 
“smooth and orderly as possible”.


“Additional risks to the euro area could emerge as a consequence of the UK’s 
withdrawal from theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>. Banks 
located in the UK supply over half of debt and equity issuance by continental 
firms, and account for over three-quarters of foreign exchange and derivatives 
activity in the EU,” said Carney.

“If these UK-based firms have to adjust their activities in a short timeframe, 
there could be a greater risk of disruption to services provided to the 
European real economy, some of which could spill back to the UK economy through 
trade and financial linkages.”

 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/28/ecbs-mario-draghi-urges-uk-to-disclose-brexit-plans>
Carney said there would be transitional arrangements and that it was preferable 
that firms in the City knew as “much as possible about the desired end point 
and as much as possible as early as possible about the potential path to that 
end point”.

Article 50, the formal process of leaving the EU, has not yet been triggered 
and Carney said the timing for firms to implement contingency plans for Brexit 
“is still some way off”.

He said the biggest risks to financial stability in the UK were from global 
sources, warning that there could be animpact on global trade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/28/donald-trump-economic-consequences-us-election-growth>
 from Donald Trump’s election as US president. Chinese debt is high and there 
are also risks in the eurozone, includingthe Italian referendum on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/30/italy-referendum-all-you-need-to-know-about-renzis-crunch-vote>
.

Carney said he did not expect the slowdown in global growth to be as severe as 
the near-2% contraction in global growth which was included in this year’s 
health check on the UK’s banks.

He added: “There is this possibility that the slowdown in the growth in world 
trade, which we have seen over the past few years, accelerates because of 
discrete policy initiatives potentially from the world’s largest economy.

 “While that might not directly affect the United Kingdom, if it slows the 
pace of global growth – and we’re an open trading nation, one of the most open 
nations in the world – it’s going to have a knock-on effect through this 
economy.”
 