
“I feel bad for the Republicans,” says Mark Ruffalo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mark-ruffalo>. “It’s an untenable situation 
for them in a lot of ways. The people who are clear-headed and really do hold 
conservative values are on the outs.” The presidential election is rumbling 
along and Ruffalo – ever the actor – is not above a bit of kindly empathy. 
“What’s driving the party at the moment is nothing other than fear and 
xenophobia, and a kind of paranoia that is not sustainable. You can’t govern 
with it.”

With a record of activism alongside a high achieving acting career – which 
includes such imperishable indie classics asThe Kids Are All Right 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/28/the-kids-are-all-right-review>, 
Zodiac and Margaret, no one can have much doubt where Ruffalo’s political 
sympathies lie; in 2010, a flurry of stories claimed that Ruffalo was on a 
terrorism watchlist. He wasn’t – and isn’t as far as he knows – but crinkly of 
eye, tousled of hair and mumbly of speech, Ruffalo is not afraid to step up to 
the plate. Hecollars interviewers on the red carpet 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TqAdfWmflGo>, and uses his Twitter feed (with 
more than two million followers) <https://twitter.com/MarkRuffalo> as a 
platform for his outspoken support for Democrat maverick Bernie Sanders and the 
climate change movement. Trump, he says, is “an interesting blip” in a country 
that is undergoing “kind of a correction”. Money has “corrupted the political 
system”, which has lost its credibility “on both sides of the aisle”. To 
Ruffalo, the Republican frontrunner “is playing into all the ugliest aspects of 
the fear that has been fomented by the media and the politicians themselves”; 
in contrast, he says, Sanders is offering “a reimagining of the basic premise 
of what America is”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fmark-ruffalo-on-spotlight-the-whole-of-boston-was-complicit-everybody-looked-the-other-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0dc11bae0c3286d9c9172aee8417d7ed86685f26%2F0_0_5088_3054%2F5088.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mark%20Ruffalo%20on%20Spotlight%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20whole%20of%20Boston%20was%20complicit.%20Everybody%20looked%20the%20other%20way%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fmark-ruffalo-on-spotlight-the-whole-of-boston-was-complicit-everybody-looked-the-other-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mark%20Ruffalo%20on%20Spotlight%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20whole%20of%20Boston%20was%20complicit.%20Everybody%20looked%20the%20other%20way%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fmark-ruffalo-on-spotlight-the-whole-of-boston-was-complicit-everybody-looked-the-other-way%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0dc11bae0c3286d9c9172aee8417d7ed86685f26%2F0_0_5088_3054%2F5088.jpg>
 Ruffalo as Mike Rezendes in Spotlight: ‘He has that sense of social justice. 
It’s a drive thing.’ Photograph: Moviestore/Rex//Shutterstock 
Ruffalo is back on the cultural radar because he has just been Oscar nominated 
for his role inSpotlight <https://www.theguardian.com/film/spotlight>, an 
appropriately angry hand-grenade of a film that takes its title from thespecial 
investigations team of the Boston Globe 
<https://digitalaccess.bostonglobe.com/da/82/?camp=BGSpotlight&p1=BGHeader_SmartBar_Marketing_Gen>
, and chronicles itscelebrated 2002 exposé of clerical sex abuse 
<http://www.bostonglobe.com/metro/specials/clergy> in the city, and subsequent 
cover-up. Ruffalo plays reporterMike Rezendes <https://twitter.com/mikerezendes>
 as a twitchy, dogged, loose cannon of a journalist. Hair brushed forward, 
loping from courthouse to record hall to lawyer’s office, Ruffalo’s Rezendes is 
the bloodhound of the Spotlight team.

Ruffalo explains he spent a good while with the real-life Rezendes, who is 
still at the Boston Globe – going to his home, shadowing him at work – which, 
he says, “proved a real, great source for me”. Rezendes was working onanother 
big, long-term story at the time, about the state psychiatric hospital at 
Bridgewater: <http://www.bostonglobe.com/metro/specials/bridgewater> “the 
guards kept killing all of these inmates”, he says, and Ruffalo says he was 
right there when it was breaking. “It’s the investigative reporter’s version of 
a ride-along to a drug bust. So I got to see him action.” So it was exciting, 
right? “Uh,” he considers it, “it was mostly working the phones.”

Spotlight: 'How I made the least fashionable film ever'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jan/20/spotlight-film-fashion-costume-director>
To its credit, Spotlight <https://www.theguardian.com/film/spotlight> doesn’t 
try too hard to overdramatise the mundane working life of most journalists, 
even if Ruffalo does get a high-volume “This is bullshit!” scene, where he 
butts heads with his editor. Ruffalo suggests that he was trying to channel 
what he calls the “sense of righteousness” he saw in the real Rezendes. “He has 
that sense of social justice. It’s a drive thing. It was really interesting to 
see it in action within the institution of journalism.

“I don’t know if it’s always like that, but I know it’s true for Mike, he sees 
what he is doing is for the good of the public. For the Globe, there is a sense 
of, ‘I am going to take this motherfucker down, cos he is a bad guy.’ To be a 
great investigative journalist you have to have a kind of tenacity that doesn’t 
respect stature or title. It doesn’t keep them from going after the truth; 
that’s what great journalism is.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fspotlight-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F28%2F1453983455154%2FKP_1520749_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Spotlight%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fspotlight-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Spotlight%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fspotlight-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F28%2F1453983455154%2FKP_1520749_crop_640x480.jpg>
Ruffalo is acutely aware that the exact time-frame that Spotlight describes – 
mid-2001 to early 2002, encompassing the 9/11 attacks – is a pivotal one for 
journalism, the intersection of the old print era and the new frontier of the 
digital age. In some ways, Spotlight is a paean to journalism’s archaic 
methods, as it lovingly dwells on microfiches, card indexes, picture folders 
and clippings files. “It’s a hell of a lot easier to do a word search than to 
go through a stack of clippings. It’s a totally different thing.”

The demands of the digital age, with its data dumps, clickbait and 24-hour 
news cycle, is also something that interests him, and not just because of 
Spotlight. “I do think there’s a scramble right now – where does long-term 
investigative journalism go in an age when papers are starting to phase out 
that aspect of their work, and when people’s attention spans are shorter?” For 
Ruffalo, “investigative journalism is the way news is meant to be, to get to 
the bottom of something, without editorialising. And I love that.”

Well, it’s not every day you can feel proud of your profession, even if 
talking to film actors isn’t quite in the same league as processing Wikileaks or
being shadowed by the Russian security services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/sep/23/luke-harding-russia>. But 
Ruffalo boosts his point by likening Spotlight to a cop movie – or, at least, 
his character to the one he played in the David Fincher movie Zodiac, about the 
1960s serial killer, which also dabbled in gloomy, morally ambiguous newspaper 
detective work.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fspotlight-michael-keaton-mark-ruffalo-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Spotlight%20stars%20and%20director%20Tom%20McCarthy%3A%20'The%20Catholic%20church%20can't%20live%20this%20down'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fspotlight-michael-keaton-mark-ruffalo-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Spotlight%20stars%20and%20director%20Tom%20McCarthy%3A%20%27The%20Catholic%20church%20can%27t%20live%20this%20down%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fspotlight-michael-keaton-mark-ruffalo-video-interview&media=>
Ruffalo is careful, though, to make sure he – as well as the film – isn’t seen 
to knock the Catholic church itself, even ifhe did publicly issue an open 
invitation for the Pope to watch the film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/03/mark-ruffalo-urges-pope-to-use-his-new-film-to-heal-sex-abuse-victims>
. Like many of the journalists in the film, Ruffalo grew up a Catholic, but 
lapsed as his political consciousness took hold. “The thing about this story 
is, the whole city was complicit. It wasn’t just the police and church: it was 
police, church, legislative branch, the Globe. Everybody at some point looked 
the other way.”

At 48, Ruffalo now finds himself in an enviable position: a well-earned 
reputation as an actor’s actor, with auteurs on his CV such as Fincher, 
Scorsese (Shutter Island), Michael Mann (Collateral) and Jane Campion (In the 
Cut); but also a reputation as a bit of a thinking woman’s crumpet. When I put 
this career-profile combination to him, he lets out a sheepish giggle and 
snorts. “That’s my sweet spot right there!”

Ever since he made his mark as Laura Linney’s unreliable brother in You Can 
Count on Me, directed byKenneth Lonergan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/kenneth-lonergan> in 2000, Ruffalo has come 
to represent a particular type of literate, socially concerned US independent 
cinema. He makes a lot of films, but chief among his more recent roles are the 
genial, supportive sperm donor in The Kids Are All Right, and a genial, 
supportive wrestling coach in Foxcatcher. “My list of criteria,” he explains, 
“starts with the part: is it something that scares me, or challenges me, or 
gets my motor going?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fmark-ruffalo-on-spotlight-the-whole-of-boston-was-complicit-everybody-looked-the-other-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7990e990fedd1486983e55c21fd77cf686824ac%2F0_0_4724_2835%2F4724.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mark%20Ruffalo%20on%20Spotlight%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20whole%20of%20Boston%20was%20complicit.%20Everybody%20looked%20the%20other%20way%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fmark-ruffalo-on-spotlight-the-whole-of-boston-was-complicit-everybody-looked-the-other-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mark%20Ruffalo%20on%20Spotlight%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20whole%20of%20Boston%20was%20complicit.%20Everybody%20looked%20the%20other%20way%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fmark-ruffalo-on-spotlight-the-whole-of-boston-was-complicit-everybody-looked-the-other-way%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7990e990fedd1486983e55c21fd77cf686824ac%2F0_0_4724_2835%2F4724.jpg>
 With Julianne Moore in The Kids Are All Right. Photograph: Alamy 
Then, in 2012, Ruffalo turned up as, of all things, the Incredible Hulk in the 
blockbuster comic-book hit The Avengers. Why? “The Hulk was one of my favourite 
TV shows when I was a kid, and that character was really interesting to me, and 
how we deal with anger.” He said he initially turned the role down, but changed 
his mind after spending “hours and hours” talking it over with the director, 
Joss Whedon. “I thought, unless we could do something that added something 
worthwhile to this story, I am not the right guy. But he convinced me.”

In any case, he says, “as an actor I like fucking with people’s preconceived 
notions. I don’t like being put into any kind of a box. But, in the end, it was 
down to the material.”

The presence of Ruffalo in The Avengers may have been part of the ongoing 
indiefication of the superhero movie, but it also meant he had to change his 
own way of working, after allowing himself to be locked into a series. “I made 
a commitment to myself that I would never do a job without reading the script 
first. But now I am in a franchise, it’s like I’ve got to do them. But the good 
thing about Marvel is that we can have a dialogue about it. They don’t just 
hand the script to you and say, ‘here it is’. I get to work with them on it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fmark-ruffalo-on-spotlight-the-whole-of-boston-was-complicit-everybody-looked-the-other-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb8bbc8f92417e857e0dd6447224ae5fc19bed8d%2F107_0_2204_3304%2F2204.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mark%20Ruffalo%20on%20Spotlight%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20whole%20of%20Boston%20was%20complicit.%20Everybody%20looked%20the%20other%20way%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fmark-ruffalo-on-spotlight-the-whole-of-boston-was-complicit-everybody-looked-the-other-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mark%20Ruffalo%20on%20Spotlight%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20whole%20of%20Boston%20was%20complicit.%20Everybody%20looked%20the%20other%20way%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fmark-ruffalo-on-spotlight-the-whole-of-boston-was-complicit-everybody-looked-the-other-way%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb8bbc8f92417e857e0dd6447224ae5fc19bed8d%2F107_0_2204_3304%2F2204.jpg>
 As the Hulk in The Avengers. Photograph: Everett/Rex/Shutterstock 
Ruffalo’s unflashy acting style also means he has practically perfected the 
art of the supporting player: lead roles, George Clooney style, just don’t seem 
to be his thing. Is he the ultimate team player, the consummate ensemble man? 
Ruffalo mumbles a bit: “I wish my career had more of a strategic point of view 
than it did. I find it more interesting, working like that. Not to take away 
from what George Clooney does, or being a lead, but I just go where my heart 
takes me. I mean, I love acting. Like I said before, the priority is the role. 
Is it something I haven’t done before, or that speaks to my heart in some way. 
That can take me into any kind of movie.”

“You know,” he continues, “when you are young, you just take whatever they 
give you. As you get older and more established, you are able to ask questions. 
I am lucky that I have a good sense of people, and sense whether I am going to 
be able to work together with someone. For me, trust is really about being 
heard.”

So with his third Oscar nomination in the bag – all for supporting actor, 
naturally – is he pleased with the way things have gone? Again the sheepish 
laugh: “I’m pleased, but also nervous. I’m just waiting for the hammer to drop 
on my head.”

• Spotlight is released in the UK on 29 January

They say the age of investigative journalism has passed. It hasn’t
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/17/investigative-journalism-spotlight-attacking-the-devil> 