
Mark Carney appointed King’s successor

November 2012: The chancellor, George Osborne, springs a surprise on the City 
by announcing that Canada’s central bank chiefwill succeed Mervyn King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/nov/26/mark-carney-bank-of-england-governor>
 as governor of the Bank of England.


Mark Carney <https://www.theguardian.com/business/mark-carney> is the first 
non-Briton to become Bank governor. He is largely unknown outside the 
cloistered circles of central bankers and financial regulators, but has gained 
a reputation as a tough operator able to confront the banks at the heart of the 
financial crisis.

December 2012: It emerges that Carney will receive a £250,000 annual housing 
allowance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/dec/19/new-bank-england-boss-mark-carney-pay>
, taking his total pay package to £874,000 a year when he takes the reins in 
summer 2013.

July 2013: Carney takes over from King. On his first day, he arrives at 
Threadneedle Street by tube 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jul/01/mark-carney-tube-bank-england-governor>
.


Carney launches ‘forward guidance’


August 2013: Carney unveils a strategy of “forward guidance” 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetarypolicy/Pages/forwardguidance.aspx>, 
under which policymakerswill not consider raising rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/aug/07/bank-of-engand-links-interest-rates-jobless-target>
 until unemployment declines to 7% (from 7.8%). The Bank’s forecast puts 
unemployment above 7% in 2016.


The scheme is greeted with scepticism in the City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/sep/24/uk-economy-mpc-david-miles-bank-england>
.


November 2013: Carney reins in the mortgage market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/nov/28/bank-england-fls-mortgages-house-prices>
 in an attempt to prevent five years of ultra-low interest rates and Osborne’s 
help-to-buy scheme from fuelling a housing bubble.


Carney announces plastic banknotes 

December 2013: Carney announces that Britain will switch to using plastic 
banknotes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/dec/17/sterling-notes-go-plastic-bank-of-england>
 from 2016, ending 320 years of paper money. The Bank says itwill introduce 
“polymer” notes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/dec/18/bank-england-plastic-pound-notes-winston-churchill-fiver>
, as it prefers to call them, starting with a £5 note featuring Winston 
Churchill in 2016 and a Jane Austen £10 note a year later. The move follows 
Carney’s native Canada, where plastic notes are being rolled out.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmark-carney-tests-new-5-plastic-note-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mark%20Carney%20tests%20new%20%C2%A35%20plastic%20note%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmark-carney-tests-new-5-plastic-note-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mark%20Carney%20tests%20new%20%C2%A35%20plastic%20note%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fmark-carney-tests-new-5-plastic-note-video&media=>
Mark Carney tests new £5 plastic note 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/video/2016/sep/14/mark-carney-tests-new-5-plastic-note-video>
Carney insists forward guidance ‘is working’

February 2014: Six months after forward guidance was launched, the 
unemployment rate has dropped below 7% – two years earlier than the Bank had 
been expecting. However, Carney signals that the Bank willkeep interest rates 
at a record low 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/feb/12/bank-england-interest-rates-hold-inflation-report>
 of 0.5% for at least another year and says policymakers “will not take risks 
with this recovery”. He also insists that “forward guidance is working”.

May 2014: Carney warns that the housing market poses the biggest risk to 
Britain’s economic recovery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/18/mark-carney-house-prices-risk-economy-bank-of-england>
 as a shortage of new homes drives up prices.

‘Unreliable boyfriend’ warns of rate rise ahead

June 2014: The Bank is given powers to control the size of mortgages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/12/george-osborne-mansion-house-bank-england-powers-curb-mortgages-bubble-economy-interest-rates>
. Carney says interest rates are likely to rise before the end of 2014.

Later this month, members of the Treasury select committee accuse the Bank of 
behaving like an “unreliable boyfriend”, giving mixed messages on when the 
first rise in interest rates is likely.

September 2014: Carney <https://www.theguardian.com/business/mark-carney> 
warns workers that they face higher interest rates in spring 2015, before real 
wages rise.

May 2015: The Conservative-Liberal Democrat coalition government is replaced 
by a Conservative government. The former was the first administration in more 
than half a century toenjoy unchanged borrowing costs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/05/uk-interest-rates-set-to-mark-new-milestone>
 for its entire term. In the first announcement from the Bank under the new 
government,interest rates are held at 0.5% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/11/bank-of-england-holds-interest-rates-at-record-low>
.

New interest rate rise hints


July 2015: The Bank governor says an interest rate rise in the UK is “moving 
closer” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/14/interest-rate-hike-moving-closer-bank-of-england-governor-mark-carney>
. Later this month, Carney suggests the first interest rate rise since the 
global financial crash could comearound the turn of the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/16/uk-interest-rate-rise-new-year>
.

November 2015: The Bank is ready to step up housing market controls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/05/interest-rate-bank-of-england-leave-record-low-decision>
 if a prolonged period of record-low interest rates risks inflating a property 
bubble, Carney says. As he signals that interest rates are likely to remain on 
hold well into 2016, Carney suggests that the Bank may have to revert to other 
measures, such as tighter lending rules, to keep a lid on house prices.

February 2016: Carney says policymakers in the UK could cut interest rates to 
zero 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/23/bank-of-england-could-cut-interest-rates-to-zero-but-not-below-says-mark-carney>
 if necessary, but would seek to avoid following Sweden, Denmark and the 
eurozone by setting negative rates to bolster growth and inflation.


Responding to questions from MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2016/feb/21/central-bankers-on-the-defensive-as-weird-policy-becomes-even-weirder>
 on the Treasury select committee, Carney says the world economy has entered a 
period of low growth and low interest rates and is likely to be prone to 
financial shocks.


Seven years of record-low rates

March 2016: The UK marks seven years of record-low interest rates. Research 
marking the anniversary claims that rock-bottom borrowing costs and 
quantitative easing (QE) havecost savers an estimated £160bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/02/low-interest-rates-savers-monetary-policy>
, but supported strong increases in the prices of property, stocks and bonds.

In its analysis, financial services company Hargreaves Lansdown suggests that 
loose monetary policy has “annihilated” returns on cash.

March 2016: Carney tells MPs that the referendum on EU membership is the main 
homegrown threat to stability. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/08/mark-carney-bank-of-england-brussels-eu-deal-supports-financial-stability>
 Later this month, the Bank’s financial policy committee warns that a leave 
vote risks causing a run on sterling, a credit crunch and higher interest rates 
for mortgage payers and businesses.

April 2016: The Bank repeats a warning that a Brexit vote could harm economic 
growth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/14/bank-of-england-warns-brexit-could-do-serious-harm-to-uk-economy>
 and have a serious impact on the pound and other UK assets. This chimes with 
earlier comments from the International Monetary Fund that a British vote to 
leave the EUrisked damaging the whole region 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/12/imf-says-britain-leaving-the-eu-is-a-significant-risk>
, spilling over into an already fragile global economy. Carney says the impact 
of currentuncertainty is already being felt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/19/brexit-is-a-risk-to-uk-growth-says-carney>
 in the fall in the number of commercial property transactions, while jittery 
markets had sent the pound down by 10% since the beginning of the year.

‘Dangerous intervention’ on Brexit

May 2016: The Bank warns for the first time that Britain could enter recession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/12/bank-of-england-keeps-interest-rates-on-hold-as-brexit-fears-bite>
 in the aftermath of a vote to leave the EU. At a news conference to present 
the Bank’s economic forecasts, Carney says there are a range of possible 
scenarios for the economy in the event of Brexit and these “could possibly 
include a technical recession” – defined as two consecutive quarters of 
shrinking GDP.

Carney’s comments draw anger from pro-leave campaigners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/15/brexit-minister-bank-of-england-dangerous-intervention-andrea-leadsom-financial-markets-eu>
, with the Conservative energy minister Andrea Leadsom calling them an 
“incredibly dangerous intervention”. Carney hits back by saying the Bank has a
responsibility to the British people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/24/bank-of-england-governor-rejects-accusations-of-bias-over-eu-referendum>
, “who don’t want risks kept from them”.

16 June 2016: A week before the referendum, the Bank issues a fresh warning 
that a vote to leave the EU risks harming economic growth, pushing the pound 
sharply lower and sending shockwaves through the global economy. Announcing a 
decision tokeep interest rates at 0.5% 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/news/2016/006.aspx>, the 
Bank says the vote is the biggest immediate risk to UK financial markets.

The warning comes after Nigel Lawson, Norman Lamont, Michael Howard and Iain 
Duncan Smith write a Telegraph article accusing the Treasury and the Bank of a 
“woeful failure” to offer a fair analysis of what might happen in the event of 
Brexit. But the prime minister, David Cameron,defends the Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/david-cameron-criticises-former-tory-leaders-bank-of-england-eu-brexit>
, saying the leave campaign’s criticism is “deeply concerning”.

Carney steps in to calm markets

24 June 2016: As Britain wakes up to news of a leave vote, Carney seeks to 
calm financial markets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/24/bank-of-england-mark-carney-says-brexit-contingency-plans-under-way>
 by insisting that Threadneedle Street will take any measures needed to secure 
economic and financial stability.

In a statement choreographed to follow Cameron’s announcement that he intends 
to step down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/david-cameron-resigns-after-uk-votes-to-leave-european-union>
 as prime minister, Carney says contingency plans drawn up by the Bank and the 
Treasurywill swing into action 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/news/2016/056.aspx>. The 
governor draws praise in financial markets for his calm manner and timely 
comments, but worries grow over Osborne’s silence.

30 June 2016: Carney lays the ground for interest rate cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/30/interest-rate-cut-likely-brexit-bank-of-england-mark-carney>
 following the Brexit vote, saying the UK economy is showing signs of strain. 
The governor uses a speech to reassure business leaders and investors that the 
Bank’s contingency plans are “working well” and it is considering further 
measures to safeguard financial stability.

5 July 2016: The Bank warns of “challenging” risks to financial stability and 
takes steps torelease up to £150bn of lending 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/05/bank-of-england-releases-150bn-pounds-risks-financial-stability>
 to households and businesses by relaxing regulatory requirements on the 
banking sector.

12 July 2016: At a Treasury select committee hearing, Carney faces questions 
about whetherhe had “peddled phoney forecasts” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/12/mark-carney-hand-notes-private-talks-chancellor-mps-brexit>
 about the risks of a Brexit vote. Carney agrees to hand MPs notes of private 
meetings he had with the chancellor in the run-up to the EU referendum.

14 July 2016: At a scheduled policy meeting, the Bank holds interest rates at 
0.5% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/14/bank-of-england-leaves-uk-interest-rates-on-hold-at-05>
, confounding City analysts, who had expected a collapse in business and 
consumer confidence to convince policymakers to support the economy and cut the 
cost of credit.

However, the Bank puts households on notice that a rate cut is certain if the 
economic situation fails to improve over the next month.


Rate cut to shore up economy

4 August 2016: The Bank cuts interest rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>
 for the first time in more than seven years and expands its electronic money 
printing programme in a bigger than expected package of measures designed to 
prevent a post-Brexit vote recession. The move brings relief to borrowers, but 
angers savers, who have been getting low returns for years due to rock-bottom 
interest rates.

9 August 2016: The Bank’s post-Brexit economic recovery plan gets off to a 
stumbling start 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/09/banks-post-brexit-strategy-hits-snag-as-gilt-buyback-falls-short>
 when it is unable to buy as many government bonds as it needs from major City 
investors. Threadneedle Street must get reluctant investors to part with 
government bonds, also known as gilts, in order to provide additional stimulus 
to the economy under its £60bn QE programme.

Carney defends pre-EU referendum warnings

7 September 2016: Carney rejects claims that the Bank overcooked warnings of a 
hit to the economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/07/mark-carney-serene-about-bank-of-englands-brexit-stance>
 after the Brexit vote, despite growing signs that the downturn will be 
shallow. Under fire from leave campaigners, the governor says he is “absolutely 
serene” about the Bank’s warning of a possible downturn in economic growth and 
its preparations for the impact from the Brexit vote. But the Tory MP Jacob 
Rees-Mogg accuses Carney and the monetary policy committee of going too far in 
their warnings.

15 September 2016: The Bank leaves the door open to another interest rate cut 
this year, but decides that the safest option is to wait and see if the economy 
can continue to weather the initial shock of the Brexit vote.

16 September 2016: Carney reveals that his childhood nickname was “Carnage” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/16/mark-carnage-carney-fields-questions-from-coventry-school-children>
. He tells an audience of schoolchildren in Coventry that he likes Dairy Milk 
chocolate, dogs and the Specials – but not Craig David.

Carney responds to May’s QE criticism

6 October 2016: Theresa May prompts questions about a rift between Carney and 
Downing Street after shecriticises the impact of quantitative easing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/05/theresa-may-consigns-cameron-to-history-in-populist-speech>
 in her Conservative party conference speech, saying “people with assets had 
got richer, people without them had suffered”.

Carney backs the prime minister’s call to rethink Britain’s economic policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/06/theresa-may-has-ditched-osborneomics-but-what-will-she-replace-it-with>
 and rejects the idea that criticism of the side-effects of unconventional 
measuresamounted to an attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/06/mark-carney-backs-prime-ministers-call-for-economic-shakeup>
 on the independence of the Bank.

Carney says: “I entirely agree with the spirit of what the prime minister 
said. I have long said that monetary policy has been overburdened. There needs 
to be a better balance of monetary policy, fiscal policy and structural policy.”

14 October 2016: Carney says the Bank will not take instructions on policies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/14/prices-to-continue-rising-warns-bank-of-england-governor>
 from politicians, a week after Theresa May took a swipe at the impact of the 
its actions on “ordinary” people. Speaking at Birmingham town hall as part of 
the Bank’s Future Forum, Carney says it becomes difficult for Threadneedle 
Street when politicians comment on its policies rather than its objectives.

21 October 2016: Michael Gove becomes the latest senior Conservative to 
criticise the governor, accusing Carney of being intolerant of criticism and 
lacking in humility.

Gove compares Carney to the Chinese emperor Ming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/21/mark-carney-michael-gove-criticism-thought-crime-bank-england>
, whose “person was held to be inviolable and without imperfections” and whose 
critics were flayed alive.Writing in the Times 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/6f669c40-96fb-11e6-914a-7a36010296b9> 
(paywall), Gove says: “[Carney’s] position is held to be independent and 
without any error. And so any criticism of his actions is regarded as a thought 
crime.”

Will he stay or will he go?

25 October 2016: Carney indicates that an onslaught of criticism of his 
performance by the Conservative establishment will not influencewhether he 
stays in his post 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/21/should-he-stay-or-should-he-go-mark-carney-faces-big-decisition-as-he-weathers-attacks>
 beyond 2018. Asked by a House of Lords committee whether high-level 
interference will force him to leave, the Bank’s governor says he will not be 
swayed by political issues as he weighs up the option of departing in two years 
or extending his contract by a further three years to 2021.

He stays ... for an extra year

31 October 2016: Financial markets grow impatient for an indication 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/30/mark-carney-may-announce-decision-to-quit-thursday-bank-of-england>
 from Carney as to when he will leave his post, following a barrage of 
criticism from Eurosceptic MPs about his approach to Brexit. An announcement is 
expected by Thursday, when the Bank next presents its economic forecasts. But 
sources say Carney is equally likely to delay the announcement until later in 
November and will take the decisionbased on his personal circumstances 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/25/mark-carney-political-issues-stay-job-bank-england-lords-tory>
.



Theresa May gives her full backing to Carney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/31/theresa-may-support-mark-carney-full-term-bank-of-england-governor>
 and praises his efforts to steer the UK economy through the post-Brexit vote 
period during a Downing Street meeting.

Finally, in a 6pm announcement, Carney ends weeks of speculation about his 
futureby agreeing to stay on as governor of the Bank until Brexit negotiations 
with the EU have ended in June 2019 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/31/mark-carney-extra-year-bank-of-england-governor>
 - adding an extra year to his original five year term.
 