
Mark Carney <https://www.theguardian.com/business/mark-carney> has ended weeks 
of speculation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/30/mark-carney-may-announce-decision-to-quit-thursday-bank-of-england>
 about his future by agreeing to stay on as governor of the Bank of England 
untilBrexit  <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>negotiations 
with the EU have ended in 2019.

Despite being urged by the prime minister, Theresa May, and the chancellor, 
Philip Hammond, to serve a full eight-year term at Threadneedle Street, until 
2021, Carney said he would only agree to remain in place for an extra year. He
started in the job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jul/01/mark-carney-tube-bank-england-governor>
 in July 2013.

The governor said in a letter to Hammond that he had intended to leave the 
Bank for personal reasons after five years, but the altered landscape for the 
UK following the vote in June to leave the EU had caused him to change his mind.

“Since then, my personal circumstances have not changed, but other 
circumstances clearly have, most notably the UK’s decision to leave the 
European Union,” he wrote.

“Recognising the importance to the country of continuity during the UK’s 
article 50 negotiations, and notwithstanding those personal circumstances, I 
would be honoured to extend my time of service as governor for an additional 
year to the end of June 2019.


“By taking my term in office beyond the expected period of the article 50 
process, this should help contribute to securing an orderly transition to the 
UK’s new relationship with Europe.”

His announcement followed a meeting with May in which the prime minister gave 
the governorher full backing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/31/theresa-may-support-mark-carney-full-term-bank-of-england-governor>
 for his handling of interest rates and called on him to stay to helpsteer the 
UK economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/ng-interactive/2016/oct/24/how-has-the-brexit-vote-affected-the-uk-economy-october-verdict>
 through the post-Brexit vote period.

Mark Carney's time as Bank of England governor – key moments
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/31/mark-carney-bank-of-england-governor-key-moments-timeline>
The public show of support for Carney from the government’s two leading 
figures reflected concerns that news of his early departure would put further 
downward pressure on analready weak pound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/17/uk-government-bond-sell-off-continues-keeping-pressure-on-pound>
. Sterling fell by 6% in October, during which it was the weakest of 150 global 
currencies tracked by Bloomberg.

While May and Hammond will be disappointed that Carney has declined to stay on 
until 2021, they will be relieved that he is remaining at the Bank while the 
two-year article 50 talks are taking place. May haspledged to trigger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/01/theresa-may-to-propose-great-repeal-bill-to-unwind-eu-laws>
 article 50, beginning the process of the UK leaving the EU, by the end of 
March 2017. The pound rose by half a cent on foreign exchanges on Monday 
following the prime minister’s show of support.

May’s spokeswoman said Carney’s decision to stay on was good news for the UK 
and would provide continuity and stability while Britain negotiated its EU exit.

However, Andrew Tyrie, the chair of the Treasury select committee, said it 
needed “a good deal of examination and explanation” and that he would be 
questioning the governor at a meeting of the committee in a fortnight’s time.


Before the referendum, Carney said he would make a decision on whether to stay 
on at the Bank before the end of 2016, but hehas been forced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/30/mark-carney-may-announce-decision-to-quit-thursday-bank-of-england>
 to make his intentions clear by a flurry of speculation about his future.

This began when May used her speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/06/theresa-may-has-ditched-osborneomics-but-what-will-she-replace-it-with>
 at the Conservative party conference to question the “bad side-effects” of 
ultra-low interest rates and the Bank’s money creation programme.

Downing Street apologised to the Bank, insisting that May had not intended to 
attack the governor, but her commentsprompted open criticism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/21/mark-carney-michael-gove-criticism-thought-crime-bank-england>
 of Threadneedle Street and Carney from senior Conservative politicians 
including the former chancellor Lord Nigel Lawson, the former foreign secretary 
William Hague and the leading Brexit campaigner Michael Gove.

His critics were unhappy at what they saw as the overpoliticisation of his 
role in the run-up to the EU referendum. They have also attacked the Bank’s 
forecasting record and the ramifications of its seven-year stimulus programme.

With rumours about Carney’s future helping put pressure on sterling, Hammond 
publicly backed the governor and said he would be delighted if he stayed on 
until 2021.

Mark Carney is what stands between Britain and economic chaos | David 
Blanchflower
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/31/mark-carney-britain-chaos-theresa-may-government-brexit>
May’s spokeswoman had made it apparent ahead of the announcement that the 
prime minister was also concerned Carney might stick to his original plan to 
leave after five years.

“The PM has been clear in her support for the governor; the work he is doing 
for the country. It is clearly a decision for him, but the PM would certainly 
be supportive of him going on beyond his five years,” the spokeswoman said.

Asked whether May considered Carney to be the best person for the job, the 
spokeswoman said: “Absolutely.”

Responding to the news, Hammond wrote in his letter to Carney: “I am very 
pleased to hear that you intend to continue as governor of theBank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> until the end of 
June 2019.

“This will enable you to continue your highly effective leadership of the Bank 
through a critical period for the British economy, as we negotiate our exit 
from the European Union.”


But Sir Martin Sorrell, the chief executive of advertising company WPP, 
expressed disappointed that Carney would not be staying on until 2021. “One 
year is better than nothing ... But it’s disappointing that he won’t serve his 
full term,” he told Sky News.

“Maybe he was a little bit bruised by the criticism, I think unjustified 
criticism, that he’s been subjected to.”

 