
The governor of the Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> has hit back at 
accusations by politicians in the US and UK that central banks have increased 
inequality, saying such allegations are a “massive blame-deflection exercise”.

Mark Carney <https://www.theguardian.com/business/mark-carney> told the 
Treasury select committee that any increases in the gap between rich and poor 
were the result of structural changes in western economies that could only be 
tackled by politicians and could not be blamed on low interest rates.

The Tory MP Steve Baker asked Carney how he reacted to accusations from 
Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/21/criticising-mark-carney-tory-hobby-bank-england-governor>
 that low interest rates were hindering the recovery and increasing inequality 
by crippling individual savers and encouraging property speculation, helping 
the rich get richer.

Donald Trump has also taken aim at the US Federal Reserve, arguing that 
interest rates must return to levels seen before the 2008 crash, which rewarded 
saving.


Carney, who confirmed he will remain governor until 2019 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/oct/31/mark-carney-bank-of-england-speculation-eurozone-gdp-business-live>
, said the economy needed low interest rates while productivity remained weak 
and business investment low. House prices were pushed higher by the lack of 
supply, he said.

Carney back to face the Conservatives
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/13/carney-back-to-face-conservatives-bank-of-england-governor>
“An excessive focus on monetary policy in many respects is a massive 
blame-deflection exercise. We can’t make the structural decisions that change 
the path of productivity. Monetary policy doesn’t drive fundamentals,” he said.

Answering accusations that central bank policies were depressing household 
incomes and fuelling populism, he said: “There is a school of thought that 
central banks should tighten policy to force governments to take tough 
decisions. That would be political.”

Carney also warned that a hard Brexit remained a real threat to the City and 
could push banks to shift operations to foreign financial centres.

He said banks could start to relocate activities before the end of 2017 if the 
government begins thearticle 50 divorce process 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/11/brexit-could-be-reversed-government-lawyers-may-argue>
 in March as promised.

Banks and insurers were already making contingency plans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/22/leading-banks-set-to-pull-out-of-brexit-uk>
 in case Britain loses a lot of its access to the EU’s single market, he said, 
and if a hard Brexit is likely, “a number of those firms would take decisions 
[to leave], that’s the best guidance I can give”.

In a signal that relocation plans are being drawn up, Germany’s finance 
ministry said it has been fielding an increasing number of requests for 
information since the summer from financial institutions in Britain considering 
a move to the EU’s largest economy.

Several Bank of England officials appeared with Carney before a sometimes 
hostile group of MPs to defend their record since the Brexit vote.

UK banks get two more years to meet capital rules
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/uk-banks-get-two-more-years-to-meet-capital-rules>
The Bank recently revised up its GDP growth forecasts to 2.2% for 2016 and 
1.4% in 2017 after the economy recovered strongly from the Brexit vote.

But it slashed its projections for 2018 to 1.5% from 1.8%, giving a gloomy 
outlook for households, which it said would suffer higher unemployment and 
soaring inflation that would knock their spending power.

Tory MP Jacob Rees-Mogg asked Carney why, when the Bank’s forecasts “were so 
wrong”, he had failed to support monetary policy committee member Ian 
McCafferty, who said the UK was more robust than Threadneedle Street’s 
forecasts predicted and refused to back some measures to ease credit further.

“I listened to Mr McCafferty carefully,” said Carney. “The forecast is the 
judgment of the whole committee. It was our best judgment and we had a much 
higher growth forecast that most. We did aim off the surveys, but [the Brexit 
vote] hasn’t affected the consumer and the housing market as much as we 
expected.”

The governor also replied to MPs’ concerns that the MPC might be out of touch 
with regional businesses.

Carney said MPC members and the Bank’s regional agents were in close contact 
with leaders of small, medium and large businesses, adding that he personally 
toured the country once a year. He pointed to a recent Bank survey that found 
that about 45% of businesses had shelved or delayed investments following the 
referendum.

However, a little more than half of the UK businesses polled said Brexit was a 
“non-issue”.

“So they’re not adjusting based on the twists and turns of the Brexit process, 
either they’re entirely domestically focused or they’re focused on third 
country export markets. And in fact if they’re the latter type of business, the 
adjustment in the exchange rate is obviously a positive development and they’re 
moving forward,” he said, referring to the near 20%drop in sterling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/07/theories-emerge-for-pounds-flash-crash-against-dollar>
 against the US dollar since the referendum.
 