
Pregnancy is not a time of high glamour. Quite the opposite, really, when you 
consider the swelling limbs, pock marks, breathlessness, exhaustion andsleeping 
only on your left side 
<http://www.nhs.uk/news/2011/06June/Pages/mothers-sleeping-position-and-risk-of-stillbirth.aspx>
, which leaves half of your body as tender as a bruise. Still, if you’ve seen
Beyoncé in burnt orange at the MTV Awards 
<http://www.realstylenetwork.com/celebrities/wp-content/uploads/sites/4/2011/08/Pregnant-Beyonce-holding-her-belly-on-red-carpet-of-MTV-VMA-awards.jpg>
 orAngelina Jolie swathed in forest green chiffon at Cannes 
<https://its04.files.wordpress.com/2008/06/angelina-jolie-pregnancy-made-fashionable-31.jpg>
, it’s difficult to quash the notion that those 40 weeks of expanding stomach 
should represent something of a fashion opportunity.

In fact, most celebrities are a terrible source of maternity-style 
inspiration. One or two red carpet appearances, stitched into a couture dress, 
does not equate to 40 weeks of waddling to work, hoping that your elasticated 
pregnancy jeans don’t fall down. According to the conspiracy theories of one 
Los Angeles doctor,a staggering amount of celebrities aren’t really up the 
duff, anyway 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-3303994/Celebrity-fertility-doctor-reveals-listers-secretly-paid-surrogates-FAKED-pregnancies.html>
; the use of prosthetic bumps is rife in Hollywood, he claims. Obviously, when 
such rumours reared their heads about Kardashian she addressed them the 2015 
way –with a naked selfie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2015/aug/12/kim-kardashian-pregnancy-selfie-titian-art>
.

Unlike most celebrities, Kardashian is photographed almost daily – clearly, 
spending weeks watching Scream Queens while mainlining cornflakes is not an 
option with 53.2 million Instagram followers to entertain. And while recreating 
her exact wardrobe of Balmain and Givenchy would require Kardashian-levels of 
time, money and contacts, there are lessons in gumption for everyone.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fmaternity-monotoning-kim-kardashians-fashion-tips-for-the-third-trimester%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c6fe93c329c706ae10078bd00fbe3df67632c15%2F0_0_3314_4971%2F3314.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Maternity%20monotoning%3A%20Kim%20Kardashian's%20fashion%20tips%20for%20the%20third-trimester&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fmaternity-monotoning-kim-kardashians-fashion-tips-for-the-third-trimester%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Maternity%20monotoning%3A%20Kim%20Kardashian%27s%20fashion%20tips%20for%20the%20third-trimester&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fmaternity-monotoning-kim-kardashians-fashion-tips-for-the-third-trimester%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c6fe93c329c706ae10078bd00fbe3df67632c15%2F0_0_3314_4971%2F3314.jpg>
 Kim Kardashian in California, October. Photograph: Jeff Vespa/Getty Images 
1. Channel Girls Aloud circa 2004

Kardashian has made it her business to swathe her bump in the kind of stretchy 
fabric last seen in the Girls Aloud Love Machine video – and she looks all the 
better for it. She wore bodycon in the early months, when baby bumps tend to 
look more post-Pret bloat than earth mother, and she’s sticking to it in the 
third trimester, too, a time when most in the public eye wearapologetic, 
tent-like smocks 
<http://static.celebuzz.com/uploads/2012/12/03/Princess-Diana-pregnant2-271x560.jpg>
 if they leave the house at all. Bodycon can be more forgiving than it sounds 
when styled, the Kardashian way, under a loose outer layer. In the real world, 
try going a couple of sizes up in abasic H&M tube dress 
<http://www.hm.com/gb/product/82552?article=82552-A> and plonk on a denim shirt 
or duster coat.
 Kim Kardashian in 2015, dressed up as Kim Kardashian in 2013. Photograph: 
@kimkardashian/instagram 
2. Be yourself – literally

Obviously, no selfie-respecting social media star would pass up the 
opportunity to pose nude with a bun in the oven – although when Kardashian did 
it she bolsteredher own social media following 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/6P0-KluS5-/> with the image, rather than doing it 
to flogcopies of Vanity Fair 
<http://photos.vanityfair.com/2015/01/30/54cbf8431ca1cf0a23ac87c3_image.jpg>, 
which would be totally 1991. Never one to hide her light under a bushel, 
Kardashian’s clothes have been revealing, too, featuring see-through fabrics, 
bra tops and racy cut-outs. Though a few charming wags on social media have 
taken to “fat” shaming her for such a brazen display, she doesn’t seem to give 
a stuff. In October, she laughed louder in the face of pregnancy style 
criticism, wearing a dizzyingly meta Halloween costume: she dressed up as 
herself at the Met Ball in 2013, the last time she was pregnant, whenthe 
internet decided she looked like a sofa 
<http://cdn.gossiponthis.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/05/kim-blends-couch.jpg>. 
Dressing up as yourself is remarkably easy to achieve when you are not famous, 
too, though few are likely to get the joke; the true lesson here is to ignore 
the pressure to suddenly “dress like a pregnant person”. For you, that could 
mean channellingKanye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/dec/29/from-kanye-west-to-the-x-factor-the-rise-of-the-longline-sweater>
, not Kim, in Doc Martens, maternity jeansand an oversized, longline jumper 
<http://www.topshop.com/webapp/wcs/stores/servlet/ProductDisplay?catalogId=33057&storeId=12556&productId=22251608&langId=-1>
 – whatever you wear, it doesn’t need to be demure.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fmaternity-monotoning-kim-kardashians-fashion-tips-for-the-third-trimester%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc88e6b7a237d81bda49734a12b4fa8ec7fd495e%2F0_0_3172_4535%2F3172.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Maternity%20monotoning%3A%20Kim%20Kardashian's%20fashion%20tips%20for%20the%20third-trimester&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fmaternity-monotoning-kim-kardashians-fashion-tips-for-the-third-trimester%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Maternity%20monotoning%3A%20Kim%20Kardashian%27s%20fashion%20tips%20for%20the%20third-trimester&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fmaternity-monotoning-kim-kardashians-fashion-tips-for-the-third-trimester%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc88e6b7a237d81bda49734a12b4fa8ec7fd495e%2F0_0_3172_4535%2F3172.jpg>
 Kim Kardashian West attends Kanye West Yeezy Season 2 during New York Fashion 
Week in September. Photograph: Kevin Mazur/Getty Images 
3. Try monotoning

All of Kardashian’s seemingly outlandish outfits have one thing in common: 
slavish devotion to a single hue. Kardashian might wear chiffon dresses with 
cleavage for weeks, but the look will be head to toe black. Or she’ll wear 
beige-on-beige, in a skin-tight midi dress with a duster coat, or grey-on-grey 
in the same silhouette. (Added duster coat bonus:the type that are designed to 
be worn open 
<http://www.asos.com/Never-Fully-Dressed/Never-Fully-Dressed-Waterfall-Crepe-Maxi-Duster-Coat/Prod/pgeproduct.aspx?iid=5628223&istCompanyId=6f061ed0-7427-4b6c-bb90-987c0bd08468&istItemId=lamxtxpqx&istBid=tztx&affid=14173&channelref=google+shopping&utm_source=google&utm_medium=ppc&utm_term=80367512611&utm_content=&utm_campaign=&cvosrc=ppc.google.80367512611&network=g&mobile=&search=1&content=&creative=53983301781&ptid=80367512611&adposition=1o3&r=2&mk=ab&gclid=CNW6-cyhv8kCFYu4GwodxjENxg>
 will still fit when you are no longer pregnant.) All in all, monotoning is 
polished, flattering and offers further proof thatKanye is a really good 
stylist. 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-3253803/Kim-Kardashian-praises-Kanye-West-changing-look-helping-pregnancy-curves.html>
 Add an oversized choker and an eye-roll at the haters, and you’re done.
 