
The Italian prime minister, Matteo Renzi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/matteo-renzi>, has doubled down on a promise 
to resign if he loses an upcoming referendum, saying the “decrepit system” that 
would be left in the wake of his defeat would have to be taken care of by 
someone else.

The vow to leave his seat in Palazzo Chigi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/06/could-italys-renzi-be-next-victim-of-an-unwanted-referendum>
 comes as polls show the centre-left leader is likely to be heading for defeat 
on 4 December, and that various strategies to win over Italian voters in the 
last few weeks have done little to convince them to support Renzi’s proposed 
constitutional reforms.

“If the citizens vote no and want a decrepit system that does not work, I will 
not be the one to deal with other parties for a caretaker government, ” Renzi 
said on Thursday in a radio interview on RTL.


At the beginning of the campaign, Renzi said he would stand down if he lost 
the vote, but had seemed to back away from the do-or-die strategy in the last 
few weeks in an effort to depersonalise the campaign and insist the vote was 
not about him. On Thursday, he returned to square one.

In effect, Renzi’s statement means a victory for the no camp would force 
Italy’s president, Sergio Mattarella, to choose the head of an interim 
government, which would be in place until new elections were held. Renzi would 
remain head of the centre-left Democratic party.

The finance minister, Pier Carlo Padoan, and the culture minister, Dario 
Franceschini, have been mooted as possible interim prime ministers.

“At the end of the day, Renzi will remain the leader of the biggest party in 
parliament, so most likely we end up with a Mr Nobody as prime minister,” said 
political analyst Wolfango Piccoli of Teneo Intelligence.

While Renzi was attempting to scare voters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/political-science/2016/oct/06/why-referendums-are-problematic-yet-more-popular-than-ever>
 by suggesting that a no win could leave the government in a state of chaos, 
Piccoli said, the strategy would not do much to sway the electorate, because 
the prospect of political instability did not necessarily frighten Italians.

“It’s a pretty futile exercise,” Piccoli said. The next steps will most likely 
be determined in part by the margin of defeat or victory, he added.

Fears mount that Renzi may be next referendum casualty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/06/could-italys-renzi-be-next-victim-of-an-unwanted-referendum>
The 4 December vote is centred on complicated legal changes to Italy’s 
constitution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/20/italian-pm-renzi-electoral-reform-m5s>
 that would, in effect, make it easier for any ruling party to pass laws and 
weaken the power of the senate, the upper chamber of parliament.

Opponents of the reforms span the political spectrum, aligning political 
opponents on the far right and many on the left, including within Renzi’s own 
party, who have said the change will dangerously weaken Italy’s system of 
checks and balances.

Proponents of the changes say Italy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> 
has to take steps to ease the passage of laws after decades in which the 
parliament has proven itself to be incapable of passing large and necessary 
economic and political reforms.

More than two dozen polls published since the end of October have shown the no 
camp with a sizeable lead of about five points over the yes campaign. But the 
polls have shown that about a quarter of voters are still undecided, a fact 
most likely linked to the complicated nature of the referendum and voters’ 
apathy over Renzi’s personal political fate.

Even as Renzi has struggled to make inroads with voters, lawmakers in his 
government have pointed the finger of blame at social media outlets allegedly 
controlled by theFive Star movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/06/italy-m5s-became-a-real-contender-five-star-politics>
 (M5S) the anti-establishment and populist party leading the no campaign, which 
they say are propagating fake news stories and deriding politicians ahead of 
the vote.

Alessia Morani, an MP in Renzi’s Democratic party, likened them to 
“mud-slinging machines”.

A top adviser who has been described as Renzi’s “right hand”, Luca Lotti, has 
filed a complaint – apparently for defamation, although the legal case was not 
clearly stated – against a Twitter user with an apparently fake handle who 
accused Lotti of being connected to organised crime. Lotti vehemently denies 
the allegation.

A prosecutor in Florence, where Renzi once served as mayor, has reportedly 
taken up the case to determine whether the Twitter user – posting under the 
name Beatrice de Maio – is a paid affiliate of another political party.

“Lotti has taken on this initiative because it is intolerable that the deputy 
secretary of the presidency of the council of ministers is referred to as being 
in the mafia. The next step is now up to the prosecutor, who will determine who 
the person or persons are that are concealed under the name Beatrice di Maio,” 
said Federico Bagattini, an attorney for Lotti.

Bagattini declined to release the complaint to the Guardian.

The case, which was first reported by La Stampa, has caused consternation in 
the press. A column inIl Fatto Quotidiano 
<http://www.ilfattoquotidiano.it/2016/11/16/luca-lotti-e-la-cyber-propaganda-guai-a-criticare-il-governo-si-finisce-in-tribunale/3197468/>
 questioned whether such a case could threaten freedom of speech for critics of 
the government, who were at risk of abusing their powers, even if their critics 
were internet trolls connected to an opposition party.

A Five Star official slammed the report in La Stampa, saying the allegation of 
wrongdoing against M5S had been reported by the “corrupt” press as if it had 
discovered actual wrongdoing.
 