
One excellent way to bring a dinner party to a close, if it’s late and you’d 
like your guests to leave, is to raise the philosophical question of“free will” 
<http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/freewill/>. Do we have any? It certainly 
seems that way. Suppose I’m at the supermarket, about to reach for a jar of 
blackcurrant jam: surely it’s within my power to change my mind and switch to 
apricot? Yet some philosophers say it isn’t. After all, every molecule in the 
universe – including those in my limbs and brain – is subject to the laws of 
physics: A causes B, B causes C, in predictable ways (with some randomness 
thrown in, courtesy of quantum mechanics). Seen this way, my jam-choosing sits 
at the very end of a vast chain of causes and effects, reaching back through 
millennia. From the moment of the Big Bang, you could have predicted I’d go for 
blackcurrant.

This is an outrageous thought, so the usual response is to reject it – or, in 
the dinner party scenario, suddenly to remember you’ve an early start tomorrow. 
But while philosophers debate ifeverything is predetermined, psychologists have 
basically established something only slightly less disturbing: a large 
proportion of your decisions aren’t independently made by you. In his new book,
Invisible Influence <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/invisible-influence.html>
, Jonah Berger puts the figure at 99.9%: that’s how many of your choices are 
significantly influenced by forces of which you’re unaware. We choose music and 
novels, clothes and careers, because others did. Or we choose the opposite, to 
show we’re not like them – a phenomenon marketers call “snob effects”. You 
probably named your child in order to sound similar, but not identical, to 
names that were in the air at the time: after Hurricane Katrina, fewer American 
kids got named Katrina, but girls’ names starting with a hard K shot up, Berger 
writes. We choose our politics partly to mimic or rebel against our parents; 
and we’ll support or reject the exact same policy,research suggests 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14599246>, depending on whether it’s 
described as right- or leftwing.

Taken individually, these effects aren’t surprising. What is striking is the 
volume. Pop psychology tends to present these“hidden persuaders” 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2007/12/30/books/review/Greif-t.html> as anomalies, as 
if we usually make up our own minds, and only occasionally get blown off 
course. But, reading Berger, you get the feeling it’s the other way round: 
we’re mainly robots, acting out the influences of our environments, lucky if we 
manage a tiny sliver of independent thought. Even the decision to kill yourself 
is heavily influenced by the immediate availability of the means to do so. When 
you remove people’s access to those means, they often don’t just “find another 
way”; rather,a suicide is prevented 
<https://www.hsph.harvard.edu/means-matter/means-matter/saves-lives/>.

Want an antidote to chaos in the world? Maybe Barack Obama has the answer | 
Oliver Burkeman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/29/oliver-burkeman-need-for-drama-barack-obama>
Is this lack of autonomy a cause for alarm or relief? When it comes to 
ordinary daily decisions, probably the latter. If my choices are my own, I’ll 
be constantly anxious about choosing well. But if every “choice” I make is 
inevitably shaped by countless unseen pressures, I can relax a bit. If I ever 
write my autobiography, I have the first line: “Due to circumstances beyond my 
control…”

oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com>
 