
When connoisseurs of dance are asked to compile a list of the world’s greatest 
movers,Fred Astaire <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fred_Astaire> is nearly 
always close to the top. As a dancer, he brought a ballroom finesse and a 
loose-knit debonair grace to the grounded rhythms of tap. As a choreographer, 
he was remarkable for the puckish playfulness of his imagination: playing the 
drums while he danced in the 1937 filmA Damsel in Distress 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yTH9VwACh7o>; dancing with his shadow in Swing 
Time <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xm1jiv3zYw0> (1936); and revelling in the 
possibilities of trick photography as he danced up the walls and across the 
ceiling inRoyal Wedding <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CsoYyDlYU8M> (1951).

Yet Astaire himself declared that his own tap heroes were Fayard and Harold 
Nicholas, two black dancers who became one of the most popular double acts of 
the mid 20th century. During the 1930s and 40s, the brothers toured the world 
and acquired an international public through Hollywood movies such as Down 
Argentine Way and Stormy Weather. Nor was it just Astaire who rated them 
professionally – over the years, dance luminaries such asGene Kelly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/g2/story/0,3604,480424,00.html>, George Balanchine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/georgebalanchine>, Mikhail Baryshnikov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/nov/23/mikhail-baryshnikov-people-applauded-the-ham-in-me-woke-up-interview-photography-exhibition>
 andMichael Jackson <https://www.theguardian.com/music/michaeljackson> added 
their own accolades. Tap devotees still prize the Fabulous Nicholas Brothers, 
but to the general public their names have become less well known. Picturehouse 
Cinemas’ retrospective of their work should lead to a deserved reappraisal of 
their importance.

Fayard (born in 1914) and Harold (born in 1921) grew up in Philadelphia, where 
their parents led the resident band of theStandard theatre 
<http://explorepahistory.com/hmarker.php?markerId=1-A-62>. It was the heyday of 
black vaudeville in the States – a period when great African American 
performers such as Bessie Smith toured the country. And much likeJosephine Baker
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2012/feb/01/josephine-baker-still-scintillating-sepia>
, who learned to dance by imitating the acts she’d seen at her local theatre in 
St Louis, the brothers acquired their skills at the Philadelphia Standard, as 
Fayard studied acts including Willie Bryant and Bill Robinson, then passed his 
skills on to his younger brother.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Ftap-dancing-fred-astaire-fabulous-nicholas-brothers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b34f8279c8498314e255813f38b50bb8f2fa48a%2F0_0_2822_2326%2F2822.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mean%20feet%3A%20the%20tap-dancing%20duo%20who%20were%20Fred%20Astaire's%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Ftap-dancing-fred-astaire-fabulous-nicholas-brothers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mean%20feet%3A%20the%20tap-dancing%20duo%20who%20were%20Fred%20Astaire%27s%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Ftap-dancing-fred-astaire-fabulous-nicholas-brothers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b34f8279c8498314e255813f38b50bb8f2fa48a%2F0_0_2822_2326%2F2822.jpg>
Natural mimics as well as naturally talented, the Nicholas boys also picked up 
tricks from the acrobats and comedians who appeared on the Standard stage. By 
the time they started performing themselves, around 1930, they had developed 
their own unique physical virtuosity, and by 1932 they’d moved up to New York, 
starring at theLafayette vaudeville theatre in Harlem 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lafayette_Theatre_(Harlem)> and at the Mecca of 
black dance and music,the Cotton Club 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cotton_Club>.

Given the brutal segregation that operated within the entertainment industry, 
it was hard for black entertainers to break into the white mainstream. But the 
Nicholas brothers were among the privileged few, like Baker and Smith, whose 
talent was too irresistible a commodity. In 1936, when Harold was still 
virtually a child, they were hired to perform in theZiegfeld Follies 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ziegfeld_Follies> on Broadway, where their 
dancing created such an uproar that the singer and comedienne Fannie Brice, who 
came on stage after the brothers, had to quiet down the theatre by cracking the 
line: “Do you think we can talk now?” The following year, ballet choreographer
George Balanchine <http://balanchine.com/> hired the brothers to dance in the 
musical Babes in Arms. Hollywood, too, came calling, and during the 1940s the 
two men featured in some dozen major films, their bravura skills showcased in 
sequences such as thisChattanooga Choo Choo 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eMR3OnbmWkA> routine, in the 1941 movie Sun 
Valley Serenade.

The brothers did not make the transition on screen from dancers to romantic 
leads, as Fred Astaire had done the previous decade. Their skin colour was an 
obvious barrier, although Astaire himself would think nothing of blacking up 
his face to perform the “Mr Bojangles” number in Swing Time. But as dance 
artists the brothers pushed themselves constantly, absorbing new ideas and 
taking influences fromballet <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ballet>, a form 
they greatly admired. In performance they seemed both fearless and joyous. 
Baryshnikov declared they were the most “amazing dancers” he’d ever seen; and 
their most astonishing screen performance, thefinale to the 1943 film Stormy 
Weather <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zBb9hTyLjfM>, was adjudged by Astaire 
to be the “greatest dance and music” sequence in the history of cinema.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzBb9hTyLjfM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzBb9hTyLjfM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzBb9hTyLjfM&media=>
Watching this clip, its striking how similar the brothers were to Astaire in 
certain ways; although physically chunkier, they brought the same quality of 
upper-body float to their dancing, the same easiness in their carriage and 
arms. It’s a lightness that informs their glissando slides (at 2mins 45secs) 
and the insouciant timing of their jumps – even when they’re leaping 
hazardously from table to table, over the band (0.32) or up a flight of stairs, 
the brothers work that special dance miracle of stretching out the seconds, of 
catching an impossible breath mid-air.

Like Astaire their phrasing is impeccable, not least in the witty 
call-and-response section they perform with their pianist (1.30). Almost any 
other dance act would have milked this moment for much longer – Astaire 
certainly would have done so – yet here its only a glorious joke, a brilliant 
bagatelle before the brothers move on to other feats.

The special hallmark of their act was its athleticism, however: the brothers’ 
ability to incorporate spins, kicks and flips into the middle of riotously fast 
and jazzy footwork; their special stunt of sliding down into the splits and 
back up again (1.36), as if friction and gravity were meaningless. The climax 
of this Stormy Weather clip almost beggars belief, as the two men make a 
leapfrogging descent of the staircase, taking it in turns to jump over each 
others heads, each time landing in the splits and rebounding back up. All this 
they manage in full evening dress, and without a moment’s hesitation flickering 
through the mega-wattage of their exuberance and charm.

Gregory Hines <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gregory_Hines>, no mean dancer 
himself, said of the Nicholas brothers that it would be impossible to make a 
movie about their lives because it would be impossible to cast. No two dancers 
could ever be found to match their a skills, Hines believed, and the 
revelations of this three-minute clip suggest he may have been right.

 * The Fabulous Nicholas Brothers season 
<http://www.thefabulousnicholasbrothers.co.uk> is at selected cinemas from 19 
October–4 November as part of the BFI’s UK-wide seasonBlack Star 
<http://www.bfi.org.uk/black-star>.  