
Late last year, after a decade of failed attempts to make the journey, I drove 
14 hours acrossAfghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> to 
look upon one of the architectural wonders of the world. The road east from 
Herat had long given way to dumpy tracks and rocky riverbeds when suddenly - 
through a cleft in the looming cliffs - I caught my first glimpse of the 
minaret of Jam, a fragile sliver of tapering, man-made beauty dating from the 
12th century and set among momentous mountains.

Rising 65 metres, the minaret is far from inconspicuous, yet such is its 
remoteness that rumours of its existence only reached the west in 1944. The 
tallest complete and authentic ancient minaret in the world, it is believed to 
have been built by the once great Ghorid empire, who in the late 12th century 
ruled over what are now Afghanistan, Pakistan and India, as far south as Delhi. 
Before a French archaeologist finally located it in 1957, the minaret had 
endured more than 700 years of obscurity and neglect after the Ghorids were 
defeated by Genghis Khan.

Now this moving, beautiful building is once again under threat. In 2002, 
Unesco declared Jam a WorldHeritage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/heritage> site, the first in Afghanistan, 
but soon after also listed it as a site in danger. Rich in archaeological 
remains, the spot has been ruthlessly looted for the past 20 years, while the 
minaret itself is slowly crumbling and tilting, its foundations undermined by 
the waters of a nearby river. Repairs started in the 1970s, but were 
effectively halted by the conflict that subsequently engulfed the country. It 
was only in 2001 that work to stabilise the minaret and shore up its 
foundations finally resumed.

But these repairs have now halted again, and visits from the outside world 
have all but stopped. The journey to Jam is deemed too dangerous for most, with 
threats ranging from local banditry to abduction or execution by insurgents who 
range through Ghor province, in which the minaret stands, on their way south to 
do battle with the International Security Assistance Force (Isaf) in Helmand.

Yet, with caution and careful preparation, a trip to Jam is possible. My own 
journey was with a team from the BBC; we hoped to be the first crew ever to 
make a TV programme about the minaret, and in so doing remind the world of its 
wonder and vulnerability. Our journey was complex, arduous and at times 
baffling. When we finally arrived in Herat from Kabul, we had to gain 
permission to travel from various Afghan authorities, as well as clear our 
plans with the Isaf.

Meetings with the deputy governor of Herat and his chief of police went well, 
but we then needed permission from the chief of police for the western 
provinces. This was crucial. After questioning, this powerful policeman decided 
we were a good thing, and took us under his personal patronage, giving us an 
escort of 60 police for part of the journey. Flattering, perhaps, but our 
convoy was clearly going to be more high-profile than we had wanted - and in 
Afghanistan, the police are targets for insurgents.

Then we met the Italian army, the Isaf body responsible for security in Herat 
and Ghor. They were impressed by our plan and, perhaps, our audacity - they had 
never sent a patrol to Jam. In fact, none of the Afghans we met in Herat had 
made the journey, either.

But we managed it - and it was worth every difficulty. The minaret is made of 
hard yellow brick. As I stood before it, I saw that it is in this material that 
the building's most striking message is written. Its shaft is a dazzling 
display of virtuoso brickwork, with geometric forms incorporating Islamic 
eight-pointed stars and Kufic lettering. There is a panel bearing the date of 
construction: 1193/4. But, more importantly, the lower portion bears the entire 
19th sura of the Koran. This chapter, called Maryam, tells of the Virgin Mary 
and Jesus, both venerated in Islam, and of prophets such as Abraham and Isaac. 
It's a text that emphasises what Judaism, Christianity and Islam have in 
common, rather than their differences. It seems the Ghorids placed the text 
here to appeal for harmony and tolerance in the land, a message that is more 
relevant now than ever.

Inside, I found a stupendous, engineered construction, with two spiral 
staircases winding around each other to form a double helix. This strong 
construction, combined with the fine brickwork, has preserved the structure 
from earthquakes and neglect. But for how long? As we filmed, the police became 
increasingly unsettled, fearing "enemies" might be gathering against us. So, 
sooner than I would have wished, we left the minaret, solitary and exposed in 
its remote valley. For more than 800 years it has survived against the odds - 
but all who care about it must now tremble for its future.

Â· The minaret of Jam features on Dan Cruickshank's Adventures in Architecture, 
tonight on BBC2.
 