
Tidjane Thiam, the former Prudential chief now running Credit Suisse, won’t be 
thanked by his counterparts at Deutsche Bank for saying so at this moment, but 
he is correct: bigEuropean banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/europeanbanks> are “not really 
investable” and the industry is in a “very fragile situation”.

Look at the share prices to see that investors agree. In the old pre-crisis 
days, banks traded at a premium to their book value on the reasonable 
assumption that the business of lending would tend to increase profits over 
time. These days discounts to book value are the norm for big banks.

Low interest rates, accompanied by piles of government debt trading at 
negative yields, has made lending fundamentally less profitable. Banks can shed 
staff and overheads, but that is not a cost-free process. Meanwhile, mergers – 
essentially grander cost-cutting exercises – are more or less forbidden because 
the world can’t stand more institutions that are too big too fail. The position 
is a mess. Put another way, big banks used to run on obscene levels of leverage 
and haven’t found a new model to allow them to plod through the era ofnear-zero 
interest rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/19/zero-interest-rate-policy-wall-street-workers>
.

That is why it is wrong to regard the crisis at Deutsche as merely a standoff 
with the US Department of Justice over the size of the penalty for mis-selling 
mortgage-backed securities in 2005-07. Yes, a demand for $14bn (£10.8bn) – or 
possibly even half that sum – would probably trigger a need for more capital, 
as analysts say. But investors can also see that Deutsche is years behind even 
its peers in adapting to the new world.

UBS rallied around its asset management division; Barclays sold its asset 
manager, shed many of its continental European business and is getting out of 
Africa. Deutsche, by contrast, has tried cutting costs but has not radically 
changed shape. Even now, the co-chief executive, John Cryan, talks about a 
restructuring that will take five years, a timescale that looks far too relaxed 
if he finds himself pleading with his shareholders to give him more capital at 
short notice.

It is still quite possible that the DoJ’s demand could fall from $14bn to 
$4bn, which would allow everybody to breathe more easily. But, given what’s at 
stake, it would be amazing if German chancellor Angela Merkel and her officials 
are not working on contingency plans for Deutsche. Shehas to deny all such 
suggestions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/28/deutsche-bank-john-cryan-denies-asking-german-government-help>
, of course, because there is no point fuelling the sense of crisis. But this 
crisis in confidence in European banks, with Deutsche at the centre, has been 
brewing for at least 12 months. If the German government and Frankfurt 
regulators weren’t paying attention, they weren’t doing their job.

Germans won’t sit around in game of pass the parcel

German companies still do the simpler business of delivering parcels well, 
which is why Royal Mail’s share price fell 3% on news thatDeutsche Post, owner 
of DHL, is buying UK Mail for £243m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/28/deutsche-post-agrees-to-buy-uk-mail>
. Deutsche Post is a €33bn (£28.6bn) titan and won’t be returning to the UK 
parcels industry simply to sit on UK Mail’s 4% share of the market. It will 
want to grow.

The timing is cute from Deutsche Post’s point of view. It has waited for UK 
Mail to overcome teething problems at its new automated sorting centre. It is 
paying 43% more than UK Mail’s share price on Tuesday but well below the 
all-time high.

From UK Mail’s point of view, you can understand why chairman Peter Kane, who 
started the business in 1971 as a taxi firm in Harrow, has decided to sell. 
Amazon, which is building an in-house delivery operation, is gradually become a 
competitor rather than a customer for the industry.

For Royal Mail, the game won’t change overnight. It is still the dominant 
player and internet shopping in the UK is still booming. But 3% off its share 
price looks about right: Deutsche Post has very deep pockets.

When any excuse for a thumbs-down will do

Get ready for the European lobbying event of the year. The proposed £24bn 
merger between the London Stock Exchange Group and Deutsche Börse has been sent 
to Brussels for a full competition inquiry. Almost every EU finance ministry 
will have an opinion.

Let’s hope somebody throws a large spanner in the works. This deal looks 
highly dangerous for the City of London if it encourages financial business to 
flow out of the UK, a risk that can only be assessed properly once the terms of 
Brexit are settled. The commission is worried about pan-European competition, 
not the UK’s national interest, but any grounds for a thumbs-down will do.
 