
In ordinary times, you would expect a president like Barack Obama to nominate 
a young, liberal judge for theUS supreme court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/us-supreme-court>. But these aren’t ordinary 
times. On Wednesday, Obama announced his pick: Merrick Garland. The 63-year-old 
chief judge of the United States court of appeals for the DC circuit is older 
than many expected the nominee to be – and more moderate. In other political 
circumstances, the choice of Garland would be unusual. But these are not 
ordinary times.

With the exception of Harriet Miers – the quickly withdrawn George W Bush 
nominee – the last supreme court nominee older than 55 was Ruth Bader Ginsburg 
in 1993. The reason lifetime appointments to the supreme court have been 
trending younger is obvious: in general, it means that a president’s 
constitutional values will get a longer period of representation on the court. 
Most of the justices on thetypical shortlist 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/jurisprudence/2016/02/obama_s_supreme_court_shortlist_is_full_of_great_candidates.html>
 of potential nominees are significantly younger than Garland.

The pick would also be unusual in that Garland is more moderate than Obama’s 
two previous supreme court nominees, Elena Kagan and Sonia Sotomayor. While not 
a conservative, he does have a conservative streak on some issues,most notably 
<http://www.scotusblog.com/2010/04/the-potential-nomination-of-merrick-garland/>
 the civil liberties of criminal defendants. As Obama observed more than once 
when announcing Garland’s nomination, the judge’s moderation earned him 
significant bipartisan support for his confirmation in the US Senate. Had 
Garland been nominated in 2007, liberal groups would be up in arms.

 But it’s not 2007. Senate Republicans have made 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/powerpost/wp/2016/02/23/key-senate-republicans-say-no-hearings-for-supreme-court-nominee/>
 it clear that they will not hold hearings, let alone a vote, on any Obama 
replacement for Scalia. Given the stakes – even if he is more moderate than 
Kagan or Sotomayor, Garland would still be the first Democratic nominee to be 
the median vote on the court since early in the Nixon administration and would 
move the court to the left – they have no reason to back off before the 
election.


Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell immediately asserted again that nobody 
would be confirmed before the 2016 elections. Garland’s age and substantive 
views are therefore probably not terribly important. The significance of the 
nomination is more about the politics of supreme court nominations and the 2016 
elections than about changing the direction of the court.

Obama’s logic is not hard to discern. Assuming that Republicans will obstruct 
the nomination, Obama is presumably trying to make Senate Republicans look as 
unreasonable as possible. The influential Senate Republican Orrin Hatchactually 
cited 
<http://thinkprogress.org/justice/2016/03/16/3760727/who-is-merrick-garland/> 
Garland as the kind of moderate justice Obama should appoint but allegedly 
wouldn’t. The well-liked Garland will be very difficult to portray as a 
wild-eyed liberal too far outside the mainstream to merit a hearing, and could 
serve to make Republican obstruction look unreasonable.

Another factor to consider is that not every potential nominee may have been 
willing to serve as what Texas senator John Cornyncandidly described 
<http://talkingpointsmemo.com/livewire/cornyn-pinata-scotus-nom> as a “piñata.” 
Jane Kelly, for example, a moderate judge currently serving on the eighth 
circuit court of appeals, was always a longshot to be nominated. But because 
she had been supported by her fellow Iowan, the Republican Senate Judiciary 
Committee Chairman Chuck Grassley, a conservative group decided to preemptively 
attack.


An ad was run in Iowa 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/03/jane-kelly-attack-ad-220649> criticizing 
Kelly for arguments she made representing an accused child molester when she 
was a public defender. The ad was deeply unfair – Kelly was just doing her job, 
providing the representation the Sixth Amendment guarantees to even the most 
unsavory criminal defendants. But more than one person on Obama’s shortlist may 
well have quietly let the president know that they weren’t enthusiastic about 
being put through months of Republican attacks without any chance of actually 
becoming a supreme court justice.

Whether this is the best choice from a political perspective remains open to 
question. Some supporters of President Obama undoubtedlywould have preferred 
<http://prospect.org/article/obama-and-supreme-court-lose-today-win-tomorrow> a 
well-qualified minority candidate such as ninth circuit judge Paul Watford or 
California State supreme court judge Tino Cuellar. The Democratic base is less 
likely to be enthusiastic about Garland. Some liberals will also argue that 
Obama should make the case for a strong liberal rather than making a relatively 
bland, centrist pick.

Obama’s calculation appears to be that the best political course is to make 
Republican obstruction look as unreasonable as possible. We will see in 
November whether his judgment is correct. But either way, the next president is 
virtually certain to still have a supreme court vacancy to fill.
 