
Fred Astaire strolls into a toyshop with a walking stick and spats, whistling. 
He snatches an oversized Easter bunny from a small boy and proceeds to do a tap 
dance using a series of conveniently positioned props that happen to be lying 
around on the shop floor. "I'm plumb crazy for drums," he sings, for no obvious 
reason. Then he takes his bunny – without paying – and nonchalantly strolls out 
again.

This – a scene from Easter Parade (1948) – is the sort of thing that could 
only happen in the fantastical Technicolor world of the MGM musical. Such 
trifles as logical plot development and plausible human motivation have no 
place here. What matters is getting as quickly as possible to the next song and 
the next dance and letting the stars do their thing. In an MGM musical, every 
sidewalk is made for dancing and every woman has cherry-red lips and 
high-kicking legs. When you're in the right mood, the formula is absurdly 
effective. The comfort seeps in from the moment you hear that MGM lion roar. 
You find your mouth involuntarily turning up at the corners, your toes twitch 
and your heart feels as if it's being pumped full of candy floss.Gotta Sing! 
Gotta Dance! is the title of the current BFI celebration of the genre, which 
offers the chance to revisitSingin' in the Rain and Meet Me in St Louis 
alongside lesser known gems such asThe Band Wagon, worth it just for the scene 
in Central Park <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7iAWxCxTgoI> where Astaire and 
Cyd Charisse twirl and clinch to "Dancing in the Dark".

The genius and the oddness of the MGM musical is largely the product of the 
sensibilities of one man, Louis B Mayer (born Lazar Meir in Ukraine in 1884), 
who combined sugary sentimentality with a ruthless focus on the bottom line. 
The star system of the golden era was Mayer's creation.Greta Garbo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2011/nov/06/ten-best-silent-movie-stars-in-pictures>
,Clark Gable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/dec/22/clark-gable-screen-legend> and 
Katharine Hepburn <http://film.theguardian.com/gall/0,8544,988061,00.html> all 
owed their careers to him.

After MGM production chief Irving Thalberg died in 1936, Mayer was able to 
push MGM even more towards crowd pleasers. Which meant musicals. Much of the 
genre was shaped by Mayer's gut instincts. In 1939, at the preview screening of
The Wizard of Oz <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jul/19/fiction6>, the 
director Victor Fleming got jittery and wanted to cut "Somewhere Over the 
Rainbow", arguing it was too long and difficult. Mayer made a snap decision to 
keep it. In that moment, sitting on a bale of fake Kansas hay, the 16-year-old
Judy Garland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/sep/23/judy-garland-ruby-slippers-auction>
 stopped being a child star and became a real star, whose voice seemed to make 
all our troubles melt like lemondrops. "There's no place like home," said 
Dorothy. Oh yes, there is: there's a place even better – the homes created on 
the MGM backlot, peopled entirely by stars. Mayer liked to say that MGM had 
more stars than the heavens. At their best, the MGM musicals gave the stars a 
perfect hermetic space in which to perform: shimmering curtains, yellow brick 
roads and an aura of homeliness more potent than anywhere people might really 
live.

"She can't act, she can't sing and she can't dance … The triple threat," says 
Donald O'Connor's Cosmo of the dreadful silent film star Lina Lamont (Jean 
Hagen) inSingin' in the Rain (1952). As with so much else in the film, it's 
self-referential. MGM was an efficient machine that showcased talents in a 
highly targeted manner, depending on how much of a "threat" the particular star 
might be. There are the single-threat pretty faces, the chorus girls who flash 
across the screen for a single lovely moment, or the barnstorming male ensemble 
dancers inSeven Brides for Seven Brothers, whose muscular cartwheels and jumps 
speak louder than words.

Then there are the double threats. Ann Miller was a fantastically leggy and 
charismatic brunette dance prodigy with Cherokee ancestors. Her publicists 
claimed that she could tap her feet 500 times a minute. Miller could sing, too, 
but was no great actor, which made her hard to position in conventional 
pictures. Her career went nowhere much at RKO or Columbia Pictures before she 
finally found her form with an MGM contract. MGM gave Miller a way to shine 
that had nothing to do with characterisation and everything to do with talent. 
In her set-piece solo dance sequences, Miller was given three minutes of 
freedom in glamorous outfits to shimmy and tap to her heart's delight, with the 
camera trained only on her. No dancing woman, not even Rita Hayworth, has ever 
looked quite so sure of her own power as Miller inEaster Parade, "Shakin' the 
Blues Away" <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rn0mEok_FSY> in yellow elbow-length 
gloves. Virtuoso doesn't even cover it. Miller later said she had to pour blood 
from her high heels after all the relentless takes. But all we see on the 
screen is Technicolor perfection. As someone says at the beginning of"Too Darn 
Hot" <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4CYjE9Gv3A4>, Miller's hottest number in 
Kiss Me Kate: "Go, girl, go!"

Singin' in the Rain, meanwhile, is a film starring three all-singing, 
all-dancing, all-acting "triple threats" in the form of Debbie Reynolds, Donald 
O'Connor and Gene Kelly, who also co-directed. To see the three of them, perky 
and bright-eyed, linking arms and singing"Good mornin', good mornin', we talked 
the whole night through" <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uA3OnIYW5u4> is to 
participate in a deeply wholesome version of the American dream. It's almost 
Nietzschean in its polished will to power. You feel: these people have fought 
their way to the top as performers in the most competitive society in the 
world. They have been dressed by the finest costumiers (Debbie Reynolds's cute 
neckerchief deserves its own Oscar), slathered in greasepaint by the finest 
make-up artists and lit and shot by the most talented technicians. And they are 
still smiling! If the routine were even a tiny bit less crisply rehearsed, it 
would seem horribly trite. But somehow the three are such pros that they take 
all the artifice – the gimmickry with raincoats and sofas – and make it 
loveable and spontaneous.

The formula wasn't always so winning. In the 50s, the studio continued to 
churn out expensive musicals, with all the trademark MGM polish, after public 
tastes had moved on. Mayer's biographer Bosley Crowther noted that his 
"authority as a showman relied upon insistence on qualities of sentiment and 
make-believe that were nothing short of 'corny' in the postwar age". Mayer 
himself was ousted from MGM in 1951, replaced by a supposedly grittier chief of 
production, a kid from RKO called Dore Schary. But still the sentiment and 
make-believe continued, except now they often had a desperate air of cynicism.

You may hate me for saying this, because this movie has a bewildering number 
of fans, but a nadir was reached withHigh Society (1956), a film so much 
smaller than the sum of its starry parts. Take Grace Kelly's beauty in a white 
swimming costume, Bing Crosby's crooning, Frank Sinatra's worldliness,Louis 
Armstrong's humour and jazz <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FtfxSAnOgoU>, Cole 
Porter's songs, and what do you have? A cold-hearted, self-regarding mess of a 
film. The various classy elements never really gel.High Society lacks the 
emotional punch of the Rodgers and Hammerstein musicals of the late 50s and 
60s, and does not have the pure joyous artifice of 1940s MGM.

The one person who could have made it work had sadly lost her contract with 
MGM back in 1950, after one too many nervous collapses. The actor who found her 
truest form in the MGM musical was Garland, the original quadruple threat: she 
could dance, she could act, she could be funny; and oh, she could sing. Garland 
took the most preposterous lines that Irving Berlin could dream up –"I was born 
in Michigan / And I wish and wish again" 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YggEcjhqlpQ> – and imbue them with 
heart-stopping resonance.

It is no accident that Garland was the star of the finest MGM musical of them 
all, the only one so brilliant and human that it surpasses the genre, 1944's
Meet Me in St Louis. It's showing from 16 to 29 December at the BFI, the 
perfect Christmas treat. Directed by Garland's future husband Vincente 
Minnelli, it tells the story of an affluent St Louis family during the four 
seasons of a single year, 1903, the year before the World's Fair. Garland plays 
Esther, the second of four sisters (there is also a brother). The family is 
thrown into turmoil when their father is offered a job in New York. You 
wouldn't think that having to leave St Louis for New York was the stuff of 
tragedy, but it is. The criticDavid Thomson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/davidthomson> calls it "the most 
satisfying story ever told as a musical", comparing it to a Chekhov play, 
though here the sisters want to stay in their home, not leave it.

For once in an MGM musical, the bits between the songs are good enough to 
sustain a film by themselves. Minnelli gives us a non-mawkish picture of family 
life at the turn of the century, when five-year-olds might stay out all day 
riding the milk float and grown-up daughters suffer the embarrassment of having 
to conduct a long-distance phone conversation with a man trying to propose in 
front of the entire family. The cast are all excellent, from Mary Astor as the 
mother to Tom Drake as the boy next door. For stretches, you almost forget it's 
a musical. Then Garland as Esther opens her mouth to sing and you are 
transported to a higher plane."The Trolley Song" 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jrwK34qdeqA> is sublime, as is "Under the 
Bamboo Tree" <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s8qpMcrEtTg>, where Garland pulls 
off the trick of dancing with a child – her little sister Tootie – and making 
it look completely natural.

It all culminates in "Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas" 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yudgy30Dd68>. This song has been ruined by a 
thousand smug, easy listening versions. But the original, as sung by Esther to 
her distraught little sister, trying to console her for the fact that they are 
leaving the place they love, is almost unbearably sad. Garland's lustrous voice 
is not saying: "Isn't it jolly? It's Christmas." She is saying: "Yes, things 
are miserable, but one day they might not be" – a powerful message in 1944, and 
still resonant now, in this recession Christmas.

"Someday soon, we all will be together / If the Fates allow / Until then, 
we'll have to muddle through somehow." We are a long way from Fred Astaire and 
the Easter bunny, but also not so far. Like all the other studio's musical 
stars, Garland was simply parading her talent, in this case, a talent for 
wringing tears from a willing audience. It took all the artifice of MGM to 
create a moment of such purity and truth.

Gotta Sing! Gotta Dance! The MGM Musical is at the BFI Southbank 
<http://www.bfi.org.uk/whatson/bfi_southbank/film_programme/december_seasons/gotta_sing_gotta_dance_the_mgm_musical>
 until 30 December.
 