
The stories of a young Germaine Greer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/germainegreer>, the Melbourne Cup winner 
Michelle Payne and the suffragette Vida Goldstein will be brought to the screen 
by female producers, directors and writers after a record $3m grant from 
government funding body Screen Australia.

 The Brilliant Stories program 
<http://www.screenaustralia.gov.au/funding-and-support/feature-films/development/gender-matters-brilliant-stories>
 awarded 45 women-led story ideas for film, TV and online as well as 13 
industry projects as part of sweeping reform to ensure at least half of Screen 
Australia’s funding goes to women by the end of 2018.

Only 29% of the people working in Australian film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/australia> production are women, with just 
32% of women working as producers, 23% as writers and 16% as directors.

Gender matters in Australian film and equality can't come soon enough | 
Stephanie Van Schilt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/08/gender-matters-in-australian-film-and-equality-cant-come-soon-enough>
 The wider $5m Gender Matters program 
<http://www.screenaustralia.gov.au/new-directions/gender-matters> announced by 
Screen Australia in 2015 includes the promotion of gender and cultural 
diversity across all funding guidelines.

 Tuesday’s announcement marks the biggest cash injection for the screen 
industry in a single day in the agency’s history.

The Gender <https://www.theguardian.com/world/gender> Matters taskforce chair, 
Deanne Weir, said she sees a future in which stories about women, told by 
women, are of equal interest to all audiences, leading to more diversity and 
richness on Australian screens.

 “I absolutely believe that the opportunities being created today will have a 
resounding effect on our screen industry for many years to come,” Weir said.

 The women whose projects were successful are a mix of high-profile, 
established and emerging creatives, including the actor and producer Claudia 
Karvan (The Secret Life of Us), the actor and writer Kat Stewart (Underbelly) 
and the Offspring producer Imogen Banks.

Germaine Greer’s life before she wrote her groundbreaking book The Female 
Eunuch will be made into a two-part TV series, I Am Woman, directed by Daina 
Reid and written by Alicia Gwinner.

 The actor and director Rachel Griffiths will make her feature film directing 
debut in Ride Like A Girl, about jockey Payne who went on to become the first 
woman to win the Melbourne Cup.

The ABC journalist Sarah Macdonald’s book about her life in India when her 
husband was a foreign correspondent,Holy Cow 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/3858.Holy_Cow>, will be brought to the TV 
screen by producers Ester Harding, Radha Mitchell and Chloe Rickard.

 The producer Jo Porter will work with the director Rachel Ward on a period 
drama about the 19th century women’s suffrage activist Goldstein.

Being Mia Freedman: 'The idea you’re doing feminism wrong I find laughable'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/may/27/being-mia-freedman-this-idea-youre-doing-feminism-wrong-i-find-laughable>
The award-winning playwright and actor Nakkiah Lui 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/nakkiah-lui> will be adapting her 2015 
Belvoir production Kill the Messenger for the screen, for a feature directed by 
Samantha Lang.

 The veteran producers Jane Campion and Jan Chapman will executive produce 
feature film Runaway about a young woman who enters into a dangerous world of 
sexual fantasy.

 Thirteen projects which aim to create business and industry infrastructure 
around women were also awarded funding, including The Athena Project, which 
will provide writers and directors from regional areas with industry forums; 
and Bunya Engendered, which pairs women of diverse backgrounds with mentors to 
support their writing.

 Mia Freedman’s media empire was one of these thirteen, receiving support for 
a web series onMamamia.com.au <http://www.mamamia.com.au/> called Mamamia: Love 
| Laugh | Learn, from director Julie Kalceff and story producer Rosie Lourde. 
Freedman is named as the creative director on the project.

 For the full list of Gender Matters funding recipients, visit Screen 
Australia’s website 
<http://www.screenaustralia.gov.au/new-directions/gender-matters-funding>.
 