
For a man with arguably one of the toughest jobs, as head of the National 
Offender Management Service 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/national-offender-management-service/about>
 (Noms), responsible for prisons and probation in England and Wales, Michael 
Spurr looks surprisingly upbeat.

The majority of our prisons are overcrowded and, according the Prison Officers 
Association (POA) and prison reform groups, understaffed. Violence, self-harm 
and deaths in custody are at anall-time high 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/444785/hmip-2014-15.pdf>
: in the year to March 2015, in an average week, there were 300 assaults, 500 
incidents of self-harm and four or five prisoners died. In his last annual 
report the former chief inspector of prisons, Nick Hardwick described the jails 
he had inspected as “places of violence, squalor and idleness” and said that 
English and Welsh prisons were in their “worst state 
<http://prisonwatchuk.com/2015/07/15/chief-inspector-says-prisons-in-england-wales-at-worst-in-a-decade/>
 in 10 years”.

When I ask Spurr if he thinks such condemnation is fair, he becomes defensive 
and points to the level of change Noms has had to manage. “The change has been 
difficult. We’ve had a lot of external pressures that have come at the same 
time as that change.” He cites the closing and “reconfiguring” of some 16 
prisons and new “benchmarking arrangements” in public-sector jails with regard 
to staff numbers, activity levels and safety measures. There has also been a 
reduction in spending over the last parliament of £2,200 per prison place.

Prisons face overcrowding due to policy failure, says watchdog
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jun/14/prisons-overcrowding-policy-failure-watchdog>
The biggest challenge, however, is the hugely detrimental impact 
<http://data.parliament.uk/writtenevidence/committeeevidence.svc/evidencedocument/justice-committee/prison-safety/oral/25442.html>
 of legal highs. “The dynamic in prisons has definitely changed over recent 
years. And it’s not just an excuse to say NPS [New Psychoactive Substances or 
so-called ‘legal highs’ such as Spice and Black Mamba] have made a difference – 
they have made a real difference,” he says.

“New types of drugs have just flooded into prisons, which we’ve taken some 
time to get on top of – the whole difficulty of testing and detecting them – 
and the fact that lots of people initially were saying, they’re legal. You 
could buy them in shops on the street.

“Ordinary families were bringing them in. And then you had an issue around 
organised crime syndicates looking to supply. So you’ve got the drugs coming 
in, the new regimes, the higher population in some parts of the country that 
led to issues around staffing as well, and that’s put a lot of pressure on the 
service. So, is it where I want it to be? No.”

There isn't any jail that is actually cushy. People don't want to be there

But he insists the drugs situation is, “much better than it was in the 90s”. 
As a prisoner then, I remember well the epidemic of hard drugs coming in to 
jails, the accompanying rise in serious violence and the denials by prison 
authorities that there was a problem. At least Spurr acknowledges there is a 
problem now. “I hope we’ve learned the lesson of not trying to put our head in 
sand and deny that there’s an issue around NPS,” he says.

Last year, there were over 15,000 recorded violent incidents in prisons. Was 
that fuelled by drugs? “It’s a combination of factors,” says Spurr. “It’s the 
drugs to some degree. It’s the changing nature of the population, the way that 
people use violence on the streets and bring violence into prisons linked to 
gang affiliations, particularly among younger prisoners.” Disputes are settled 
he says, “with much higher levels of violence than used to be the case”.

It has got so bad that last month the POA wrote to Spurr threatening 
“appropriate legal action” 
<http://insidetime.org/poa-gives-noms-28-days-to-put-its-house-in-order/> if 
Noms did not address what it called the “parlous health and safety situation” 
in which their members have to work. Spurr says he was disappointed by the 
letter, “because we’ve been working with them on health and safety. I’m 
absolutely committed to do that. Things haven’t changed overnight. I’m 
continuing to work with the POA. Their concerns are my concerns as well. 
Violence, safety are really, really important. It matters as much to me because 
the POA members are my staff. It’s something we’ve got to be working at all the 
time.”

Violence, safety, are really, really, important. It’s something we’ve got to 
be working at all the time. 

Spurr joined the Prison Service as a prison officer in 1983 and worked his way 
up to become chief executive of Noms in 2010. Since then he has worked with 
three justice secretaries, Ken Clarke,Chris Grayling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/chrisgrayling> and Michael Gove. All 
Conservative politicians but each with a very different approach to the job. 
Clarke pressed for a “rehabilitation revolution,” focusing on work and 
education, but was then moved before any of his rehabilative measures could be 
implemented.

Chris Grayling’s policy was “transforming rehabilitation” and famously 
declared that prisons on his watch were no longer going to be “holiday camps 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2205824/Ill-stop-jails-like-holiday-camps-says-new-minister-justice.html>
”. His approach was condemned by prison reform groups and described as, “a 
ramped-up political emphasis on punishment rather than real rehabilitation” by 
Juliet Lyon of the Prison Reform Trust. Gove is the only one of the three to 
talk about “tempering justice with mercy, giving people a sense of possibility 
and hope,” a stance welcomed by Frances Crook of the Howard League, but derided 
by his hardline fellow Tory, Philip Davies MP, who says that Gove has “gone 
native 
<https://www.politicshome.com/home-affairs/articles/story/gove-doing-bad-job-justice-secretary-tory-mp>
”

“Mr Gove’s been really clear about his commitment to want to see prison 
reform. To want to see prisons focusing on rehabilitation,” says Spurr. One of 
the first things Gove did was toreverse Grayling’s ban on books 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/12/ban-friends-and-family-sending-books-prison-prisoners-lifted-grayling>
 being sent to prisoners and recently he announced he was scrapping punitive
criminal court costs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/dec/03/michael-gove-scraps-criminal-courts-charge>
.

Under Grayling low morale among prisoners and staff was endemic. My last 
attempt to interview Spurr was blocked after Grayling contacted the Guardian’s 
then editor, Alan Rusbridger. Now, despite the challenges, Spurr appears 
ebullient. “You know and I know that prison as a punishment is a hard 
punishment. For all that people think cushy prisons this, cushy prisons that, 
there isn’t any prison that is actually cushy. The impact of prison is 
massively underestimated by tabloids, and by the community. There were 28,000 
incidents of self-harm in prison last year. People generally don’t want to be 
there. Prison is a place that is genuinely a punishment.”

“As the secretary of state makes clear, going to prison is the punishment. Our 
ethos is about preventing victims by changing lives. If you work with prisoners 
to help them to change and reduce their risk of offending when they go out, you 
prevent more victims.”

Diplomatically, he says Grayling’s reforms focused on providing better support 
for short-term prisoners on release, whereas Gove comes with a very clear 
priority on prisons. In his first major speech as justice secretary, in June, 
Gove said that prisoners “can become assets – citizens who can contribute and 
demonstrate the human capacity for redemption”.

“Of course that’s right,” says Spurr. “I’ve seen people who have done wrong, 
they’ve been punished, and they’ve turned their lives around.

“There are numerous other people that I know who have gone through an 
experience in prison and left prison to make a really big contribution to 
society. I’d love everybody who comes to prison to be in that place. And I 
think Mr Gove highlighting that is a really positive thing.”

Does he ever look across enviously at what Scandinavian prisons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/feb/25/norwegian-prison-inmates-treated-like-people>
 apparently achieve; humane prison conditions, prolonged staff training and 
reoffending rates half that of this country?

“I’ve been to Scandinavia on a number of occasions. I know their heads of 
service. Their societies are different. The pressures they face are different,” 
he says. He gives Norway as an oft-quoted example of good practice where prison 
officers are offered a two-year diploma course as part of their training. “Of 
course I would love the opportunity for people to have that amount of 
additional training. But the population that Scandinavian countries are looking 
after in prison is also very different to the population that we’re looking at. 
They don’t have an urban centre like London, or indeed Manchester or Leeds.

“The prisons are smaller. Norway’s population is smaller than Scotland’s. 
There are things in their systems I really like. Home detention curfew as an 
option came out of a look at what was going on in Sweden years ago. I’m always 
looking at what’s going on elsewhere.”

Last month, George Osborne announced £1.3bn funding to improve the prison 
system. What are Spurr’s hopes for the plannednine new prisons 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-34763339> being built to replace the old 
Victorian institutions? Are they going to be people warehouses?

“No they’re not. I feel it’s fantastic that [Gove’s] managed to get investment 
to be able to improve what we do with rehabilitation,” says Spurr. “The focus 
to turn prisons into more effective places for rehabilitation is fantastic. 
That it is backed up with a huge amount of investment can make it real. The aim 
will be to design and develop prisons that are about rehabilitation.” He adds: 
“It’s a really exciting opportunity to think about how we can redesign what we 
do in prisons in a modern way that really does make a difference.”

Curriculum vitae


Age 54.

Lives London.

Family Married.

Education Morley high school; Durham University, economics and economic 
history.

Career  2010-present: chief executive officer, National Offender Management 
Service (Noms); 2008–2010: chief operating officer, Noms; 2003–2008: director 
of operations, HM Prison Service; 2000-2003: East of England Prisons area 
manager; 1998-2000: governor, HMP Norwich; 1996-1998: governor, HMP Wayland; 
1994-1996: Head of population management, Review of management of disruptive 
prisoners, Noms; 1990-1994: deputy governor, then governor, HM youth offending 
institute Aylesbury; 1985–1988: assistant governor, HMP Standford Hill; 
1988-1990: assistant governor, HMP Swaleside; 1983-1985: prison officer, HMP 
Leeds.

Interests  Leeds football club, Yorkshire county cricket club.
 