
Michael Gove has become the latest senior Conservative to criticise the 
governor of theBank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor>, accusing Mark 
Carney of being intolerant of criticism and lacking in humility.

Gove compared Carney to the Chinese emperor Ming whose “person was held to be 
inviolable and without imperfections” and whose critics were flayed alive.

Writing in the Times 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/6f669c40-96fb-11e6-914a-7a36010296b9> (£), 
Gove said: “[Carney’s] position is held to be independent and without any 
error. And so any criticism of his actions is regarded as a thought crime – and 
those who dare to question his rule are flayed in the press with dire warnings 
left hanging in the air to emphasise the governor will brook no challenge to 
his authority.”

Gove’s attack on Carney follows comments by Theresa May in her recent Tory 
party conference speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/oct/05/theresa-may-speech-tory-conservative-conference-theresa-mays-speech-politics-live>
 in which she criticised low interest rates and money printing –quantitative 
easing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/qe-quantitative-easing-all-you-need-to-know>
 – for damaging returns for savers while making owners of assets richer. The 
prime minister said: “A change has got to come. And we are going to deliver it.”

Carney rebuked May a week ago  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/14/prices-to-continue-rising-warns-bank-of-england-governor>
by saying the BoE, which operates independently of the government, would not 
take instruction from politicians. But on 18 October William Hague, the former 
foreign secretary,said central bankers could lose their independence if they 
ignored anger about low interest rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/18/william-hague-attacks-bank-of-england-over-ultra-low-interest-rates>
.


Hague’s intervention prompted talk of an effort by Conservatives to pass the 
blame for the economic consequences of Brexit to the BoE or to unsettle Carney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/oct/18/is-there-tory-conspiracy-bank-of-england-mark-carney-hague>
, who is considering whether to remain as governor beyond his planned departure 
date of 2018.

William Hague attacks Bank of England over ultra-low interest rates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/18/william-hague-attacks-bank-of-england-over-ultra-low-interest-rates>
Gove, like Hague, raised the prospect of some kind of comeuppance for the 
governor. He said: “Mr Carney should ponder the fate of the Chinese emperors, 
overwhelmed by forces they could not control because they could not bear to 
accept any criticism, and recognise that nothing so enhances authority as a 
dash – now and then – of humility.”


The BoE cut interest rates to a then-record low of 0.5% after the bankruptcy 
of Lehman Brothers in September 2008 threatened to send the world economy into 
a depression. Ratesetters, led by Carney,cut borrowing costs to 0.25% in August 
and expanded its quantitative easing (QE) programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>
 of buying up bonds to support economic activity.

Gove said QE and August’s rate cut were “misjudged” and that May was right to 
say the BoE’s policies had created significant economic problems. The BoE has 
suggested it could cut rates further, to about 0.1%, but Carney has said 
monetary policy has borne too heavy a burden and called on the government to 
use tax and spending to support the economy.

The BoE’s chief economist, Andy Haldane, published a paper this week rebutting 
critics and arguing the BoE’s response to the Brexit vote had reduced long-term 
borrowing costs for the government and business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/19/bank-of-england-rebuts-may-and-hagues-attacks-on-quantitative-easing>
.

Gove, the former justice secretary and Tory leadership candidate, who 
ridiculed experts when campaigning to leave the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/09/michael-gove-experts-academics-vote>
, cited research by two economists showing those who declare themselves experts 
are error-prone because they fail to acknowledge mistakes.

His comments were ridiculed by Stephen King, an economic adviser to HSBC, and 
Roland Rudd, who chairs the Open Britain campaign to stay in the single market.
Stephen King (@KingEconomist) 
In which @michaelgove <https://twitter.com/michaelgove> cites the views of two 
experts he agrees with to explain why we should ignore experts:
https://t.co/LvifFD5JRG <https://t.co/LvifFD5JRG>
 <https://twitter.com/KingEconomist/status/789354010553749504> October 21, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/KingEconomist/status/789354010553749504> Roland Rudd 
(@RolandRudd) 
Has @michaelgove <https://twitter.com/michaelgove> lost all sense of irony or 
self-awareness in attacking Mark Carney for his lack of humility?
 <https://twitter.com/RolandRudd/status/789347321616162816> October 21, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/RolandRudd/status/789347321616162816> 
Carney has faced criticism from other Conservatives during the referendum 
campaign and since. The backbencherWilliam Rees-Mogg called on the governor to 
resign for warning about possible economic problems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/24/bank-of-england-governor-rejects-accusations-of-bias-over-eu-referendum>
 if there was a vote to leave the EU andBoris Johnson accused Carney of talking 
down the economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/boris-johnson-dismisses-bank-of-englands-brexit-warning>
.
 