
Michael Gove <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove>’s failure to 
make the final shortlist for theTory party’s ballot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservative-leadership> on the next 
prime minister is the latest in a series of extraordinary twists in the 
fortunes of leading Brexiters, with those who led the campaign for the UK to 
leave the EU now set to watch the formation of a new government from the 
sidelines.

Gove praised his “formidable” leadership rivals – Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> and Andrea Leadsom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrea-leadsom> – minutes after crashing 
out of the race on Thursday, after his late bid for No 10 against former ally
Boris Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> proved lethal for 
both men.

The justice secretary’s stalled campaign saw him lose votes over the course of 
the week: 46 MPs backed him in the second round of voting on Thursday, two 
fewer than he had in the first round on Tuesday.

Andrea Leadsom and Theresa May win Tory MPs' vote on leadership
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/07/theresa-may-andrea-leadsom-tory-leader-prime-minister>
Conservative MPs had hinted they felt queasy over Gove’s last-minute run for 
the leadership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/30/michael-gove-to-stand-for-conservative-party-leadership>
, despite his repeated denials he wanted the job, and how the announcement had 
been timed two hours before Johnson’s leadership speech, forcing the former 
mayor of London out of the race.

Instead it is Leadsom, the energy minister, who is now the insurgent 
standard-bearer for Brexit, against the overwhelming frontrunner, May, who 
backed remain.

Gove’s future in government looks deeply uncertain, Gove having had a public 
spat over extremism in schools that led to his demotion from education 
secretary to the whips’ office as well as the resignation of May’s political 
adviser.

On Thursday night May’s team called the justice secretary a “huge talent” but 
made no guarantees over his future if she were to win. One of Gove’s backers 
said he hoped Gove would continue in government, but said he expected him now 
to stay at his role in the Ministry of Justice.

“He is popular there: he was intensely disliked by teachers when he was at 
education, though of course that can be a sign you are doing necessary work,” 
the backer said. “I’d like to see him stick at justice – it’s very important 
work there on the judiciary and on prison reform.”


Gove’s leadership bid was launched two hours before Johnson was set to 
formally announce his own candidacy. At 9am on Thursday last week, Gove emailed 
journalists saying he had decided to run himself.

The justice secretary had said in earlier interviews he was “incapable of 
being prime minister” and that he was not equipped for the job. However,he said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/30/gove-ambush-is-swift-and-fatal-for-johnsons-hopes-of-leading-tories>
 he had “come, reluctantly, to the conclusion that Boris cannot provide the 
leadership or build the team for the task ahead”. Gove was said to be concerned 
over his place in Johnson’s team, as was Leadsom who also launched her own 
campaign for the leadership the same morning.

With no path to victory in sight for Johnson, at least during those two 
painful hours as the hall packed out with his supporters expecting him to 
launch his candidacy, the MP used his speech to drop out of the race.

Gove’s shock announcement prompted a sudden flurry of senior MPs jumping from 
Johnson to Gove. Nick Boles became his campaign chair, whileNicky Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicky-morgan>, the education secretary 
who had been considering a leadership bid herself, was the first to sign his 
nomination papers.

Dominic Raab <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/dominic-raab>, who that 
morning had written an article for the Sun endorsing Johnson, also joined the 
team along with other prominent Brexiters Michael Fabricant and Jacob Rees-Mogg.
Ed Vaizey <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ed-vaizey>, the culture 
secretary, announced within hours that Gove had his backing.

However, the initial flow of supporters began to slow, and Tory MPs started to 
mutter about the methods of the man who had always been said to be one of the 
most polite in politics.

He came third behind Leadsom in the first vote, and despite a turbulent 48 
hours where she was questioned over her CV and her tax returns, the night 
before the second vote it became clear to Gove’s team not only that their man 
could lose out to Leadsom but that the energy minister had a fighting chance of 
getting the keys to No 10.

How Tory party members will choose the next prime minister
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/07/how-tory-party-members-will-chose-the-next-prime-minister>
Boles sent an ill-advised text 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/06/andrea-leadsom-resists-pressure-to-publish-tax-returns>
 to Tory MPs saying Gove would not mind “spending two months taking a good 
thrashing from Theresa … if that’s what it takes to stop AL [Andrea Leadsom]”. 
He apologised after the message was leaked, saying Gove had not approved it.

In the end, even any tactical voting was not enough to keep the justice 
secretary in the race, leaving Leadsom representing the Brexiters as she faces 
off against May over the summer for the votes ofTory members 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/07/how-tory-party-members-will-chose-the-next-prime-minister>
 who will decide on the next prime minister.

Senior members of his team, including Morgan, Vaizey and the schools minister 
Nick Gibb, announced their backing for May within minutes. In a short 
concession speech outside parliament, in which he declined to say whether he 
would back Leadsom or May, Gove said he was pleased the next prime minister 
would be a woman, and a person with “formidable skills”.

“It’s now up to the Conservative party and indeed the wider country to assess 
the skills, the abilities and the leadership potential of these two 
candidates,” he said. “I hope over the course of the next few weeks we will 
have an opportunity to have a debate about the direction in which the country 
should go, which will be civilised, inclusive, positive and optimistic.”
 