
Everyone can do a Michael Caine impersonation. Some do it extremely well. One 
of the finest comic sketches of the past decade involved Steve Coogan and Rob 
Bryden doing battle to get the voice – complete with nasal inflection and 
cracked emotionality – just right. But no one does Michael Caine quite as well 
asMichael Caine <https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-caine>.

He does him so well that it’s easy to forget what a great actor he is. 
Because, like the best screen actors, he uses the force of his personality to 
inform his characters. They may be very different people and performances, but 
there’s something irreducibly Caine-like about them.

It’s a quality that can be mistaken for narrowness of range, but in fact, in a 
career that spans more than 120 films, Caine has played a diverse set of 
characters, from a transsexual psychopath inDressed to Kill to a butler in 
three Batman movies. And he invariably takes the audience along with him. His 
latest film, as he approaches his 83rd birthday in March, isYouth, by the 
Italian director Paolo Sorrentino, whoseThe Great Beauty won the Academy Award 
and Bafta for best foreign-language film two years ago.

Again, Caine is a long way from his stereotype of the tough cockney. It’s very 
much a European art house film and he plays Fred Ballinger, a retired 
composer-conductor holed up in a Swiss sanatorium with his best friend, an 
American film director played by Harvey Keitel. It’s fascinating to see Caine 
and Keitel together with their very different acting techniques. There’s a 
fabulous stillness about Caine, an ease in front of the camera that makes 
Keitel’s performance look a little awkward and forced.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fobserver-profile-michael-caine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa60873a6ddc6de909eda97d50dda203f24e16672%2F0_194_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Caine%3A%20the%20class%20act%20who%20enjoys%20the%20political%20fray%20%7C%20Observer%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fobserver-profile-michael-caine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Caine%3A%20the%20class%20act%20who%20enjoys%20the%20political%20fray%20%7C%20Observer%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fobserver-profile-michael-caine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa60873a6ddc6de909eda97d50dda203f24e16672%2F0_194_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Paul Dano, Harvey Keitel and Michael Caine in Youth. Photograph: 
Allstar/STUDIOCANAL 
Mostly, Caine is on affectingly restrained form, but there’s one scene in 
which he becomes riled by an emissary from Buckingham Palace and he suddenly 
snaps: “That’s enough!” And you know that even Leonard Bernstein or Herbert von 
Karajan at their most exasperated would never have mustered such coiled menace 
in two words. That’s it and then Ballinger is back on sweet old man form, but 
that flash tells us a lot about how he came to be an uncompromising artist.

By all accounts, or at least’s Caine’s, Sorrentino wrote the part specifically 
for Caine, who was notionally in retirement. But he’s been notionally in 
retirement for about 20 years, during which he’s hardly stopped working. He’s 
finished yet another film sinceYouth and in an interview on Radio 4’s Today 
programme he said he’d be happy to take a part in the proposed film about the 
Hatton Garden heist, if the script was right.

During that same interview, he suggested the UK should vote to get out of 
Europe unless there were some “extremely significant changes” in the way the EU 
is organised. “You cannot be dictated to by thousands of faceless civil 
servants,” he told Nick Robinson.

No doubt Ukip or the irredentist wing of the Tory party will be getting in 
touch with his agent, but Caine has never been afraid to voice his opinion on 
politics, especially if it concerns his livelihood. He announced he was leaving 
Britain for the US in the late 1970s when, under James Callaghan, the 
super-rich paid an 83% tax rate. “I realised that’s not a socialist country,” 
he said a few years ago. “It’s a communist country without a dictator.”

In 2009 he suggested that Britain should bring back national service to give 
young people a sense of belonging and also threatened to leave Britain again if 
Gordon Brown raised income tax any higher than 50%.

He made those comments during the promotion of Harry Brown, a kind of gritty 
vigilante movie set on a council estate in London’s Elephant and Castle, in 
which Caine plays the sort of character he might have become had he not become 
a multimillionaire film star.

He has described himself as a “Cockney yob from the Elephant and Castle”. His 
father was a Billingsgate porter who died when Caine was in his early 20s and 
his mother was a charlady.

“I had a very tough father and a very tough brother and if anybody ever came 
to our house, they never came again,” he has said. But he was a classic case of 
a bright kid going to the local grammar school – Camberwell, in his case – and 
gaining an interest in books, thanks to his English teacher, a Mr Watson.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fobserver-profile-michael-caine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34d8362d6d4c5ed089ba649d53276d94a7fba522%2F0_78_2146_1288%2F2146.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Caine%3A%20the%20class%20act%20who%20enjoys%20the%20political%20fray%20%7C%20Observer%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fobserver-profile-michael-caine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Caine%3A%20the%20class%20act%20who%20enjoys%20the%20political%20fray%20%7C%20Observer%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fobserver-profile-michael-caine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34d8362d6d4c5ed089ba649d53276d94a7fba522%2F0_78_2146_1288%2F2146.jpg>
 Michael Caine, with Stanley Baker, in 1964’s Zulu, the film that brought him 
to fame. Photograph: Allstar/PARAMOUNT 
Not that it was an easy path from there. He left school at 16 and worked as a 
clerk and as messenger before doing his national service, which included active 
combat in Korea. He says that it was experiences there that extinguished his 
youthful sympathy for communism. As a 19-year-old soldier, he apparently had a 
near-death experience that, he said, “formed my character for the rest of my 
life”.

He had taken up acting after coming out of the army, starting off as an 
assistant stage manager at a small rep company in Horsham in West Sussex. 
Married with a young child, he worked solidly throughout the 1950s on stage and 
in TV, but it was, he has said, “brutal” work.

If the Korean incident formed his character, then his outlook, his philosophy, 
was very much located in the 1960s. He was one of number of prominent figures 
from working-class backgrounds who found themselves at the forefront of fashion.

Newly single, he shared a flat with Terence Stamp and was good chums with the 
photographer Terry O’Neill and hairdresser Vidal Sassoon, none of whom came 
into the world accompanied by a silver spoon. He was something of a hell-raiser 
until he met his second wife, Shakira, whom he married in 1973.

His big break didn’t come until 1963 in Zulu. He played an upper-class officer 
which, as a British working-class actor at the time, was a revolutionary piece 
of casting by the American director Cy Endfield.

Caine has always maintained that he would never have got the part had Endfield 
not been a foreigner. “I swear to you,” he reiterated just recently, “no 
English director... would have cast me as an officer – not one.”

He’s probably right, but that sense of class awareness allied to a sense of a 
self-made man pushing back the social boundaries of a snob-filled England was a 
very 1960s story and it has remained a key part of Caine’s identity. Perhaps 
his defining role in those terms was Harry Palmer, the anti-Bond spy in the 
three mid-60s adaptations of Len Deighton novels,The Ipcress File, Funeral in 
Berlin and Billion Dollar Brain.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fobserver-profile-michael-caine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1f759e2b124518539470e56e14ba7fc5dd3946d%2F207_517_4621_2773%2F4621.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Caine%3A%20the%20class%20act%20who%20enjoys%20the%20political%20fray%20%7C%20Observer%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fobserver-profile-michael-caine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Caine%3A%20the%20class%20act%20who%20enjoys%20the%20political%20fray%20%7C%20Observer%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fobserver-profile-michael-caine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1f759e2b124518539470e56e14ba7fc5dd3946d%2F207_517_4621_2773%2F4621.jpg>
 Michael Caine poses with his co-star Sue Lloyd during a break in the location 
filming of The Ipcress File in London, 1965. Photograph: Pictorial Parade/Getty 
Images 
Palmer was dry, sceptical and working class. He understood how the world 
worked, found his upper-crust bosses painfully detached, but he was dogged and 
had a knowing sense of self. A loner, but unlike Bond, a real outsider.

Caine has been a highly successful and extremely wealthy actor for more than 
50 years, but he still sees himself as an outsider, someone who is perhaps 
better appreciated in the “classless” environment of America than Britain.

He has been nominated for six Academy Awards and won two of them, the first 
for one of his greatest performances, and certainly some of the finest acting 
ever seen in a Woody Allen film – as a philandering husband in the grip of an 
epic midlife crisis inHannah and Her Sisters.

But even after that, Caine was still seen as a bit of hack, someone who would 
appear in anything. And his filmography is a rich and varied document, 
featuring Steven Seagal movies, straight to video fodder, but very rarely a bad 
performance.

His friends teased him in 2000, when he was knighted, that surely the Queen 
knocked the chip off his shoulder with her sword. But in spite of the 
knighthood, the Oscars, the large Surrey house with swimming pool and a bank 
balance large enough to survive any tax increase, there will always be an 
element of the underappreciated in Caine. Perhaps that’s why he continues to 
produce acting that demands our appreciation.

THE CAINE FILE

Born 14 March 1933 in Rotherhithe, London. His father, Maurice, was a porter 
at Billingsgate, his mother a charwoman.

Best of times Winning his two Oscars, first in 1986 as best supporting actor in
Hannah and Her Sisters and then again for the same category in The Cider House 
Rules in 1999. Meeting his second wife, Shakira:,“Life began again at 40,” he 
says.

Worst of times His upbringing was pretty tough but he says the first decade of 
his career as an actor was “brutal, very brutal”.

What he says “I always say to any actor: don’t listen to advice from actors, 
especially if they’re older than you. Because when I was very young, I asked 
lots of older actors for advice and every single one of them said to me, ‘Give 
it up, you can’t act and you’ve got a rotten accent’.”

What others say “Perhaps he will do anything for the money, but while doing 
anything he will do everything to make that anything something.” Christopher 
Bray, author ofMichael Caine: A Class Act
 