
Michigan regulators were deluged with angry comments this week, after reports 
that the state haddrafted 
<http://www.michigan.gov/documents/deq/deq-odwma-ehs-nwsu-nestle_section17_application_533989_7.pdf>
 a permit approval for Nestlé to nearly double the amount of groundwater it 
pumps from a plant in Evart, Michigan to 210m gallons a year.

The pumping increase is only expected to cost the Swiss food giant $200 a year 
<http://www.mlive.com/news/index.ssf/2016/10/nestle_groundwater_pumping_exp.html>
, and possibly the price of apermit fee 
<http://www.democracynow.org/2016/2/17/michigans_water_wars_nestle_pumps_millions>
, because its bottling plant in Evart is considered a private well under state 
law, regulators said.

In a statement, Nestlé touted the move as a boon to the state because it is 
created “some 20 new jobs 
<http://www.nestle-watersna.com/en/nestle-water-news/pressreleases/nestle-waters-expansion-of-michigan-bottling-plant>
”. The company is valued at$219bn <https://www.google.com/finance?q=VTX:NESN>. 

Some local residents were not so enthusiastic.

“Why on earth would the state of Michigan, given our lack of money to address 
water matters of our own, like Flint, even consider giving MORE water for 
little or no cost to a foreign corporation with annual profits in the 
billions?” a man from Ada,Michigan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michigan> wrote to regulators, who 
provided the message and others to the Guardian.

“Please do not attempt to justify giving away our resources for the ‘benefit’ 
ofNestlé <https://www.theguardian.com/business/nestle> adding 20 more jobs.”

The Nestlé plant at Evart is just 120 miles from Flint, where a recent move by 
public officials to save money by switching water sources caused lead to 
contaminate the city’s water.

Flint’s water is still not safe to drink without a filter 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/29/us/flint-michigan-water-investigation.html?_r=0>
 and health have officials saidbacterial illnesses 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/05/us/flint-hit-with-bacterial-illness-as-residents-shun-city-water.html>
 are on the rise because residents fear bathing. Flint’smayor is still lobbying 
<http://michiganradio.org/post/flints-pipe-replacement-program-moves-third-phase>
 Congress for cash to fix the city’s pipes.

“Please, please, please reconsider allowing Nestlé to pump additional gallons 
of water from their facility near Evart,” wrote a woman who identified herself 
as being from Newaygo, Michigan. “The rape of our Michigan inland fresh water 
sources is a cause for concern, especially when it is done by a private company 
for profit.”

Another commenter told regulators Nestlé “could literally suck the life out of 
the state”.

The company’s proposal to increase pumping from 150 gallons a minute to 400 
gallons a minute from an aquifer underneath the plant is part of a planned $36m 
expansion of bottled water operations in Stanwood, Michigan. The company has 
already increased pumping to 250 gallons per minute, an increase for which no 
permit was required.

Water protection laws won't change until 2017 despite Flint crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/23/lead-copper-rule-drinking-water-epa-flint-crisis>
The additional water will be bottled under the Ice Mountain and Pure Life 
brands and distributed “throughout Michigan and the midwest”, according to a
press release 
<http://www.nestle-watersna.com/en/nestle-water-news/pressreleases/nestle-waters-expansion-of-michigan-bottling-plant>
.

The company was sued by residents more than a decade ago, over a nearly 
identical permit.

In that case, Nestlé pumped 400 gallons of water per minute from a plant 30 
miles south in Mecosta, Michigan. That rate is equal to around 576,000 gallons 
per day and 210 gallons per year. For a sense of scale, one million gallons is 
roughly the equivalent of a 267ft long, 50ft wide and 10ft deep swimming pool, 
according to theUS Geological Survey <http://water.usgs.gov/edu/mgd.html>. 

In 2009, a settlement 
<http://www.mlive.com/news/grand-rapids/index.ssf/2009/07/settlement_reached_in_mecosta.html>
 allowed Nestlé to pump 218 gallons of water a minute.

The lawyer who represented plaintiffs in that case, Jim Olson, criticized 
regulators for not giving the public more notice of the new proposal.

“We’ve seen an erosion of public notices and more internal official 
decisions,” Olson said. “That’s at the heart of the Flint water crisis, and now 
we have the same kind of institutionalized expediency here.”

Nestle bottled water operations spark protests amid California drought
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/20/nestle-water-bottling-california-drought>
Michigan Live 
<http://www.mlive.com/news/index.ssf/2016/10/nestle_groundwater_pumping_exp.html>
 reported that the plan was first published by the Michigan department of 
environmental quality (MDEQ) last month, as part of its permit calendar. On 
Thursday, MDEQ officials extended the public comment period by 30 days and 
planned a public hearing.

A spokesperson for Nestlé Water <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/water>
 North America, Christopher Rieck, said: “We appreciate that some people may 
have concerns … sustainability and water quality are top priorities for us as 
well.

“We are deepening our investment in Michigan to meet growing consumer demand. 
As we do so, we are committed to an open, transparent process that allows the 
public to share their views and learn more about our operations.”
 