
We are sitting beneath a huge window in the corner of Michael Clark’s east 
London rehearsal space, amid exercise balls, yoga mats and discarded trainers, 
and as the late-summer light fades, our conversation turns toDavid Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/davidbowie>, whose music has been a constant 
throughout the dancer’s life.

“I was so shocked by his death, really shocked,” says Clark, quietly. “I kept 
thinking of that moment when he put his arm around Mick Ronson [Bowie’s 
guitarist] onTop of the Pops all those years ago in the 70s and how it 
triggered this huge sense of relief in me as a boy. It was the only physical 
contact I had seen men do apart from punching each other. It seems ridiculous 
now that a small gesture like that could be so meaningful, but, for me, it was. 
It planted in me the idea that there was another way.”

With Michael, the fragility and the perfectionism go together; you can't 
separate one from the other
Sophie Fiennes 
Clark has pursued that other way ever since, often using Bowie’s songs in his 
performances: a forthcomingweek-long residency at the Barbican 
<https://www.barbican.org.uk/theatre/event-detail.asp?ID=19696> in London, 
entitled to a simple, rock’n’roll… song, will culminate in a new piece 
choreographed to Bowie’s valedictory song Blackstar from his final album of the 
same name. It will be preceded by two piano pieces by Erik Satie (Ogives 1-4 and
Prelude – Fête donnée par des chevaliers normands en l’honneur d’une jeune 
demoiselle) and an interpretation of Patti Smith’s incantatory Land 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KWGk2R2gHEU>. The performance will also 
include a short cameo by Clark himself dancing to Pug-Nosed Face, the mocking 
song – “little fat man who sold his soul” – that Bowie sings to Ricky Gervais’s 
Andy Millman during hisguest appearance on Extras 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x502ac_david-bowie-he-s-a-little-fat-man-h_music>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJ8W9sQJaAdM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJ8W9sQJaAdM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJ8W9sQJaAdM&media=>
 Michael Clark and company on the Whistle Test in 1984 with The Fall. 
“Why not?” says Clark, who, at 54, and despite receiving the approval of the 
establishment in the form of a CBE, continues to dance to his own wilfully 
offbeat tune both on stage and off. He remains a mercurial and almost waif-like 
presence, whose performances attract audiences not normally drawn to 
contemporary dance even though his live appearances are now tantalisingly 
fleeting. Despite his reputation as a punkish provocateur and iconoclast as 
well as his own self-destructive behaviour, theMichael Clark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/michael-clark> Dance Company is now 32 years 
old, an achievement that, one senses, surprises its founder as much as the rest 
of us. “I never really had a plan,” he says, “except to express myself as 
purely as possible.”

In the intervening years, he has survived several financial crises, a 
dalliance with heroin, a protracted addiction to methadone, and an attendant 
disappearance from the public eye in the mid 1990s during which he lived back 
home in Aberdeen with his mother and drifted into alcoholism — “I’d start 
drinking every day at 11 in the morning to stop the shakes.”

Today, he looks as frail as ever, but his eventful life is now etched on that 
once beatific face. In person, dressed in tracksuit and trainers, his head 
shaven, he looks tired and is soft-spoken, given to somewhat tangential trains 
of thought. He is remarkably open throughout, even when talking about his 
addiction, and seems free of the egotism that often attends the naturally 
gifted. One can see almost immediately why he has gathered such an extended 
support system – loyal dancers, artists, musicians, gallerists – around him: he 
exudes an effortless charisma that seems to be enhanced rather than undercut by 
his apparent fragility.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fmichael-clark-i-still-make-the-dance-on-my-own-body-first-interview-to-a-simple-rock-n-roll-song%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff04a5bc8f28c0ce09b65e5380fb776c3a9f901b4%2F0_128_5670_3390%2F5670.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Clark%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20still%20make%20the%20dance%20work%20on%20my%20own%20body%20first%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fmichael-clark-i-still-make-the-dance-on-my-own-body-first-interview-to-a-simple-rock-n-roll-song%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Clark%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20still%20make%20the%20dance%20work%20on%20my%20own%20body%20first%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fmichael-clark-i-still-make-the-dance-on-my-own-body-first-interview-to-a-simple-rock-n-roll-song%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff04a5bc8f28c0ce09b65e5380fb776c3a9f901b4%2F0_128_5670_3390%2F5670.jpg>
 Clark: ‘a mercurial and almost waif-like presence’. Photograph: Richard Saker 
for the Observer 
Supporters include the artist Sarah Lucas, the gallerist Sadie Coles, who 
hosted an art auction in 2006 to keep his company afloat, Jarvis Cocker, and 
the film-maker Sophie Fiennes. “Michael is one of the most charismatic people I 
know and he has the charm of the devil,” says Fiennes, who met Clark when they 
both worked on Peter Greenaway’s 1991 filmProspero’s Books (he played Caliban 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2hg9NKqHO-M>) and subsequently directed the 
documentaryThe Late Michael Clark for the BBC in 2000, “but he is a fragile 
soul and also very particular to the point of obsessive in terms of what he 
creates. People recognise that and try to help him get to the place where he 
can creatively deliver his best, but also to help him survive. With Michael, 
the fragility and the perfectionism go together; you cannot separate one from 
the other.”

With this in mind, I ask Clark if he has found getting older particularly 
difficult – the often uneasy transition from dancer to choreographer means that 
he now entrusts his ideas to a company comprising, as he mentions twice, 
performers half his age.

“I still make work on my own body first, as I always have,” he says. “I can 
only understand it from the inside. For that, I have to dance and, of course, 
like everything else, it gets more difficult as you get older. I work every 
day, but I’m impatient. I still don’t warm up properly so, right now, I have a 
twinge in my back from yesterday. But, yes, a lot of ballerinas, like 
footballers, become depressed when they stop and become alcoholics, but 
hopefully I got that all out of the way when I was younger.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fmichael-clark-i-still-make-the-dance-on-my-own-body-first-interview-to-a-simple-rock-n-roll-song%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1296e7265467c57079e839016fc55898270699e8%2F0_62_2208_1411%2F2208.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Clark%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20still%20make%20the%20dance%20work%20on%20my%20own%20body%20first%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fmichael-clark-i-still-make-the-dance-on-my-own-body-first-interview-to-a-simple-rock-n-roll-song%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Clark%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20still%20make%20the%20dance%20work%20on%20my%20own%20body%20first%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fmichael-clark-i-still-make-the-dance-on-my-own-body-first-interview-to-a-simple-rock-n-roll-song%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1296e7265467c57079e839016fc55898270699e8%2F0_62_2208_1411%2F2208.jpg>
 Before and After: The Fall at Sadler’s Wells in 2001, designed by Clark’s 
friend, the artist Sarah Lucas. Photograph: Andrea Stappert. 
Now that he no longer uses friends who are non-dancers – they have aged, too, 
or, as in the case of his most famous collaborator,Leigh Bowery 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kbN8QUIIcrA>, died young – has his 
choreography become more formal and rigorous as a result? He mulls this over 
for a few moments. “Yeah, it has. I say that with a bit of regret in my voice, 
but I don’t mean to. Right now, the dancers need to have a particular kind of 
ability to do the work I am choreographing. That’s just how it’s developed.”

Does that mean he has embraced a kind of late maturity as an artist? Another 
pause. “Probably, yes. I’m not in a position any more to employ people just 
because I want to. The world has changed and dancers have changed. It’s very 
tough financially. It has been made very hard for people purely to be in it for 
love. But, even though I’m not working with my friends, and the people I have 
around me are much younger, I still have an old-fashioned belief that if I make 
something for somebody, I want them to own it too. As time passes, I want them 
to feel protective towards it.”

In the early 1980s, when, in pop cultural terms, the fertile experimentalism 
of post-punk was giving way to the excesses of new romanticism, Michael Clark 
emerged as if fully formed to create an aesthetic that drew on the discordant 
energy of the former and the gender-bending flamboyance of the latter. His 
talent was undeniable, his spirit transgressive and his self-belief seemingly 
unshakable. The youngest of five siblings, he had begun dancing, aged four, by 
gatecrashing his older sister’s Scottish dancing lessons in rural 
Aberdeenshire. “From the start, dancing was always an escape from normality for 
me,” he says now, “and I took to it even though, at the very start, I found it 
very boring – holding on to a chair and doing the same thing over and over. I 
somehow stuck at it while the few other boys would come and go. I also saw it 
as a way of getting to the city, which, even as a child, is where I wanted to 
be.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fmichael-clark-i-still-make-the-dance-on-my-own-body-first-interview-to-a-simple-rock-n-roll-song%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77fbd57c1ec72ad1e1cc0123ed5de4ec080f1b3f%2F54_27_2316_3446%2F2316.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Clark%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20still%20make%20the%20dance%20work%20on%20my%20own%20body%20first%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fmichael-clark-i-still-make-the-dance-on-my-own-body-first-interview-to-a-simple-rock-n-roll-song%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Clark%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20still%20make%20the%20dance%20work%20on%20my%20own%20body%20first%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fmichael-clark-i-still-make-the-dance-on-my-own-body-first-interview-to-a-simple-rock-n-roll-song%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77fbd57c1ec72ad1e1cc0123ed5de4ec080f1b3f%2F54_27_2316_3446%2F2316.jpg>
 Michael Clark, photographed in 1986. Photograph: Frank Martin 
In 1975 he was spotted by talent scouts from London, and given a place at the 
Royal Ballet School in Richmond, London. It was a dramatic and not altogether 
easy transition. “It was all very rigorous and serious. They x-ray your wrists 
to see how tall you are going to be and do various tests to make sure you are 
loose and relatively symmetrical. They’d get me out to do Scottish dances at 
the Royal Albert Hall, which was fine as I knew all that stuff, but I was two 
years behind everyone else in terms of the ballet. Culturally, I felt very 
different and not just because I was Scottish.”

Was it the discipline he found hard to take? “No, I thrived on it, but the 
whole thing seemed so constricting somehow, so I was glad of punk. I’d bunk off 
school to see the bands, but – and I’m not being big-headed here – they 
couldn’t throw me out because I was the best. I had to find a way of bringing 
together what I had learned with all this other stuff that was much more 
exciting to me – punk and post-punk. People think I arrived from nowhere but it 
actually took some time for things to come together.”

To the dismay of his teachers, he stubbornly resisted the overtures of the 
Royal Ballet Company, opting to join the more experimental Ballet Rambert 
before forming his own company in 1982, aged just 21. When his hybrid vision 
finally coalesced to the abrasive music of post-punk groups like Wire and the 
Fall, the Michael Clark Company became one of the most provocative and exciting 
pop-cultural happenings of the 1980s, with works likeNo Fire Escape in Hell and 
I Am Curious, Orange – performed at Sadler’s Wells with the Fall on stage and 
Leigh Bowery cavorting among the trained dancers – drawing a young, hip 
audience with little or no interest in contemporary dance. If Clark annoyed the 
purists with his antics – bum-displaying costumes by young designers such as 
BodyMap, giant dildos as props – his dancing was of a calibre that could not be 
easily dismissed.

“Michael was extremely rigorous,” says Fiennes, who watched him rehearse and 
perform at close range. “The press tended to home in on his provocations, but 
he worked hard on his ideas and his choreography, though he knew from very 
early on that the dance world would limit him. His conceptual grasp of 
aesthetics outstripped the ambition of contemporary dance. He was drawing on 
Merce Cunningham, John Cage, David Bowie, Yvonne Rainer and the whole post-punk 
idea of the outsider, whether that was Mark E Smith of the Fall or Leigh 
Bowery. It all came together in his head and in his dancing.”

For a time, Michael Clark was feted as the enfant terrible of dance, 
commissioned by, among others, Rudolf Nureyev, with whom he became friends. “He 
was very flirtatious and he was someone who was used to getting his way all the 
time. It was interesting because he was obviously gay but he wasn’t out, but he 
was in a way because everybody knew. I remember I got chucked out of his 
apartment by one of his chefs for snogging someone. It was not the done thing 
at all.” At another of Nureyev’s dinner parties, he met Dame Margot Fonteyn and 
Jacqueline Onassis – “She was very dignified, but good fun. She spoke to one of 
my friends on the phone when I asked her to and she let me try on her coat.” 
All three, he notes, were dead within a year of the dinner party.

I have to remember that what is happening is exactly what I wanted to happen… 
It’s an amazing life I have, really

Sophie Fiennes believes that Clark’s subsequent slide into addiction was 
precipitated not by his partying, but by the pressures of keeping the Michael 
Clark Company a viable concern. “He was under immense pressure after the huge 
success of his early performances, He had to keep the entire company afloat 
and, as we now know, he was not temperamentally suited to that kind of 
organisational responsibility. I think he just wanted more mental space. I 
remember he once said: ‘I thought if I take heroin, all these other things will 
just fade away.’ It was almost thought out.”

Clark refers to his addiction as his “wilderness years”, which is not 
altogether true given that he managed to dance while on heroin at least for a 
short while. He is remarkably open about the drug, its attraction and its 
lingering grip on the psyche – “I have to be constantly mindful that it is 
stronger than me” – and, blessedly, is not one of those reformed users whose 
eyes light up when they talk about the drug.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fmichael-clark-i-still-make-the-dance-on-my-own-body-first-interview-to-a-simple-rock-n-roll-song%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69fb20b0f402eef717206de58ec72b9eb0c4a29e%2F0_0_3543_2228%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Clark%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20still%20make%20the%20dance%20work%20on%20my%20own%20body%20first%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fmichael-clark-i-still-make-the-dance-on-my-own-body-first-interview-to-a-simple-rock-n-roll-song%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Clark%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20still%20make%20the%20dance%20work%20on%20my%20own%20body%20first%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fmichael-clark-i-still-make-the-dance-on-my-own-body-first-interview-to-a-simple-rock-n-roll-song%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69fb20b0f402eef717206de58ec72b9eb0c4a29e%2F0_0_3543_2228%2F3543.jpg>
 Michael Clark in rehearsal for Mmm in 1992. Photograph: Henrietta Butler/PAL 
With hindsight, can he cast any light on why he did it? “Well, some people say 
that they felt they weren’t whole until they took it, that it makes them 
function in a way they could never have done before. I wasn’t like that. I was 
doing fine without it. I did it relatively late, which is probably not a bad 
thing. I had the memory of functioning well without it.” He pauses for a moment 
as if deep in thought. “I have to be careful here, but people conveniently 
don’t mention how great it makes you feel at the start. But, then, you are 
chasing that first hit and you have got to get the amount just right. It’s a 
full-time job just getting it, and everything else comes second to that.”

And so it was with his dancing. At some point in the late 1980s, having 
dabbled for a time, the impressionable young artist who naively believed that 
to dance to Heroin by the Velvet Underground you had to actually be on heroin, 
soon found himself as strung out and desperate as the protagonist of Lou Reed’s 
song.

“His trajectory seems almost unbelievable until you look at his work and 
realise it is all about telling his own story,” says his friend Sadie Coles. 
“Whether dancing to Heroin or the gender-bending stuff with Leigh Bowery or 
even Stravinsky’sThe Rite of Spring, it’s all autobiographical in some way. 
Michael is serially honest as a person and, like most artists, he can be 
complicated and dysfunctional and test your patience to the limit, but, as a 
performer, all that makes for an authenticity and an edge in the work. Plus, I 
do think that dance, in its purity and its rigour, is quite self-punishing, 
almost sadomasochistic. In a way, you are bound to fail in the constant seeking 
of perfection through pushing the body. His work and, to a degree, his life, 
contains that anxiety.”

I miss the old, wild days of squatting, dole money and freedom, but they’re 
gone … no regrets

Things reached a nadir of sorts for Clark in the mid-90s, when, suffering from 
a nagging knee injury and attendant loss of self-confidence, and depressed by 
the death of his friend Leigh Bowery on New Year’s Eve 1994, he fled back home 
to Scotland to live with his mother. So began a four-year disappearance – the 
real wilderness years – in which the myth of Michael Clark grew.

How on earth did he pass the time for four years in the village of Cairnbulg, 
Aberdeenshire?

He laughs, then falls serious. “When I eventually came off methadone, which 
was a prolonged and hard process, I moved to alcohol. They start drinking there 
at nine in the morning which definitely didn’t help.”

Does he believe that he has an addictive personality? “I guess so. In my case, 
all the evidence would point to that.”

What he doesn’t mention as a possible precipitating factor in all of this is 
the suicide of his father, which occurred when Clark was 18 years old. Clark 
senior was a complex man by all accounts: a farmer who longed to be an 
accountant, a heavy drinker, a gambler who ran up huge debts and, on a good 
day, the life and soul of the party. “I found him exciting to be around as a 
child though I’m sure some expert would say that he was not a good role model. 
He was very entertaining, larger than life, funny and unpredictable. A bit like 
Leigh Bowery, funnily enough.” He lapses into a prolonged silence. “I was the 
younger son and I was very angry when he killed himself,” he says, finally, 
“but I think he saw enough to know I had potential.” Is he still angry about 
it? “No, not really. It was, in many ways, a very aggressive act and it had a 
lot of repercussions, people still blaming themselves and each other 20 years 
later. But, no. I’m not angry about it now. Sad, yes, but not angry. ”

Michael Clark Company | Dance review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/sep/06/michael-clarke-luke-jennings> 
Clark’s creative resurrection began when he reconnected with his old Royal 
Ballet School teacher, Richard Glasstone, in the early 2000s, and began taking 
lessons again. His comeback work was mischievously titledBefore and After: The 
Fall  <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2001/oct/24/artsfeatures>and it was 
followed, beginning in 2005, by a creative residency at the Barbican, during 
which he has created three interpretations of Stravinsky ballets and a piece 
for the 2009 Edinburgh festival calledThank You, Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/aug/09/interview-michael-clark-ballet-dancer>
, for which Bowie was the inspiration. Now comesto a simple, rock’n’roll… song. 
Michael Clark may have mellowed, but he remains predictably unpredictable.

He also remains close to his mother, Bessie, who is now is her 80s and appears 
to some degree to share her son’s punkish attitude – she appeared inMmm… in 
1992 and was topless on stage inO <https://www.artangel.org.uk/project/mmm/> in 
1994. “It does sometimes cross my mind that I could be one of those gay men who 
can’t live without their mothers,” he says. “It seems to be a classic thing – 
Alexander McQueen, Billy MacKenzie [singer with post-punk group the 
Associates], both committed suicide after their mother died. I was afraid for a 
moment that I was going to be one, too. I spoke to my mum about it and she 
said, ‘I’d rather you didn’t do that. It would mean I hadn’t done a very good 
job as a mother.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fmichael-clark-i-still-make-the-dance-on-my-own-body-first-interview-to-a-simple-rock-n-roll-song%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F189f5d20a578f38269bda1c5a2f62ef8379d9a96%2F35_48_866_559%2F866.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Clark%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20still%20make%20the%20dance%20work%20on%20my%20own%20body%20first%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fmichael-clark-i-still-make-the-dance-on-my-own-body-first-interview-to-a-simple-rock-n-roll-song%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Clark%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20still%20make%20the%20dance%20work%20on%20my%20own%20body%20first%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fmichael-clark-i-still-make-the-dance-on-my-own-body-first-interview-to-a-simple-rock-n-roll-song%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F189f5d20a578f38269bda1c5a2f62ef8379d9a96%2F35_48_866_559%2F866.jpg>
 Clark’s mother, Bessie (second from left), next to Leigh Bowery, and Clark 
himself (third from right) in Mmm…, an Artangel commission at King’s Cross 
Depot in 1992. Photograph: Stephen White courtesy Artangel 
Does he still dislike dance, the medium that has made him what he is? “Well, I 
don’t go and see it, so that kind of answers the question. In the past, I would 
go to see Merce Cunningham, but I struggled even with that. I found it a bit 
dry. The codes of behaviour are so bizarre and ritualised. It’s a strange 
medium, really, because ultimately you can’t abstract the body, which is what 
they are trying to do. You put two people together and they have to interact 
and embrace. The body is not an abstract thing.”

Does he have any regrets? “No. Not really. I miss the old, wild days of 
squatting, dole money and freedom, but they’re gone. I don’t regret not joining 
the Royal Ballet, as that would just be silly and sad.” He thinks about the 
question some more, looking like his older, younger self in the fading light. 
“What I want to do,” he says, finally, “is to appreciate the good things that 
are happening to me. I have to step back and remind myself that what is 
happening is exactly what I wanted to happen and not take that for granted. 
It’s an amazing life I have, really, even if everything does get more difficult 
as you get older. It’s tough, but I’m lucky: I’m still doing what I always 
wanted to do.”

The Michael Clark Dance Company: to a simple rock’n’roll… song is at the 
Barbican, London EC1, from Thursday to 15 October 
<http://www.barbican.org.uk/theatre/event-detail.asp?id=19696&pg=9878> at the 
Lowry, Salford <http://www.thelowry.com/event/michael-clark-new-work-2016>, on 
19 October
 