
Michelle Obama may have done the seemingly impossible. She may just have 
rescued the US elections from the grotesque and demeaning mire into which they 
have descended. She did something even more remarkable, and just as badly 
needed. With the touch of a poet,her speech last night 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/10/13/michelle-obama-just-put-a-huge-and-emotional-exclamation-point-on-trumps-hot-mic-tape/?tid=sm_fb>
 shamed the tat and the tawdry of populism and held out the possibility of 
something better. She lent her extraordinary ability to say what people are 
feeling to every English-speaking woman in the world.

Nominally, she spoke for Hillary Clinton at a run-of-the-mill political rally. 
In fact she made apassionate and clear-eyed appeal for decency and respect in 
public life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/13/michelle-obama-donald-trump-misconduct-frightening>
. Clinton’s Republican rival Donald Trump did not get a single mention, but he 
was in every word of every sentence. It was one of the most sustained put-downs 
in modern democratic politics.

There have been many protests this week as Trump’s lewd bragging about 
sexually assaulting women finallyregistered in the Republican scale of shame 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/11/donald-trump-republican-party-disloyal-election-2016>
. His campaign is floundering, at last. Obama’s contribution was not to add to 
the direct attacks on him. Instead, on behalf of American voters – women and 
girls, of course, but men and boys too – she gave a victim’s statement.


The Trump tape, she said, had shaken her to her core.

“I feel it so personally – and I’m sure you do too – particularly the women. 
(I love that “particularly”).

“The shameful comments about our bodies.

“The disrespect of our ambitions and our intellect.

“The belief that you can do anything you want to a woman.

“It’s cruel – it’s frightening – and the truth is it hurts.”

This hits home in a way that a direct attack on the insolent, impervious 
figure of Trump himself does not. It appeals to people of every political 
persuasion. She pitches this attack as defence. A defence of humanity. She 
brings to it her extraordinary mix of talents. She can find words that make 
pictures. She brings passion and intellectual clarity. She has an actor’s sense 
of timing. This morning she seems the world’s most complete leader.

On Monday, in the second debate between the presidential candidates, Clinton 
quoted Obama: “When they go low, we go high.” Great advice – a nightmare to 
follow. The first lady has found a way of doing it that avoids the elephant 
traps and the little snares.

She has a graceful humanity. She looks normal. Glamorous, but in a normal kind 
of way. She sounds like a normal person, she uses the language of normal people 
and she expresses normal hopes and fears. As a wife and a mother, an American, 
a black woman – all these parts that make her who she is – she has a fine 
capacity to say what millions of women and men have been thinking sincethe 
Trump tape 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/08/donald-trump-tape-arianne-zucker-sexual-assault-groping>
 first came to light last weekend.

Michelle Obama denounces Donald Trump's rhetoric: 'It has shaken me to my core'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/13/michelle-obama-donald-trump-misconduct-frightening>
It was hardly a surprise to hear her speak so well. Her speech introducing 
Clinton as the Democrat nominee to theparty’s convention 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4ZNWYqDU948> in July revealed the exceptional 
talent that she has been nurturing over these past eight years. That was the 
speech where she reminded her listeners what could be done by collective 
effort. She talked of the “lash of bondage” and the “sting of servitude” and 
then described waking up every morning in the White House, “a house built by 
slaves” and watching her daughters, “two beautiful intelligent young black 
women” playing with their dogs: “and because of Hillary Clinton, my daughters, 
and all our sons and daughters, take for granted that a woman can be president 
of the United States”.

Last night she talked of women doing what women have always done “just trying 
to get through it … trying to pretend this doesn’t really bother us”. She 
ended: “This is not normal, this is not politics as usual … this has got to 
stop right now.”

When she speaks, Michelle Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michelleobama> doesn’t stop being the wife 
of the president, but she transcends it. She becomes the personification of the 
best of her country. Perhaps there is something in the first lady status, in 
politics but not of it, that uniquely privileges the holder of the office. Who 
in Britain can make that nonpartisan appeal to ordinary human decency? Last 
night she spoke for everyone who thinks politics can be better than this.
 