
As news broke of Microsoft’s $26.2bn acquisition of LinkedIn last week, one 
wag took to Twitter to quip: “Satya Nadella makes bold final attempt to stop
LinkedIn <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/linkedin> from emailing him.”

Many people worn down by the site’s relentless emails will have echoed that 
sentiment. But Microsoft’s chief executive is in fact taking a bold and 
optimistic gamble in buying LinkedIn at a 50% premium to its share price. 
Nadella is betting that social networks will be at the centre of our 
professional lives, while bolsteringMicrosoft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft> products that must take over 
from fading mainstays such as Windows if the company is to ensure its long-term 
survival.

LinkedIn’s emails, with their pervasive phrase “I’d like you to join my 
professional network”, may seem like a scourge to some. But millions rely on 
the service, whose entries show members’ past and current jobs as well as who 
they know. While helping people find new jobs, the company founded by Reid 
Hoffman in 2002 also gives leads to recruiters and salespeople looking to sell 
products and services to expanding companies. It has 433 million members, of 
whom 105 million use it at least every month. Crucially, 60% of usage is on 
mobile devices, which is an important metric given how much time professionals 
spend on their smartphones.

At $255 per active user, “this is a very expensive transaction”, says 
technology consultant Richard Windsor. Nadella is much more positive, saying 
that the deal widens the market for Microsoft products and gives the company 
access to the social network phenomenon.

To consumers, Microsoft’s best-known brands are Windows, Office and Xbox. But 
it is its back-office systems, and especially software for large businesses to 
manage their IT and customer relations, that really generate cash and profits. 
Nadella cited the potential of walking into a meeting and, through LinkedIn’s 
integration with a calendar and database, know all the salient details about 
the attendees.

Nadella’s official statements on the deal use typical tech verbiage like 
“social selling” and “human capital management”, buzzwords used by the 
professional groups that Microsoft increasingly looks to for its financial 
future. As consumers turn to smartphones and tablets, Windows is fading – as 
will Microsoft’s Office suite, which is being shifted to a cloud-based 
subscription service rather than a PC-based application.

The greatest risk has been that Microsoft’s software for large businesses – 
“enterprises” – would be upended by cheaper cloud-based rivals that don’t rely 
on tortuous licences to lock them in. At the same time, companies now have to 
focus on individuals, including employees inside and outside the business, 
which makes professional identity an important factor for day-to-day 
operations. And who has the best insight into professional identity? LinkedIn. 
That is why Microsoft outbid cloud-based rival Salesforce – which hosts 
businesses’ marketing and customer relations systems – to buy it.

Ben Thompson, of the tech consultancy Stratechery, notes that the purchase 
means Microsoft can embrace a world where you run your business on other 
people’s computers in the cloud. “What is potentially transformative about this 
deal is a future where Microsoft retains its focus on enterprise, while 
shifting the locus of its business from companies to employees,” notes 
Thompson. “LinkedIn knows more about its users than anyone outside of Facebook 
— and when it comes to our professional lives, they know more. This is the most 
valuable data in the world.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fmicrosoft-bets-heavily-linkedin-world-after-windows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0f9f18db92fc4f58a70a72fb99233e576554b66%2F0_67_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Microsoft%20bets%20heavily%20on%20LinkedIn%20to%20secure%20its%20place%20in%20a%20world%20after%20Windows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fmicrosoft-bets-heavily-linkedin-world-after-windows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Microsoft%20bets%20heavily%20on%20LinkedIn%20to%20secure%20its%20place%20in%20a%20world%20after%20Windows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fmicrosoft-bets-heavily-linkedin-world-after-windows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0f9f18db92fc4f58a70a72fb99233e576554b66%2F0_67_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Satya Nadella, chief executive of Microsoft. Photograph: Anindito 
Mukherjee/Reuters 
But can it work? Microsoft has a poor record on big-money acquisitions in 
recent years – though its overall record is good. In August 2007 it bought the 
advertising company aQuantive for about $6.2bn; in July 2012it wrote down  
<http://news.microsoft.com/2012/07/02/microsoft-announces-non-cash-accounting-charge/#sm.00001erl8snjtdouybu1v43dbeigc>
the entire value of that deal. In September 2013 it bought Nokia’s mobile phone 
unit for $7.2bn; in July 2015 it wrote it off. In May 2011 it bought Skype, the 
voice-over-internet business, for $8.5bn; whether it has added that value to 
the company since is unclear. And, in retrospect, it dodged a bullet byfailing 
to acquire Yahoo for $44.6bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/feb/01/microsoft.useconomy> in 2008; 
Yahoo is now beingauctioned for about $3bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/07/verizon-yahoo-bid>. All 
this happened under previous chief executive Steve Ballmer, in charge until 
2014.

But Microsoft has also had significant successes. Its first acquisition, in 
June 1987, was a company called Forethought, which made a product now known as 
PowerPoint. In December 1997 it bought Hotmail for $500m, and turned it into 
the basis of its huge webmail service. In July 2002 it spent $1.3bn on 
Navision, whose technology became the basis of Microsoft’s customer relations 
system Dynamics – into which LinkedIn is intended to feed.

That track record suggests that when a technology is a poor fit with 
Microsoft’s overall aims, so is the outcome. The aQuantive purchase aimed to 
shore up its struggling search engine’s ad business. The Nokia purchase was a 
futile attempt to compete in smartphones, which Nadella opposed. LinkedIn, by 
contrast, carries much more potential: Nadella says it will add to 
profitability within two years, a sign of his confidence in his judgment.

The acquisition, which is equal to a quarter of Microsoft’s cash pile, is 
being funded with debt, because there would be a heavy tax penalty for 
repatriating overseas funds; debt is cheap at present.

The other question the purchase raises is: are we seeing the peak of the tech 
bubble? Only PC-maker Dell’s purchase of storage business EMC for $67bn, 
described by analysts as “like a python swallowing a cow” and still ongoing 
after beingannounced last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/12/dell-to-buy-emc-in-67bn-dollars-deal>
, has been bigger.

With a spending slowdown beginning to hit the tech sector, there are signs 
that venture capitalists are becoming more wary. Spotify’s latest fundraising 
was via debt, not equity, which imposes significant extra costs. Earlier this 
month Uberraised $3.5bn from Saudi Arabia’s sovereign wealth fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/01/uber-investment-saudi-arabia-royal-government-tech>
, at the cost of a seat on the board. There are signs of tension as some 
startups approach the end of their funding without concomitant revenue, and 
have to accept “down rounds”, with funding below their previous valuations.

Yet, despite years of expectation, there’s still no sign of the bubble 
bursting in the way that it did back in April 2000. LinkedIn’s flotation, in 
May 2011, saw it valued at $10bn – and wastaken as “proof” of overinflation 
<https://www.yahoo.com/news/linkedins-scorching-hot-ipo-proof-tech-bubble-135800443.html>
. Five years on, it has grown in perceived value. If there is a bubble, it is 
still inflating.

Other social network companies in play

Twitter’s stock price, which has been in the doldrums for months, shot up by 
7% when Microsoft announced its purchase of LinkedIn. If one big lossmaking 
social network could get bought for a nosebleed price, then surely the most 
visible independent one, with hundreds of millions of users, would be?

Expectation remains strong that Google (or its parent, Alphabet) will at some 
point buy Twitter. This has been strengthened by the news last week that Larry 
Page (pictured), Google’s co-founder,tried to do exactly that 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/news/2016/06/nick-bilton-on-the-future-of-twitter> 
in 2011. But Nick Bilton, the journalist who revealed the story, doubts that 
deal would ever happen. “While there are undoubtedly numerous companies that 
I’m sure would love to buy Twitter, the sexiest of them would be better off 
spending their billions elsewhere,” he said. “in Silicon Valley, revenue growth 
is in other corners of the business.”

The photo-messaging service Snapchat has now passed Twitter in total users, 
and its young demographic appeals to advertisers. It is valued at roughly 
$22bn. Facebook, which snapped up photo-sharing business Instagram for $1bn in 
2012 and messaging service WhatsApp for $19bn in 2014, might try again. 
Pinterest, the online scrapbooking site, could also come into play.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fmicrosoft-bets-heavily-linkedin-world-after-windows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35ca8a375b6833980a9cd9f2409cbad5bf31b377%2F0_28_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Microsoft%20bets%20heavily%20on%20LinkedIn%20to%20secure%20its%20place%20in%20a%20world%20after%20Windows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fmicrosoft-bets-heavily-linkedin-world-after-windows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Microsoft%20bets%20heavily%20on%20LinkedIn%20to%20secure%20its%20place%20in%20a%20world%20after%20Windows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fmicrosoft-bets-heavily-linkedin-world-after-windows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35ca8a375b6833980a9cd9f2409cbad5bf31b377%2F0_28_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Google’s Larry Page tried to buy Twitter in 2011. Photograph: Eduardo 
Munoz/Reuters 
Dropbox, the file-transfer service, was valued at $10bn when it last raised 
money in January 2014. Although Steve Jobs sniffed at its capabilities as “a 
feature, not a product” – because he thought it easily copyable – it has stayed 
independent so far. There’s little sign of any of Apple, Google or Microsoft 
wanting it, though. All have products that can perform the same function.

Salesforce, valued at $55bn, was reportedly an underbidder for LinkedIn 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-06-16/salesforce-said-to-be-goldman-s-failed-rival-suitor-for-linkedin>
 because it could have used the corporate identity data to strengthen its own 
sales services. Microsoft and Salesforce also held buyout talks last year, 
according to CNBC, but couldn’t agree a price: Microsoft offered $55bn, while 
Salesforce chief executive Marc Benioff wanted $70bn. Instead, Salesforce 
bought DemandWare earlier this month for $2.8bn in what Benioff called the 
“most intense, most exciting” period for acquisitions he has ever seen.

And it’s not over. As venture funding runs out and revenues prove elusive, 
more small companies will looking for refuge as economies slow down.
 