
This was a forgettable victory for Gloucester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby>. Better than last week's 
memorable loss atCardiff <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cardiffblues>, but 
not a performance to ease the anxieties at Kingsholm. Gloucester are 
spluttering along.

Expectations on the way to this match were modest. This Anglo-Welsh Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anglowelshcup> appears to have more 
detractors than advocates. But for a while those expectations exceeded the 
reality. The start was horribly scrappy; Gloucester were tentative, nervous 
even, and theDragons <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/newportdragons> had 
most of the territory and the possession. This was not going to be so one-sided 
as we thought. Gloucester looked fragile.

There were mistakes galore in the first 20 minutes, but from some of them 
something constructive evolved. The first two tries came from the inability of 
players to catch simple, speculative kicks. First, Dragons' full-back, Phil 
Dollman, dropped a high ball without an opponent in sight. Scrums were conceded 
near the try-line; in factGloucester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby> preferred another scrum to 
a penalty and finally we witnessed a slick and successful move. A neat reverse 
pass and Lesley Vainikolo was unstoppable.

A minute later Rory Lawson let slip a kick up field and the Dragons attacked 
from the subsequent scrum. Mike Tindall missed a tackle on Rhodri Gomer-Davies 
and Richard Fussell raced over in the corner.

This was Gomer-Davies's final contribution. He was soon floored trying to 
tackle Tindall and as he lay flat out the match went on -the modern game, all 
huff and puff, stops for nothing. Fortunately, the Welshman eventually left the 
pitch under his own steam.

By now it had dawned on us that we had an interesting game on our hands, 
albeit not one of high quality. After more Dragons pressure Grant Webb powered 
over to give the visitors the lead.

Gloucester responded with another rare, slick move. A throw to the front of 
the line-out, a quick interchange of passes and Scott Lawson scuttled over the 
line.

In open play Gloucester were much clumsier. Just before half-time they had 
possession of the ball for five minutes, going forwards and backwards, often 
starting again after another errant pass. This prompted one heartfelt piece of 
advice to meandering Gloucester forwards from one of the locals in the stand: 
'Get out of the bloody way!'

I am sure the coaches had a more technical explanation for Gloucester's woes 
but with the score 12-12 at half-time the home side were making heavy weather 
of this. A Shaun Connor penalty at the start of the second half and the Dragons 
were back in the lead.

Gloucester's exasperation heightened on and off the pitch. Back and forth the 
ball was booted. It was Iain Balshaw that turned the tide. Receiving the ball 
deep he opted not to kick it. Instead he set off on a mazy, pacy run before 
setting up Vainikolo five yards from the line. No contest. Then Balshaw 
scrambled over for a try of his own and at last the home side could dictate.

Kingsholm 8,057

Game rating |||||||||| Referee N Owens (Wales)

GLOUCESTER Balshaw; Foster, Tindall (capt), Barkley, Vainikolo; Walker (Adams 
58), R Lawson (Lewis 29); Dickinson (Satalo 75), S Lawson (Titterell 54), 
Nieto, Eustace, Bortolami, Buxton, Hazell, Strokosch

Tries Vainikolo 2, S Lawson, Balshaw Con Barkley

Pen Barkley

NEWPORT GWENT DRAGONS Dollman; Selley,

Gomer-Davies (Tovey 22), Smith (capt), Fussell; Connor, Evans; Black, S Jones 
(Willis 58), Thomas, A Jones (Murphy 62), Hall, Lydiate, Parks (Ringer 52), 
Webb (Bearman 58)

Tries Fussell, Webb, Tovey Con Connor Pen Connor
 