
Oh no, look at it, remind me never to trust AccuWeather 
<http://www.accuweather.com/en/gb/united-kingdom-weather> again: it said mainly 
clear or overcast, zero chance of precipitation after nine o’clock, sunny 
spells, I even put on sun screen (look, it’s still saying it, and it’s actually 
raining out there, insane!) or I would never have come on the bike. I haven’t 
even got an umbrella, thanks to them, plus the wind must be around 26mph, can 
you believe this, what happened to summer? It was 12 degrees at 6.30am this 
morning, though the wind made that feel more like 11, that’s colder than it was 
in spring, I went out without tights in March, that’s only happened four times 
in the last nine years.

We’ve had to put the heating on, I know they can’t be 100% accurate, but 
this is way off, oh look they’ve changed it, now it’s saying light rain for 25 
minutes, I wouldn’t call that light, more like the European monsoon with the 
return of the westerlies, what’s it doing up north, look it’s only eight 
degrees in Carrbridge – Aldershot’s 19, lucky!

Modern tribes: the men’s club president
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/04/the-men-only-membership-secretary-modern-tribes-catherine-bennett>
Same with the long-range, in May they were talking about a heatwave, maybe 30 
degrees, you know that’s still well under the highest ever recorded – 38.5C, 
June 1976 –Piers Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/24/piers-corbyn-other-rebel-in-the-family-jeremy-corbyn-climate-change>
 said tremendous, flaming June, so we booked Cornwall and it was the second 
wettest June ever, well in some places, since 1910, 111.9mm in Essex, and now 
they’re showing average temperatures, that’s around 21 to 23 degrees, until 
September, have you seen next week’s?

The Met Office says the jet stream’s moving down again so typical we’ve got a 
barbecue planned for Saturday, because on Monday there’s a new weather front 
coming in, could be 26 degrees by two o’clock, that’s well above the 
normal range. No, too late to cancel, I’ve just said turn up at 3.45, that way, 
if the forecast’s right, there’s only a .9% chance of light rain until it turns 
thundery at 7.15, 20 degrees, tops, but we’re lucky really, you should see what 
it says about Perthshire.
 