
Wait – got it, just a basic Pidgey 
<http://bulbapedia.bulbagarden.net/wiki/Pidgey_(Pok%C3%A9mon)>, do you want to 
see, now I can evolve it into aPidgeotto 
<http://bulbapedia.bulbagarden.net/wiki/Pidgeotto_(Pok%C3%A9mon)>, fantastic – 
though that probably doesn’t mean much to you, does it? Don’t you want to 
interrogate the boundaries of augmented reality? I’ll show you, it won’t take a 
second, but first I need more candy, let me explain. Actually it’s much simpler 
if you try it, I promise you’ll be hooked, mind if we stop at the church? I 
need more eggs and there’s a PokéStop in the nave. So I can incubate more 
Pokémon – course I need to, if I want to understand the sociology of ambulatory 
gaming, that’s the whole point. To collect more Pokémon for my Pokédex.

It’s not why do I want to, but why would anyone not want to be part of a 
massive cultural shift, what would that say about you as a person?

Mind if we walk faster – I’m incubating a 10 kilometre egg – that means it 
could be a fighting one, please let it be aHitmonlee 
<http://bulbapedia.bulbagarden.net/wiki/Hitmonlee_(Pok%C3%A9mon)>, I’ll show 
you, want to try to catch one?

Modern tribes: the bride
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/30/modern-tribes-bride-> 
I can’t believe you won’t even try, you meet loads of amazing people, anyway 
it’s not “just” a game unless you think chess is “just” a game, amazing, I 
can’t believe it – aVoltorb 
<http://bulbapedia.bulbagarden.net/wiki/Voltorb_(Pok%C3%A9mon)>! You have 
literally no idea what that means, do you? And chess doesn’t even have teams. 
I’m so glad I chose team Mystic, I think you’re probably more a Valor person, 
though that’s meaningless to you, isn’t it, let me explain, teams are one of 
the most incredible things about Pokémon Go (look, there’s aKrabby 
<http://bulbapedia.bulbagarden.net/wiki/Krabby_(Pok%C3%A9mon)> over there) the 
sense of purpose and belonging, but if you won’t play you’ll never understand. 
It’s all about communication, plus the exercise is incredible, I’ve lost three 
kilos.

Well you can exercise all you like, but it’s not going to help you with the 
hermeneutics ofPokémon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon> as 
a phenomenon, is it, even if I didn’t like playing I’d play, just to explore 
what it tells us about ourselves, culturally, anyway, how are you – oh my God, 
see that crowd, there’s a Snorlax, that’s incredibly rare, got to run, I’ll 
explain later.
 