
No, we’re keeping it very simple, not as simple as I wanted, I thought just 
the two of us eloping to Scotland would be romantic, plus it wouldn’t cost 
£25,000, but Nick’s mother says, you only get married once, do we want to look 
back in 10 years and think why did we deliberately deprive our families of 
beautiful memories they will cherish all their lives? And did I want to live 
with that guilt, because she wouldn’t want to. Plus she says if you elope, you 
never get another chance to get a candy cart, they hadn’t been invented when 
she got married.

Well it’s kind of a wagon, you should look on Pinterest 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2014/07/what-is-pinterest-a-database-of-intentions/375365/>
, you can have a plain table, but Nick’s mother says, do you want to go to 
another wedding and see an amazing candy cart, and think, why in God’s name 
didn’t I listen to my mother-in-law and get a decent cart while I had the 
chance, and decorate it with organic flowers and our wedding hashtag and witty 
sayings about marriage?

Modern tribes: the angry millennial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/23/modern-tribes-angry-millennial-catherine-bennett>
So we’ve booked the cart, they do it to match your theme, ours is boho meets 
bunting, do you like it, we thought it was quite original: we start with this 
very simple woodland ceremony in a treehouse, with owls swooping in with the 
rings, just six bridesmaids, in vintage, I’d thought a bit Kate Moss but after
Jamie Hince 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-3435822/Jamie-Hince-cite-adultery-divorce-proceedings-Kate-Moss-relationship-Nikolai-von-Bismarck-continues-play-public-eye.html>
 we’ve gone more Midsummer Night’s Dream.

Then I – actually my mother – had this lovely thought, everyone’s done 
flashmobs <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flash_mob>, but what about a flashmob 
of actual morris dancers as we come down from the tree? So if you wouldn’t 
mind, it’s only six months of rehearsals, mum’s hired a choreographer, we’ll 
email you about the costumes. Then we all dance to the marquee, which has this 
very Laurie Lee vibe, champagne from jam jars, hay bales in the photobooth, 
then a five-course meal before the cabaret, but there’s this huge row about the 
cake, Nick’s mother wants fruit, I want the sponge unicorn I designed when 
I was 10.

Nick? I’ve no idea, we haven’t spoken for three weeks.
 