
Poor old Boris, he can look after himself of course, but every time he sits 
down now there’ll be this pack of demented harpies out with their tape measures 
to check if he’s taking up too much space, can you imagine if we tried telling 
them how to sit! You wonder if they’ve ever seen a naked man, if they think 
that’s manspreading, how do they want us to sit? My theory is their type only 
goes out with men with miniature gonads or maybe after a few years of 
misandrist nagging your grapes shrivel up, so when they see a normal guy, 
sitting in a normal way, resting his massive bollocks the way I am now, all the 
girls think is, why doesn’t he sit like us? Granted,Philip Hammond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond> sits like a girl, what 
does that tell you aboutTheresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>, that she picks a chancellor 
with micro bollocks? Nothing wrong with that, mind, takes all sorts, but why 
should Boris have to be body-shamed, just because he’s not been castrated – now 
I mention it, my pair are a bit squashed, hang on, oof that’s better.

Blatant prejudice, I call it, persecuting well-endowed men when it’s cruelty 
to innocent genitalia they should be addressing, what kind of normally equipped 
man fits in an average train seat? But nobody ever shames the women invading 
your 180 degrees, or glaring at you when you’re just giving Robert – that’s 
what I call mine – some much-needed lebensraum, same with them grabbing the 
armrests, have they not noticed that men’s arms are twice the size of theirs?

Modern tribes: the bad mother
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/10/modern-tribes-bad-mother-catherine-bennett>
If there was any decency, women would double up, and we’d get proper spaces, 
with maybe a soft central area for our equipment, they go on about babies on 
board, nobody ever asks what it’s like to carry a massive heavy todger 
around all day, same with breastfeeding. I’d love to get my tackle out right 
here, give it some air, but it’s one rule for women, another for us, as per, 
sexism pure and simple, you know what, I’m changing Robert’s name to Boris, 
mark of respect.
 