
I’m not saying I don’t want to see Adele 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/18/adele-to-headline-saturday-night-at-glastonbury>
, but if she clashes with Jeremy Corbyn, forget it. Yes, I know what he’ll say, 
give or take, but we know what she’s going to sing, don’t we, plus thank God 
for a Corbyn reality check, with all those billionaires.

The social justice line-up sounds incredible this year – pure luck our tipi is 
about five minutes fromLeft Field 
<http://www.glastonburyfestivals.co.uk/areas/left-field/>. Sorry, ours is full, 
but you might still get one – around £2,000, but for that you get showers and 
decent toilets, plus proper security, worth every penny. And there’s always 
this great atmosphere around the fire, loads of debate – last year, we were up 
all night discussing the impact of neo-liberalism on entrenched inequalities 
with this amazing guerrilla gardener from Pricewaterhouse. It got quite heated, 
actually, after someone found out he sends his kids to private school. I was 
like, I’m saying nothing.

Apparently John McDonnell’s still a possible, which would be fantastic with 
the whole austerity theme, then I’m booked for Owen Jonesat Latitude 
<http://www.latitudefestival.com/news/how-do-you-solve-problem-rich-live-debate>
 – he can sign my copy of Chavs, plus they’ve done this brilliant pre-festival 
reading list, so you arrive debate-ready. That’s if there’s time beforeHay 
<https://www.hayfestival.com/portal/index.aspx?skinid=1&localesetting=en-GB>: 
I’m not paying to see AC Grayling on Descartes unless I’m totally up to speed 
with the whole mind-body dualism thing. Can you believeYanis Varoufakis 
<https://www.hayfestival.com/p-10549-yanis-varoufakis-talks-to-martha-kearney.aspx>
 is already sold out? But we’re in for the Gordon Brown Q&A. Sod’s law it’ll be 
back to back with Slavoj Žižek debating debt at How The Light Gets In – £12, 
which isn’t bad when you think he cost £20 at Sidmouth, though that included 
a buffet lunch and radical socialism.

Modern tribes: the Elena Ferrante fan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/30/elena-ferrante-fan-girl-modern-tribes>
Then we’re doing Wilderness <https://www.wildernessfestival.com> for the 
philosophy. There’s a whole session asking if we’re actually fictional 
characters, and the food, Raymond Blanc’s 25-course tasting banquet – that’s if 
it doesn’t clash with Charlotte Church. We’ve got a Royal Safari Tent in the 
boutique field, I know it’s extravagant, but trust me, when you’re trying to 
think, you need some decent lighting. I’m just praying they’ll keep the music 
down.
 