
Well, RIP Bake Off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-great-british-bake-off>, I don’t 
care who they get instead, it won’t beMel and Sue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/14/i-love-the-great-british-bake-off-not-mel-sue>
, can you believe they didn’t even ask them? Of course they’re saying it’ll 
stay the same, but how will that work without Sue and Mel? I’m still in shock.

OK, Paul <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/paul-hollywood> and Mary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/mary-berry> are brilliant – actually, I 
preferred Mary before they made her over within an inch of her life, and to be 
honest he’s got a bit smug – but it’s the Mel and Sue banter that makes it, the 
whole soggy bottom thing, hilarious. And the puns, remember when, Mel – no, 
maybe it was Sue – anyway, she did this amazing meringue joke, I’ll never 
forget it, something like, you merRANG sir, genius, and that time they were 
incredibly rude about madeira cake, talking about cracks.

Who are they going to find with that sort of talent? God, and the spotted 
dick episode!Davina McCall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/davina-mccall>? Oh, please no, it’s 
not that kind of show. Well, it wasn’t before they got so greedy, there was an 
innocence about it, wasn’t there, with the bunting and jokes about baps? And 
those lovely Smeg – no, as in fridge-freezers, I got a pale blue  one, insane 
price, but I wouldn’t be without it. Can you believe the rubbish product 
placement they’ll do now, it’ll be like QVC, well, I’m not watching it, not 
unless they hire someone decent. RememberJo Brand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jo-brand>? Does she do puns? Remember 
when Sue – no, maybe it was Mel – anyway, she said, “Stop loafing around!” As 
in bread? Well, it made me laugh.

Modern tribes: the bad mother
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/10/modern-tribes-bad-mother-catherine-bennett>
And if Paul goes, they’re finished, well, yes, that extramarital thing with 
the American presenter and all, but he came back, didn’t he, kept it vintage, 
that’s Bake Off for you, so innocent.

They were mad to lose it, you know how much they pay for the Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague>, and they couldn’t even 
find the money for Mel and Sue. Makes you wonder what the BBC is for, doesn’t 
it, if they won’t pay £25m for a baking show. Do you know what brand of mixers 
they’re using this time?
 