
Day 1

I have mixed feelings this trip – happy to be back but sad that it could be 
the last time. The Guardian's day-to-day coverage of theKatine community 
development project 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/katine/2008/sep/23/background.news/> officially 
finishes at the end of October this year. I hope I don't have to explain that 
to too many of the friends I have made here.

First astonishment comes on the way from Soroti to the Amref (African Medical 
Research Foundation) <http://www.guardian.co.uk/katine/amref/> project office 
in Katine, a distance I now know is 19km (about 12 miles). I know that because 
immaculate signposts, with clear, dark lettering tell me so, as we take what 
used to be the red road out of the town.

That road was something of a symbol for me three years ago. I imagined it 
winding through and around the lives of men, women and children I met. Their 
villages lay either side, accessible to the wider world only along the cratered 
track.

But now any British city would be proud of that road 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/katine/2010/sep/09/katine-livelihoods-new-road/>. It 
is tarmacked and perfectly smooth and level, with not even a hint of an 
incipient hole. More amazing still, it has a yellow line down the centre and 
bicycle lanes marked on each side - life-preserving in Uganda, a country full 
of bicycles, usually carrying three people, two suitcases and six chickens. 
Yesterday I saw a man with a door across the back of his bike negotiating a 
main city roundabout in Kampala.

So Katine now has bike lanes shared with pedestrians, signposts and even bus 
stops. Extraordinary. Apparently some people think the project delivered the 
road. In fact it was a Chinese company, which put in a special effort after 
being "blackmailed", I was told (I think he meant blackballed), by the World 
Bank for five years. Their efforts have been rewarded by a second big contract, 
it seems. They deserve it.

The smart Katine project office is full of people except for the room where 
the local community can use the computers to look at the website (or whatever 
else they choose), which is empty. Apparently it was over-run, particularly 
with schoolchildren and students, some of whom were skipping classes. So now 
the public are only allowed in at lunchtimes and after 4pm. That's only two 
hours a day, which seems a shame. Maybe they should limit the under-18s but not 
the rest. Besides, the primary schools are on holiday at the moment.

I get back to the Landmark Hotel in Soroti, which feels like home from home 
because of the time I've spent here. I notice caked red mud from Kampala has 
fallen off my shoes onto the – admittedly stained and worn – carpet and I feel 
bad. It's the rainy season, so impossible to avoid mud. The taps on the basin 
have a life of their own – swivelling as I try to turn them – and the light is 
so dim it's hard to read, but the water is hot and not even brown, so I'm 
happy. Tilapia, of course, for dinner.

Day 2
 Women farmers display their produce at a weekly market in Katine, 
north-eastern Uganda. Photograph: Graeme Robertson for the Guardian 
It's Tuesday, so the only place to be is the market. I haven't missed it on a 
single trip. It's a vibrant, noisy, colourful and smoky place (there is a whole 
row of mud and wattle structures which are cafes with tree trunks for benches, 
offering beef, goat and chicken stews cooked outside, depending on the 
ingredients the woman restaurateur can afford to buy that day).

As always, people stop to say "how are you" and "I'm fine" (the conversation 
doesn't usually go much further) every three steps. Some say they recognise me 
– well, my white face stands out just a bit. One was a traditional birth 
attendant, sitting on the ground still wearing the blouse of her navy-blue 
uniform, selling fish.

The government has forbidden traditional birth attendants <> to deliver any 
more babies, on the basis that all women must go to a proper maternity unit. 
It's honoured, if you will pardon the pun, in the breach. My friend told me she 
had delivered about 20 babies since the announcement.

Women live many miles from the health centre and babies have a habit of coming 
in the night. Yes, the ambulance now lives in Katine, at the main health 
centre, rather than Soroti town, but a family has to pay up to Ushs 30,000 
(£8.50) for fuel if they call it out. And if they have the cash, that's not 
exactly easy. Only the most well-to-do people in Katine have mobile phones. 
Usually somebody has to find a bike to ride to the health centre to sound the 
alarm.

I can't get over the shock of discovering that the centrepiece of the 
project's plan for improving health in Katine fell apart last September. Amref 
set great store by the village health teams, known as VHTs. These were two or 
four people from each village (depending on its size) who were trained as 
community health workers. Their chief roles were to spot sickness, particularly 
malaria, and get adults and children treatment, and teach families about 
hygiene and sanitation.

The VHTs went from house to house telling people that they should dig pit 
latrines, wash their hands after using the toilet and before touching food, 
leave plates and pans on a rack to dry off the ground and so on. Basic, but 
essential public health advice. It was paying off. The VHTs were the people who 
collected the data that showed it. They filled in lengthy forms every month, 
logging births, deaths, disease, sanitation arrangements and even numbers of 
children in and out of school.

And all this good work stopped abruptly in September last year. An edict was 
handed down from Amref's Kampala office. VHTs should no longer be paid a very 
small (Ushs 5,000/£1.40) allowance for attending training sessions and 
maintaining the bicycles Amref gave them because the project was going to hand 
over to the district authorities (in two years' time) and the government policy 
was not to pay VHTs anything. According to the VHTs I have so far spoken to, 
there was no discussion, no meeting, no consultation and no negotiation. So the
VHTs downed tools <>, as people say here, and have not worked since. 

The consequences have been catastrophic not only for the health plan but also 
for water and sanitation. More than 270 VHTs who were patrolling villages, 
teaching people how to stay well and helping them get treatment when sick, are 
no longer doing anything. And the figures Amref relied upon to map the health 
of Katine have not existed for a year. The project no longer knows how well it 
is doing in health.

And in hygiene and sanitation, I am told things are sliding. Families who have 
not got around to building a latrine are no longer being nagged to get going. 
Others that had the"ideal home" <> facilities, - from washing rack to separate 
kitchen, washing shelter, latrine and "tippy tap" (basically a small plastic 
container suspended from a branch which pours water when you press your foot on 
a stick attached to a cord) - are not always maintaining them.

 We will be publishing further extracts from Sarah Boseley's Katine diary 
over the next few days
 