
In this week’s double bill, as the snow thawed, the plot got very silly 
indeed. The more relevance this series reaches for – with talk ofhomophobic 
hate crimes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/08/homophobic-attacks-double-after-brexit-vote>
, zealotry in the US and refugees – the more farfetched it all feels. Trying to 
make television relevant is no doubt an admirable aim, but this feels like 
someone has followed a paint-by-numbers guide to making TV for the times.

But, having got that off my chest, I’m still intrigued to see where it all 
goes – and it’s easy to stay tuned when there are so many fairy lights, Habitat 
homes and soaring shots of moonlit pools. I’m also intrigued by what will 
become of Inger and parka-pinup Ingvar – their sexual tension came to a 
slightly unfortunate head this week, by way of some butting of heads in a 
police interview room, a snog by the coat rack and an overheard encounter that 
lets on to Inger that Ingvar has another flame on the go, but I feel sure there 
will be more loaded looks yet for this pair.

This week opened with the killer having a bad dream in his caravan. Having 
smashed Robin’s head repeatedly against a wall at the end of last week’s 
episodes, he dreams that his blood-smeared victim comes to his caravan, climbs 
into bed with him – where he’s chained down – and tries to … spoon him? The 
horror! The horror!

With this as the starter for 10, over the course of this week’s episode it’s 
continually alluded to in no subtle way that the caravan-dwelling killing 
machine is most likely gay, but obviously very repressed and heavily 
indoctrinated into believing that sodomy must be punished. When a red-haired 
waitress’s attempts to flirt with him are met with disdain, she gets up: “Oh my 
God, you’re not into girls. I didn’t mean to make you uncomfortable.” If only 
she knew how uncomfortable! Then when Inger meets medical examiner Hedvig to 
rehash the details of the murders in the hope of opening up a psychological 
window on to the killer, she sums it up: “He hates gays and yet he has physical 
contact with them … he could shoot but he likes the contact … it’s as if he 
wanted to reach within them and feel their death with his body.” No psychology 
prizes for guessing that what he really wants to kill are his own homosexual 
urges.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-five-and-six-does-all-evil-come-from-scandinavia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F970ef9b1f458ca96a5ee55773b85db7220499326%2F373_0_3112_1868%2F3112.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20five%20and%20six%20%E2%80%93%20does%20all%20evil%20come%20from%20Scandinavia%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-five-and-six-does-all-evil-come-from-scandinavia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20five%20and%20six%20%E2%80%93%20does%20all%20evil%20come%20from%20Scandinavia%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-five-and-six-does-all-evil-come-from-scandinavia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F970ef9b1f458ca96a5ee55773b85db7220499326%2F373_0_3112_1868%2F3112.jpg>
 Inger meets medical examiner Hedvig to rehash the details of the murders and 
open up a psychological window on to the killer. Photograph: BBC/© Miso Film 
2015/Johan Paulin 
The murderer’s characterisation is yet another plot point that feels obvious – 
as with last week’s revelation that the murders are homophobic hate crimes – 
but that dawns on one or other of our Ings painfully slowly; surely this is the
great flaw of whydunnits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/25/modus-new-scandi-noir-drama-takes-genre-in-a-new-direction>
? Where we mere mortals tend to be a few steps behind the likes of Saga or 
Sarah in discovering who’s done what and why, we are a good 10 ahead of Inger 
in her quest for who, watching as the clunky whys come into focus.

But still, we soldier on … unlike poor Robin who, having eventually made his 
way home, dies in bed, as his horrified mother Gunilla discovers. She’s no 
idiot and even as they’re wheeling Robin away she notices the same SUV she’s 
seen outside Rolf and Marcus’s swanky pad, where she works as a housekeeper. As 
the killer sits in his 4x4 outside, thankful to see a body being taken away, a 
text from M soon nips any relief in the bud: they’ve got Carlsson.


They sure have, and our Ings wake to find that their IT guy has managed to get 
into one of his computers. On it there are images and information about 
Isabella and Robin that Carlsson sent to a hotmail address in the US. Having 
also just heard about a new murder (that of Robin as he was leaving Cafe Intime 
– Carlsson, remember, had a piece of paper with the name of that caff and a 
bunch of times on it, which turn out to be Robin’s shifts) – Inger puts her 
thinking cap very firmly on, culminating in a call to the FBI. And oh do I wish 
she hadn’t. This is one of several moments when our ham-ometer went pinging off 
the charts. “Do you seriously believe it’s 1+5 who’s behind it?” asks an FBI 
agent on her way home from a “situation”. ’Fraid so, and with their aim to 
“reduce the number of homosexuals” and “spread terror”, it seems likely there 
will be more murders before the series is out. With all this new information, 
it’s now obvious to the Ings that Carlsson’s acting for someone else – likely 
an American.

Ah, and sure enough, here’s Hawre Ghani. A 19-year-old male sex-worker who 
lives in the tunnels of Stockholm subway system with a girl who has a way with 
spray paint. She’s depicted Ghani’s family – based on the last photograph taken 
of them before his sisters were killed when their school in Kandahar was set on 
fire.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-five-and-six-does-all-evil-come-from-scandinavia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffddfb394c3369578196b8bea87ad7df531cff6ce%2F0_0_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20five%20and%20six%20%E2%80%93%20does%20all%20evil%20come%20from%20Scandinavia%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-five-and-six-does-all-evil-come-from-scandinavia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20five%20and%20six%20%E2%80%93%20does%20all%20evil%20come%20from%20Scandinavia%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-five-and-six-does-all-evil-come-from-scandinavia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffddfb394c3369578196b8bea87ad7df531cff6ce%2F0_0_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
 Hawre Ghani and the girl who has a way with spray paint, who live in the 
tunnels of Stockholm subway system. Photograph: BBC/© Miso Film 2015/Johan 
Paulin 
M texts the killer to tell him they’ve arranged a meeting “with the boy at 
9pm”. And so we see Ghani go to meet our killer – his (girl)friend doesn’t want 
him to go and nor do I! It’s on a ferry moored in the harbour, as he starts to 
pull his trousers down, that the killer breaks his neck. He then takes him and 
places him in the street outside Marcus’ office, positioned so Marcus can see 
him. And see him he does; as does his PA, Marianne Larsson, and Ghani’s 
artistic pal.

It’s a sad and pretty gross moment when a senior police officer called 
Sundberg arrives on the scene and, seeing Marcus next to the body, immediately 
connects the “faggot CEO” to the “dead fag whore” who’s been killed. Things go 
from bad to worse when poor Marcus is subjected to a rectal examination not far 
from the loitering lump that is Sundberg. But here comes Marianne – who seems 
to knows Sundberg and used to be on the force – with security footage showing 
that Marcus only left the office after she had already been down there and 
called the police; he can’t be the killer (which of course we know)! That 
doesn’t stop Sundberg from staging one final humiliation for Marcus and 
crashing into the room as he is still being examined.

And so to the other big developments concerning motive and method this week … 
it seems that the US-based preacher heads up an anti-gay group that wants 
“swift action” – getting a contract on one gay person, then sentencing five 
other homosexual people connected to the first to death. Hence the 1+5. And not 
content with sticking on US soil, it seems the preacher has sent caravan man to 
Sweden. Why? Because “all evil comes from Scandinavia”, silly. “Their society 
is infected with sodomy and propaganda – no rules! They say that they are free 
… from what? The heavenly powers. In Sweden, God does not exist. Everything is 
permitted. That country predicts the end of the world.”

It’s a comically hammy moment when the preacher, banging on about Leviticus 
and Sweden as today’s sodom, meets his end at the hands of the feds while the 
killer watches from his caravan. With his cult leader dead, will his mission 
lose momentum? It seems unlikely – he instantly texts “M” – it’s Marianne! – 
Marcus’ PA, and while they set the caravan and the car on fire, he reiterates 
that he means business: “Someone has to clean up this mess.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-five-and-six-does-all-evil-come-from-scandinavia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e1bd09db70ccc77c24a060e2cbcd1c3737e645c%2F0_0_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20five%20and%20six%20%E2%80%93%20does%20all%20evil%20come%20from%20Scandinavia%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-five-and-six-does-all-evil-come-from-scandinavia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20five%20and%20six%20%E2%80%93%20does%20all%20evil%20come%20from%20Scandinavia%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-five-and-six-does-all-evil-come-from-scandinavia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e1bd09db70ccc77c24a060e2cbcd1c3737e645c%2F0_0_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
 Will the killer track down the girl in the tunnels? Photograph: BBC/© Miso 
Film 2015/Johan Paulin 
Meanwhile, Rolf has been continuing to cotton on that he and Marcus may well 
be at the centre of this ever-thickening plot. He calls and notes that he and 
Marcus were married by Elisabeth, were supposed to be having their New Year’s 
party catered by Isabella, that he had been at Niclas’ art opening, and that 
their housekeeper’s son is Robin. Could Marcus, with his padded gilet over 
tartan suit combos, be the “1”? The Ings certainly think so. So it’s a tense 
moment when he’s driven off by Marianne, AKA “M”.

The future’s not looking much rosier for the girl in the tunnels. The killer 
had chased her earlier, on realising she’d seen him with Ghani’s body. But she 
got away with a kick to his balls and a scratch to his eye. He goes back into 
the tunnels, though, egged on by M who’s worried the girl has his DNA under her 
nails. Just as she’s finishing a giant mural of the killer’s big mean face, he 
finds her down there. Lucky for her, he’s more keen to paint over the picture 
than chase her. Odd priorities – couldn’t he have done that later? – but it 
seems likely he will turn his attention back to her, and his lurking DNA, next 
week. Let’s hope our Ings find her first.

Thoughts and observations
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-five-and-six-does-all-evil-come-from-scandinavia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d5570407ab67046bd6594afda095abe8a2b6f35%2F0_169_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20five%20and%20six%20%E2%80%93%20does%20all%20evil%20come%20from%20Scandinavia%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-five-and-six-does-all-evil-come-from-scandinavia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20five%20and%20six%20%E2%80%93%20does%20all%20evil%20come%20from%20Scandinavia%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-five-and-six-does-all-evil-come-from-scandinavia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d5570407ab67046bd6594afda095abe8a2b6f35%2F0_169_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
 The Elisabeth/Erik/Lukas storyline rumbles on, but when will Lukas find out 
the woman in the picture was his mum’s lover? Photograph: BBC/© Miso Film 
2015/Johan Paulin 
The Elisabeth/Erik/Lukas storyline rumbled on this week, but it did feel a bit 
tangential. Still, I’m glad Lukas is on track to find out that the woman in the 
picture was his mum’s lover, not his sister, and that he got to Uppsala in time 
to stop Erik killing himself with a very long rifle.

Is there some significance to Stina’s little tin box of dead beetles? They 
seem to be cropping up a lot.


Is it me or are the flashback scenes to the swerving truck night very daft 
indeed? Inger seems to be linking the fact she senses doubt in the murderer to 
the fact that man (she doesn’t know for sure he’s the killer yet) hesitated 
before saving Stina from the truck. But surely being hesitant before killing 
someone is not a direct parallel, personality profile-wise, to being hesitant 
before saving a little girl who just witnessed you murder someone?


Does the fact the killer deliberately packed up Stina’s car, AKA “cat”, before 
burning down the caravan signal Stina’s going to come back into the fray next 
week? Eek. Linnea to the rescue?
 