
This week’s double bill took us into ever deeper, icier water with more 
murder, more soaring birds’-eye shots of snowy Stockholm and even a 
supernatural sighting (not something you get every day in Scandi-noir).


I think it’s fair to say that, at least thus far, Modus is no Bridge or 
Killing. And though I don’t think we can or should compare all shows from our 
Scandinavian neighbours, there are enough similar tropes here that it’d be hard 
to avoid comparison.

Modus can be daft, hammy, a little too obvious – and the cliches rain down 
like cats and dogs. But, I’m mildly embarrassed to say, I don’t think that 
matters especially. Call it a willing suspension of taste, but Modus is 
certainly entertaining. And with the nights now drawn in, a Scandi-noir – 
subtle or otherwise – is exactly what the season ordered. So put on your 
fur-trimmed parka, hot-wire your car and join me as we sort the truth from the 
femi-nazi conspiracy.

This week kicked off with shifty Erik lobbing Elisabeth’s laptop into a 
freezing lake in Uppsala. She turns up momentarily, a vivid mirage in the pale 
landscape, I suppose as a sort of thanks to her husband for hiding her secret.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-three-and-four-the-caravan-killer-is-always-lurking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0807749137fe9d8356ad942d2a7d249eadd4885%2F0_0_3543_2125%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20three%20and%20four%20%E2%80%93%20the%20caravan%20killer%20is%20always%20lurking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-three-and-four-the-caravan-killer-is-always-lurking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20three%20and%20four%20%E2%80%93%20the%20caravan%20killer%20is%20always%20lurking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-three-and-four-the-caravan-killer-is-always-lurking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0807749137fe9d8356ad942d2a7d249eadd4885%2F0_0_3543_2125%2F3543.jpg>
 Shifty … Erik lobs Elisabeth’s laptop into a lake to protect her secret. 
Photograph: BBC/© Miso Film 2015/Johan Paulin 
With the body of Isabella found in the hotel basement at the end of last week, 
Ingvar visits Inger to ask if she’s sure Stina didn’t see anything – they found 
a size 2.5 footprint and a hair bobble (Stina, remember, was lining some up in 
a neat row on her way to the wedding) at the crime scene.

But Stina is standing firm – and who can blame her after the encounter in 
Stockholm’s answer to theHorniman museum <http://www.horniman.ac.uk/>. When her 
dad, Isak, loses sight of her for a moment, the killer is waiting for her 
amongst the taxidermy – grimacing wolves, a moose, stag and wild cats. “Don’t 
tell your mom, and I will never be back”, he says in his decidedly iffy 
American accent (the actor, a quick Google tells me, is Austrian). While she 
does eventually admit she saw Isabella in the basement, she says she saw no one 
else. She even keeps stumm to Linnéa when they’re having a heart-to-heart under 
the covers at their grandparents’ house in the country. If only she hadn’t!

Prompted by fear for her daughter’s safety, Inger decides to come on board. 
It’s not long before she’s typing things into her computer like “narcissistic 
personality disorder”, “dark tetrad” and “impulse control issues”. Who wouldn’t 
want Inger on the case?

We learn more about the killer when, safely ensconced in his caravan, he prays 
for forgiveness for “not appreciating love when love was there”. He flicks 
through photos showing what seem to be his late wife and child. And this week’s 
prize for most gammony moment goes to him whispering “I miss you so much” to a 
photo of his son.

One night, while he’s eating his tea, another of his several phones flashes. 
This time it’s a picture of an industrial-looking building with a tower. Cut to 
Marcus and Rolf who have just been told by Patricia, the blond half of the 
lesbian couple they co-parent Noah with, that they’re going to be dads again 
(cheer up, Marcus!), and Rolf and Patricia head out to a trendy exhibition 
opening – in the exact building the killer just looked at a picture of. Who’d 
have thunk it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-three-and-four-the-caravan-killer-is-always-lurking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3dd7da27db2713845f26fe67eba4e41b4d114e5%2F0_8_3543_2125%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20three%20and%20four%20%E2%80%93%20the%20caravan%20killer%20is%20always%20lurking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-three-and-four-the-caravan-killer-is-always-lurking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20three%20and%20four%20%E2%80%93%20the%20caravan%20killer%20is%20always%20lurking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-three-and-four-the-caravan-killer-is-always-lurking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3dd7da27db2713845f26fe67eba4e41b4d114e5%2F0_8_3543_2125%2F3543.jpg>
 ‘I love old bodies’ … Niclas Rosén, Rolf and Patricia at the art opening. 
Photograph: BBC/© Miso Film 2015/Johan Paulin 
The opening can best be described, from Rolf’s perspective, as an emotional 
rollercoaster. At first he’s giggling with Patricia about not being able to see 
the naked model’s “dick”. Then he seems convinced that the artist, Niclas “I 
love old bodies” Rosén, is up to no good with his husband. The saucy subtext of 
all the chat about male bodies – in purple, plastic or chocolate – is that 
Marcus and Niclas are doing more than just 3D printing.

But when Rolf confronts a tartan-waistcoated Marcus about the fact he’s 
spotted Google searches for Niclas on his computer, Marcus assures him that 
he’s just a candidate for one of his foundation’s art grants. Even if Marcus 
manages to convince Rolf (and us) this time around, it gets harder to believe 
the link between them is quite that innocent (I would say platonic, but could 
Marcus be Niclas’ father?!) when he cries, and distracts Rolf with talk of dog 
food, upon learning of the artist’s death. And what’s with his comment that 
“maybe he was just a fraud. Someone who drained other people?”

And so to that death … our caravan-dwelling killing machine is once again 
lurking. This time, he’s in the industrial estate near the gallery. We can all 
breathe a sigh of relief as Patricia’s taxi arrives – she’s staying alive for 
two now, remember – but poor Niclas is not nearly so lucky. The killer stages 
the murder to look like a heroin overdose. But our Ings soon learn the truth. 
In a brilliant scene that typifies the awkward, unglamorous romantic 
meanderings of Scandi-noirs, looks are shot across the postmortem table where 
Niclas’ corpse lies, as medical examiner Hedvig tells them she found no trace 
of heroin in his blood. Instead, there’s a neuromuscular blocking drug called
suxamethonium 
<http://www.gizmodo.com.au/2012/05/the-history-of-sux-the-worlds-most-discrete-murder-weapon/>
, the kind used in lethal injections in the US.


Inger proves she’s worth her investigative salt from the get-go. Looking on 
Isabella and the bishop’s websites, she spots comments – “narcissistic wannabe” 
and “feminazi” – that because of the language and similar misspellings look to 
be by the same person. She calls Ingvar to tell him, and he makes a quick 
change out of his dressing gown – he’s had his flirty, apparently married, 
colleague round for a romp! – to confirm that, yes, they are the same person: 
Lennart Carlsson AKA 666 AKA Dala Horse, a man with priors, including stalking 
his ex-wife, who lives – wait for it – in that den of nefarious crime (as this 
programme would have us believe) Uppsala.

Carlsson’s reaction to being arrested by Ingvar’s team is adolescent. And 
looking round his house, it all starts to make sense. There are scattered 
tissues from his “one-man sex”, as Inger puts it. A sticker of the confederate 
flag (his involvement with the radical churchgoing American starts to fit in). 
Inger profiles him then and there: “Computers are his only social outlet. No 
eye contact, no code of conduct. No understanding whatsoever of the feelings of 
his harassment victims.” His porn library “all serves the purpose of 
reinforcing his sense of masculinity. His sense of entitlement to women and 
sex.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-three-and-four-the-caravan-killer-is-always-lurking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa69a92f6545fe3c37ab293d4c23eb21f34b281a3%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20three%20and%20four%20%E2%80%93%20the%20caravan%20killer%20is%20always%20lurking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-three-and-four-the-caravan-killer-is-always-lurking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20three%20and%20four%20%E2%80%93%20the%20caravan%20killer%20is%20always%20lurking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-three-and-four-the-caravan-killer-is-always-lurking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa69a92f6545fe3c37ab293d4c23eb21f34b281a3%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Never were stares so deathly … Inger and Carlsson come face-to-face. 
Photograph: BBC/© Miso Film 2015/Johan Paulin 
A monster, then. But – hang on! – he’s got alibis for the nights of the 
murders, and one of them (being in Stockholm on Christmas Eve) fuels Inger’s 
suspicion that it’s this “son of a bitch” who took pictures of Stina outside 
her house. And what’s this in the scanner? Something about Cafe Intime with a 
bunch of times on it. “Why is it English?” Inger wonders. It obviously has 
something to do with our killer’s next move.

When Inger eventually comes face-to-face with Carlsson, it’s brilliantly 
tense; never were stares so deathly. Carlsson mouthing “fucking bitch” at her 
was one of the more shiveringly disturbing TV moments I’ve seen for a while.

And this is just the first of a few things that slot into place for Inger. 
Though none, I must admit, seem particularly hard to slot? Looking at pictures 
of the exhibition opening party – in which Niclas is apparently standing so 
close to a man that it’s obvious (?!) “he’s in love with that guy” she has a 
thought. And after the best part of a bottle of red and a Chinese takeaway, she 
divulges her newly spun theory: “Isabella Lavin was gay … Niclas Rosén was gay. 
What if the bishop’s husband protected his wife’s secret? That she was gay? Is 
that the common denominator for these three homicides?” Ingvar, not the 
sharpest knife in the drawer, eventually catches on: “Hate crimes. Hatred for 
homosexuals?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-three-and-four-the-caravan-killer-is-always-lurking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb6f8e907753f910c633668e57f6c977e5e64201%2F0_35_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20three%20and%20four%20%E2%80%93%20the%20caravan%20killer%20is%20always%20lurking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-three-and-four-the-caravan-killer-is-always-lurking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20three%20and%20four%20%E2%80%93%20the%20caravan%20killer%20is%20always%20lurking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-three-and-four-the-caravan-killer-is-always-lurking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb6f8e907753f910c633668e57f6c977e5e64201%2F0_35_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Who wouldn’t want them on the case? Inger and Ingvar. Photograph: BBC/© Miso 
Film 2015/Johan Paulin 
It now seems only a matter of time before Erik’s son cottons on too that the 
woman from the picture is not in fact his sister, but his mum’s lover; the 
woman Erik visits this week for soup, a cry and a conversation about his “pact 
with God”, which I think must just be to keep Elisabeth’s homosexuality a 
secret?

The theme of hate crimes continues with a lesbian couple who had just been at 
Niclas’ funeral being harassed and beaten on their way home, in spitting 
distance of Cafe Intime no less. And, again, the killer is lurking. But it’s 
not for this pair; it’s for poor old Robin. By this point we’ve met him a few 
times – outside Rolf and Marcus’ palatial house, where he asked his mum, their 
housekeeper/nanny, for money. And the next morning when, presumably having 
spent said money on booze and drugs, he shouts at his mum because he’s trying 
to sleep, before later leaving her an apologetic voicemail.

As the blue lights flash for the beaten-up women, our killer follows Robin 
down an alleyway and smashes his head against a wall. Somehow, though, when 
caravan man wanders to see what the sirens are for, just for a second, Robin 
manages to escape.

Thoughts and observations
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-three-and-four-the-caravan-killer-is-always-lurking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F846969b782029bf63e446923e2bb45b4a519c44c%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20three%20and%20four%20%E2%80%93%20the%20caravan%20killer%20is%20always%20lurking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-three-and-four-the-caravan-killer-is-always-lurking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20three%20and%20four%20%E2%80%93%20the%20caravan%20killer%20is%20always%20lurking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-three-and-four-the-caravan-killer-is-always-lurking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F846969b782029bf63e446923e2bb45b4a519c44c%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Very awkward … Ingvar and Isak cross paths at Inger’s door. Photograph: BBC/© 
Miso Film 2015/Johan Paulin 
Is it me or do things tend to get most hammy when the characters speak in 
English? (Remember Kill Brothers from season three of the Bridge?) Could it be 
that all Nordic noir is hamtastic and its subtitles pull the woolly jumper over 
my eyes? Can’t be true – cannot compute.

It’s a very awkward moment when Ingvar and Isak cross paths at Inger’s door. 
Poor old Isak, with his broken heart and Weasley-family aesthetic.

Let’s just for a second revisit that monologue from Niclas Rosén: “I love 
marble statues, where plasticity is on the surface. Nothing’s hidden, and yet, 
or maybe because of that, the craft gets in the way of the work. So by 
exhibiting a real body, an experienced body, I capture its artistry, texture 
and eroticism, its life, its authenticity. I love old bodies.”

“Course I’m okay to drive home. I’ve only had half a bottle plus I’m a cop, I 
know the back roads” = policeman lolz.

It’s a sweet exchange between Inger and Hakim Hammar. He seems to have a bit 
of a fanboy moment, introducing himself as someone she met five years ago at a 
lecture. But she remembers him! And the name of his son who, like Stina, is on 
the spectrum.

It’s pretty adorable when Erik’s grandaughter thinks the three wise men are 
called Casper, Jasper and Jonathan.
 