
Another winter, another chilly Scandi noir to warm our cockles. Modus is a 
Swedish crime thriller about a series of bloody murders that happen over a very 
white Stockholm Christmas. I will be recapping each Saturday night’s double 
bill, so please join me – and add your theories in the comments below.


It’s been almost exactly a year since the last airing of The Bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/the-bridge-episode-by-episode>
. And while we’ve had the icily brilliant Icelandic thrillerTrapped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/mar/07/trapped-icelandic-thriller-tv-hit-of-the-year>
 and the Danish financial crime thrillerFollow the Money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/follow-the-money--episode-by-episode>
 to give us our fix, I feel the urgent need for more. So, with storms lining up 
to batter our shores, and the hazy outlines of thehorsemen of the apocalypse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/22/nigel-farage-uk-ambassador-us-donald-trump>
 starting to come into grim focus, let’s ignore all those who say we’ve passed 
the point of peak-Nordic noir, pop on some mohair socks and get ready to feel 
that magical Scandi blend of cosy and scared witless.

In these opening episodes we meet Inger Johanne Vik (recognise her from The 
Bridge?), a former Swedish National Bureau of Investigation and FBI profiler, 
psychology professor and first-time author. (Her book has the catchy title The 
Criminal Soul; here is a woman, we are led to believe, who can get into the 
minds of killers.) She has two daughters with ex-husband Isak – the 
rambunctious, highly articulate Linnea and her older sister Stina who, we 
learn, is somewhere on the autistic spectrum, and has trouble expressing 
herself with words.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-one-and-two-a-christmassy-welcome-to-a-chilly-scandi-noir%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fabf1fba7bc1b242d1b5b7504c89945e70e8ab90d%2F0_0_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20one%20and%20two%20%E2%80%93%20a%20Christmassy%20welcome%20to%20a%20chilly%20Scandi-noir&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-one-and-two-a-christmassy-welcome-to-a-chilly-scandi-noir%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20one%20and%20two%20%E2%80%93%20a%20Christmassy%20welcome%20to%20a%20chilly%20Scandi-noir&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-one-and-two-a-christmassy-welcome-to-a-chilly-scandi-noir%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fabf1fba7bc1b242d1b5b7504c89945e70e8ab90d%2F0_0_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
 Here is a woman, we are led to believe, who can get into the minds of killers 
… Inger. Photograph: BBC/© Miso Film 2015/Johan Paulin 
The series opens with some prime Scandi-ing: soaring shots of a snowy wood and 
a creepy lupine man driving a 4x4 along icy winding roads. He rocks up to a 
remote caravan and finds a box of mobile phones stashed in a cupboard. A 
picture of a hotel flashes up on one of them.

Cut to Inger and her girls travelling to the wedding of Inger’s sister in a 
swanky waterside hotel – the one from the pic! – in central Stockholm. And it’s 
in this very hotel, after Inger has given the world’s strangest wedding speech 
– “I believe in the lust of the flesh and the incurable isolation of the soul … 
That’s why we marry, to make that loneliness bearable” – that the first murder 
takes place.

TV chef Isabella is heading from her hotel room for a late-night massage when 
creepy caravan man attacks her and carries her to the basement. But there’s a 
witness: Stina, unable to sleep, has wandered into the stairwell. She peers 
over the bannister to see the steely-eyed man mopping up blood, Isabella’s limp 
legs just visible. Cue a brilliantly tense chase – the kind I like to call a 
“walk chase” – where Stina, clutching the toy car she calls a cat, blusters 
through the car park and out into the middle of the road. A truck is heading 
straight for her, and at the last minute, egged on by Inger’s screams, the 
killer goes from chasing her to snatching her out of the path of the truck. The 
truck swerves, almost hitting another family. Poor Stina: the murderer’s 
sinister finger to lips shushing would be enough to make most people keep 
stumm. Her mum, angered he hesitated before saving her, gives him an almighty 
slap.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-one-and-two-a-christmassy-welcome-to-a-chilly-scandi-noir%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F976e8f45497211e23db1633b88c7ea8ca04835f2%2F0_30_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20one%20and%20two%20%E2%80%93%20a%20Christmassy%20welcome%20to%20a%20chilly%20Scandi-noir&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-one-and-two-a-christmassy-welcome-to-a-chilly-scandi-noir%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20one%20and%20two%20%E2%80%93%20a%20Christmassy%20welcome%20to%20a%20chilly%20Scandi-noir&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-one-and-two-a-christmassy-welcome-to-a-chilly-scandi-noir%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F976e8f45497211e23db1633b88c7ea8ca04835f2%2F0_30_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Stina witnesses the first murder, then wanders into the path of an oncoming 
truck … and is saved by the killer. Photograph: BBC/© Miso Film 2015/Johan 
Paulin 
Up pops parka-wearing Ingvar Nyman, who happens to be in the area and who 
works for the National Bureau – he knows of Inger, at least by reputation. 
Ingver is also divorced (ooo, ‘ello) and it emerges he had a daughter who’s 
died – his fleeing from Inger’s ridiculously lovely Habitat home on seeing an 
angel figurine falls into place when he later visits a gravestone that reads 
“Stella Nyman, 2007 – 2013”; it has an angel carved into it.

Stina struggles to deal with what she’s seen. When her mum asks what she was 
doing outside the hotel, she sits bolt upright in bed, says “she’s dead”, then 
crashes into the pillows wide-eyed and rattled. Another night, Inger finds her 
fully clothed and rocking in the shower, water running. She worries about what 
happens to people’s souls if there’s no window to escape through – the hotel 
basement clearly on her mind.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-one-and-two-a-christmassy-welcome-to-a-chilly-scandi-noir%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ac6fb7007155914e65dd1f0d1f365c38cb536a3%2F0_160_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20one%20and%20two%20%E2%80%93%20a%20Christmassy%20welcome%20to%20a%20chilly%20Scandi-noir&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-one-and-two-a-christmassy-welcome-to-a-chilly-scandi-noir%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20one%20and%20two%20%E2%80%93%20a%20Christmassy%20welcome%20to%20a%20chilly%20Scandi-noir&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-one-and-two-a-christmassy-welcome-to-a-chilly-scandi-noir%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ac6fb7007155914e65dd1f0d1f365c38cb536a3%2F0_160_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
 ‘She’s dead!’ Poor Stina struggles to deal with what she’s seen. Photograph: 
BBC/Miso Film 2015/Johan Paulin 
Things only get worse. When Stina’s playing outside – Inger is inside 
decorating the Christmas tree – a sinister man takes her photo and asks: “Are 
you excited about Christmas, Stina?” Things go from bad to terrifying when, 
tipped off by said aforementioned sinister man, Stina spots the killer 
loitering outside her dad’s (also ridiculously nice) house. Fortunately she 
doesn’t know – in what has to be one of the programme’s stranger/more hammy 
turns thus far – that she is also the focus of an American preacher who asks 
the killer, during a sermon he streams, about “the girl”. He’s reassured that 
“she won’t be a problem”.

This sermon, given in his deeply off-kilter American accent, might give us a 
window into the killer’s motives: “those who live … in profanity shall be 
sentenced to death.” Well it wouldn’t be a Scandi-noir if our killer didn’t 
have some ill-advised political or social motive that may or may not turn out 
to be secondary to his being a nutter, would it?

But Stina’s not our killer’s only focus. Here comes bishop Elisabeth in her 
grand rectory, along with her husband Erik, two adorable grandchildren, son and 
daughter-in-law. She delivers an altogether different kind of sermon to a 
congregation that, in an Agatha Christie-ish way, seems to include our entire 
cast of characters under one hallowed roof, killer and all. Among them are the 
man (Marcus), woman and child (Noah), who the swerving truck very nearly hit – 
they’re joined by a second man (Rolf) and woman: these two gay couples seem to 
be joint parents to Noah.

Not long after the service Elisabeth, now de-dog collared and in a sexy silky 
shirt, is getting ready to go out. She and Erik have an odd exchange that ends: 
“It’s not just about us … times are different now, Erik.” It’s unclear what 
exactly she’s on about but I’d bet my bottom kroner it’s linked to why, on her 
walk across the park, she meets her end at the hands of caravan man. And it 
seems likely to tie into the nuggets we learn about Elisabeth after her death: 
she argued for gender-neutral weddings (that now trad Scandi-noir topic). She 
was also staunchly pro-life, even in the case of pregnancies resulting from 
rape.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-one-and-two-a-christmassy-welcome-to-a-chilly-scandi-noir%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18f736a9438d253d10d1c1d977d6c3fd0a0e10f9%2F0_76_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20one%20and%20two%20%E2%80%93%20a%20Christmassy%20welcome%20to%20a%20chilly%20Scandi-noir&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-one-and-two-a-christmassy-welcome-to-a-chilly-scandi-noir%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20one%20and%20two%20%E2%80%93%20a%20Christmassy%20welcome%20to%20a%20chilly%20Scandi-noir&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-one-and-two-a-christmassy-welcome-to-a-chilly-scandi-noir%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18f736a9438d253d10d1c1d977d6c3fd0a0e10f9%2F0_76_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
 Elisabeth delivers a sermon to a congregation that, in an Agatha Christie-ish 
way, includes our entire cast of characters, killer and all. Photograph: BBC/© 
Miso Film 2015/Johan Paulin 
The subject of their cryptic final exchange must be linked to Erik’s bizarre 
behaviour after news of Elisabeth’s murder reaches him – never was a man more 
defiant while wearing a velvety dressing gown. He burns her belongings, hides 
an old picture of a woman their son thinks might be his secret half-sister, and 
tells detective Ingvar to take a hike when he asks him where Elisabeth was 
going the night she was murdered. I think we can guess that it’s where Erik 
himself later walks to through the nighttime streets.

This week’s double bill also shows Ulrika, the partner of first murder victim 
Isabella – whom it’s hard not to feel sorry for, as she searches desperately 
for her partner and is treated with disdain by hotel staff who think her “date” 
is clearly cheating on her – finally finding what she’s been looking for, but 
never wanted to find like this: the body of the TV chef slumped in the hotel 
basement.

Back to Inger and Ingver (must they have basically the same name?!) and the 
former is resisting a role that Ingver is offering as an external consultant. 
Her book has a chapter on the murders of high-profile women which sounds like 
it would be helpful in cracking Elisabeth’s murder case, and – as we know, but 
they as yet don’t – that of Isabella too. Inger apparently, when working in the 
US, got so involved in her work that she forgot her children on the subway. The 
big idea that made her absent-minded: “the weak one behind”. Hmmmm. No wonder 
she needed to stick to research eh?

And to round things off, our killer and the sinister photographer meet in a 
spot with a lovely view over the city to talk about a new assignment: “It’s 
about the girl … Stina.”

Thoughts and observations
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-one-and-two-a-christmassy-welcome-to-a-chilly-scandi-noir%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74cf6905edb10b9d14328e23a992a0629219de13%2F0_11_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20one%20and%20two%20%E2%80%93%20a%20Christmassy%20welcome%20to%20a%20chilly%20Scandi-noir&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-one-and-two-a-christmassy-welcome-to-a-chilly-scandi-noir%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20one%20and%20two%20%E2%80%93%20a%20Christmassy%20welcome%20to%20a%20chilly%20Scandi-noir&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-one-and-two-a-christmassy-welcome-to-a-chilly-scandi-noir%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74cf6905edb10b9d14328e23a992a0629219de13%2F0_11_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
 Is there something fishy going on with Marcus? Photograph: BBC/ Miso Film 
2015/Johan Paulin 
Yes, waiting for news on a biopsy, as Marcus apparently is, must be stressful, 
but who else thinks there’s something fishy going on with this guy? His 
reaction to Rolf telling him that the police are questioning everyone at the 
church for Elisabeth’s last sermon is odd. What unkosher business can he be up 
to?

Poor Isak doesn’t seem to be quite over Inger, does he? How’s he going to cope 
with the romance that I think we can assume will develop between our Ings…?

Inger, interviewed about what makes someone a killer, says it’s “a choice”: 
when “two people feel wronged or traumatised by life. One channels his feelings 
into hatred, vengefulness, adrenaline rushes. The other one may try to return 
to normality … and live this new experience.” Are we meant, here, to think that 
our husky-eyed killer is the former, Ingver is the latter? Perhaps.

Remember the moment in episode one where caravan man lined up three pills. Are 
they for Inger and her children?! I sincerely hope not.
 