
Mohamed Fahmy <https://www.theguardian.com/media/mohamed-fahmy>, a former 
al-Jazeera journalist who was released from prison in Egypt in September, has 
returned to Canada with the hope of starting an election debate on how the 
Canadian government can better protects its citizens abroad.

Fahmy said that he had arrived in Toronto with his wife on Sunday and had long 
imagined that moment when in prison.

Peter Greste says fight not yet over despite al-Jazeera colleagues' freedom
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/24/peter-greste-says-fight-not-yet-over-despite-al-jazeera-colleagues-freedom>
His arrival ends a near two-year ordeal that raised questions about Egypt’s 
commitment to free speech and whether Canada’s Conservative government did 
enough to help him.

Fahmy was arrested in 2013 with two al-Jazeera English colleagues, Baher 
Mohamed <https://www.theguardian.com/world/baher-mohamed> and Australian Peter 
Greste. He was sentenced to three years in prison in a retrial this year after 
being found guilty of airing what a court described as “false news” and 
coverage biased in favour of the now-banned Muslim Brotherhood.

The case was widely condemned by rights groups and others. He and his Egyptian 
co-defendant, Baher Mohamed, received a presidential pardon in September.

“This is what I’ve been waiting for,” Fahmy said. “I felt humbled and safe 
seeing the kind and heartfelt vibes from the police officers and security at 
the airport who were extremely hospitable and recognised my face despite my 
attempts to keep my arrival quiet.

“It was mind-boggling that the cab driver, passengers on the flight and 
strangers recognised me in the airport and knew the details of my story. I felt 
lots of warmth and love.”

Greste was released a year before Fahmy and Mohamed and sent back to Australia.

The Canadian prime minister, Stephen Harper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/stephen-harper>, who is facing an election 
next Monday, has been criticised by Fahmy and others for not doing enough to 
get the journalist back to Canada. Fahmy said he made sure to come back to 
Canada amid the campaign because he feels it his responsibility to start a 
debate on the issue.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Fi-still-cant-believe-it-says-pardoned-al-jazeera-journalist-mohamed-fahmy-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F23%2F1443030904167%2FKP_481558_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20still%20can't%20believe%20it'%2C%20says%20pardoned%20Al-Jazeera%20journalist%20Mohamed%20Fahmy%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Fi-still-cant-believe-it-says-pardoned-al-jazeera-journalist-mohamed-fahmy-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20still%20can%27t%20believe%20it%27%2C%20says%20pardoned%20Al-Jazeera%20journalist%20Mohamed%20Fahmy%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Fi-still-cant-believe-it-says-pardoned-al-jazeera-journalist-mohamed-fahmy-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F23%2F1443030904167%2FKP_481558_crop_640x480.jpg>
 ‘I still can’t believe it.’ 
Fahmy said Harper’s “hyper-conservative approach directly damaged and delayed 
my chances for freedom”. He said the former foreign affairs minister, John 
Baird, damaged his case when he said during a press conference in Egypt that 
Canada would not prosecute Fahmy should he be turned over toCanada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada>, something Fahmy called a diplomatic 
faux pas. He would have more to say about it at a press conference in Toronto 
on Tuesday.

A senior government official said Harper spoke to Egypt’s president, Abdel 
Fattah al-Sisi, earlier this year and sent several letters on Fahmy’s behalf, 
including a letter about four or five weeks ago.

Fahmy has said he was not aware that Harper had called Sisi. He was grateful 
but asked: “Why aren’t they transparent about him making a call and taking a 
stand?”

Fahmy met the opposition Liberal leader, Justin Trudeau, late on Monday and 
has plans to meet the opposition New Democrat’s leader, Tom Mulcair, but had no 
plans to endorse a candidate.

He also plans to take up a position as an adjunct professor at the University 
of British Columbia’s school of journalism in Vancouver, and is writing a book 
about his experiences.
 