
Every strategy needs to be regularly re-assessed to ensure it is delivering on 
the original vision.

It is for this reason that Guardian News & Media (GNM) has independently 
reviewed its community programme, nearly four years after the media company 
moved from its long-term home in Farringdon to King's Cross.

The relocation of the business at the time created the opportunity to expand 
the company's existing partnerships from four to 11, but have they all been the 
success we hoped for?

To find out, in January 2012, GNM commissioned sustainability consultancy 
Acona to conduct an independent evaluation. While the sustainability team had 
already developed a number of qualitative measures, there had not been much 
quantitative analysis or an effective system for tracking the programme year on 
year.

By having an independent evaluation, it was hoped that partner organisations 
would feel free to speak about the value and problems of their relationship 
with GNM.

To begin with, Acona looked at the original thinking behind the decision to 
expand the community programme, which was championed by Tim Brooks, the 
managing director at that time. He told an all-staff briefing: "I am determined 
that we will not live in a bubble at Kings Place and ignore what is going on 
around us. We have a fantastic opportunity to think hard about how we integrate 
ourselves into this new community."

At that time, the community team met local community leaders and charitable 
groups to gain an understanding of the issues local people faced and how GNM 
could support them.

As a result, GNM came up with several criteria for our new community partners; 
for them to be local to our offices and to be engaged in work media education, 
social exclusion and environmental regeneration given the company's own 
ambition to become environmentally regenerative. We also wanted to develop 
long-term relationships with partners, with shared projects and joint goals, 
allowing relationships to grow and deepen.

Before the move, GNM had four community partners â€“ Live magazine 
<http://www.live-magazine.co.uk/>, a youth run publication based in Brixton and 
three schools, Richard Cloudesley special needs school,Winton primary 
<http://www.wintonprimaryschool.com/index.asp> and Elizabeth Garrett Anderson 
secondary school <http://www.egaschool.co.uk/>. 

After moving to Kings Place, the number of partner organisations rose sharply. 
New projects included work with those at risk of social exclusion, such asNew 
Horizons Youth Centre <http://www.nhyouthcentre.org.uk/> and Age UK Camden 
<http://www.ageuk.org.uk/camden/>. We also teamed up with the management 
committee of the local housing estate, Bemerton, andTeam Cally 
<http://www.teamcally.org.uk/>, a community organisation that supports 
residents and businesses in the local Caledonian ward.

We expanded our programme to include environmental projects, concentrating on 
theLondon Wildlife Trust <http://www.wildlondon.org.uk/>, via its local Camley 
Street natural park 
<http://www.wildlondon.org.uk/Pages/Category.aspx?IDCategory=4fd545f7-a11e-4b85-b143-724a886ffa16>
, andGlobal Generation <http://globalgeneration.org.uk/>, a local 
sustainability charity that works with young people.

The community team also concentrated on media projects, such as working with 
Pentonville prison, supporting prisoners and teaching staff working on 
publishing the magazine Voice of the Ville.

After talking to volunteers and partner organisations, Acona developed a set 
of 21 measurement indicators to capture both the value and shortcomings of the 
11 partnerships.

Charity expert Caroline Fiennes, who was on the Acona team, discussed in a 
blog post on the Guardian's Living our Values website how it was difficult to 
scientifically assess the impacts of the programme because GNM's support is 
often only one factor among many.

However, Acona concluded that some of the projects would end without GNM's 
support, such as some of the school reading programmes, Winton primary school's 
chess club and the work at HMP Pentonville.

Acona also found that "the administrative burden on the community partners 
seems laudably low. Corporate donors often require charities to complete 
bespoke reporting forms, which diminishes the net value of the support. We did 
not hear of this with any of GNM's relationships."

After speaking to staff volunteers, it also became clear that the programme 
had been important for some in attracting them to join the company. "When I saw 
that the Guardian does this... that was definitely a good reason for me to 
join," said one staff member.

One of Acona's key findings was that GNM could manage internal resources 
better if there was a clearly articulated programme of support for partners 
agreed on at the start of each financial year.

With this in mind, the sustainability team will be meeting with partners 
during summer 2012 to draw up plans for 2012-13 and to discuss our ongoing 
relationship in the light of the financial cuts in the budgets.

We aim to manage our resources better, but there will inevitably be some 
changes to the programme of support. We will work closely with our partners to 
help manage the impact of this.

Acona also suggested refreshing the strategy for the programme as a whole, 
setting clear objectives, securing board-level ownership and increasing senior 
management involvement in the programme and visible support for it. We will be 
developing targets for 2012-13 to address these issues.

The need for this is highlighted in GNM's recent volunteering survey, which 
showed only 15% of respondents feel their line manager or senior management 
were actively participating and promoting volunteering.

With staff cuts across the board, it is not surprising that just over a 
quarter of respondents said that fitting volunteering into their work could be 
challenging. In fact, half of staff who left the programme said they were doing 
so because of work pressures.

One respondent said: "I think the Guardian's staff volunteering is laudable, 
but unworkable. We're working longer hours with fewer staff. I've had to 
reluctantly cancel three volunteer sessions because of covering for another 
staff member or work that has popped up unexpectedly."

Another volunteer wrote: "It's all very positive in general. Only real 
irritation really is that my line manager sometimes gets a bit cross when I 
vanish off to volunteer, even though I do it at the same time every week in my 
lunch break. It would be good, I think, if there was some sort of communication 
to managers clarifying: this is something you should be positively encouraging, 
rather than just tolerating."

We hope this lack of active support from management will be addressed in part 
by linking volunteering week 2012 to business training needs, with a digital 
skills focus.

Also during the recent strategy planning process, which took place across the 
commercial departments, heads of department and teams expressed the wish to 
work with community organisations both during their team away days and longer 
term. Setting up these connections with community partners and teams within GNM 
will help build understanding within the business of the value of volunteering.

We have also developed a skills map of current volunteering and will publish 
this along with information about volunteering on our intranet. This will 
support staff to talk about volunteering in terms of skills development in 
their appraisals and help make the case to reluctant line managers who 
currently struggle to see the benefit.

We recognised that, with 40% of staff who responded to a recent all-staff 
survey saying they were either not sure of how to get involved in the 
volunteering programme or had no knowledge of it, we need to develop our 
communications strategy.

In response to this we are working closely with the internal communication 
department and sustainability advocates from across the business to help get 
information about the programme more widely disseminated.
 