
Our article on underrated shows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/27/tvs-most-underrated-shows-pulling-top-gear-time-trumpet>
 got a huge reaction from readers espousing their favourite, long-forgotten 
greats. Out of the thousands of comments the article received, here are five 
shows our readers seemed to agree were worthy of more love than they got at the 
time.

1. Monkey Dust
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjvQyRXoCA_Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjvQyRXoCA_Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjvQyRXoCA_Y&media=>
A well-timed bout of unemployment led to watching this quite a lot, late night 
on BBC 3’s precursor, BBC Choice. From its unsettling Eels theme to its broken 
(and eminently quotable) characters, Monkey Dust was proof that Britain could 
produce animation as dark and twisted as anything the US was putting out.


“Monkey Dust was a work of genius. I still dig out my recordings of it to play 
people things likeThe Crusades,” said PickmansModel 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3503824>.

“It’s amazing how many people seem never to have heard of it, but I suppose it 
wasn’t exactly laugh-out-loud stuff.”

2. Nathan Barley
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0X6APGN1cAs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0X6APGN1cAs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0X6APGN1cAs&media=>
The guy behind the funniest spoof listings website of all time (better than it 
sounds <http://www.tvgohome.com/>), and the guy behind The Day Today and Brass 
Eye: expectations for Nathan Barley were stratospheric in some quarters, but 
Nathan Barley doesn’t quite rank up there, possibly because its target – 
hipsters – had not yet gone global.

“Disappointed and baffled at the time, but it turns out that Chris Morris and 
Charlie Brooker saw the future before it happened – the idiots are winning,” 
saidFirstWorlder <https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/79999100>
.

3. Early Doors
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrdQUXINKkZ4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrdQUXINKkZ4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrdQUXINKkZ4&media=>
Set in an ordinary pub in Stockport, Early Doors never got the praise or fame 
of its big sister, The Royle Family. Its mix of understated humour and kitchen 
sink – or rather, backroom pub – drama won it plenty of plaudits, but it only 
lasted for two series.


“Felt Early Doors found the tone and gags that The Royle Family (after the 
first couple of series) tried to find but usually failed to. John Henshaw and 
the other copper were outstanding,” saidKenri. 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4765645>

4. Families at War
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dvv7ijWDeRaQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dvv7ijWDeRaQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dvv7ijWDeRaQ&media=>
We had a few Vic & Bob suggestions – kudos to those who suggested Catterick – 
but heroically Vic Reeves and Bob Mortimer were once entrusted with a Saturday 
night light entertainment show on BBC1.

“Did that really happen?” marvelled commenter Billy Fluig.  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/11847048>

 <https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/80003550>“Yes it did. 
Without it we’d never have witnessed the Leo Sayer treadmill accident.”

5. Lost! 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM-fTr31Hg7o&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM-fTr31Hg7o>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM-fTr31Hg7o&media=>
Not the surreal plane-crash drama, but the Channel 4 reality show that dropped 
three teams in the middle of nowhere with £2,000 and told them to make it back 
to Trafalgar Square in London.

 “The scrapes some of them got into were bloody terrifying,” said ProjectXRay 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4740293>.

 “I’m really not sure how they sorted the visas for it, or got away with 
making it at all for that matter. I’m surprised none of the contestants ended 
up in a central asian reeducation gulag or a shallow grave.”
 