
Charities in Calais have said that more than 1,000 children remain in shipping 
containers inthe demolished camp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/25/calais-camp-crews-move-in-to-begin-demolition>
, with inadequate food and water supplies and no information provided about 
their future.

Alf Dubs, the Labour peer who introduced legislation committing the UK to 
taking some of the more vulnerable child refugees, said the government’s 
handling of the situation was morally unacceptable.

Clearing the Calais refugee camp – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2016/oct/24/clearing-calais-refugee-camp-france-in-pictures>
Volunteers said the uncertainty was very distressing for the young people, who 
had been given temporary accommodation in the fenced-off container area of the 
site.


“Children have no idea what is happening to them and volunteers equally don’t 
know what to say and themselves are not allowed into the containers,” said 
Josie Naughton, a co-founder of HelpRefugees. “Very few adults seem to be 
inside the container camp to be responsible for this vast number of minors. The 
children are incredibly stressed and confused.”

She estimated that there were about 30 unaccompanied female teenagers, mostly 
under 15, the youngest of whom is understood to be 12.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fwhere-next-the-last-days-of-the-calais-refugee-camp-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Where%20next%3F%20The%20last%20days%20of%20the%20Calais%20refugee%20camp%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fwhere-next-the-last-days-of-the-calais-refugee-camp-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Where%20next%3F%20The%20last%20days%20of%20the%20Calais%20refugee%20camp%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fwhere-next-the-last-days-of-the-calais-refugee-camp-video&media=>
Where next? The last days of the Calais refugee camp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/oct/28/where-next-the-last-days-of-the-calais-refugee-camp-video>
An emailed summary of the situation from Refugee Community Kitchen 
<http://refugeecommunitykit> – the charity providing food for the children – 
said: “There are no official organisations or charities or government bodies 
there. Only a big police and security presence. Tonight our teams finished at 
10pm; another 15-hour day trying to serve food and answer questions that we 
simply do not know the answers to.”

Volunteers faced questions such as: “When are the buses coming to take us to 
UK?”, “Where do I get phone credit to call my family?” “Have you got shoes?”, 
“I need a blanket,” “Who can I talk to about my family in UK?”.

In an open letter to the government, signed by leading rabbis and bishops, 
Lord Dubs (who was brought to the UK as a child refugee in 1938 on a
Kindertransport train) described the scenes of chaos that have accompanied the 
camp closure.


“Charities such as Citizens UK, Save the Children and Help Refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/refugees>, report that as many as 50 
unaccompanied children who had been unable to register their claims with camp 
authorities in the rush of the demolition, being driven off into the cold night 
as the ‘Jungle’ burned,” he wrote, criticising the government’s argument that a 
display of toughness was necessary to deter more young refugees from traveling 
to Calais in the hope of getting to the UK.


“The argument that such a tough approach was needed to prevent a pull factor 
is morally unacceptable. One does not leave a child playing in the road to 
deter other children from similar behaviour.”

The letter called on the government to restart the suspended process of 
transferring unaccompanied asylum-seeking children to the UK. Lord Dubs echoed 
earlier calls made by the French president, François Holland, for Britain to 
accept all of the remaining minors in the camp.

“This is less than 10% of the total population of the camp, less than that of 
a medium sized secondary school ... Will the home secretary restart the rescue 
and see every one of these minors protected?” the letter concluded.

Theresa May declined to make any further commitments on the number of child 
refugees Britain was planning to take, after receiving a call fromHollande 
urging Britain to consider its “moral duty” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/30/therea-may-declines-francois-hollandes-request-take-more-calais-child-refugees>
. So far this month the UK has taken about 274 child refugees.
 