
Seven years of record low interest rates may have hammered savers, but 
borrowers are continuing to benefit.

Yesterday marked the seventh anniversary of the Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> slashing interest 
rates to their current 0.5% historic low. And while the outlook for savers 
remains bleak, competition among mortgage lenders is increasing.

Last week, Britain’s biggest mortgage lender Halifax cut its first-time buyer 
and homemover rates by up to 0.3 percentage points. Two-year fixes now start at 
1.64%, and borrowers can fix for five years at 2.24%.

Figures from Hargreaves Lansdown show that the average mortgage rate has 
fallen by about a third over the past six years, saving borrowers £270 a month 
on a £200,000 repayment.

Separate figures from the Bank show that for a borrower with a 25% deposit, 
the average cost of a five-year fixed-rate mortgage has sunk since 2009. Then, 
average rates stood at 3.98%, but borrowers now are paying just 2.77%. 
Meanwhile, rates on two-year deals have halved from an average of 3.98% seven 
years ago to 1.95% today.

However, lenders’ criteria has become increasingly stringent over this period, 
under new rules that came into force in April 2014. The changes are seeing 
borrowers being asked for more detail about their spending when they apply for 
a home loan.

David Hollingworth of mortgage broker London & Country warned that borrowers 
should not get complacent, and while the base rate has languished at 0.5% for 
many years, at some stage it will rise. “It is wise to prepare for this change, 
and take action. This includes taking the opportunity to cut the rate you’re 
paying with ongoing competition between lenders and attactive deals around. 
Also, prepare for a rise by overpaying to get rid of debt more quickly.”
 