
All it takes is a couple of clicks on your phone – while you’re on the train, 
say, or sitting at your desk – and your groceries will arrive at your door on 
the same day. With its emphasis on speed and convenience, thenew Amazon Fresh 
service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/09/amazon-starts-uk-fresh-food-delivery>
, which is being rolled out in central and east London is likely to shake up 
the grocery market.

As Amazon takes on the UK grocery market, can it deliver a profit?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/11/amazon-fresh-launches-in-uk-can-it-deliver>
However, even if you are not a fan of the global retail giant, there are 
plenty of grocery-buying apps out there that also deliver the goods and save 
you money.

With apps rather than desktop shopping, you can more easily scroll special 
offers, and it’s quicker to zip through the mobile checkout while you’re 
cooking the tea or checking what’s in the cupboards than it is to fire up your 
computer.

Main supermarkets 

Generally speaking, the apps from the major supermarkets, such as Tesco, Asda, 
Morrisons, Ocado, Waitrose and Sainsburys work in a similar way to the 
retailers’ websites. You can download the “pick your own offers” app from 
Waitrose, for example, and set your choices the same way as you can if you were 
shopping on your computer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fmove-over-amazon-grocery-apps-online-shopping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9916d78f440201dc8227fc9c9104c08f407a0d34%2F1_21_715_429%2F715.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Move%20over%20Amazon%3A%20other%20grocery%20apps%20that%20make%20shopping%20click&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fmove-over-amazon-grocery-apps-online-shopping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Move%20over%20Amazon%3A%20other%20grocery%20apps%20that%20make%20shopping%20click&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fmove-over-amazon-grocery-apps-online-shopping%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9916d78f440201dc8227fc9c9104c08f407a0d34%2F1_21_715_429%2F715.jpg>
 Sainsbury’s app. 
However, some do have extra features, which may make it more likely that you 
will spot a deal. For example, Lawrence Hene, director of marketing and grocery 
retail at Ocado, says: “Shoppers can find products by using voice search (on 
Android), barcode scanning or simply typing the product name. Shoppers can 
quickly add products to an existing order using one-click functionality.”

With Tesco, you can take things a step further if you download the If This 
Then That app and link it to <https://ifttt.com/tesco> your shopping basket. 
You can set preferences, for example, asking it to pop nappies into your basket 
every fortnight. “You set the rules,” says Nick Lansley, an innovation 
consultant who has worked for Tesco on its website and apps. “If you run 5K, 
you can tell the app to reward you by putting chocolate into your basket, say. 
Or if your favourite wine drops below a certain price, the app will add a 
bottle to your list. You can change your mind before paying for your goods, but 
it means your basket builds up without you having to fill it.”

Money-saving sites

The Mysupermarket app 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.mysupermarket.mysuperlist&hl=en_GB>
 lists prices across major supermarkets, including: Sainsburys, Aldi, Waitrose, 
Tesco, Ocado, Asda, Iceland and Morrisons. Unlike the main website, the app 
also allows you to scan products by their bar codes to find out where they are 
cheapest. You can check the best prices for individual products at any given 
time, and find out where your basket would be cheapest overall before you 
checkout.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fmove-over-amazon-grocery-apps-online-shopping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0990b587085fc4b2481d524d49c01ee37c3b5250%2F47_0_997_598%2F997.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Move%20over%20Amazon%3A%20other%20grocery%20apps%20that%20make%20shopping%20click&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fmove-over-amazon-grocery-apps-online-shopping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Move%20over%20Amazon%3A%20other%20grocery%20apps%20that%20make%20shopping%20click&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fmove-over-amazon-grocery-apps-online-shopping%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0990b587085fc4b2481d524d49c01ee37c3b5250%2F47_0_997_598%2F997.jpg>
 HotUKDeals. 
There’s a grocery section on the app from deal-sharing community HotUKDeals 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/hotukdeals-uks-hottest-deals/id570702323?mt=8>
, which allows members (there are as many as 1.4m of them registered) to share 
information about bargains they have spotted. On its app, you can search for 
products, scroll the posts and sign up for keyword alerts for supermarket 
brands or branded products. Currently on the app, for example, members are 
sharing deals such as half-price strawberry trifles at Sainsburys and boxes of 
Alpen at Tesco at £1.39 (half price). There’s plenty of deals to trawl through, 
but to make the biggest savings, instead of making spontaneous purchases from 
the random deals, sign up for keyword alerts on pricier items such as meat, 
fish, alcoholic drinks and household cleaning products.

Cashback sites 

TopCashback, Quidco and Shopitize all have apps allowing you to earn cashback 
when shopping at your local supermarket simply by taking a photo of your 
receipt.


Once you’ve signed up to TopCashback (there are free options) and downloaded 
its Snap & Save app, you buy an item, and upload a photo of your receipt via 
the app and the cashback (advertising commission paid to the site by the 
retailer) will be credited to your account in the usual way.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fmove-over-amazon-grocery-apps-online-shopping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbd2d9d21af987de221386bcf12fd45900dc125c%2F0_127_1232_739%2F1232.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Move%20over%20Amazon%3A%20other%20grocery%20apps%20that%20make%20shopping%20click&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fmove-over-amazon-grocery-apps-online-shopping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Move%20over%20Amazon%3A%20other%20grocery%20apps%20that%20make%20shopping%20click&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fmove-over-amazon-grocery-apps-online-shopping%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbd2d9d21af987de221386bcf12fd45900dc125c%2F0_127_1232_739%2F1232.jpg>
 Quidco. 
The Quidco app <http://www.quidco.com/app/> is similar, though there is an 
option to activate personalised offers. You download the ClickSnap app and, 
when you’ve gone to a store and bought a featured product, you upload the 
receipt. However, an easier way to claim the cashback is to pick a supermarket, 
share that choice with the app and then just buy featured products online. 
Either way, you earn cashback such as £1.50 if you buy a Brookside chocolate 
pomegranate pouch 198g at Tesco and £2 cashback if you buy Malibu white rum 
with pineapple 75cl at Asda or Waitrose.


Shopitize’s cashback app is currently offering £1.50 if you buy five sachets 
of Moma Porridge from Sainsburys and many offers allow you to buy at a wider 
selection of stores, such as an 80p cashback offer on a Birds Eye Spanish 
paella, available at Waitrose, Asda, Co-op, Tesco, Sainsburys and Morrisons.

Independents 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fmove-over-amazon-grocery-apps-online-shopping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbfa6be2048432c6510029f339cd9fdbd8e47bd6d%2F27_49_1617_970%2F1617.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Move%20over%20Amazon%3A%20other%20grocery%20apps%20that%20make%20shopping%20click&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fmove-over-amazon-grocery-apps-online-shopping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Move%20over%20Amazon%3A%20other%20grocery%20apps%20that%20make%20shopping%20click&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fmove-over-amazon-grocery-apps-online-shopping%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbfa6be2048432c6510029f339cd9fdbd8e47bd6d%2F27_49_1617_970%2F1617.jpg>
 Farmdrop. 
A new way to buy local produce? Food Assembly is coming to Britain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jul/10/new-way-buy-local-produce-food-assembly-coming-britain>
If you want to buy groceries from independents and local producers there are 
apps that can help you do that. The newly launchedthe Food Assembly app 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/food-assembly-buy-food-directly/id1052198033?mt=8>
 allows you to buy directly from producers within a 28-mile radius and collect 
your groceries at a weekly meeting.

There are also geographically specific apps for seasonal, fresh foods. 
London-based customers can use theFarmdrop app 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/farmdrop-freshest-food-direct/id1037990660?mt=8>
, for instance, while theWe Deliver Local app 
<http://www.wedeliverlocal.co.uk/Info/App.aspx> delivers affordable groceries 
from local butchers, bakers and grocers in your area.

Dietary requirements 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fmove-over-amazon-grocery-apps-online-shopping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ee173b350d5d4685e3dafa4167607c76715117e%2F25_0_1295_777%2F1295.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Move%20over%20Amazon%3A%20other%20grocery%20apps%20that%20make%20shopping%20click&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fmove-over-amazon-grocery-apps-online-shopping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Move%20over%20Amazon%3A%20other%20grocery%20apps%20that%20make%20shopping%20click&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fmove-over-amazon-grocery-apps-online-shopping%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ee173b350d5d4685e3dafa4167607c76715117e%2F25_0_1295_777%2F1295.jpg>
 Foodmaestro. 
Buying groceries on your phone can be tricky if you have dietary restrictions, 
as the apps (as do the websites) vary in how much information they list about 
each product. If you avoidgluten, dairy or nuts, for example(and particularly 
if you have a serious peanut allergy), you often have to go into shops in 
person to read the back of packets. However, the technology is improving, and 
new apps are appearing –FoodMaestro <http://www.foodmaestro.me/about> is one – 
that list dietary information and filter products such as wheat-free items, 
which makes shopping by smartphone easier.

In future, buying food via an app could get even easier, as technology that 
has already been invented is rolled out. In Sweden, a firm is talking aboutapps 
that can get the food to your fridge without you having to wait in 
<http://postandparcel.info/72507/news/swedish-companies-to-test-in-fridge-delivery-of-groceries/>
, while in the UK Sainsbury’s is experimenting with technology that allows 
people to take“fridge selfies” 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/entry/fridges-cameras-sainsburys-food-waste_uk_573ca4d1e4b058ab71e628d1>
 to remotely check before they start shopping.
 