
One of the MPs behind a damning report on Sir Philip Green’s handling of BHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> has dismissed criticism of their 
work by the businessman’s lawyers as an attempt to “wiggle off the hook for his 
responsibilities”.

On Tuesday, Sir Philip Green published a review by his lawyers which hit back 
atthe parliamentary report published in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/bhs-demise-sir-philip-green-reputation-torn-apart-in-damning-report>
 , calling it “bizarre” and beset by “serious factual errors”.

Green published the review as MPs prepare to debate a motion in parliament on 
Thursday that “the sale of the company to Retail Acquisitions Limited for £1 
was clearly not in the interests of British Home Stores’ employees and 
pensioners”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fsir-philip-green-is-sad-and-very-very-sorry-to-bhs-workers-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sir%20Philip%20Green%20is%20sad%20and%20very%2C%20very%20sorry%20to%20BHS%20workers%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fsir-philip-green-is-sad-and-very-very-sorry-to-bhs-workers-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sir%20Philip%20Green%20is%20sad%20and%20very%2C%20very%20sorry%20to%20BHS%20workers%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fsir-philip-green-is-sad-and-very-very-sorry-to-bhs-workers-video&media=>
Sir Philip Green is sad and very, very sorry to BHS workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/video/2016/oct/18/sir-philip-green-is-sad-and-very-very-sorry-to-bhs-workers-video>
The backbench motion sponsored by six MPs also asks fellow parliamentarians to 
note the failure of Green to resolve the deficit in the company pension fund 
over many years and calls on him to fulfil his promise to do so.

A further amendment tabled by another 11 MPs, including Richard Fuller and 
Michelle Thomson, calls on the house’s honours forfeiture committee to 
recommend Green’s knighthood “be cancelled and annulled”.

Ian Wright, the chair of the then business innovations and skills select 
committee and one of the MPs behind the motion calling on Green to sort out the 
BHS pension, said: “The report from Sir Philip Green’s no doubt expensively 
appointed lawyers is just the latest wheeze by Sir Philip to wiggle off the 
hook for his responsibilities to BHS pension-holders. This legalistic opinion 
doesn’t question the facts of the unanimously agreed select committee report 
but it does mirror Sir Philip’s litany of excuses for the collapse of BHS and 
for his delay in ‘sorting’ the BHS pension deficit.

“The select committees heard hours of oral testimony and considered thousands 
of pages of written evidence in this inquiry and there will be a welcome 
opportunity to air these issues further in Thursday’s debate.”

Frank Field, the chair of the work and pensions committee who jointly led the 
inquiry into BHS with Wright and is also sponsoring the debate motion, is 
singled out for particular criticism in the review by Green’s lawyers for 
“repeated insults to witnesses, with bullying and threats” and for making 
public comments expressing “conclusions before he had heard all of the 
evidence”.

Field responded by saying that the conclusions and recommendations of the 
parliamentary report had been agreed unanimously by 10 MPs drawn from two 
different select committees and were based on “huge amounts of evidence”.

He added: “My own views were shaped by that evidence as well as the 
circumstances of those former BHS workers whose jobs have been lost and 
pensions put at risk. MPs are entitled to have views and to take those views 
with them into parliament.

“That one of the country’s top legal minds has been drawn in to defend Sir 
Philip’s actions shows how Herculean that task is. But the house will draw its 
own conclusions later this week.”

In the review, Lord Pannick QC and Michael Todd QC criticised the MP’s 
findings, which held the tycoon responsible for leaving BHSwith a £571m pension 
deficit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/17/sir-philip-green-sold-bhs-due-to-pension-rescue-scheme-evidence-shows>
,taking nearly £400m in dividends 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/25/bhs-philip-green-family-millions-administration-arcadia>
 from the retailer andselling the business for £1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/12/sir-philip-green-sells-off-lossmaking-bhs>
 in March 2015 to the serial bankrupt Dominic Chappell’s Retail Acquisitions 
vehicle.

The lawyers said: “These dividends were lawful and were paid at a time when 
the BHS pension schemes were in surplus. BHS was not sold until 10 years later. 
The law does not prevent a company from paying dividends because of a risk that 
the company might become insolvent many years later.

“The main causes of the pension deficit were the increasing longevity of 
pensioners and the global financial crisis in 2008.”

Green claims that he invested more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/15/sir-philip-green-defends-bhs-investment-letter-mps>
 than his family took out in dividends and used the statement to lambast the 
work and pensions and business, innovation and skills select committees for 
“very serious factual and legal errors”.

The review said the committees’ inquiry process was “so unfair that, if 
parliamentary privilege did not prevent a legal challenge, a court would ‘set 
aside’ the report”.

On BHS’s sale to Chappell, the statement, issued through Green’s holding 
company, Taveta Investments, said: “There was nothing unlawful, improper or 
even unusual about Taveta and Sir Philip Green’s decision to assist Dominic 
Chappell and Retail Acquisitions Limited in the purchase of BHS. The select 
committees’ criticism in this regard is bizarre.”
 