
Karl Marx made a much-quoted remark about history repeating itself first as 
tragedy and then as farce 
<https://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/quotes/k/karlmarx382655.html>. But Theresa 
May’s government is turning Marx on his head in its European policy. In its 
handling of Brexit, it is starting with the farce. Only later will we get to 
the tragedy.

The farce is being provided courtesy of foreign secretary Boris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/16/the-guardian-view-on-boris-johnson-he-is-causing-too-much-needless-chaos>
. In some ways, Johnson is the leaver in whom pro-Europeans should have 
most hope. He is not a diehard anti-European. Unlike many Brexiteers he does 
not dislike foreigners. As a former London mayor, he knows perfectly well that 
the capital city is what it is because it is open and diverse.

Johnson’s problem – ours too – is that he is fundamentally unserious. As the 
referendum showed, his political thinking reflects the general indiscipline of 
his personality. Everything is always all about him. Public life is a jape. 
Jokes are never off limits. And he is steeped in English upper-class snobbery. 
Some people can’t get enough of this. Others, me among them, can never find the 
off-switch quickly enough.

The Conservative party is too ungovernable to coalesce around any practical 
proposal. Into that vacuum comes Johnson

Brexit would be difficult enough even with Canning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/from-the-archive-blog/2011/may/06/national-newspapers-guardianmediagroup>
 or Talleyrand as foreign secretary. But Johnson’s flippancy threatens to make 
it impossible. He is doing real damage. British voters did something on 23 June 
that others see as immensely and irredeemably destructive, and we have sent a 
narcissist to tell the world what we now stand for. It’s hardly surprising that 
serious-minded Europeans – and yes, of course, some of them lack even a grain 
of self-awareness – find this intolerable, and that some want to punish us and 
him as a result.

The May government’s Brexit policy is, as the prime minister put it again this 
week, to have “the best possible trading deal with the European Union once we 
have left”. Yet Johnson only gets in the way of this effort. Telling Europeans 
not to worry about Donald Trump is patronising.Describing free movement as 
“bollocks” 
<http://www.politico.eu/article/boris-johnson-free-movement-as-a-fundamental-freedom-bollocks-brexit-trump/>
is insulting.Talking as if Italy’s only export is prosecco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/16/european-ministers-boris-johnson-prosecco-claim-brexit>
 is infantile. Telling his Czech opposite number that the UK will leave the 
customs union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/15/britain-probably-leaving-eu-customs-union-says-boris-johnson>
 and still be part of the single market is stupid or a lie or both.

These things might seem trivial in themselves – though leaving the customs 
union is hardly that; think about the effect on the Irish border. But in 
context, these Johnsonisms are cumulatively harmful. I yield to few people in 
my exasperation at the EU’s failure to contemplate serious reshaping of the 
European project. The need for Europe to rethink fundamental pillars of 
unification is urgent. But Britain has a Brexit deal to strike with this 
Europe, not some other Europe. It is not a jape. The country’s future is on the 
table.

That’s where the tragedy looms ever larger behind the current farce. If 
Britain is to proceed with Brexit, which some of us still hope may be avoided, 
we need a deal with the EU that is as good for the British people as possible. 
That means, in reality, a system of controls on the movement of people into the 
UK that preserves as much of the economic benefit of the single market as 
possible: that’s not unachievable, though it is hugely complex and difficult to 
negotiate with an EU of 27 nations.

But it is absurd that the government refuses to even say publicly that a 
trade-off is needed. This refusal is entirely political. Ministers are silent 
not because there is no solution possible. They are silent because they can’t 
agree about what that solution might be. They can’t agree about it because the 
Conservative party is too split and ungovernable to coalesce around any 
practical proposal. Into that vacuum comes Johnson.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fcorbyn-and-may-clash-over-brexit-at-pmqs-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Corbyn%20and%20May%20clash%20over%20Brexit%20at%20PMQs%20-%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fcorbyn-and-may-clash-over-brexit-at-pmqs-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Corbyn%20and%20May%20clash%20over%20Brexit%20at%20PMQs%20-%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fcorbyn-and-may-clash-over-brexit-at-pmqs-video&media=>
Jeremy Corbyn and Theresa May clash over Brexit at PMQs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/nov/16/corbyn-and-may-clash-over-brexit-at-pmqs-video>
May’s speech to the lord mayor’s banquet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/mays-banquet-speech-out-blinged-by-farages-trump-tower-snaps>
 this week contained an illustration of how deeply trapped she is by this 
failure. As she made her case, correctly, for governments to intervene to 
redress economic inequalities, May pointed out that government should support 
and boost universities in less prosperous regions. Yet the greatest uncertainty 
in the universities todaycomes from Brexit’s effect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/apr/12/four-reasons-a-brexit-would-be-bad-news-for-uk-universities>
 on their staff, students, research potential and finance. The immobilising 
effect of Brexit extends everywhere.

In theory, that would change if there were a general election that spelled out 
the government’s terms and in which May won a mandate for them. That’s why, 
with the Tories enjoying robust poll leads over Labour, there is recurrent talk 
about an early election. But theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> face an insurmountable 
problem. Even if there were no other impediments to an early election, such as 
the Fixed-Term Parliaments Act, they cannot call one without an agreement on 
Brexit terms over which they are split. So, no election.

May defends EU plan as Corbyn accuses her of Brexit shambles
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/16/theresa-may-eu-plan-corbyn-brexit-shambles-pmqs>
The government is increasingly paralysed over Brexit. There aren’t hundreds of 
Tory backbench zealots who want to turn their backs completely on an EU deal; 
but there are enough to make any such deal too divisive to risk, even with the 
support of the Democratic Unionists. And the anti-EU press, with its profound 
collective self-interest in preventing any form of effective government, will 
do everything it can to frighten more of them into that backs-turned camp.

Until now, most of the frustrations over the progress of the government’s 
Brexit strategy have not been directly political. They have been bureaucratic: 
the need to get new departments up and running. They have been legal: the need 
to sort out article 50, which currently awaitsthe judgment of the supreme court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/15/supreme-court-judges-views-on-article-50-legislation-anger-leave-campaigners>
. And they have been intellectual: the sheer complexity of the process and 
timetable, extending into every corner of the British state – including the 
devolution settlements – for years to come is truly daunting.

It is now increasingly clear that parliamentary politics also now 
stands across the route of the Brexit process too, whatever the outcome of the 
article 50 process. There are between 40 and 60 liberal and progressive Tories 
who are now focused on ensuring that the UK gets a soft Brexit deal. They are 
increasingly well organised, and they can stop a hard Brexit if they have the 
discipline to see it through. The deal they want is extremely unlikely to be a 
deal that the outright anti-Europeans could accept.

It is not surprising that the government has just backed off from its 
Cameron-era plan to clip the wings of the House of Lord 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/17/government-ditches-plans-to-curb-lords-as-it-prepares-for-brexit-bill>
s. This government needs all the votes it can get, in both houses. The EU 
referendum didn’t end the European question in British political life. On the 
contrary. Increasingly, it seems to have given it a whole new lease of possibly 
very long life.
 