
MPs are to investigate how many occupational pension schemes are at risk of 
failing, amid inquiries into the collapse of BHS and the debate over thefuture 
of the £15bn British Steel pension fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/26/tata-steel-pension-chief-backs-controversial-cuts>
.

The Commons work and pensions select committee, which is already investigating 
the £571m deficit atBHS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> scheme, said 
on Friday night it would launch a wide ranging inquiry into the problem, 
probably starting in the autumn.

Workers’ occupational pensions have been forced centre stage in recent months 
by BHS’s collapse and by Tata Steel’s potential sale of its UK business.

Almost 13,000 current and former BHS employees who were under retirement age 
when the company went into administration in March may face a 10% cut to their 
pensions as a result.

Tweaking pensions law to save Tata Steel UK would be a risky move
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/may/26/tweaking-pensions-law-save-tata-steel-uk-risky-move>
The British Steel pension scheme, one of Britain’s largest defined benefit 
plans with 130,000 members, is also facing cuts as the government races to put 
it on a sound footing to help facilitate a sale. The latest figures show it has 
liabilities of almost £15bn and the deficit has ballooned to £700m.

Announcing the broader inquiry, the chair of the committee, Frank Field 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/frank-field>, said: “The state of the 
British Steel pension scheme is further worrying evidence of a wider danger to 
one of the biggest savings successes in Britain during the last century – 
occupational pension schemes. The select committee’s in-depth case study on BHS 
is illustrating how such schemes are already creaking from rising life 
expectancy and record low returns on capital.

“Pension law and regulation must urgently adapt to the issues of the future, 
rather than the problems of the past. We should be under no illusions that 
British Steel is a special case. The whole savings edifice is in danger.”

The Labour MP said 11 million workers have private defined benefit pensions, 
but more than 5,000 of the associated pension schemes are in deficit by £805bn 
overall.

“This will be a major inquiry considering radical solutions to one of the 
great problems of this age,” headded.

Last week the committee joined forces with the business, innovation and skills 
committee to question the heads of the Pension Protection Fund and thePensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> Regulator about the BHS debacle.

In the coming weeks, the committees will be offering some of the best free 
theatre in London when on 8 June they quiz senior BHS managers and Dominic 
Chappell, the former bankrupt who controversially bought the department store 
chain for £1 from Sir Phillip Green, who will be appearing a week later.
 