
Above us only sky

You start off trying to change the world for the better. Along the way there 
are distractions, complications, and at some point there’s a discussion about 
becoming living gods or whatever. Then, before you know it, you’re planning to 
kill hundreds of people in an explosion. It’s a story as old as time.

And it’s the story we were being told in the second season of Mr Robot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mr-robot>, which wrapped up this week 
in an episode full of answers but short on satisfaction.

The first answer was to the biggest question: what is Stage Two? Very similar 
to stage one, it turns out, though instead of hacking E Corp to destroy its 
information, the plan was to blow it up. This plan was concocted by Elliot 
Alderson (or at least the aspect of his personality known as Mr Robot) and 
Tyrell Wellick, a former executive of E Corp who was very much not killed by 
Elliot in the run-up to stage one.

Elliot had believed that Tyrell was dead. I believed it too. But we were both 
just a couple of rubes because Tyrell was alive and in possession of a gun 
which fired a bullet into Elliot’s gut. Elliot blacked out, which caused Mr 
Robot to fritz out too, but our hero isn’t dead.

We know this because the first thing Tyrell did was call Angela Moss, who 
seemed thoroughly unflustered by the news. This caused me some disquiet. It was 
obviously a shock to find the closest thing Elliot has to a love interest being 
involved in an apparent plot to wound him. But not only did I find this 
dramatic leap difficult to process, it also sent me scrambling backwards 
thinking: so there was a plan about what to do should Elliot resist stage two? 
And Angela was key to it? But she only met Whiterose in the last episode? And 
when didshe learn that Tyrell wasn’t dead?

There’s also the further complication that I had been coming to believe that E 
Corp were in on the hack, and that causing chaos was all part of Philip Price’s 
greater game. If so, why try to rebuild the business through the accumulation 
of paper records? Perhaps it’s so he can have his cake and eat it (give people 
E Coin loansand revive their dollar debts too) but if so, I’m kind of pulling 
this together on my own here.

Whatever the machinations, at the end of the second season our hero is 
unconscious, in a pool of his own blood, sold down a path towards terrorism by 
a voice he cannot ignore. So much for a happy ending.

You may say I’m a dreamer, but I’m not the only one
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fmr-robot-recap-season-two-finale-so-much-for-a-happy-ending%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7ae7fa4a827174bc9d2e080c983fcf3fd4503d2%2F0_0_978_587%2F978.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mr%20Robot%20recap%3A%20season%20two%20finale%20%E2%80%93%20so%20much%20for%20a%20happy%20ending&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fmr-robot-recap-season-two-finale-so-much-for-a-happy-ending%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mr%20Robot%20recap%3A%20season%20two%20finale%20%E2%80%93%20so%20much%20for%20a%20happy%20ending&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fmr-robot-recap-season-two-finale-so-much-for-a-happy-ending%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7ae7fa4a827174bc9d2e080c983fcf3fd4503d2%2F0_0_978_587%2F978.jpg>
 Get ready for a bad-ass double act in season three … Dom DiPierro’s spider 
diagram of crime. Photograph: Amazon 
Mr Robot is a smart show, maybe at times too smart for its own good. There’s 
so much to love in it, so much detail, so much verisimilitude (particularly in 
the hacking detail), but sometimes I feel like I could do with a little more 
hand-holding to work out what’s going on.

Sam Esmail, the show’s creator and writer and director and producer and 
everything else, has given a post-season interview toVariety 
<http://variety.com/2016/tv/news/mr-robot-season-2-finale-sam-esmail-elliot-shot-tyrell-alive-1201867301/>
 in which he makes it clear that “we wanted to resolve all of the mysteries 
we’d been setting up all season”. And he did, to an extent. Not only do we know 
what Stage Two is, we know for sure Tyrell is alive, who was sending the 
messages to Joanna Wellick (that’s bereaved E Corp CTO Scott Knowles), where 
Trenton and Mobley are hiding out (in California, at a fast food company) and 
who killed Romero (a neighbour, by accident).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fmr-robot-recap-season-two-finale-so-much-for-a-happy-ending%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84608db650f17ed90be4743c66eb3af996b1edff%2F0_0_1147_688%2F1147.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mr%20Robot%20recap%3A%20season%20two%20finale%20%E2%80%93%20so%20much%20for%20a%20happy%20ending&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fmr-robot-recap-season-two-finale-so-much-for-a-happy-ending%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mr%20Robot%20recap%3A%20season%20two%20finale%20%E2%80%93%20so%20much%20for%20a%20happy%20ending&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fmr-robot-recap-season-two-finale-so-much-for-a-happy-ending%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84608db650f17ed90be4743c66eb3af996b1edff%2F0_0_1147_688%2F1147.jpg>
 Finally, we know how Leon got out of prison. Photograph: Amazon 
Each answer turns out to be partial though, and in turn beg many more 
questions. I’ve listed those about Angela, but there are also questions about 
where Tyrell has been, why Joanna cares so much about framing Knowles, what 
this magic Stage One control-z Trenton has managed to uncover is, and how Leon 
got out of prison and found them in the first place.

Of Angela, Esmail tells Variety that:

“You can just never quite read her. [Portia Doubleday] does it in such an 
exquisite fashion that we played up the notion where she’s a character that’s 
riding down the middle. On the one hand, you could feel that she’s flipped and 
turned to E Corp, and on the other hand, no, she’s trying to bring them down. 
We played with that the whole season. We thought that was so fascinating. We’re 
double-downing. Our assumption by the end of the season was that she’s siding 
with the Dark Army. As we move forward to the next season, it’ll be interesting 
to play that dynamic. Is she really with them or is she not? It’s just 
something with Angela’s journey, we can always keep people off balance in terms 
of what directions she’s actually going in.”

I don’t think anyone could argue that Angela has not been as Esmail describes. 
The question is more how much the audience enjoys being thrown around in its 
perceptions like this. The uncertainty over E Corp I liked; if she was working 
with them it was to put some kind of mental block on her grief. If she was 
working against them, it was an effective ruse. But to now set up the same 
dilemma with another antagonist (only less motivation) I’m inclined to find the 
whole thing a bit wilful.

Whatever happens, I’ll always have Dom DiPierro. The FBI agent interviewed 
Darlene this week and tried to bring her onside in the ongoing investigation 
against f.soc and the Dark Army, “one of the biggest events in world history”. 
Darlene is, to put it mildly, disinclined to engage. “Go suck a dick” is how 
she puts it. But a late introduction to Dom’s spider diagram of crime suggests 
that maybe the ladyis for turning. Stay tuned for a bad-ass double act in 
season three.

The remaining questions

What is WhiteRose’s endgame? What is going on at the Washington Plant? What 
happened to Angela and Elliot’s parents? Can Trenton make the world whole 
again?Will Mr Robot wake up when Elliot does?

Note to the reader

It’s been great to do these recaps with you this season. You’ve been an 
informed and informative community and you’ve kept coming back so thanks. We 
got some things right and some things wrong but I hope, like me, you’ll be back 
for another round next year. I’d be particularly keen to hear your highlights 
of this season in the comments.
 