
If you really want to know where we are as a world, rather than a tiny and 
bamboozled nation, turn away from the news and towardsMr Robot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mr-robot>, the award-winning US drama 
that has just entered itssecond season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/13/mr-robot-season-two-rami-malek-usa-network>
. It follows the adventures of Elliot Alderson, an emotionally troubled young 
computer security engineer turned vigilante hacker. He is recruited by the 
eponymous character, the leader of a New York-based anarchist group, to destroy 
the largest conglomerate in the world.

Mr Robot's season two is proof the show refuses to play by the rules of TV
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/13/mr-robot-season-two-rami-malek-usa-network>
Of course, emotionally troubled heroes out to bring down the big guys and 
champion the underdog are nothing new. But Elliot may be the first to be 
inspired by the chance to wipe out people’s debt (money being these days just a 
mass of pixels on a screen and bytes on a server, and nicely susceptible to his 
re-coding ministrations) and bring about, asMr Robot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mr-robot> says, “the single biggest 
incident of wealth redistribution in history!”

If television is both a barometer and a bellwether of collective concerns and 
incipient urges … guys, I think we just ushered in the age of cyber-communism. 
And its vanguard is getting Golden Globes instead of the hurried assembly of a 
new House Un-American Activities Committee.

Forget (if you haven’t already in order to protect your own mental health and 
preserve that precious, un-ulcerated stomach lining)the Labour party and its 
flailing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/14/labour-right-shambles-jeremy-corbyn-questions-answer>
 after whatever it decides it is actually flailing after; the revolution is 
being televised, comrade, right now.

Its leader is a skinny, badly dressed, unsmiling man determined to try and 
save a world he more or less clearly hates. You’re going to feel very much at 
home, except that Elliot has the perfect modern skillset with which to 
accomplish his goals.

Brexit: the royal remedy

“Where is the Queen?” people have been crying since everything went 
pear-shaped on 24 June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/over-to-you-says-puffy-eyed-cameron-as-brexit-vultures-circle>
. “Isn’t she meant to unite us? Lead us safely by the regal hand through times 
of national angst and geopolitical turmoil?”

Well, yes she is, and now she has. And how? By going to the pub. The Sheep 
Heid Inn in Edinburgh played host to Her Maj 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/07/13/queen-surprises-pub-goers-by-dropping-into-her-local-in-edinburg/>
 when she called in for a meal – possibly rump of lamb, possibly sea bass, 
according to reports – after a day at Musselburgh racecourse.

Imagine the advisers who must have been flocking round her these past few 
weeks, recommending a stirring speech here, a pointed state visit there, the 
deployment of the Emergency Third Pregnancy Plan (“Wake up, Kate! The Palace 
called and so does duty!”), eager to orchestrate the subtle gathering of royal 
muscle ready to be flexed when the time of crisis looks deepest. Imagine Liz 
Twoth looking round in silence at the jabbering fools and growing pandemonium 
around her, inwardly summoning the wisdom gleaned from 64 years on the job and 
announcing, “Nah. Pub.” And off she trots, knowing that sometimes – often, 
almost always, in fact – there is really nothing else to be done.

Mums and PMs 

As a mother, I am very confused about what, as a mother, I am allowed to do. 
As a mother, I would apparently be a good PM 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/09/andrea-leadsom-tory-leadership-am-dram-peasant-revolt>
 but (if the stats on the number of women permitted to return to work at their 
pre-partum level are to be believed) nothing else. And, as a mother, I am 
allowed to stay home with my kids, but not (according to the furore over the 
picture of Victoria Beckham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2016/jul/13/kissing-your-child-on-the-lips-is-perfectly-acceptable>
 doing so with five-year-old daughter, Harper) kiss them on the mouth. But I am 
allowed to name them Harper? Could somebody, please, clarify?
 