
Well Nancy’s like, OK, we need to talk about schools. I’m like, wait let me 
finish this design, do you thinkshagreen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/mar/23/is-it-ok-to-buy-bags-made-from-stingray-skin>
 details are really *now* totewise #brandCameron? Dave’s like, wait, listen to 
the first line of my memoirs *coughs*. “In those heady days of 2010 it never 
occurred to me that my new head of “blue sky thinking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/jul/31/blue-sky-thinking>” – 
good old Hilto – was in fact a cunning double agent who would repay my kindness 
with the blackesttreachery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/27/vote-leave-vote-steve-is-hilton-hitting-the-headlines-to-sell-his-book>
. Everyone, me included, had taken his signature barefoot ‘look’ to be a sign 
of the immensest integrity.”

Vote leave? Vote Steve! Is Hilton hitting the headlines to sell his book?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/27/vote-leave-vote-steve-is-hilton-hitting-the-headlines-to-sell-his-book>
I’m like wow, genius babes! Nancy’s like, wrong, I totally saw through him 
Dad. Dave’s like, but you were tiny! Nancy’s like, even a child of six could 
see he was a total douche, I’m like *moving on voice* so I thought a £2,500 
pricepoint for this bag – Nancy’s like, schools, NOW.

I’m like God, soz, I know, I had totes forgotten you were still at, um, St 
Whatever’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2010/jul/12/david-cameron-comprehensive-schools>
, I mean that place the Goveys told us to send you, chill, we will get you out 
asap, she’s like, noted, I take it there is no actual plan, protecting your 
children’s life chances, following a wholly predictable, Brexit-forced 
relocation to deepest Goveland. Comments, Dad?

Dave’s like, God, right, a plan, very good question, let me ask the 
Letwinator, what he does not know about schools is not worth knowing, Nancy’s 
like uwotm8? Dave’s like, if only Eton took girls, well at least we aresorted 
for Elwen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/31/david-cameron-private-school-son-elwen-pledge-support-state-sector>
, listen, chapter two: “In the sunlit days of 2010, it never occurred to me 
that my trusted education secretary – good old Govey – was in fact a closet 
communist who would repay my kindness with theblackest treachery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/07/farewell-michael-gove-traitor-prime-minister>
. Everyone, me included, had taken his comical appearance as a sign of the 
highest intelligence”, I’m like, omigod babes, LOVE it. Nancy’s like, so there 
is no school, fine, I resign.

So farewell then, Michael Gove. You were right about one thing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/07/farewell-michael-gove-traitor-prime-minister>
I’m like, wait, I know resigning is having the biggest moment, after all 
*proud face* Dave started it, but do not be hasty.

Nancy’s like, trust me, this is not a decision I have taken lightly, but to 
quote Dad, why should I do all the hard shit, write your own memoirs, lol.
 