
Well, Mummy was like you poor darlings, how ARE you, I’m like I’m fine, 
really, tbh the kitchen was starting to look a bit tired, plus do not forget I 
went to art school withTricky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/may/23/tricky-i-dont-believe-death-exists>
, Downing Street was never completely *me*, but *puts on something-in-my-eye 
voice*leaving IS quite #sadface 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jul/13/david-cameron-and-family-leave-downing-street-for-the-last-time-video>
?

Mrs Cameron’s Diary: Dave’s memoirs are all chagrin. But all I want is 
shagreen | As seen by Catherine Bennett
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/08/mrs-camerons-diary-dave-memoirs-chagrin-shagreen-hilto-govey-treachery>
Mummy’s like, because of Dave making such an utter hash of things, darling, 
tell him to think of it as work experience, SO dreary but marv for his CV, plus 
he still has his Duke of Edinburgh award. I’m like, actually Nancy is the sad 
one, what with HS2 & having to leave her entire Cobra team behind, honestly 
moving is hell, Mummy’s like, obvs darling, why else do people stay in their 
houses, you know what they say, better a safari park than a removal van – but 
surely you are not doing it alone?

I’m like, except for Letwin – look, any port in a storm – all the people who 
used to *do* for us have gone, as in nobody would callthe Goveys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove> willing, but if you promised 
them a free dinner or some old clothes they could literally move like 
lightning, same with dear old Danny in the early days, omigod, remember the 
Cleggs, lol, God, where are they now, but now Craig Whatever has vanished, as 
per, & we have not seen Rosie since she went to source pompoms a couple of 
weeks ago, God who’d be a fashion adviser, well Nancy is telling me to FGS 
hurry & pack my diaries or there will be nothing for the #memoirs, but 
non-swank thank goodness I kept them, can you believe Dave had totes forgotten 
the huskies? Ditto *opens pages at random* Hilto, the wind turbine, lol, 
WebCameron, NHS reform, Uncle Phil’s efficiency hints, the happiness index,
nudge theory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2015/sep/12/nudge-theory-mental-manipulation-wrong>
, the big society, Tamara the trade ambassador *spits out tea*, Libya & someone 
called Leveson, do you have any idea who he is because we literally have NO 
clue?

Mummy’s like, that horrid little man, did your bathroom? I’m like, of COURSE, 
nightmare, she’s like, how was the Queen, was it *terribly* emosh? I’m like, 
OMD, so embarrassing, tears everywhere, soon as we walked in? But I think it 
was just the uncertainty, she literally purred when Nancy told her the Mays 
would do Balmoral, tbh, Dave could barely concentrate after he spotted Pikachu 
under her throne? Mummy’s like, seriously, I’m like, IKR, lucky, just when Dave 
desperately needed two months to focus on playing, along came Brexit, then Mrs 
May, lol, literally she could not have happened at a better time :)))

Nancy’s like *vom face* God, what were you all like #Chippy #NottingHill?

Mummy’s like, what is that noise, I’m like, oh just Dave singing, that means 
*proud face* anotherPokémon win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/12/pokemon-go-becomes-global-phenomenon-as-number-of-us-users-overtakes-twitter>
. Dave’s like, YESS, nailed him babes, Mewtwo, behind the lectern, do not 
forget to put that in your diary, what a note to leave on, God can you believe 
it is only six years since that Chequers weekend when I finished all the levels 
on Angry Birds #legend, seems like yesterday. I’m like, IKR, where did the time 
go, remember the charades, the Fartmeister’s tricks & the smell of Oik roasting 
on the fire #goodtimes. Dave’s like, IKR, non-stop bantz with the Clarksonator, 
Govey on his bongos, hunting Coulson with Helena Bonham Carter – did you pack 
my Bullers coat?

I’m like, omigod *shudders* was that what Mr Cobber’s liniment was stuck to, 
at least it was not as bad as Hilto’s socks & srsly, can you believe there were 
10,000 mouldy King James Bibles in the shed, do they take Bibles at the dump? 
Dave’s like, but Govey swore the children loved them, it was in Sarah’s column, 
I’m like, plus, before Letwin bins it, do we know anyone who would have hidden 
a bag of lesbian pornography in the airing cupboard? Dave’s like *choking back 
tears voice* God I never thought I’d say this, but sometimes I miss Charlie & 
Rebekah?

Nancy’s like *vom face* God, what were you all like #Chippy #NottingHill? 
Dave’s like, is something wrong Nancy, she’s like, oh nothing, but ICYMI, my 
dad just trashed his own reputation & bankrupted his country out of sheer 
arrogance & sloth, before we even got to ride in his new plane, & now the 
economy is in freefall & your children have to live literally out of suitcases 
until we return to a tiny hovel round the corner from your mortal enemies 
#Goveys, but, no honestly, I’m fine with it.

I’m like, but Nancy there are literally millions of fabulous things about 
leaving, she’s like, you can leave your kids in pubs without anyone knowing, 
amirite? I’m like, plus (1) no moreLarry the cat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/11/larry-the-cat-will-not-be-evicted-from-no-10-cabinet-office-confirms>
 (2) proper holidays (3) goodbye M&S hello Roksanda, recommended cost-per-wear 
ratio updated to minimum £1,500 per outing #maths (4) no more diary writing, 
triple yays!!! Nancy’s like, mother, you know nobody under 25 says yay any 
more? I’m like, OM – she’s like, also, before you say OMD, hint, it does not 
stand for oh my dog? Dave’s like, God srsly, who knew?

I’m like, Dave, tell Nancy some more great things about leaving here literally 
overnight, two months early? He’s like, Larry, I’m like, I did Larry, he’s like 
(6) – Nancy’s like, you mean (5) he’s like, no more Lanzarote (6) or looking at 
fish (7) hunting (8) shooting (9) non swankerama, maybe a bit of House of Lords 
action, yolo, Nancy, is yolo still a thing? Nancy’s like no, & Dad, canunot do 
the -erama suffix, can we talk about my legacy?

Dave’s like *trust fund voice* trust me Nancy, you will be well provided for, 
all in good time. She’s like, am I the only person round here who genuinely 
wanted to leave this country a better place? Dave’s like, yeserama? She’s like, 
so what were you even doing all these years, I’m like, darling, look in my 
diaries, we never stopped doing literally genius things, it’s just they weren’t 
so much legacy-related as – Nancy’s like, let me guess, totes hilair?
 