
Young, highly educated Muslim women who live in modern, urban environments may 
be choosing to wear the veil because it enables them to mix with non-Muslim 
friends, work outside the home and interact with strangers, according to the
first empirical study into why wearing the veil increases alongside 
modernisation 
<http://esr.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2016/07/27/esr.jcw035.short?rss=1>.


 Attempts to force Muslim women to stop wearing the veil might, therefore, be 
counterproductive by depriving them of the choice and opportunity to integrate: 
if women cannot signal their piety through wearing a veil, they might choose or 
be forced to stay at home, concludes the study, published in the Oxford 
University Press’sEuropean Social Review <http://esr.oxfordjournals.org/>.

 “For highly religious women, we found the modernising forces of education, 
occupation and higher income, urban living, and contacts with non-Muslims 
actually increase veiling,” saidOzan Aksoy 
<http://esr.oxfordjournals.org/search?author1=Ozan+Aksoy&sortspec=date&submit=Submit>
, co-author of the report, Behind the Veil: The Strategic Use of Religious Garb.

“We conjecture that for highly religious women modernising factors raise the 
risk and temptation in women’s environments that imperil their reputation for 
modesty: veiling would then be a strategic response, a form either ofcommitment 
to prevent the breach of religious norms or ofsignalling women’s piety to their 
communities.

 “Our findings have important implications for cultural policy and Muslim 
integration in Europe as if the option of wearing a veil is taken away from 
Muslim women, they fall on costlier ways of proving their piety,” said Aksoy, a 
postdoctoral research fellow from the department of sociology at the University 
of Oxford.

“A veil is seen as a genuine expression of a woman’s religiosity. 
Paradoxically, it is the women who are engaging with the modern world who 
appear to rely on the veil to signal to others that they will not succumb to 
the temptations of modern urban life,” he added.

Diego Gambetta 
<http://esr.oxfordjournals.org/search?author1=Diego+Gambetta&sortspec=date&submit=Submit>
, the report’s other co-author, agreed. “Contrary to the populist cant that 
seems now dominant in Europe, veiling could be a sign of more rather than less 
integration.

“Highly religious women who have more native friends and live in areas 
dominated by natives use the veil to keep their pious reputation while being 
integrated,” said Gambetta, a professor of sociology and an official fellow of 
Nuffield College, University of Oxford. “Banning or shunning veiling would 
deprive them of a means that allow them more opportunity for integration rather 
than marking their differences.”

The study drew on data of thousands of women living in Belgium, Turkey and 25 
Muslim countries. Aksoy and Gambetta used mathematical models to see how the 
intensity of wearing the veil varied according to the women’s education, 
employment, urbanisation and contact with non-Muslims. The study includes the 
wearing of headscarves, the turban or hijab, the chador, the burqa (which 
covers the face too), and no head covering at all.


“As you might expect, we found the tendency for veil wearing decreases among 
young, highly educated women when they are exposed to modern influences if they 
are ‘averagely religious’ Muslim women,” Gambetta said. “However, Muslim women 
who are ‘highly religious’ tend to increase their wearing of religious head 
coverings and use more conservative styles as the level of modernisation, or 
‘risks’ they are exposed to, increase.”
 