
David Cameron has described members of the Muslim Brotherhood as possible 
extremists 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/muslim-brotherhood-review-statement-by-the-prime-minister>
 but stopped short of banning the group after a long-delayed official inquiry 
into its activities in Britain.

The prime minister said the review 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/486932/Muslim_Brotherhood_Review_Main_Findings.pdf>
 found the Islamist organisation, of which the ousted Egyptian president 
Mohamed Morsi is a senior member, had had significant influence in groups 
claiming to speak for British Muslims.

He added that the Brotherhood, which is opposed by some Gulf states, 
characterised the UK as fundamentally hostile to Muslim faith and identity and 
had expressed support for terrorist attacks by the Palestinian Islamist group 
Hamas.


“The main findings of the review support the conclusion that membership of, 
association with, or influence by the Muslim Brotherhood should be considered 
as a possible indicator of extremism,” Cameron said in a written ministerial 
statement to MPs. “Parts of theMuslim Brotherhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/muslim-brotherhood> have a highly ambiguous 
relationship with violent extremism.”

The prime minister’s statement went far further than expected, and the report 
ends by claiming that “aspects of Muslim Brotherhood ... are contrary to our 
values and have been contrary to our national interests and our national 
security”.

The review was undertaken by the former British ambassador to Saudi Arabia, 
Sir John Jenkins, and Charles Farr, the director general of the office for 
security and counterterrorism in the Home Office. The findings were due to be 
published in July 2014 but have been long delayed, with no explanation from 
Downing Street.

An 11-page summary makes it clear the government accepts that the “Muslim 
Brotherhood has not been linked to terrorist-related activity in and against 
the UK” and has “often condemned terrorist-related activity in the UK 
associated with al-Qaida”.


However, the report raises concerns over the “sometimes secretive, if not 
clandestine” way the Brotherhood operated in the recent past and noted it 
sought to shape – by stealth – Muslim thinking through three UK mainstream 
organisations: theMuslim Association of Britain <http://www.mabonline.net/>, the
Muslim Council of Britain <http://www.mcb.org.uk/> and the Islamic Society of 
Britain <http://www.isb.org.uk/>, which has now disowned its roots.

The Jenkins report says that “for some years the Muslim Brotherhood shaped the 
[then] new Islamic Society of Britain, dominated the Muslim Association of 
Britain and played an important role in establishing and then running the 
Muslim Council of Britain.”

It says in its conclusions: “Much about the Muslim Brotherhood in the UK 
remains secretive, including membership, fundraising and educational 
programmes. But Muslim Brotherhood associates and affiliates here have at times 
had significant influence on the largest UK Muslim student organisation, 
national organisations which have claimed to represent Muslim communities (and 
on that basis have sought and had a dialogue with government), charities and 
some mosques.

“Though their domestic influence has declined, organisations associated with 
the Muslim Brotherhood continue to have an influence here which is 
disproportionate to their size.”

The report also concludes that while engagement with the government has at 
times been facilitated by what appeared to be a common agenda against al-Qaida 
and militant Salafism: “But this engagement did not take account of Muslim 
Brotherhood support for a proscribed terrorist group and its views about 
terrorism which, in reality, were quite different from our own.”


The prime minister said that under the new counter-extremism strategy, 
ministers would ensure that government did not inadvertently provide legitimacy 
or a platform for extremists and would keep the question of banning the Muslim 
Brotherhood under review.


Last month, the Guardian revealed that the United Arab Emirates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/06/uae-told-uk-crack-down-on-muslim-brotherhood-or-lose-arms-deals>
, dominated by the oil-rich emirate of Abu Dhabi, threatened to block 
billion-pound arms deals with the UK, stop inward investment and cut 
intelligence cooperation if Britain did not act against the Muslim Brotherhood, 
which it regards as a terrorist outfit.

UAE told UK: crack down on Muslim Brotherhood or lose arms deals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/06/uae-told-uk-crack-down-on-muslim-brotherhood-or-lose-arms-deals>
A trio of the UK’s closest allies in the Arab world – Egypt, Saudi Arabia and 
the UAE – have all complained that London is a base for the Brotherhood, which 
began and was developed inEgypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt>.

These Arab nations have all outlawed the group and accused it of links to 
terrorism. The Brotherhood denies this, saying it is a peaceful political 
movement. The report accepts that the organisation has opted for “non-violent 
incremental change on the grounds of expediency”.

The Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood said Cameron was effectively condemning 
millions of Muslims as extremists and its lawyers were putting together a case 
to take the government to court. Its foreign relations chief, Yehia Hamed, said 
the report was not based on credible evidence or a proper review process.







The South Asian versions of the Brotherhood were also criticised. One such 
group – theIslamic Forum for Europe 
<http://www.islamicforumeurope.com/live/ife.php> – was shown to be privately 
advocating sharia law in Tower Hamlets, east London.

The Brotherhood, founded in Egypt in 1928, grew into an international 
organisation with chapters across the Muslim world. The report says that while 
it has been non-violent and taken part in democratic elections inEgypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> and Tunisia, the “Muslim Brotherhood 
at all levels have repeatedly defended Hamas attacks against Israel, including 
the use of suicide bombers”.

While the armed wing of Hamas is banned in Britain, the organisation’s 
political wing has held talks with senior UK officials –most recently this year 
with the former prime minister, Tony Blair 
<http://www.haaretz.com/middle-east-news/.premium-1.670831>, who reportedly 
invited Hamas’s leader to the UK.

Cameron said the government would keep a close watch on the views promoted by 
Brotherhood associates in Britain in Arabic and English, as well as their 
activities. Britain would also continue to refuse visas to members and 
associates of the Brotherhood who were on record as having made extremist 
comments.

There would be a particular focus on fundraising in Britain for the 
Brotherhood to ensure that money raised by charities with links to the 
organisation was not used to finance it, he said.

The Liberal Democrat leader, Tim Farron, said the Jenkins review had been 
requested by the Saudi government and “shines a light into the shady corners of 
our relationship with the kingdom. We should decide these things based on real 
and credible intelligence and not pressure from Riyadh,” he said.

“We need to be less of a slavish ally and more critical of their role both 
within the region and on human rights. We are now calling on the government to 
start a formal inquiry into the external funding for extremist perversions of 
Islam.”



 