
Summer is a time when natural light can lend an otherness to almost any 
subject. From Ryan McGinley’s playful homage to Renaissance nudes, to Nadav 
Kander’s eerie inlet at Mont Saint-Michel, these shots by contemporary 
photographers are testament to that.

As the holiday snaps that flood Instagram show, the light can also enhance 
even the most cliched chronicle of a summer vacation. We take a different kind 
of photograph in the sun, sensing that it makes us look better because it makes 
us feel better. The self we display in a selfie, or so we tell ourselves, is 
leaner, lither, more tanned, more relaxed and less self-conscious.

A snapshot of a sandy beach and a blue sea, especially taken through the V of 
tanned feet, would once have been consigned to a pile of envelopes in a 
cupboard, to be looked at briefly and bemusedly years later in a bout of 
decluttering. Now, shared in real time on Instagram, it is something else: more 
knowing, artful and presumptive. “I am here and you are not,” is the subliminal 
message it carries to friends back home. Yet sunlight falling on skin or sand 
bestows a shimmer of lightness – literal and atmospheric – on even the most 
inane snapshot.

Against all of this, I can understand why even a contemporary master of deep 
colour such as Alec Soth would choose to shoot someone diving into a rocky 
swimming hole in monochrome. Here is the chill of summer, the childhood risk of 
summer, the dark dreamtime of an adolescent summer in which limits are being 
tested. It is an antidote to the dappled days of sun, sea, sand and luminous 
light.(Sean O’Hagan <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/seanohagan>)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fmy-best-summer-photograph-sally-mann-ellen-von-unwerth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F148fb3ebadd816161c25e7166d926d74abc3b8e9%2F0_0_2200_1650%2Fmaster%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20best%20summer%20photograph%3A%20sun%2C%20sand%20and%20plastic%20surgery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fmy-best-summer-photograph-sally-mann-ellen-von-unwerth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20best%20summer%20photograph%3A%20sun%2C%20sand%20and%20plastic%20surgery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fmy-best-summer-photograph-sally-mann-ellen-von-unwerth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F148fb3ebadd816161c25e7166d926d74abc3b8e9%2F0_0_2200_1650%2Fmaster%2F2200.jpg>
 Near Kaaterskill Falls, New York, 2012 by Alec Soth. Photograph: Alec Soth 
‘I tried a cliff-dive myself. It was thrilling’ 
Alec Soth  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/oct/06/alec-soth-gathered-leaves-photographer-uk-retrospective>

I took this on a road trip through upstate New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2011/jun/25/the-adirondacks-millionaires-at-play>
 one summer. The area has a curious Rip Van Winkle quality at that time of 
year, which made for a deeply romantic trip. I had created this kind of 
imaginary newspaper called the LBM Dispatch, naming myself chief photographer. 
I was working with a friend, a writer. We would drive around a region, 
allocating time to stop and report on whatever we found.

I had mapped out various swimming holes. There are loads dotted across upstate 
NY: places where people gather to swim and, as it turns out, cliff-dive. It 
wasn’t at this spot, but at another, that I tried it out for myself – and it 
was totally thrilling. That feeling of letting go fascinated me. It tied in to 
ideas of escape that I have explored for years.

Suicide fantasies, escape fantasies – this has elements of both

I was experimenting with flash, working like a news photographer, who pauses 
and instantaneously zeroes in on someone’s life. There is something about the 
result here that’sevocative of Weegee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2015/mar/31/the-best-of-weegees-new-york-street-photography-in-pictures>
 [Arthur Fellig, famed for his black-and-white photographs of New York crime 
scenes from the 1930s]. It seems timeless too: I don’t think you could ever 
guess when it was taken.

The image was published in Songbook, my most recent work, but it’s linked to 
two earlier projects. I shot a series called Niagara, attracted to the area and 
its motels by the falls – and the suicides. A more recent project was Broken 
Manual, which focused on men who run away, attempting to escape from the world 
and their lives. This cliff-dive is reminiscent of elements in both: fantasies 
of suicide, fantasies of retreat – it’s all in there.

Maybe that’s depressing, too depressing for a snapshot of summer, but my work 
is often chilly. To me, seasons are somewhat abstract, but summer is almost 
mythical in its ability to evoke childhood, unfamiliar places, a moment outside 
day-to-day life, like a dream. That’s what the picture is: a dream-like moment 
of total release.(Interview by Edward Siddons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/edward-siddons>)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fmy-best-summer-photograph-sally-mann-ellen-von-unwerth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7f85614cb96eb1fd0d59a868854dc38e879716d%2F0_0_1384_2076%2F1384.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20best%20summer%20photograph%3A%20sun%2C%20sand%20and%20plastic%20surgery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fmy-best-summer-photograph-sally-mann-ellen-von-unwerth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20best%20summer%20photograph%3A%20sun%2C%20sand%20and%20plastic%20surgery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fmy-best-summer-photograph-sally-mann-ellen-von-unwerth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7f85614cb96eb1fd0d59a868854dc38e879716d%2F0_0_1384_2076%2F1384.jpg>
 Barn Flip (Red), 2013 by Ryan McGinley Photograph: Ryan McGinley/Courtesy Team 
Gallery 
‘They’re like the nudes in the Sistine Chapel’ 
Ryan McGinley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/apr/13/ryan-mcginley>

I love shooting out in nature during the summer because it’s warm and people 
are comfortable being naked. I can shoot all day and take my time to find the 
surprises that make an image exceptional. Something about being outside at this 
time of year seems extra spiritual and serene.


This shot consists of three friends of mine, all artists: photographer 
Carlotta Kohl is on the left, painter Christopher Bostwick is in the middle, 
and film-maker Petra Collins is on the right. The location is deepestWest 
Virginia <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/west-virginia>. For my shoots, I 
look for properties to rent that have lots of land to explore, usually farms 
with unique old structures that I like to include in my shots. When I rent a 
place like this in the middle of nowhere, they are usually inexpensive, so I am 
easily able to take my crew of 15 along.

This was shot at dusk, a time I like because the sky turns beautiful shades of 
blue. I set up an airbag for the models to jump on to. When Christopher started 
doing flips, it reminded me of looking up at the nudes inthe Sistine Chapel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2014/oct/30/why-vatican-thinks-tourists-idiots-3d-michelangelo-sistine>
. I grew up Roman Catholic and was influenced by Michelangelo’s nudes. 
Actually, the flying nudes of the Renaissance have been in my DNA from a very 
early age. One of the reasons I initially cast Petra was because she looked as 
if she had stepped out of a Renaissance painting.

While we were shooting, one of the owner’s friends, a biker, stood there 
watching us. He was drunk and kind of mumbling things to himself as all the 
models were jumping out of the barn. I told him to go away, to let the models 
have their privacy, but he kept coming back. The following morning, at around 
3am, he walked into our house and yelled: “Who wants to party?” We were all 
terrified. That afternoon, the owner told us, he had gotten on his motorcycle 
at around 7am, driven off, crashed and died.(Ben Beaumont-Thomas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/ben-beaumont-thomas>)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fmy-best-summer-photograph-sally-mann-ellen-von-unwerth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F371e7f48906117345814958b52551bcb27955f03%2F0_0_2538_1998%2F2538.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20best%20summer%20photograph%3A%20sun%2C%20sand%20and%20plastic%20surgery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fmy-best-summer-photograph-sally-mann-ellen-von-unwerth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20best%20summer%20photograph%3A%20sun%2C%20sand%20and%20plastic%20surgery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fmy-best-summer-photograph-sally-mann-ellen-von-unwerth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F371e7f48906117345814958b52551bcb27955f03%2F0_0_2538_1998%2F2538.jpg>
 Mont Saint-Michel, Normandy, France 2002 by Nadav Kander Photograph: Nadav 
Kander 
‘This shot only exists in summer’ 
Nadav Kander <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/nadav-kander>

Water has always been important to me. There is something enchanting about its 
stillness, how it covers everything, how it flows along the path of least 
resistance and submerges everything in a level way. There’s something starkly 
beautiful – and calming – about it. I think you are either a mountain person or 
a lake person. I’m a lake person.

I took this around Mont Saint-Michel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/22/supertide-mont-saint-michel-france>
 in France, just over the Channel from Cornwall. In autumn, the area turns 
orange, and in winter it has hardly any colour at all, so summer is the only 
time that this shot really exists.

I found the flatness of the scene captivating. When I made my way through it, 
all these inlets started to look rather surreal. That’s something I’m always 
searching for elements of, in among the normal. I never photograph nature in 
its purity, hence the castle looming in the distance. It’s a symbol of man, 
whose traces can be detected elsewhere in the landscape. Sheep aren’t native to 
the area. The sea grass ought to be much longer, but the introduction of 
livestock means the floodplain is grazed. That’s what gives the picture its 
clean lines and gently folding greenery.

My work always has something to do with man, or at least his mark, whether 
that is a felled tree, concrete objects or, in this case, a whole fortress 
built into the sea. Artists in earlier times, especially in England, would be 
asked to paint a landscape and, even if it was fictitious, they would insert a 
ruin into a far hillside. It lent reason, the weight of past lives. The 
castle’s inclusion here tells us that man has lived here, much has come before 
us, our own life is short.

So you could say the shot is more portrait than landscape. Without that 
building, I think it’s just pictorial and nothing more. The castle adds a 
history, a layer into time, access to humanity across the years.(ES)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fmy-best-summer-photograph-sally-mann-ellen-von-unwerth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fbbce263b8eb7c4a5459a13a2a3c76e2b9be023%2F0_0_4200_3387%2F4200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20best%20summer%20photograph%3A%20sun%2C%20sand%20and%20plastic%20surgery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fmy-best-summer-photograph-sally-mann-ellen-von-unwerth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20best%20summer%20photograph%3A%20sun%2C%20sand%20and%20plastic%20surgery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fmy-best-summer-photograph-sally-mann-ellen-von-unwerth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fbbce263b8eb7c4a5459a13a2a3c76e2b9be023%2F0_0_4200_3387%2F4200.jpg>
 Ox and Angela, plastic surgeon and wife, Rio, Brazil, October 2002 by Zed 
Nelson Photograph: Zed Nelson 
‘He’d a gun down the back of his trousers’ 
Zed Nelson <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/zed-nelson>

I spent five years working on my Love Me series, travelling to 17 countries to 
look at the phenomenon of body obsession and self-image. I was interested in 
how the beauty industry has made us more vain and self-conscious – and 
therefore more willing to spend money on its products.

I found myself in Rio de Janeiro and made an appointment to meet this plastic 
surgeon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/may/16/plastic-surgery-love-me-zed-nelson>
 at his home one weekend. I didn’t even know about his wife. She’s a carnival 
queen: she would dance on floats, something a lot of women in Brazil aspire to. 
She was quite strange, to be honest.

He'd done about six operations on her, so she is sort of his Frankenstein's 
monster

On the way there, I went to the beach and someone stole my flip-flops, so I 
had this weird experience of turning up at a plastic surgeon’s house barefoot. 
It turned out to be a good icebreaker. His wife came down in this carnival 
costume with enormous wings. It was a bit much, so I asked her to take the 
wings off. Then he scooped the dogs up off the sofa and everything looked 
perfect.

He had done about six or seven operations on her, so she is sort of his 
creation, his Frankenstein’s monster. At the time, he was having an operating 
theatre built on the top floor of his apartment. Smiling and posing for the 
camera has become such a social contrivance that I usually discourage it. But 
look at her body, look at that pose – she probably learned how to sit as a 
child. What a flattering angle it is. And that’s an interesting thing to 
document.

The two hours I spent there were rather surreal. He had a gun tucked down the 
back of his trousers. A year later, I found out he had been shot and killed in 
his own home. And the families were now arguing over who got the two dogs.(Nell 
Frizzell <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/nell-frizzell>)

 * This shot is from Zed Nelson’s Love Me, published by Contrasto 
<http://www.zednelson.com/?LoveMe>.  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fmy-best-summer-photograph-sally-mann-ellen-von-unwerth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40f5f459a39580b6b6e7f1c97971793ee9959b90%2F0_0_1772_1794%2F1772.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20best%20summer%20photograph%3A%20sun%2C%20sand%20and%20plastic%20surgery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fmy-best-summer-photograph-sally-mann-ellen-von-unwerth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20best%20summer%20photograph%3A%20sun%2C%20sand%20and%20plastic%20surgery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fmy-best-summer-photograph-sally-mann-ellen-von-unwerth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40f5f459a39580b6b6e7f1c97971793ee9959b90%2F0_0_1772_1794%2F1772.jpg>
 Pikpa, Lesbos in Greece, July 2015 by Jillian Edelstein. Photograph: Jillian 
Edelstein 
‘Mohammed fled Syria after a shrapnel attack’ 
Jillian Edelstein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/dec/11/photographing-events-living-moments>

Last summer, I was on the Greek island of Lesbos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/mar/24/lesbos-greek-island-in-limbo-tourism-refugee-crisis-future>
 when the dinghies full of refugees were coming thick and fast from Turkey. I 
was working withCounterpoints Arts <http://counterpointsarts.org.uk/>, an 
organisation that connects artists with refugees and vice versa. People wept as 
they came ashore, some in grief, others in elation. They had been driven out of 
their homes and forced to run away. More than anything, they were just 
desperate to protect their children.

Those who survived the journey were segregated into camps according to their 
country of origin: Afghan refugees went to a settlement called Moria, Syrians 
to Kara Tepe. The man in the photo is Syrian. His name is Mohammed Ganom. He 
avoided the camps due to his disability and his urgent need for medical 
attention. He was taken to Pikpa [now called the Lesbos Solidarity camp], 
something of a sanctuary on Lesbos, where pregnant women, the injured, severely 
ill and dying find some form of respite. That’s where I took this.

Holidaymakers on the island complained about being disturbed by the flood of 
people

Mohammed was outside his home in Homs, western Syria, when he was hit by 
shrapnel. On a white, plastic chair, just outside of this shot, sat his 
colostomy bag, in dire need of emptying. His sister had travelled with him and 
did her best to nurse him. To me, the shot speaks of vulnerability. It 
demonstrates how easily politics can pose a threat, not only to the human 
spirit, but to our physical being.

There were holidaymakers on the island complaining about being disturbed by 
the flood of people. Refugees were turned away from hotels, even when they 
could afford a room. Some locals would rail against newcomers in the middle of 
the street. It was a stark reminder of what was going on – both in the rest of 
the world and right on Europe’s doorstep.

For these refugees, summer meant warmth. It meant sleeping rough was a little 
easier, the hostile, choppy waters were slightly calmer. Summer was a form of 
kindness to these people’s bodies. I don’t know what happened to Mohammed, but 
I’m going back soon – and I’m planning to damn well find out.(ES) 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fmy-best-summer-photograph-sally-mann-ellen-von-unwerth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F022fab53482646806ba71f3e43abc0b3d793da75%2F0_0_2448_2448%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20best%20summer%20photograph%3A%20sun%2C%20sand%20and%20plastic%20surgery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fmy-best-summer-photograph-sally-mann-ellen-von-unwerth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20best%20summer%20photograph%3A%20sun%2C%20sand%20and%20plastic%20surgery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fmy-best-summer-photograph-sally-mann-ellen-von-unwerth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F022fab53482646806ba71f3e43abc0b3d793da75%2F0_0_2448_2448%2F2448.jpg>
 Untitled, St Barts, 2016 by Tierney Gearon Photograph: Tierney Gearon 
‘It’s like a grandad got swallowed by the beach’ 
Tierney Gearon  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/jan/22/tierney-gearon-best-shot>

We were at our house on the beach in St Barts [in the Caribbean]. I’d bought 
this mask – I collect quirky little things – and one of the kids took it down 
to the beach. When I saw it lying there, I said to my daughter: “Grace, look at 
that man buried in the sand!” I like pictures to tell a story and it was as if 
a grandad had got swallowed up by the beach.

I have a Canon 5D that I use professionally, but, to be honest, my favourite 
camera right now is aniPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2016/jul/08/best-iphone-photographs-2016-in-pictures>
. Film is just so expensive. I still have the Canon, but it’s not what I carry 
around in my bag. I have one of those really big fat iPhone 6s. I didn’t put 
any filter on the shot. That luminosity is just from the pink wrap.

It’s not really children I want to take pictures of. It’s more that I want to 
explore the children within us all. I’m surrounded by kids at the moment – and 
my mother, who is mentally ill, has come back to live with me. I’m fascinated 
by the psychology of a child’s mind – how they interpret things, what they 
become. We’re all just trying to work out our own stuff and most of that 
happens when we are children. (NF) 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fmy-best-summer-photograph-sally-mann-ellen-von-unwerth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d315c2f7089e45cb2109371a529771c5acc045d%2F0_0_4354_2972%2F4354.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20best%20summer%20photograph%3A%20sun%2C%20sand%20and%20plastic%20surgery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fmy-best-summer-photograph-sally-mann-ellen-von-unwerth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20best%20summer%20photograph%3A%20sun%2C%20sand%20and%20plastic%20surgery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fmy-best-summer-photograph-sally-mann-ellen-von-unwerth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d315c2f7089e45cb2109371a529771c5acc045d%2F0_0_4354_2972%2F4354.jpg>
 Ellen von Unwerth’s summer snap, 2016.Left to right: Stuart Matthewman, Syrie 
Moskowitz, Paul Simonon, Rhys Ifans, Serena Rees, Jake Chapman, Sara Ball, 
Rosemary Ferguson and daughter, Cathy Kasterine with son and daughter, 
Christian Fourteau. Photograph: Ellen von Unwerth 
‘It was the end of a perfect day’ 
Ellen von Unwerth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/oct/28/ellen-von-unwerth-best-shot>


I only took this last week. I was in Alconàsser in Mallorca and a couple of us 
decided to meet up at one of the small, stony beaches at the foot of some 
cliffs. Over the course of the day, more and more people arrived. Our small 
party swelled into this big group.

Some went floating around in the sea, others lazed on the beach chatting or 
quietly reading. This shot was all about capturing the mood of the moment in 
the moment. I took it at the end of the day, which is perhaps why it is so 
relaxed. Everyone was exhausted.

These days, everyone knows how to get a good photo. People are much more aware 
of how to hold themselves. Tiredness minimised that. What I really love is that 
everybody has their own individual character. They are all exceptional artists 
in their own right, so maybe that’s to be expected.Rhys Ifans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/rhys-ifans> [the Welsh actor, back left] has 
something rock’n’roll about him with his cigarette resting in his mouth, whereas
Paul Simonon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/may/23/the-clash-mick-jones-paul-simonon>
 [Clash bass player, in front of him] just looks relaxed and happy.

I have worked with most of these people in some kind of professional capacity. 
Syrie Moskowitz [actor, far left] is my muse at the moment, while Rosemary 
Ferguson was a model I shot earlier in my career. Shooting in sepia added a 
timeless element, making it reminiscent of an earlier era.

It was a perfect day, but I am not one of those people who prays for eternal 
summer. I wouldn’t like to live in California. I prefer it when the seasons 
shift. I love those moments of transformation.(ES) 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fmy-best-summer-photograph-sally-mann-ellen-von-unwerth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ed2ae457736478fd4c845810400a3b8d071c80d%2F0_0_3200_2198%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20best%20summer%20photograph%3A%20sun%2C%20sand%20and%20plastic%20surgery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fmy-best-summer-photograph-sally-mann-ellen-von-unwerth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20best%20summer%20photograph%3A%20sun%2C%20sand%20and%20plastic%20surgery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fmy-best-summer-photograph-sally-mann-ellen-von-unwerth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ed2ae457736478fd4c845810400a3b8d071c80d%2F0_0_3200_2198%2F3200.jpg>
 Norfolk, 1979 by Philip-Lorca diCorcia Photograph: Philip-Lorca 
diCorcia/Courtesy David Zwirner, New York/London 
‘You can’t drown in 12 inches of water!’ 
Philip-Lorca diCorcia  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/feb/14/rent-boys-pole-dancers-philip-lorca-dicorcia-photographs>

Norfolk is an area of Connecticut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/connecticut> that is fairly affluent, 
though this was taken in one of the less salubrious parts. It was 1979 and I 
was studying at Yale. I wasn’t interested in people of another class per se. I 
was interested in people who had no interest in photography. The obvious focus 
is the young girl standing in the paddling pool. The inflatable around her 
waist is ridiculous. She couldn’t have drowned – the water was less than a foot 
deep.

Summer is fleeting, just like youth. This shot harks back to that time in your 
life when standing in 12 inches of water was truly fun. There’s a kind of 
innocence to it: you would think it was just an innocuous snapshot taken at 
random – but it wasn’t. In those days, I didn’t use a handheld. My work all had 
to be rather deliberate because I was shooting with a tripod.

There is a weirdness to the scene, but that’s good. I wanted it to be slightly 
suspicious. It relates to broader questions I like to ask about the line 
between fiction and reality. It makes you question the nature of photographic 
truth.(ES) 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fmy-best-summer-photograph-sally-mann-ellen-von-unwerth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ab0b11025f7bf51f1ffd6b8ba2d0f9b3a9c73ca%2F0_0_3000_1990%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20best%20summer%20photograph%3A%20sun%2C%20sand%20and%20plastic%20surgery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fmy-best-summer-photograph-sally-mann-ellen-von-unwerth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20best%20summer%20photograph%3A%20sun%2C%20sand%20and%20plastic%20surgery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fmy-best-summer-photograph-sally-mann-ellen-von-unwerth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ab0b11025f7bf51f1ffd6b8ba2d0f9b3a9c73ca%2F0_0_3000_1990%2F3000.jpg>
 Remembered Light, Untitled (Wall Drip with Blue Tape), 2012 by Sally Mann 
Photograph: Sally Mann/Courtesy Gagosian Gallery 
‘It’s the absence and presence of Cy Twombly’ 
Sally Mann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/18/hold-still-sally-mann-review>

This was taken in Cy Twombly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/jul/06/cy-twombly-obituary>’s 
studio in the dead of winter, after Cy had been gone at least six months. It 
was summer when he died, not in our home state of Virginia, but in Italy where 
he spent his summers and winters. In the spring and fall, he would alight in 
Lexington, the town in Virginia where we both grew up, and almost as soon as 
his bags were unpacked he would begin painting.

He had been a friend of my parents, to whom he gave his first sculpture. They 
supported him by buying, out of his arms, a painting he was carrying down the 
street one day in 1952. Cy had made it with pencil and house paint.

He loved our part of the south and his work reflected southerners’ innately 
contradictory qualities of ambiguity and plain-spokenness, cruelty and 
kindness, illumination and obscurity. Like all southerners, he was keenly aware 
of death, but the shadow of mortality failed to darken his brilliance, and the 
famous slow pace of southern life only reminded Cy how much harder he had to 
work.

And work he did. Considering he was in the fall of his life, his later 
paintings were extravagant with colour and gesture, import and whimsy. It was 
the poetic force of his personality that compelled me to take pictures in his 
studio. These bright colours, these brilliant vestiges, suggest both an absence 
and a great presence. (BBT) 

 * Sally Mann: Remembered Light, Cy Twombly in Lexington, is at Gagosian 
Gallery <http://www.gagosian.com/> 976 Madison Avenue, New York, 22 September 
to 29 October.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fmy-best-summer-photograph-sally-mann-ellen-von-unwerth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F590e74259efd1ceb85b15011b1861a8ba8ca7dbf%2F0_0_2362_1577%2F2362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20best%20summer%20photograph%3A%20sun%2C%20sand%20and%20plastic%20surgery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fmy-best-summer-photograph-sally-mann-ellen-von-unwerth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20best%20summer%20photograph%3A%20sun%2C%20sand%20and%20plastic%20surgery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fmy-best-summer-photograph-sally-mann-ellen-von-unwerth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F590e74259efd1ceb85b15011b1861a8ba8ca7dbf%2F0_0_2362_1577%2F2362.jpg>
 9/11 seen from Brooklyn, September 11 2001 by Thomas Hoepker Photograph: 
Thomas Hoepker 
‘They got upset when they saw the picture’ 
Thomas Hoepker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/aug/27/thomas-hoepker-best-photograph-muhammad-ali-boxer-fist>

In September 2001, Magnum Photos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/07/magnum-photo-agency-david-kogan> 
was due to have its AGM in New York. In the morning, somebody called me to say 
an airplane had flown into a skyscraper. Of course, I wanted to go and see it. 
I took my car out, thinking I would take a shortcut through Brooklyn and go 
over one of the southern bridges. But the bridges had been closed.

As I drove, I heard on the radio that a second plane had crashed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/september11>. Just by chance, I came to 
this little spot on the East River that looked directly across the water at 
what was happening. In front of me was this group of five people chatting. So I 
pressed the shutter – just three times – and moved on. I was still trying to 
get closer. I’m not sure if I was using my Leica or my Canon, but I was 
definitely shooting on film.

When I got to the Magnum office that afternoon, I saw what my fellow 
photographers had done. Steve McCurry lives in a high-rise just a kilometre 
from Ground Zero – all he’d had to do was go on to his roof to get the most 
amazing pictures. As the others came in and developed their images in the 
darkroom, I felt I’d got nothing.

If I'd asked their permission, it would have spoiled the moment

In the days following the attacks, there were all sorts of interesting, 
horrific and depressing things to photograph. We had so much material, we 
decided to make a book: New York September 11, by Magnum Photographers. I used 
very few of my own shots because I thought I’d blown it. Then, five years 
later, the director of a photography museum in Munich asked to do a 
retrospective of my work. He was going through my pictures and suddenly came to 
the 9/11 shots. He said: “These are incredible – the contrast of the young 
people in the sunshine, looking so relaxed, with the smoke and death in the 
background.” Of course, unconsciously, I might have seen those two trees as a 
frame to the group, but it was pure instinct. I was there for less than a 
minute.

Later, I found out that the people in the shot got a little upset when they 
saw the picture. That blonde woman in the centre is a photographer herself, a 
portraitist, and that’s a very different ballgame. Had I asked if I could take 
their picture, I would have already spoiled the moment. Or they might have told 
me to fuck off.

It was September, the end of summer – and the end of naivete, in a way. It was 
also the beginning of what we are all living with now. (NF) 



 