
Are you healthy? I have my five-a-day, but by nine or ten o'clock at night I 
have a massive blowout and just eat cake and drink a bottle of red wine. If the 
day was a bit shorter I'd be pencil thin.

Ever spent a night in hospital? I stayed in with my friend Karen who had 
meningitis once; they are so grim, hospitals. You realise those nurses do an 
absolutely brilliant job because no one's ill, everyone's just pissed.

Do you worry about your weight? Yes, ever since I was asked by Channel 4 to go 
on Gillian McKeith's Celebrity You Are What You Eat. Considering it was 
Michelle McManus and Rick Waller the previous series I thought, "Alan, it's 
time to hit the treadmill."

What exercise do you take? I have a personal trainer who tells me I'm the only 
person he's trained who has actually got fatter. The thing is, it's more of a 
social thing because he's a gossip as well. It's half an hour on the rowing 
machine and half an hour idle chit-chat.

How do you relax? I do like a nice walk, but the trouble is finding a good 
place to walk in London where you're not going to get mugged.

Are you happy? Very. I've done so many dead-end jobs that it's nice to get 
paid for something that I love. Watch me now as my car swerves off the road and 
into an incinerator.

Is sex important to you? Oh sex is important, yes. Why are you asking me? You 
sound a bit like a pervert.

How do you feel about cosmetic surgery? I wouldn't mind something happening 
with my back boobs, they hang over the chair like a cape.

How much do you drink? A bit too much. I don't go out of my way to clock up 
those units, but I probably do get quite a few - I'm a slow burner. That's 
better for your liver than bingeing, isn't it?

Attitude to smoking? I hate smoking. My parents smoked when I was growing up 
and Mum said to me, "You can smoke if you want - just don't nick my fags." My 
mum's very clever like that, she ruined the rebellion. If only she'd done that 
with drink...

â€¢ Alan Carr: Chatty Man starts tonight, 14 June, on Channel 4 (offthekerb.co.uk
 <http://www.offthekerb.co.uk>) 
 