
In a packed theatre in the basement beneath the Observer’s offices, I am 
watching a live sex show. Well, a live show about sex. It’s not that raunchy, 
to be honest. On stage, three friends – Jamie Morton, James Cooper and Alice 
Levine – sit on comfy chairs. Morton reads out a supposedly erotic story, which 
involves several members of a sales team. (They trade in pots and pans: hot!) 
Other characters include Belinda Blumenthal – our enthusiastic and uninhibited 
heroine – and a woman who’s leading a training day. Belinda, the trainer and, 
indeed, the whole sales team soon move on from a dice game to something more 
intimate, unlikely and hilarious.

As Morton reads the chapter, he, Cooper and Levine make comments. There is 
much that demands a response: the inappropriate vocabulary (are rivets a 
suitable metaphor for nipples?), the strange details (one character removes his 
clothes but decides to sit on a sock), the anatomically ludicrous sauciness. At 
one point, a couple of audience members are asked on stage to try to act out 
what’s happening in the chapter. They can’t, because the moves are physically 
impossible. At the start of the evening, a drinking game is established, where 
every time Belinda blinks, or there’s an unnecessary detail about an item of 
furnishing (this happens more often than you might imagine), everyone is 
required to have a drink. The audience – one or two who are actually dressed as 
Belinda – join in with enthusiasm. It’s fun.

This entire evening all stems from just one chapter in the adventures of 
Belinda Blumenthal. Her naughty escapades form what could loosely be called the 
plot ofBelinda Blinked, an erotic novel written by Rocky Flintstone. And yes, 
that’s a pseudonym. In real life, Flintstone is a retired father of four. One 
of his children is Jamie Morton.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fmy-dad-wrote-a-porno-and-i-turned-it-into-a-podcast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff590ca51068a71bd6580beee41ce6a78eec28875%2F0_1009_7902_4743%2F7902.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20dad%20wrote%20a%20porno%20%E2%80%93%20and%20I%20turned%20it%20into%20a%20podcast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fmy-dad-wrote-a-porno-and-i-turned-it-into-a-podcast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20dad%20wrote%20a%20porno%20%E2%80%93%20and%20I%20turned%20it%20into%20a%20podcast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fmy-dad-wrote-a-porno-and-i-turned-it-into-a-podcast%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff590ca51068a71bd6580beee41ce6a78eec28875%2F0_1009_7902_4743%2F7902.jpg>
 ‘For the podcast, we just go round to each other’s houses and have a nice meal 
and a catch-up’: (from left) Alice Levine, Jamie Morton and James Cooper. 
Photograph: Pål Hansen for the Observer 
My Dad Wrote a Porno <http://www.mydadwroteaporno.com/> is, for Morton, the 
truth. His dad did write a porno – “Well, a dirty book”, says Morton. On 
retirement, his dad decided he was going to write a novel, along the lines of 
“50 Colours of Grey,” as he called it. It didn’t take him too long and, once he 
was done, he emailed a few chapters to his only son – who ignored them, as you 
would. When Morton finally plucked up the courage to open theBelinda Blinked 
files, he took them to a Christmas lunch, where he read out parts to his 
friends, including Cooper and Levine. Soon after, they turned it into apodcast 
<http://www.mydadwroteaporno.com/>. Each week, Morton reads out a chapter and 
the three friends comment.

“But the show isn’t really porn, though,” says Levine, a few days later, when 
I meet them in a café. “The title is click-baity, but the content isn’t that 
shocking…”

Mum said: ‘This is disgusting, I want no part of it!’ and went up to her 
bedroom

“My dad doesn’t really write sex,” says Morton. “It’s very much an anatomical 
exercise.”

“We might have been desensitised though,” points out Cooper. “I mean, before 
this show I would never have said the words tit-clit. We’ve been coarsened.”

The podcast – three friends laughing about something they all find funny – 
could easily have fallen into an “in-joke” podcast. But Morton edits and 
produces the show, ensuring that each programme is far from the waffling 
self-indulgence of that familiar (and boring) model. It helps that the three 
are very funny together. There is nothing laddy about it either. Often, Morton 
and Cooper are confused. “Sometimes the boys are like… well, Alice?” says 
Levine. “And I’m, like, I can’t speak for everyone, I’m sure some people are 
into that, but I can’t put my name to that action!”

Anyway, from the moment it launched, in 2015, My Dad Wrote a Porno has been a 
success. This, despite the lack of publicity. Initially, iTunes wouldn’t list 
it because of its rude title, but it’s now No 1 on the UK chart. Advertisers 
ran a mile for similar reasons. But listeners loved it. It’s been downloaded 
18m times and there are numerous spin-offs, including merchandise and a book: 
essentiallyBelinda Blinked, in all its appalling glory, with notes from the 
trio. There is talk of a musical, perhaps a TV show.

To be honest, there is a lot of talk about a lot of things. Morton, Cooper and 
Levine spiral off into many topics, as funny in real life as they are on air. 
They met at Leeds University more than a decade ago, in the TV department, and 
they clearly still enjoy each other’s company. “For the podcast, we just go 
round to each other’s houses and have a nice meal and a catch-up,” says Morton. 
“I get drunk and the other two don’t, then we set up the mics.”

Their first job in London after university was for Bebo <https://bebo.com/>, 
where they had to send people’s messages into space. Since then, they’ve made 
YouTube shows and dramas together, as well as pursuing their own, separate 
media careers (Levine is a Radio 1 presenter 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b03hjf53>). Savvy but not cynical, they knew 
thatMDWAP could be a success from the pilot episode. To check his family would 
be OK about it, Morton played the pilot to his three sisters, as well as both 
his parents, all at once. “My mum said: ‘This is disgusting, I want no part of 
it!’ and went up to her bedroom. So it was just me, my sisters and my dad. But 
then my mum crept back down! That’s the only episode she’s heard.”

The podcast also has extra shows that talk around the books. These sometimes 
have celebrity guests, such as Elijah Wood, who Levine met when he came in to 
do an interview for her Radio 1 show, andStar Wars’ Daisy Ridley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/daisy-ridley>, who contacted the show via 
Instagram. All are actual fans of the show, as opposed to star bookings. 
“Everyone’s obsessed with Rocky, to be honest,” says Morton. Rocky perfected 
his celebrity signature on a family holiday.

And how long will MDWAP last? As long as Rocky keeps ’em coming.

“We actually can’t stop him from writing,” says Morton. “We’ve tried, legally… 
No, he’s written number five in the series. There’s definitely another year of 
it. He’s in his pavilion as we speak, well his garden shed, bashing them out 
until he’s called in for his tea. He’s not allowed to write in the house. My 
mum won’t let him.”

My Dad Wrote a Porno: The Fully Annotated Edition of Belinda Blinked 1 by 
Jamie Morton, James Cooper, Alice Levine and Rocky Flintstone is published on 
27 October by Quercus at £12.99. To order a copy for £10.65, go to
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/my-dad-wrote-a-porno.html>
 