
This year I saw in the new year with just a couple of friends and our young 
children. I drained my last glass of gin, danced around the living room as the 
clock struck twelve, sang the wrong words toAuld Lang Syne 
<http://www.scotland.org/features/the-history-and-words-of-auld-lang-syne/> and 
cuddled and kissed everyone in sight. I went to bed, knowing that would be my 
last gin for a while, my last ham pie: it was going to be as wild as hedonism 
gets for a while.

I woke up on the first day of the year, resolving to go sober and vegan, and 
take up running. I have been cooking vegan recipes for a long time, long before 
the release ofmy first cookbook 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/79171>, because in the 
rubbish old days of scraping by on mismanaged, delayed and suspended benefits, 
meat and dairy products were often just too expensive, in contrast to their 
kinder counterparts. I cooked with beans and lentils for protein, always 
obsessively researching, and got my calcium and iron from bags of frozen 
spinach andyellow-stickered broccoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/oct/24/cheapest-supermarkets-last-minute-bargains-markdowns>
.

Anyone can be vegan – even cash-strapped students
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/16/anyone-can-be-vegan-even-cash-strapped-students>
When I was a child, I once announced to my parents that I wanted to be 
vegetarian. A sensitive child – quirky, bookish – I was met with: “Don’t be 
silly. And finish your roast dinner”. So, out of respect for my parents, who 
worked hard to put that dinner on the table, I did.

I have tried to give up meat several times over the past few years, yet like a 
junkie I always caved in. Packets of cooking bacon in the supermarket, cans of 
sardines, the odd roast chicken. I have written recipes for this very 
newspaper, songs ofpraise for blutwurst 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/oct/08/jack-monroe-black-pudding-carrot-hash-recipe>
 and a macabre “bunny bucco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/mar/25/jack-monroe-bunny-bucco-rabbit-stew-recipe>
” for Easter weekend. I look back, and try not to regret. I am, after all, the 
sum product of all my decisions and experiences. I am not going to indulge in 
righteous self-flagellation for fulfilling the brief of my recipe column. I was 
doing my job, as it were.

A few weeks ago, I was reading my old copy of Camellia Panjabi’s 50 Great 
Curries of India 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/50-great-curries-of-india.html> like a novel, 
as I so often do with cookery books. The introduction on the Indian philosophy 
of food made for fascinating reading. Regular readers will know that curries 
are my favourite thing, and I wanted to go back to the start and really 
research the history and philosophy of Indian cuisine, rather than just 
toasting spices, slow-cooking onions. I was hungry to understand this food that 
I love so much.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fjack-monroe-meat-vegan-food-ingredients%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e3cf3f336a333e10a662ad48da3314443335c96%2F0_0_1260_1097%2F1260.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jack%20Monroe%3A%20My%20meat%20addiction%20is%20over%20%E2%80%93%20I%E2%80%99ve%20gone%20vegan%2C%20and%20it%E2%80%99s%20brilliant&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fjack-monroe-meat-vegan-food-ingredients%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jack%20Monroe%3A%20My%20meat%20addiction%20is%20over%20%E2%80%93%20I%E2%80%99ve%20gone%20vegan%2C%20and%20it%E2%80%99s%20brilliant&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fjack-monroe-meat-vegan-food-ingredients%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e3cf3f336a333e10a662ad48da3314443335c96%2F0_0_1260_1097%2F1260.jpg>
 ‘Cans of chickpeas and bags of lentils have been staples of mine for a long 
time, and I’m excited to use them as the building blocks for my new 
adventures.’ Photograph: Jack Monroe 
Ayurveda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2001/mar/22/healthandwellbeing.health2>
, the ancient Hindu wisdom for health, is described by Panjabi as the single 
greatest influence on Indian cuisine. “Flesh has the force of violence in it, 
and the negative emotions of fear and hatred … it has no place in thesattvic 
diet <http://www.thelivingcentre.com/cms/body/peace-through-a-sattvic-diet>.”

And there, with no gory videos, no statistics, no shock-jock tactics, Panjabi 
quietly drew a line in the sand for me. I understood myself: the discomfort, 
the guilt, the addiction, the naughty thrill of a packet of bacon in the 
fridge, the promises to myself that it would be the last time. I behaved like 
an addict, with no thought for those I might have been hurting, just seeking my 
next high, my next slow-roasted pork belly, chicken skin caesar salad, slow 
bone broth. I hung out with friends who would indulge me, encourage me. And I 
needed to stop.

And I did.

Now I have found my cooking has taken on a whole new life, a veritable riot of 
colour and flavour and deliciousness. Deep-fried spicy kidney beans sit 
alongside a mushroom rogan josh, heavy aubergine bhuna and black beantarkari 
<http://www.weallnepali.com/recipe/tarkari-curry>. Mushroom replaces lamb in my 
samosas, and a sweet potato rösti rolling around in a hot dhansak sauce is a 
beautiful thing. I am writing my third cookbook (and bits of my fourth), and 
although it isn’t strictly vegan, as it is half written already, it is an 
absolute delight. Cans of chickpeas and bags of lentils have been staples of 
mine for a long time, and I’m excited to use them as the building blocks for my 
new adventures.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F02%2Fmeat-eaters-you-secretly-hate-yourselves-vegetarian-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meat-eaters%2C%20you%20all%20secretly%20hate%20yourselves%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F02%2Fmeat-eaters-you-secretly-hate-yourselves-vegetarian-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meat-eaters%2C%20you%20all%20secretly%20hate%20yourselves%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F02%2Fmeat-eaters-you-secretly-hate-yourselves-vegetarian-video&media=>
Meat-eaters, you all secretly hate yourselves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2015/sep/02/meat-eaters-you-secretly-hate-yourselves-vegetarian-video>
Scratching meat and dairy off my shopping list gives me extra to buy luxury 
ingredients I haven’t cooked with for years: the odd bag of black rice, or even 
red quinoa – aningredient for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jan/16/vegans-stomach-unpalatable-truth-quinoa>
 if ever there were one. I manage to shop in half the time, as I can avoid most 
of the aisles in the supermarket, yet my cupboards have never been more varied 
and enticing.

When friends invited me for lunch last week, and lunch was chicken, I realised 
in my keenness to blog and Instagram my vegan journey, I had forgotten to tell 
the real-life people who mattered. I prioritised a friendship over a chicken 
that was already baked in a pie, and I learned my lesson about warning people 
far in advance about my proclivities.

“Where do you get your protein from?” people ask. From chickpeas, lentils, 
mushrooms, peas, beans. Iron from tinned tomatoes, spring greens, nuts, seeds, 
and beans and pulses. Calcium from spring greens and kale, among other dark 
green leafy sources. “Don’t you miss eggs?” one Twitter user asked. Not really. 
I replace them with bananas or apple sauce when baking, with a dash of vinegar 
and cornflour in pancakes. Yes, scrambled eggs are lovely, and I’ve eaten them, 
and enjoyed them, and that was OK. Now I don’t want to any more, and that’s OK 
too.

My toddler is vegan. What’s the problem? | Sarah Campbell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/08/toddler-vegan-problem-prejudices>
Some vegan friends (and online groups) try to stop their friends from eating 
animal products by sharing gory photographs and videos online. I’ve had 
aggressive messages on my Instagram feed for reposting a grapefruit curd recipe 
from before “Veganuary” that had a couple of eggs in it. I made those things. 
I’m not going to pretend I didn’t, or flail around deleting all the carnivore 
recipes from my blog (though I will eventually have a vegan alternative for 
most of them, because I cook to live and my blog reflects that).

Unless you live under a rock, you know that geese are force-fed copious 
amounts of grain to fatten their livers for foie gras. You know thatbaby male 
chicks are flung alive into a mincer 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/earth/earthnews/8107957/40-million-chicks-on-conveyor-belt-to-death.html>
. You probably didn’t know that in natural conditions a chicken should lay 12 
eggs a year, yet battery hens lay 300. But I’m not going to gross you out with 
science. In my experience, yelling at people that they are wrong and disgusting 
rarely wins the argument, nor changes point of view. I’m doing my bit to 
encourage people to try vegan by making vegan food affordable and accessible 
and absolutely delicious. No hard-to-find ingredients, no complicated recipes, 
just doing what I’ve always done, but without the cooking bacon.

I won’t be throwing out my new Dr Martens boots, or my sexy-as-hell biker 
jacket, or my tight leather pants that were so 2013 – but I won’t be buying any 
more. Not now. I won’t be posting gory videos, or unfollowing the lushBleecker 
Burger <https://www.instagram.com/bleeckerburger/>, but you’ll all be seeing a 
lot more curry from now on. And a world with more curry in can only be a very 
good thing.
 