
The plight of Tesco banking customers, who have had £17m stolen from their 
accounts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/07/tesco-bank-freezes-transactions-online-attack>
 in some kind of cyberattack, calls into question our weird faith in online 
banking. Forty-eight hours before the news broke, I was on the phone trying to 
sort out my own little crisis.

Tesco Bank fraud: key questions answered
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/07/tesco-bank-fraud-key-questions-answered-suspicious-transactions-40000-accounts>
Last week I transferred a not inconsiderable sum of money from one account to 
another – both mine, but with different banks. It’s precisely the sort of 
everyday administrative pain in the arse that online banking has 
revolutionised: click, confirm, done. The money promptly disappeared from one 
account – and singularly failed to materialise in the other. I waited a day. 
Then another.

When nothing changed, I rang the first bank to make a polite inquiry about the 
anomaly. After checking I had input all the numbers correctly, the man on the 
helpline said there was nothing more he could do – I needed to speak to the 
other bank. To me he sounded like an airline spokesman explaining why a plane 
that has vanished off the radar is actually the responsibility of the 
destination airport.

Perhaps unsurprisingly, the helpline woman at my other bank didn’t really feel 
like taking responsibility for a transaction she had absolutely no record of. 
At this point I started to get a cold, fluttery feeling in my chest. Shuffling 
money around cyberspace – what had made me think that would work?

The helpline woman suggested I call the first bank and ask them to put a 
forward trace on the money, or something. The first bank transferred me around 
a bit before telling me I needed to update my security settings in order to 
proceed further. I patiently followed instructions for changing my password to 
one with more numbers in it, all the while resisting the urge to shout “WHERE’S 
MY MONEY, MAN?” into the phone.

Eventually I achieved a security clearance sufficient for them to confess they 
had held up my transaction on purpose because it seemed so out of character. I 
got a letter to that effect three days later.

Solar confusion

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fonline-bank-tesco-moment-cyberattack%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb20f4ede3ef3e4153cbf9946a215678ebfffc6a6%2F0_275_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20online%20bank%20gave%20me%20a%20Tesco%20moment%20%7C%20Tim%20Dowling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fonline-bank-tesco-moment-cyberattack%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20online%20bank%20gave%20me%20a%20Tesco%20moment%20%7C%20Tim%20Dowling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fonline-bank-tesco-moment-cyberattack%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb20f4ede3ef3e4153cbf9946a215678ebfffc6a6%2F0_275_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Voters cast their ballots in Miami. Photograph: Rhona Wise/AFP/Getty Images 
Way down the US election ballot, below Clinton and Trump, there were also all 
manner of local referendums to be voted on. From legalising pot to reinstating 
the death penalty, this is how a lot of state laws are made in America these 
days.

You may have lately become acquainted with the notion that a referendum is a 
pure expression of the people’s will – preferable to representative democracy – 
but in most cases that depends on the relative clarity or opacity of the 
question being asked. Should you ever need a startling example of the latter, 
look toFlorida <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/florida>.

Florida’s amendment 1 promised to guarantee residents’ constitutional right to 
own solar panels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/04/florida-solar-power-amendment-1-vote-al-gore-criticism>
. Sounds great. But a second part of the amendment – its true purpose, cynics 
might say, since the measure is supported by big power utilities – relieves 
residents who don’t produce solar energy from the obligation to subsidise its 
production. In other (less weasly) words, it would end the solar panel owner’s 
automatic right to sell surplus electricity back to the grid. So, yes or no to 
solar, voter? Quickly, there’s a queue.

Glimpsed in the black mirror


I experienced another sort of cyberattack this week, when Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> dropped a picture of me “7 
years ago” into my timeline, asking if I wanted to Share it.

No thanks. It’s just me, sitting at my desk, staring into the webcam. I don’t 
even remember taking it. It felt likean invasion of privacy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/01/facebook-target-mental-health-data-online>
, although my main reaction was one of denial: that was never seven years ago.

I didn’t own that shirt seven years ago. I didn’t look like that seven years 
ago. I was young seven years ago. That old man in the picture: that’s what I 
look like now.

I stared at it, disbelieving, until my screen went dark, and I got a quick 
reflective glimpse of what I really look like now.
 