
I had always thought I could swim. It may have been because I could run. It 
may have been because I wanted to swim. Or because I only ever did 10 minutes 
of breaststroke at a time, or splashed off a warm beach. But I really couldn’t 
swim.

It took 12 months of lessons and practice before I was able to swim in open 
water, beyond the pool or my home beach in Brighton. Then I could let myself 
believe I was up to taking on a challenge I had been dreaming of for more than 
a year: I wanted to swim in the Greek waters of the Ionian Sea. Specifically, I 
wanted to swim toIthaca <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ithaca>, the island home 
of Greek hero Odysseus.

Since childhood, I had been fascinated by Greek myths and the heroic tales of 
the Trojan war. As I grew older and read classics at university, it became 
Odysseus who captured my imagination more than any other. Legend has it that 
Odysseus was within sight of Ithaca when he was blown hundreds of miles off 
course. It took him several years to get home after that. Meanwhile, his wife 
Penelope stayed at home on Ithaca, spending every night unpicking the 
embroidery she had completed during the day, having promised her suitors that 
she would marry one of them just as soon as her sewing was finished. 
Eventually, a decade after Odysseus set out from Troy to return home, they were 
reunited. Sometimes you have to wait for the one you love.

I never wanted to be Penelope; instead, I had fought for years to be my own 
hero, my own Odysseus. I wanted my sense of belonging to come from within, and 
as soon as I found that, I found D, my husband. Now that I had my own Ithaca, I 
wanted to see the real one.

There was a deadline to contend with: after a year of marriage and even longer 
of trying for a baby, we had recently been referred forIVF 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/ivf> treatment. I was shaken by the news. 
My relationship with my body had changed radically over the last few years. 
Finally learning to have a little faith in what it was capable of had been one 
of the most rewarding experiences of my life. Now, I was being told that 
positive thinking was not going to be enough.

Six weeks later, I was on my way to the island of Lefkada 
<https://www.lonelyplanet.com/greece/ionian-islands/lefkada>, where I was going 
to spend a week on a guided swimming trip around the islands of the Ionian. It 
would be an opportunity to see what I was capable of in the water, and to 
remind myself of the barriers I had overcome, even as I was now confronting a 
new one.

The evening I arrived was heavy with heat. We all gathered on a terrace 
overlooking the sea to introduce ourselves and eat together under the vines. J, 
the leader of the trip, encouraged us to go around the table saying a little 
about ourselves.

“Hi, my name is Jess and I recently swam the English Channel as part of a 
relay with some mates.”

“Hi, my wife and I are regular Masters swimmers  
<http://www.swimming.org/masters/>in the south of France; these are our times…”

“Hi, I’m on this trip with my teenage daughter as a rest before her Olympic 
tryouts.” And so it went, on and on. These were people who had swum for their 
country, across their country and to their country. They may as well have been 
a different species.

The first morning, we boarded a beautiful wooden boat with a taciturn Greek 
captain who made no effort to hide the fact that he despaired of us all and our 
sanity. The pattern for the week was quickly set. The boat headed out to 
wherever the swim was to begin, then we would be briefed on deck about what 
type of swim it would be. Some were coastal, all the way around an island, with 
plenty to look at below us; some would be crossings from island to island – 
more satisfying, but potentially much harder work. And some would be a 
combination of the two. For most of the week, we would have a morning swim, 
lunch somewhere nearby, then a bit of time on the boat before a second swim. 
Friday would be the exception, because that was the day of the heroic 5km swim 
from Kefalonia to Ithaca.
 ‘The barriers were not merely physical, but mental.’ Photograph: Chris Floyd 
Being in an entirely unfamiliar environment was all-consuming. I was used to 
wading into the water; a slow walk with a gradual drop-off. Now, we were 
clambering or jumping off a boat, straight into deep water. The most striking 
thing was its clarity. I had never seen anything like it. In Brighton there are 
only a few days when the water is clear enough to see through, and even more 
rarely is the ocean floor visible. Now, I could see a whole new universe. In 
our underwater world, body type had little effect on how we moved. The 
strength, the glide, the ease of the reach through the water was all that 
counted.

I found the sensation of travelling between two bodies of land dizzyingly 
intimidating. Once, managing a single length of the pool had been too much for 
me. Then, swimming in open water, albeit close to the shore. Then, the unknown 
length and depth of the river. Each time, I had persuaded myself that if I 
could relax and focus, I could do it. Each time, I had been proved right. The 
barriers were not merely physical, but mental.

This was something else entirely. As we reached the farthest point between the 
islands, the sea became so deep, it was beyond blue; a dark purple, almost 
charcoal, with shimmers of yellow as the current moved on and on below us. We 
found ourselves righting and re-righting our course, having to fight to stay 
straight, rather than being dragged somewhere else. That pull in the water, 
begun as a ripple on the other side of the world, reached me then, in that 
moment, as if gently to tug my sleeve and let me know that, perhaps, I was 
reaching the limitations of what my body could do. And the thought stayed with 
me all week as we approached Friday, the day of the 5km swim.

We had a pre-6am start that morning, to be ready for a boat trip of more than 
two hours. I was tired and beginning to ache in places I had never felt before. 
The mood on the boat was noticeably quieter than usual. Until now, I had 
enjoyed conversations with the group, getting tips on my technique, as well as 
hearing stories of their entrancing swims around the world. Today’s early start 
and the task ahead, though, had left us all but silent.

It’s all about the breath, I reminded myself. Keep the breath steady and 
you’ll keep yourself steady

My nerves were mounting. Not only was it farther than I had ever swum 
continuously – by more than a kilometre – but we would be negotiating a busy 
channel, competing with swells and currents, as well as holidaymakers’ boats 
and billionaires’ superyachts. And there was the added pressure that we had 
been told to swim tightly in our groups during the crossing, directly alongside 
each other for safety: there was no option to slow down to catch my bearings or 
indulge in panic. I would either let the team down or find myself drifting 
dangerously alone in the currents.

I sat in the prow of the boat, my legs dangling over the water as she moved 
slowly through the still, flat, unbroken surface, the sun rising behind the 
distant islands, and I felt horribly alone. I missed home with a longing I was 
sure only Odysseus had ever felt. For the others, this was an energetic 
holiday, but for me it felt like a last chance to prove to myself what I was 
capable of before I faced the uncertainties of IVF.

As I stared down into the water, a dolphin’s fin broke the surface and danced 
ahead of us. I yelped; the captain cut the engine. In that instant, I saw that 
I had been a fool. Only seconds before, I had been feeling so utterly alone 
while mere metres from such a magnificent sight. The dolphin leapt and pranced 
ahead, before approaching the boat and swimming alongside it for a little 
while. I sobbed, overwhelmed at how appallingly close the lowest and the most 
beautiful moments can be to each other. Yes, we swim alone. But we can never 
truly know what swims alongside us.

Half an hour later, people started to ready themselves to head into the water. 
My heart was hammering. It’s all about the breath, I reminded myself. Keep the 
breath steady and you’ll keep yourself steady.

Now it was time to swim. I became lost in sensory overload within the first 
few minutes. The light seemed liquid, leaping up and circling me every time I 
drew my hand through the water, trying to push against the current that was 
moving with such strength beneath me.

The first hour or so went smoothly, the group moving steadily as one. About 
halfway, something changed. We were approaching a tiny island, barely big 
enough to lay a picnic blanket on, and until this point we had been using it as 
a sighting point, keeping it in view in order to steer a straight course. We 
were to swim north of it as we passed, which we were all on course to do. As we 
approached, the ocean floor came up and back within sight. There was some 
comfort in seeing the sloping patterns of the underside of the island beneath 
us. Until I realised that it wasn’t moving.
 ‘I had never stood toe to toe against nature in this way before.’ Photograph: 
Chris Floyd 
We were swimming at our hardest. Perfectly in rhythm, well warmed up, pulling 
hard, breathing hard. At last, I felt like a real swimmer. Except I was going 
absolutely nowhere. An anxiety dream come to life. I was pulling and pushing at 
the water with all my might, but we had hit the point where the currents were 
at their strongest. The harder I swam, the less I moved. The rocks below me 
were entirely static.

I continued like this for five or 10 minutes before panic set in. I knew that 
to stop was instantly to slide back, away from the group. Exhale. Keep going. 
Exhale. Believe. Exhale. Glide. But the demons were chasing me now. I had never 
stood toe to toe against nature in this way before. You can’t fight nature, I 
thought, and felt tears choke in my throat. I forced an exhale. I wouldn’t let 
myself think it. But I did. If you can’t fight nature, what about pregnancy? 
And with that I was lost in a world of worry. Would I ever get pregnant? What 
would IVF do to me? What would IVF do to us? Would it be worth it? Would we get 
there? When would I know?

The water swirled around me and roared in my ears. I forced the air out of my 
lungs, again and again. The salt water was crusting my mouth, and every breath 
felt like a punch as the sunlight hit my eyes.

Your body might never be the same after this summer, I told myself. Enjoy what 
you have

Think of home. Be your own hero, be your own Odysseus, be ship, cargo and 
crew. I repeated these things to myself again and again, forcing physical 
relaxation until mental solace came. I made myself feel the power in my limbs 
and lungs, and love it. I was strong. Your body might never be the same after 
this summer, I told myself. Enjoy what you have.

Eventually, I won the battle. The rocks beneath me slid slowly out of sight. 
The deep blue returned. I have never been so glad to be swimming so utterly out 
of my depth. But the horror wasn’t over. About half an hour later, a sort of 
fizziness began in the tips of my fingers. I had only felt it once or twice 
before, in the final few metres of running events. I knew it meant that I 
needed oxygen, and fuel. I realised what was happening and tried to power my 
way through with positive thinking. Success was limited. My mind had got me 
thus far, but my lungs had not had the chance to catch up.

I needed help. I called to the rescue boat, and clung to it. J told the others 
to carry on, while I hauled myself in. My breathing was laboured and erratic, 
my head spinning and the tips of my feet and fingers numb. I breathed. I gulped 
at the orange juice on board to get some sugar into my system. I grabbed a 
handful of nuts. Devastated not to be in the water, I sat, breathing, for five 
minutes. We were so close to Ithaca. I could make out individual trees on the 
mountainside. Ten minutes later, I knew I couldn’t let the dream go.

“Can I get back in?” I asked.

J checked me over, to make sure that I wasn’t still delirious.

“I have to reach Ithaca. It’s why I came.”

She nodded. I leapt off the boat and headed for the grey rock. I couldn’t 
believe there was any strength left in me, and I vowed never to forget the 
moment that the island’s sea life started to make itself apparent to me. Once 
again, the sea shallowed, and fish shimmied between crags, sea urchins perched 
on ridges and starfish danced on the side of the island.

Finally I touched the rock, and burst into tears. Huge sobs, shaking my 
shoulders, forcing me to cling on to the island to keep myself steady. I had 
done it. I had discovered a grit I hadn’t known I had. I had slowly, over a 
year of marriage and a year spent in the water, learned that strength does not 
always mean merely ploughing forward in the face of adversity; it means 
changing your plans when what you’re doing isn’t getting you where you need to 
go; and it means nurturing the confidence to adapt without panicking. The 
relaxation that swimming demanded of me had taught me that calmness is 
strength. As I clung to that rock, I had no idea of the extent to which my 
adaptability and survival skills were about to be tested.

***

As the plane landed back on English soil, I smiled, knowing that I would be 
home soon and that there were still a few months before the most difficult 
stages of the IVF swung into action. I was gleeful to be returning to my 
Penelope, but it was tinged with the melancholy of knowing this summer was past 
full bloom. I wanted to carry on swimming outdoors, putting my new-found 
strength and confidence into practice.

I was sure I would be pregnant soon. I was anxious about the side-effects of 
doing a cycle of IVF, but I was not anxious about it failing.

I was wrong. It proved a brutal and disorienting experience. The cycle ended 
in early September with me battle-scarred, exhausted and with a streak of red 
blood that confirmed that I was not pregnant. The Saturday morning after we 
realised the treatment had not been successful, I woke up at 6am and stared at 
the ceiling as the tears rolled slowly, silently, down the sides of my face and 
on to the pillow. What now?

Slowly, the overwhelming duvet of sadness that had swamped us began to shift. 
While the summer had not been the idyllic sea frenzy I had hoped for, once I 
looked up and beyond myself, I saw that we were being treated to an 
exceptionally beautiful autumn. We had agreed to try one more round of IVF, but 
for now I had a chink of time in which to use my body for as much adventure as 
it could manage.

As autumn progressed, I swam and I swam, feeling the strength flowing gently 
back. I had been utterly unprepared for the havoc that the drugs and surgery 
would wreak on my body. There were extra rolls of flesh that seemed to have 
sprouted within a fortnight. The belly that appeared as I grew eggs stayed, as 
did the soft pouches sitting on my hips. My boobs were uncontrollably enormous 
– the sort of thing mothers-to-be so often take delight in. But, for me, they 
did not represent an exciting new life change, merely a daily reminder of what 
I didn’t have. As did the significant amount of internal pain in which the egg 
collection surgery had left me and which meant that running, and its associated 
jiggle, was out of the question.

Slowly I emerged from this body that bore no relationship to the one I had 
built for myself over the previous five years, and took on more and more swims, 
enriched weekly by the sights, smells and sounds.

Soon, we had a second round of IVF scheduled. I felt fiercely protective 
towards my own body. Ours was a relatively new love, hard won over miles run 
and distance now swum. It had taken years to accept that, yes, my body had 
value, but that value lay more in where it could take me, what it could show 
me, than in any perceived visual pleasure it could provide for others. I tried 
to approach this latest quest with the spirit of adventure that had sprung so 
late in me but proved such a source of joy. I would not yield to any suggestion 
that my life or my body were lesser if they didn’t incorporate motherhood.

Resolute about keeping my fitness up, I swam lengths twice a week in the pool 
and continued to swim in the sea, even as the heat slowly started to ebb from 
it. The day before my second egg collection surgery, I swam in the mouth of 
Shoreham harbour, feeling my muscles read the movement of the water and warm my 
blood against the autumn chill. I had rebuilt myself. I was ready.

This time, the treatment went well, and a few weeks later we had a positive 
pregnancy test. It was followed by the heartbreak of miscarriage. The first 
round had been disappointment, a setback. This round was crushing grief. My 
body had betrayed me. Where I had found strength, I now saw inadequacy, 
insufficiency, weakness. Where I had found beauty, I now saw flesh that served 
no purpose: a nascent belly, swollen from medication but aching with emptiness, 
uncontainable breasts bursting with anything but sexuality. Where I had felt 
self-love, I now saw an unwelcome stranger in the mirror. My body had been 
rejected, and in turn I rejected my body.
 ‘I have learned not to be frightened.’ Photograph: Chris Floyd 
The first time I felt strong enough to get back into the water was in 
December. I underwent a full winter of cold-water swimming. I never chose to do 
it; I just chose not to stop doing it. Where so many other plans around me had 
turned to dust, in one area at least I just had to keep going.

Jumping into cold water if you are not accustomed to it can put huge pressure 
on your heart, send your breathing into potentially unrecoverable erratic fits 
and starts, and leave you woozy with hypothermia – too sleepy to swim, too cold 
to recover. You can’t fight thermodynamics any more than you can fight 
infertility. But you can adapt. You can acclimatise. You can find joy where 
others see pain. And this was what I chose. To keep swimming, week in, week 
out, until what had seemed like an impossibility became golden, a delight.

Through January, February and on towards March, the coldest month, I carried 
on swimming. Though the sea temperature dropped incrementally each week, my 
body, as it slowly acclimatised, felt the same each time. After five minutes or 
so, my body would start to warm me from within, the hard work of the swimming 
pushing heat as far as it could out into my limbs. My skin would glow red, as 
if I’d received a thousand tiny slaps. Within half an hour, I would be glowing 
from within, warm for the rest of the day. Like a hangover in reverse, I had 
done something that was painful for moments but that left me feeling well for 
hours. I had made the difficult habitual, the habitual easy and the easy 
beautiful.

That winter of swimming was a sort of inadvertent exposure therapy. A type of 
behavioural therapy used to treat anxiety disorders, exposure therapy usually 
involves helping people to confront their fears by exposing them in tiny, 
almost insignificant amounts to the thing they are most afraid of.

There are people all around us dealing with sickness, injury and upset, but 
they choose to keep moving

Over the winter, I repeatedly exposed myself to the elements. As I hit the 
water day after day, I took myself to a place I never thought I could go. 
Previously distressed at having reached the limits of what my body could do for 
me, I rediscovered pride in what it could achieve and where it could take me.

More importantly, I was exposing myself to myself. That winter, I was the 
heaviest I had ever been. At the time, it felt like weakness, like surrender, 
but now I see that what felt like unnecessary blubber from hormones, grief or 
greed was keeping me warm, keeping me in the water to do what I needed to do. 
To thrive at the weight I was felt not just subversive, but a triumph.

I was emerging from the water calm but energised. I could do more than I’d 
imagined, and the more I swam, the more I witnessed others experiencing this 
alongside me. As I glided along in the lido, I saw women slowly easing 
themselves down the steps, scars the length of their thighs. I saw injured 
shoulders ahead of me, struggling to swing their arms around but finding 
fluidity and peace in the water. I saw women who arrived at the seafront 
jangling with panic or sadness, leaving it serene an hour later.

These quiet, everyday gladiators battling the wet and the cold showed me time 
and again that it wasn’t just me who headed for the water in times of distress. 
There are people all around us dealing with sickness, injury and upset, but 
they choose to keep moving instead of standing at the edge of life, peering in.

When I think about never having a child, a sort of breathlessness, almost a 
vertigo, comes over me. The same metal vice tightens around my ribcage, the one 
I felt as I entered the sea those first few times. I don’t know if we will ever 
have a child. I don’t even know if we have it in us to try IVF again. But I 
never know for sure what swims beneath me as I push myself through open water.

Swimming <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/swimming> has taught me 
about my adaptability. It is not enough simply to train hard. You must adjust 
how you move, refine how you approach the water and embrace your environment. 
In swimming, as in life, I found fortitude and resilience when I needed them 
most; but I also found the courage to change depending on the weather, the tide 
or my own body. I have learned not to be frightened; that life is to be lived 
as a participant, not a spectator.

The most useful thing anyone said to me about grief is that you never really 
get over it. When you have difficulties with fertility or staying pregnant, the 
whole experience is a process of accepting that grief might be round the 
corner. But is that not the very nature of love? To fall in love is to expose 
yourself to infinite potential for rejection or pain, and to be a parent is to 
accept a lifelong commitment to the unknown. To love truly is to know that you 
might lose it in a heartbeat. In the same way that you never know if the wind 
will change when you’re half a mile from the shore, or the waves might smash 
you in the face just as you gasp to breathe. We must stand on the shore, proud 
of the life our bodies offer us, and accept that we’ll never truly know what 
lies beneath the surface any more than we’ll know what lies ahead. And then we 
must leap in.

• This is an edited extract from Leap In: A Woman, Some Waves And The Will To 
Swim, by Alexandra Heminsley, published next week by Hutchinson at £12.99. To 
order a copy for £10.65, go to bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/leap-in.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
, or call 0330 333 6846.
 