
The premise of Comedy Central’s Nathan For You doesn’t sound like the most 
forward-thinking show to ever be commissioned: it’s essentially a prank show 
without a reveal.

Nobody is urged to smile after stepping into an unusually deep puddle, and no 
C-list celebrity jumps out of a wardrobe to ruffle any participant’s hair or 
receive a string of jovial profanities. Instead, it’s growing cult audience 
revels in its occasionally stifling atmosphere of sour awkwardness and 
perplexity. And yet, rising above cheap laughs, it also functions as a 
razor-sharp satire of commercialism, with a surprising undercurrent of genuine 
pathos.

America's Next Top Model was out of fashion – like most reality TV
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/15/americas-next-top-model-out-of-fashion-reality-tv>
Shot in a breezy, reality-doc style, its conceit is genius but oh so simple. 
Playing a well-meaning but much more socially inept version of himself, 
comedian Nathan Fielder tours real-life businesses that are either struggling 
in a changing market, or in dire need of an overhaul, posing as a consultant 
and “graduate of one of Canada’s top business schools with really good grades”. 
Observant first-time viewers will notice the credits tellingly identify said 
grades as A-, a B+, two Bs and a C, respectively. Fielder’s ideas are always 
radical, but often terrible, and at best painfully convoluted, often completely 
misunderstanding the core values and market of the business. But, in the glare 
of the camera and thanks to Fielder’s gentle and occasionally manipulative 
style, their exasperated founders and employees inadvertently allow the 
experiment.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbHBaVVIrONI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbHBaVVIrONI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbHBaVVIrONI&media=>
 Season three of Nathan For You. 
If this all sounds rather mean-spirited in a still recovering business 
economy, then fear not. Nathan For You is also a traditional comedy of manners, 
and by and large, Fielder’s are always the worst in the room, as he passively 
aggressively defends his ridiculous ideas to participants usually far too 
polite to shut him down completely. Over the course of two seasons thus far, 
these ideas have included allowing attractive people to shoplift in fashion 
stores, creating software to send “lost” party invites to an email spam folder 
and in one of the show’s most memorable segments, advising a realtor to market 
her property on account of its complete lack of ghosts. This process involves a 
visit from an actual exorcist, culminating in a hysterical segment in which the 
realtor is herself purged of an inappropriate Swiss demon that has haunted her 
since her youth.

While the show could easily rest on the laurels of Fielder’s outlandish and 
inappropriate concepts, the action usually unfolds on subtle, human levels that 
are often so bizarre, even a mind as obviously imaginative as Fielder’s would 
struggle to make it up. Take fan-favourite Dating Website (“Women make up some 
of the prettiest humans in the world”), in which Fielder visits a fledgling 
dating site looking to attract more women. Fielder proposes a condescending 
scheme called Daddy’s Watching, in which grown women are secretly observed on 
dates in case of dangerous men lurking. The “Daddy” eventually recruited is 
arguably more of a risk than any date, and Nathan’s first test subject reveals 
herself to be a 9/11 conspiracy theorist while bowling, an awkward moment 
observed from the adjacent lane by Fielder himself, undercover in a niqab at 
the time.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxMW-SzZKJ-Q&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxMW-SzZKJ-Q>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxMW-SzZKJ-Q&media=>
In other hands, Fielder’s role could easily have been that of an arrogant, 
overconfident salesman, but instead, he renders himself as an increasingly 
vulnerable figure, simply misguided in his career. As he observes each scheme 
fail, or at least be nixed by Starbucks’ aggressive legal department, we watch 
his confidence slowly ebb away. In a recent interview, Fielder, who sees the 
show as“about moments between people”, promises “a more personal” 
<http://www.gq.com/story/nathan-for-you-season-3-qa> season. With his face 
becoming increasingly recognisable, Fielder might not be able to pitch his 
radical ideas for much longer, so here’s hoping he finds some success and 
contentment. Still, it can be hard to sympathise with a man not above 
encouraging Santa to bully children into buying something called aDoink It 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BNuuiydKlI0>.
 