
Tattooed across Nathan Lovett-Murray’s shoulder blades is the word “payback”. 
The name of the formerAFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> star’s hip 
hop record label, it’s etched into his skin and his family history. “Payback is 
an Aboriginal word for tribal punishment,” he says. “It’s a word that can 
relate to a lot things in the Aboriginal community, we’ve been ripped off. But 
this is our time now.”

Between the Lovett and Murray families – Lovett on his mum’s side, Murray on 
his dad’s – there is military service almost unparalleled in Anzac history. His 
grandfather Stewart Murray fought in WWII, and whenever there’s been a war, 
from WWI to Afghanistan, a Lovett has served. Five of the Lovett brothers 
fought in both WWI and WWII. But Lovett-Murray’s is a different battle – he’s 
fighting for land, for country and for black empowerment. He calls it “the 
struggle”.

Two years after finishing his career with Essendon in the AFL, Lovett-Murray 
returned to Heywood in August, 2014. Heywood is on Gunditjmara country, roughly 
equidistant from Melbourne and Adelaide in rural western Victoria. It’s a small 
town. One main street, a few shops, a pub, 1,300 people and a footy club, this 
is Lovett-Murray’s old stomping ground. Home.

Most of Lovett-Murray’s family, and there are a lot of them here in Heywood, 
are involved in the Wind-mara Aboriginal Corporation and the Gunditj Mirring 
Traditional Owners Aboriginal Corporation. In March, when Nathan was made a 
life member of Essendon, he took his nan along as his date. His focus is with 
his family and his new job as a justice worker with Wind-mara and as a 
player-coach with Heywood Football Club.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F23%2Fafl-nathan-lovett-murray-anzac-profile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a606d233ced3c3288f13efe83e8e2298da47762%2F0_0_4000_2662%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nathan%20Lovett-Murray%3A%20ex-AFL%20star%20and%20family%20still%20surviving%20despite%20struggles%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F23%2Fafl-nathan-lovett-murray-anzac-profile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nathan%20Lovett-Murray%3A%20ex-AFL%20star%20and%20family%20still%20surviving%20despite%20struggles%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F23%2Fafl-nathan-lovett-murray-anzac-profile%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a606d233ced3c3288f13efe83e8e2298da47762%2F0_0_4000_2662%2F4000.jpg>
 Nathan Lovett-Murray with sons Nyawi (left) and Mara (right) at the Let’s Read 
National Early Literacy Campaign launch in Melbourne in 2013. Photograph: 
Progressive PR/PR Image 
After surviving the 20-year-genocidal frontier wars, ongoing dispossession, 
marginalisation, outright discrimination, not to mention 10 years in the 
federal court, the Gunditjmara nation has finally been recognised as the 
traditional owners of the land. Lovett-Murray, 32, has returned to a community 
empowered by native title rights, which were determined in 2007. “We always say 
we look after the land and the land looks after you,” he says. “It feeds us. 
When I was playing for Essendon I’d always come home and it would reinvigorate 
and re-motivate me.”

Although there is an acknowledgement of the Gunditjmara people’s traditional 
ownership, Lovett-Murray remains sceptical of native title. Like many 
Aboriginal people he sees it as a compromise in the struggle for true land 
rights. “I just reckon that our people should be compensated, and a treaty put 
in place,” he says. “The land should be given back, but with no strings 
attached. We should be able to do what we want with the land.”

He wants reparations, not recognition. Still, the process of decolonisation is 
firmly underway. Lovett-Murray’s son is learning Gunditjmara language along 
with the white kids at Heywood primary school, Lake Condah has been re-flooded, 
allowing the native wildlife to return, and the family is lobbying government 
to formally change the name of Mt Eccles to Bundj Bim.

It wasn’t always this way. The first place Lovett-Murray takes me to is the 
old Lake Condah Mission where the Gunditjmara lived until 1918. A few remnants 
of the old stone houses remain, and where St Mary’s church stood is a single 
wooden crucifix. “It was bombed,” explains Lovett-Murray, “they wanted to get 
the people off the mission.”

Throughout Victoria, after WW2 land was divided up and given to returned 
soldiers. Despite their service, neither the Lovett nor the Murray family were 
granted land. Lovett-Murray’s great-uncle Herbert sent this letter to the 
Secretary of the Aborigines Protection Board in 1945:

Dear Sir,

I am writing to you to see if you could give me any information regarding the 
cutting up of Lake Condah Mission Station into blocks for Aboriginal Servicemen 
of this war.

If same was being done I would like to make application for a block.

Awaiting your early reply 

I remain yours Truly

Y 5180 Pte H S Lovett

2nd Sub Dept

1st B & D

Tocumwal

NSW

He didn’t even get a response. The Gunditjmara were forced to watch as their 
mission was carved up and given to white soldiers. On the other side of the 
family, Stewart Murray sent three similar letters, all of which were ignored. 
Later, he fought for years with RSL president Bruce Ruxton to have Aboriginal 
servicemen march together instead of in their battalions. Lovett-Murray’s dad, 
Gary Murray, says they had a “love hate relationship”. Good enough to take a 
bullet for empire, but not to receive the same wages or benefits as their 
fellow soldiers, in black Australia Anzac became yet another site of 
institutionalised racism. It remains a shameful betrayal, a historical 
injustice with legacies that are still being felt.

Lovett-Murray’s nan, Laura Bell, says her dad, Frederick, didn’t talk much 
about fighting in the wars. He didn’t talk much at all, really. Her lasting 
impression is watching him return home armed with Violet Crumble, black and 
white pudding and Minties for the kids. “I always remember his kitbag on his 
back,” she says. “I don’t have a photo of him in uniform, but I remember mum 
looking after his clothes, the shirts and the trousers. You could cut butter 
with the creases she put in his trousers.”

It’s still unknown why exactly Frederick and his five brothers decided to 
enlist. Lovett-Murray believes they wanted to gain respect for Aboriginal 
people for when they returned; his mum, Denise, speculates that a lack of 
steady work at the time led them to sign up and that they may have fought to 
stop more Europeans coming to Australia. Laura, however, is adamant that they 
just wanted to serve their country. No matter the reason, what makes the Lovett 
brothers’ service all the more striking is that they willingly fought alongside 
the descendants of the settlers who massacred their ancestors in the Eumaralla 
frontier wars just a few decades prior. The debt has never been repaid.
 Lovett-Murray and family outside his nan’s house in Heywood. Photo taken with 
his permission from Instagram. Photograph: Nathan Lovett-Murray 
Tuesday and Thursday night in Heywood is footy training; Wednesday is 
basketball with Lovett-Murray’s all-Koori Lake Condah Wanderers. At Heywood 
Lions Lovett-Murray is assistant to the head coach, Jason Saunders, an uncle 
with a considerable Anzac heritage of his own. Jason’s great-uncle was Captain 
Reg Saunders, the first Aboriginal man to command a rifle company. He didn’t 
get land in the soldier settlement scheme either.


 Lovett-Murray is rangy, rough and ready, while Saunders is short, lean and 
highly organised. His nan calls Saunders “Tinkerbell”, while Lovett-Murray is 
Nat-rat, or Uncle Nat-rat to the kids. In the dressing sheds, Saunders reads 
clear, concise instructions off a sheet of paper, highlighting two negatives 
and two positives from the previous game. Lovett-Murray, meanwhile, riffs with 
his team-mates about contests, asking them questions off the cuff and fielding 
questions in return.

As the boys go through the drills, what immediately sets Lovett-Murray apart 
from the rest is the hand skills. His handballs zip and pop with considerable 
speed, his hands whirring in perpetual motion. Watching on, the club president, 
Lovett-Murray’s uncle Michael Bell (he calls him “Uncle Mookeye”) tells me 
Heywood made the tough decision to drop back to district footy in order to 
remain competitive and retain the juniors.

Lovett-Murray was offered more than $2,000 a game to keep playing in 
Shepparton, where he won a title last season, but coming back to a lower level 
with Heywood means he pockets just $500 a game. “I always said I wanted to come 
back to Heywood and win a grand final,” he shrugs. Besides, 11 of his brothers 
and cousins are in this team, and this way he’s closer to home. In the hours 
between work and training he’s got time to pick up his son from school and have 
dinner at his nan’s house. Both Saunders and Bell say his presence is 
inspirational for the boys coming through.

The Tuesday I’m in town is Seany Mac’s 18th birthday, so after footy training 
there’s a party at the front bar of the Heywood Hotel. All the boys are here, 
and Lovett-Murray swaggers around happily in baggy tracksuit pants, baseball 
cap, Brotherboy T-shirt and that cheeky, impetuous grin. His uncle Darren Bell, 
the giant, loveable wharfie who taught him how to play physical footy, is here 
too. In the cold, wet winters the footy in these parts is rough, and they call 
Darren “Bush-rat” for his uncompromising style. That’s where Lovett-Murray, who 
stuck close to “Bush-rat” as a kid, got the nickname “Nat-rat”. I’m told he’s 
the only one to ever pin Darren down in a fight.

Uncle Michael reckons Lovett-Murray “never left the community”, and it’s here 
at the pub where this is most evident. Once last drinks are called, everyone is 
invited back to his place, where the party continues. His kitchen is decorated 
with old trophies and a faded picture of him as a 15-year-old the Heywood 
Hustlers, the basketball team that became national champions in 1988. “We beat 
all those private school kids,” he says. The living room is full of photos of 
his three young kids, in the hall there are framed photos of his great 
grandfather Sir Doug Nichols, a former footy great and governor of South 
Australia. “You don’t know how much inspiration this gives me,” he says as he 
shows me around.
 Inside the Heywood Hotel. Photo taken with Nathan Lovett-Murray’s permission 
from Instagram. Photograph: Nathan Lovett-Murray 
As the night turns into the early hours of the morning, his brother Tyson 
talks about researching the family history and the eel fishing of the 
Gunditjmara, the world’s oldest known fishing technique. Another brother Jason 
tells me about their dance troupe the Fighting Gunditjmara. “We’re bringing 
back culture that past generations lost,” says Jason.

On the verandah, one of the young guys Lovett-Murray is working with in his 
role at Wind-mara dances with him playfully, pulling one of Lovett-Murray’s 
Essendon tops tight over his barrel chest and gut. He’s been in trouble with 
the gangs around these parts, but with the support of Lovett-Murray he’s 
finishing off his community work and getting back on track. As Lovett-Murray 
removes his own shirt, you can see the dark wound on the underside of his right 
bicep, where in 2013 he was stabbed in his Melbourne home. Whatever the 
challenges, Lovett-Murray has never wanted to remove himself from his people 
and his community.

“It’s the struggle,” he says. “You feel it when you meet other blackfellas, 
you always nod at another Aboriginal person in the street even if you don’t 
know them. I never said I’m Australian. That flag, all it says to me is the 
massacres and murders. People say they fought for the flag, I’ve always 
understood it to be fighting for your mates, not for a flag.”

In early March, Lovett-Murray got a call from Meriki Onus from the Warriors of 
the Aboriginal Resistance. WAR have been busy organising protests against the 
Western Australian government’s plan to forcibly close down remote Indigenous 
communities. The prime minister, Tony Abbott, flippantly calledthe Aboriginal 
spiritual connection to land “lifestyle choices” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2015/mar/10/tony-abbott-remote-communities-lifestyle-choices-audio>
. Onus wanted Lovett-Murray to lend his name to the cause.

He readily obliged, and on 18 March tweeted a photo of himself with a placard 
that read “stop the forced closure of Aboriginal communities”, with the hashtag 
#SOSBLAKAUSTRALIA. He sees the activism as “spreading the truth”, and knows 
having a profile helps raise awareness of the issues. Next, he messaged his 
Aboriginal mates at AFL clubs, asking them to do the same. Soon protest 
pictures of AFL players, past and present, were shared on social media. “The 
AFL is the perfect example of pan-Aboriginality,” says Lovett-Murray, “the 
Aboriginal boys will always embrace after the game and see how each other are 
going.”

The protest pointed to two key themes that inform Lovett-Murray’s politics: 
land and solidarity. He sees the forced closures of Aboriginal communities in 
Western Australia as yet another land grab. “I felt the same way about the
[Northern Territory] intervention 
<http://www.abc.net.au/indigenous/special_topics/the_intervention/>, it’s the 
same story,” he says. “Victoria might be next, they’re going to want our land 
back. You’ve got to support each other. The system is set up to keep us divided 
and fighting amongst each other over funding. They call it lateral violence – 
past trauma passed down through generations and people fight amongst each 
other.”

The Gunditjmara people were finally defeated in the 20-year frontier wars 
after the settlers employed Aboriginal people from Queensland to track them 
into the rocky areas where the settlers couldn’t reach. Lovett-Murray calls it 
“black yabbie syndrome”, an adaptation of the tall poppy syndrome. “Two farmers 
have a bucket of yabbies each, one has a lid and the other one doesn’t. The 
farmer with the lid says to the other one, ‘you better get a lid for those 
yabbies’. The one without says, ‘it’s OK, they’re all black yabbies in there, 
if one tries to crawl out the other ones will pull him back down’.”
Nathan Lovett-Murray (@NATRAT42) 
#SOSBLAKAUSTRALIA <https://twitter.com/hashtag/SOSBLAKAUSTRALIA?src=hash> 
#Protest <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Protest?src=hash> #Rally 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Rally?src=hash> #Australia 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Australia?src=hash> #Melbourne 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Melbourne?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/2XcVMnJZu1 
<http://t.co/2XcVMnJZu1>
 <https://twitter.com/NATRAT42/status/578174146879713280> March 18, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/NATRAT42/status/578174146879713280> 
 Lovett-Murray wasn’t always political. His mum and dad were both involved in 
setting up Koori organisations, but as a kid he reckons he was too involved in 
sport. The racism at Heywood primary school was terrible, so he bashed the kids 
who called him names, and by high school it had stopped. “I think my reputation 
came with me,” he laughs. At 14, he read Bruce Elder’sBlood on the Wattle: 
Massacres and Maltreatment of Aboriginal Australians Since 1788. “I knew about 
our own massacre sites,” he says, “but that showed me there were similar 
stories everywhere.”

The Guditjmara people were decimated by the white invaders. His mum Denise 
shows me around theConvincing Grounds 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Convincing_Ground_massacre> on the beach at 
nearby Portland, where an entire clan group were wiped out by a British whaling 
family. As the clan descended to prepare a beached whale for food, they were 
shot one by one: men, women and children. Only two survived. “There was always 
an understanding [of politics],” says Denise of her son. “I remember as an 
eight-year-old, Nathan was watching TV and there was an Aboriginal man 
protesting. He said, ‘look, that’s our family’.”

But it was footy, and in particular Essendon Football Club, that gave 
Lovett-Murray the inspiration to learn more. At Essendon the annualAnzac Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/anzac-day> match made him enquire further 
about his family’s service, and brought him under the influence of Kevin 
Sheedy, Dean Rioli and Michael Long. Sheedy encouraged him to get out to remote 
Aboriginal communities, Rioli he describes as a “big brother”, while Long was a 
“mentor”. In Melbourne he sought knowledge from his dad, Robbie Thorpe, Geoff 
Clark and Gary Foley, all veterans of the Black Power movement.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F23%2Fafl-nathan-lovett-murray-anzac-profile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9cd570cec80ae4c18ce9aca02c296018d2e66e57%2F0_0_2046_2832%2F2046.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nathan%20Lovett-Murray%3A%20ex-AFL%20star%20and%20family%20still%20surviving%20despite%20struggles%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F23%2Fafl-nathan-lovett-murray-anzac-profile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nathan%20Lovett-Murray%3A%20ex-AFL%20star%20and%20family%20still%20surviving%20despite%20struggles%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F23%2Fafl-nathan-lovett-murray-anzac-profile%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9cd570cec80ae4c18ce9aca02c296018d2e66e57%2F0_0_2046_2832%2F2046.jpg>
 Lovett-Murray is carried off the ground by his Essendon team-mates after he 
retired from the game in August 2013. Photograph: Joe Castro/AAPIMAGE 
His politics took a radical turn in 2006-2007. First, he took a trip to 
Mutitjulu, a remote Aboriginal community near Uluru where he stayed with elder
Bob Randall <http://kanyini.org/tjilpi-bob-randall/>. Two weeks later he 
travelled to South Africa, visiting the slums and ghettoes. “The conditions are 
just as bad here, if not worse,” he says. “We’re treated like second class 
citizens. It opened my mind up to the bigger picture.”

Denise tells me she noticed the change in her son when he came home, and it 
was reinforced by the Close the Gap campaign in 2007. During the height of the 
campaign he witnessed eight funerals – friends and families in their 20s and up 
– in just two months. “There’s a health crisis here,” he explains. “There was a 
genocide here, it just wasn’t as big as others. There’s many traumatic 
experiences from massacres to stolen generations to settlement schemes.”

When Lovett-Murray speaks about politics, it’s tinged with a black class 
consciousness. “They don’t like blackfellas making money” is one familiar 
refrain; another is “the rich are getting richer while the poor are getting 
poorer”. But everything, no matter what the subject, is connected back to land. 
Land is spiritual wealth. As we walk around Lake Condah, he points out old eel 
and fish traps and places where he would camp as a kid. The sophisticated 
aquaculture of the Gunditjmara is internationally recognised anddisproves 
<http://www.smh.com.au/articles/2003/03/12/1047431096364.html> the myth that 
Aboriginal people were nomadic. Being back here, learning and being close to 
the land gives him what he calls “cultural empowerment”.

But he wants more. Having recognition of the land is one thing, but he’s 
looking for ways to create wealth in the community in order to become less 
reliant on government. Frustrated that there is no treaty, and that native 
title doesn’t provide communities with an economic base for self-determination, 
he wants to see black-owned and black-controlled businesses.

Payback Records is a starting point. Since 2007 he says he’s invested around 
$500,000 of money earned through his football career into promoting Indigenous 
rappers. “Aboriginals are not business minded,” he says. “Materialism is not 
part of our culture. But you’ve got to have money to make money. There’s a lot 
of talent, it’s just about the environment. I wanted to create an environment 
where we’d release the music, promote it and publicise it, and take Indigenous 
culture to the world through hip hop.”

There are some good young artists coming through – Lovett-Murray has high 
hopes for his cousin Philly from Mildura who releases his next single in May – 
but there’s a long way to go. Apart from Urthboy at Elefant Tracks, there 
hasn’t been much interest in Payback from the white Australian hip hop labels. 
“I’m not going to dwell on it,” he says. “You just move forward. 50 Cent, KRS 
One, Afrika Bambaattaa, Snoop Dogg, Akon, they’ve all reached out. KRS One has 
been the most supportive, and he says we need to go overseas where there is a 
bigger market.”

Ultimately, his dream is to put on a concert at the MCG to raise awareness of 
the Aboriginal health crisis. For the moment, the focus is with his community. 
He won’t be marching on Anzac Day, but he’ll be there on 1 May for the national 
protest against the forced closures of communities. They say there’s an Anzac 
spirit, but Lovett-Murray’s personal drive has been forged out of the 
injustices of Anzac. “My kids have inherited the stresses of my father and my 
grandfather,” says his dad.

Sir Doug Nichols once told Stewart Murray, “we have to use the past to build 
the future”, and that ethos seems to have been passed down to Nichols’s 
great-grandson. Lovett-Murray’s war for better health and educational outcomes, 
for self determination and for land as a means of economic and spiritual 
survival continues back in Heywood.

“We were at war and our people lost,” he says. “My belief is they wanted to 
wipe out Aboriginal culture and the Aboriginal race. They don’t realise how 
strong we are. We’re still surviving.”
 