
Nationwide <https://www.theguardian.com/business/nationwide> has become the 
latest big-name savings provider to cut the interest rates on its range of cash 
Isas, to reflect what the building society says is the general decline in 
returns across the market.


Despite no change in the Bank of England base rate, on 1 June Nationwide 
imposed cuts of up to 0.5% across the board – including online Isa deals that 
had been market-leading.

Britain is a savers’ paradise … but only for the few
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/blog/2016/apr/30/britain-savers-paradise-tax-breaks-few-benefit>
The rate paid on its popular Flexclusive Isa (issue 7) has fallen from 1.75% 
to 1.2%, the biggest cut. Despite the chop, 1.2% is still a relatively good 
deal in today’s deflated savings market.

Susan Hannums, a director at Savingschampion.co.uk, says the society is by no 
means the only provider to cut rates, as cashIsas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/isas> have been slowly losing appeal with 
providers.

2016 tax year: what you need to know
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/06/2016-tax-year-what-you-need-to-know>
“This year’s so called Isa season running from February to May was a bit of a 
non-event. Sadly, rate reductions for both new and existing savers have become 
part of a daily ritual and cash Isa savers have been hit particularly hard.”

Hannums says Metro Bank recently joined in on the act, cutting the rate for 
its existing Isa savers on a selection of accounts – although, again its rates 
remain competitive.

Birmingham Midshires cut many of its Isa products to a paltry 0.25% at the end 
of March, while the Furness building society similarly dropped rates at the 
beginning of May. Marks & Spencer is cutting its Advantage Cash Isa Option from 
1.3% to 1.1% on 28 July.

“Metro Bank was one of the only providers left in the savings market that 
hadn’t reduced existing savers rates which clearly signals that no saver is now 
immune from seeing a reduction in their rate,” says Hannums. “Overall it’s 
clear that Isas have been hit harder than standard savings account.”

A Nationwide spokesman says: “Many of our competitors have cut their savings 
rates over the last few months. We have had to react to these market changes to 
ensure the rates that we do pay on our savings enable the society to continue 
operating a sustainable business model.”


The overall cuts mean most savers will have to move their money if they want 
to grab a decent rate.

Switching Isas is pretty easy and there are some much better deals out there. 
The stand-out product is from Al Rayan Bank. It is offering the equivalent of 
2.02% on its 120-day notice Isa account. This is way above the rest of the 
market, and crucially transfers in are allowed. The bank operates under Islamic 
finance principles, and the rates displayed represent the expected profit rate.

The Yorkshire/Clydesdale bank is offering 1.5% with 40 days’ notice, on 
balances of £15,000 – but sadly it doesn’t allow transfers in from other 
providers. The next highest paying account that will allow you to transfer in 
your existing balance is the Coventry. Its Easy Access Isa 3 is paying 1.3%.
 