
Bradford’s National Media Museum (NMM) is considering changing its name to 
Science Museum North and has abandoned the city’s international film festival, 
raising further doubts about the institution’s future as the UK’s centre for 
film and photography.

The decision to pull out of the festival follows the loss of its world-famous 
photography collection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/02/bradford-photography-collection-move-vanda-reviled-vandalism>
 to London’s Victoria and Albert museum, in a move described as “an appalling 
act of cultural vandalism” by one political leader in the city.

Judith Cummins, the Labour MP for Bradford South, said the economic and 
cultural ramifications of abandoning the festival could be enormous for 
Bradford, while others suggested the city may lose its status as theworld’s 
first Unesco City of Film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jun/12/bradford-wins-unesco-city-of-film>
.


Stars including John Hurt, Kenneth Branagh, Imelda Staunton, Alan Bennett and 
Ray Winstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/25/ray-winstone-dont-mean-to-look-like-i-want-to-kill-people>
 have appeared at the film festival since it began 20 years ago.

The trustees of the Science Museum Group, which owns the NMM, have been 
quietly considering a name change for nearly a year to fit its new focus on 
science and technology.

Science Museum North is one of the leading names being mooted, it is 
understood. Losing “national” or “media” from the title would be heavily 
symbolic for an institution that opened as the National Museum ofPhotography 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/photography>, Film and Television in 
1983.

A museum spokesman confirmed a name change was being considered. When asked if 
the museum may rebrand as Science Museum North, he said: “That name is in play, 
but we haven’t made any firm decisions at the moment.”


Why must a Bradford museum lose its treasures to London? | Sam Jordison
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/01/bradford-museum-london-royal-photography-society-national-media-museum>
Cummins said: “I’m flabbergasted by this week’s announcements. Only last week 
the museum told me that they were ‘focused on delivering a vibrant film 
festival programme’, now they are announcing that they are abandoning the 
hugely popularBradford <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/bradford> international 
film festival. It raises serious questions about the direction and focus of the 
National Media Museum.


“The economic and cultural ramifications of abandoning the film festival could 
be enormous for Bradford. How can we seriously have an international film 
festival and honour our status as the world’s first Unesco City of Film without 
the National Media Museum at its centre? It just doesn’t make any sense.”

Cummins said she would express her concerns in a meeting with Jo 
Quinton-Tulloch, the museum director, on Friday.

Quinton-Tulloch has said the festival programme needed changes to make it 
sustainable and that it was not aligned with the museum’s new focus on science 
and technology.

The museum is also understood to have offered redundancy to six exhibition and 
curatorial staff in recent weeks as part of overall cuts.


The latest news comes two days after the NMM announced that its Royal 
Photographic Society <http://www.rps.org/> (RPS) collection of 400,000 objects 
would be moved to the V&A, prompting outrage among local political leaders and 
art enthusiasts.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fnational-media-museum-bradford-rebranding-science-museum-north%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F620eb89c04de52be9be054877a72b4756a35b574%2F307_313_4163_2496%2F4163.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=National%20Media%20Museum%20considers%20rebranding%20as%20Science%20Museum%20North&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fnational-media-museum-bradford-rebranding-science-museum-north%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=National%20Media%20Museum%20considers%20rebranding%20as%20Science%20Museum%20North&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fnational-media-museum-bradford-rebranding-science-museum-north%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F620eb89c04de52be9be054877a72b4756a35b574%2F307_313_4163_2496%2F4163.jpg>
 Detail from an 1864 photograph by Julia Margaret Cameron of the painter 
William Holman Hunt, which is part of the museum archive. Photograph: Julia 
Margaret Cameron © National Media Museum, Bradford / Science & Society Picture 
Library 
Simon Cooke, the leader of the Conservatives on Bradford council, said he was 
“utterly dismayed” by the latest move. “Bradford council handed over £1.5m to 
the National Media Museum to help cement its place in the local community,” he 
said.

“I’m utterly dismayed at the decision by the National Media Museum to withdraw 
from the Bradford international film festival – another unwarranted cut to 
Bradford’s cultural life determined by people in London without even bothering 
to consult councillors or the Bradford public.

“On top of the decision to decant the RPS collection to London this 
demonstrates that the museum has no intention of contributing anything to the 
cultural life of the city.”

David Wilson, the director of Bradford Unesco City of Film, described the 
announcements as a “chipping away” of the museum’s media focus but said the 
festival may continue at other venues around the city. “The agenda is very much 
set by the Science Museum Group and the Science Museum is run from London,” he 
said.

“I understand the whole side of the STEM [science, technology, engineering and 
mathematics] argument 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/jan/31/career-arts-gcse-dance-stop-the-stem-subject-snobbery>
 that we need more scientists but I would say the creative industries is the 
fastest growing sector in the UK.

Stem subject snobbery: a student’s view on why arts subjects matter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/jan/31/career-arts-gcse-dance-stop-the-stem-subject-snobbery>
“In a city like Bradford, it’s one of the youngest cities in Europe – 23% of 
the population is under the age of 16, the national average is 18%, we’ve got 
85 different languages spoken in Bradford schools – we need to harness this 
fast-growing sector. I’m all for bringing on the next generation of scientists 
but not at the loss of culture and creativity.”

Wilson dismissed concerns that the city could lose its Unesco status, 
insisting the film festival was “important but just one part of what we do”.

Quinton-Tulloch said the museum hoped to develop a new festival with a 
computer games <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games> theme as part of 
an increased focus on technology.


She added: “While the international film festival is not part of these plans, 
this year we intend to again welcome cinemagoers from around the world to an 
extended widescreen weekend, and we are working towards a festival looking at 
games and gaming.

“This is in addition to the recent £800,000 upgrade to our Imax cinema, which 
has attracted nearly 29,000 visitors since reopening, as well as working with 
other organisations to make Bradford the place to see film.”

A spokesman for the NMM said it had decided not to apply for funding from the 
British Film Institute (BFI) to stage the festival because of the museum’s 
change in focus. The grant previously subsidised but did not fully cover the 
costs of running the festival.

Funding for the arts across England was cut by 30% between 2010-15 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/oct/20/arts-cuts-spending-review-council>
. The number of visitors to the Bradford museum fell from 493,000 in 2012-13 to 
479,000 in 2013-14.
 