
Nationwide <https://www.theguardian.com/business/nationwide> Building Society 
is offering solace to savers by protecting some customers from the Bank of 
England’s interest rate cut, but admitted its profits could fall in the months 
ahead.

Joe Garner, the chief executive of the UK’s biggest building society, said the 
decision to hold deposit rates would only help those with regular savings 
products, who make up a small proportion of its overall customer base.

He said, however: “We don’t want a generation coming through thinking there is 
no point saving.”

Garner said customers who do not use its regular savings products will take a 
cut, but not any more than the quarter point imposed by the Bank. Letters to 
customers state that it will not, at this point, cut rates below 0.1%.

“It is too early to say exactly what will happen in future, but the society 
has said that it has no plans to introduce negative interest rates for either 
personal or commercial customers,” Nationwide said.

The Bank’s decision to cut rates by a quarter of a point to 0.25% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>
 came with a warning from its governor, Mark Carney, that lenders had no excuse 
not pass the reduction on to borrowers, but it has sparked concern for savers.

Nationwide’s announcement, which came as it revealed a 6% rise in 
first-quarter profits to £401m, means that Lloyds Banking Group is the last 
major lender yet to say how it will respond to Carney.

Lloyds, which is 9% owned by the taxpayer, is the largest mortgage lender in 
the UK and also the biggest savings institution.

Nationwide announced that its mortgage rates would fall in line with the 0.25% 
reduction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/lenders-svr-urged-pass-on-interest-rate-cut-bank-of-england>
 shortly after the Bank moved rates for the first time in seven years on 4 
August. About £40bn of its £120bn mortgage book is for customers who are on a 
base mortgage rate, pegged at 2% above the Bank’s rate.

Nationwide was an active mortgage lender in the three months to the end of 
June, taking a 52.8% share of new loans. The Swindon-based society said, 
however, it expected a slowdown in the buy-to-let market, which accounted for 
22% of its lending last year, for the rest of 2016.

Like many banks and building societies trying to keep a balance between 
interest paid to savers and the rate that can be charged to borrowers, 
Nationwide’s margin fell to 1.35% from 1.61%. Mark Rennison, its finance 
director, said that while this was toward the bottom of its expectations it was 
higher than the 0.8% margin that the society operated on during the banking 
crisis.

“The sustained low interest rate environment and competition in core markets 
will maintain pressure on margins and we anticipate profits are likely to 
moderate in the period ahead,” the society said. Last year it made profits of 
£1.3bn.

Garner joined Nationwide in the spring when he replaced Graham Beale, who took 
the helm just before the 2008 banking crisis. Nationwide does not usually 
appoints a chief executive from outside its ranks, but Garner, who used to work 
at HSBC, wasrecruited from BT’s Openreach business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/16/bt-openreach-boss-nationwide-joe-garner>
.
 