
A reading of more than 2,000 leaked incident reports from Australia’s 
detention camp for asylum seekers on the remote Pacific island ofNauru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nauru> will be narrated in a 10-hour protest 
outside the Australian high commission in London.

Totalling more than 8,000 pages, as published by the Guardian earlier this 
month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/ng-interactive/2016/aug/10/the-nauru-files-the-lives-of-asylum-seekers-in-detention-detailed-in-a-unique-database-interactive>
, the personal accounts of sexual abuse, torture and humiliation inflicted on 
children held by Australia in offshore detention will be narrated by members of 
theInternational Alliance Against Mandatory Detention 
<http://london.carpediem.cd/events/779738-close-the-camps-now-at-australia-house-the-strand/>
, which has organisedthe event <http://naurufilesreading.blogspot.co.uk/>.

“We want Australia to be internationally shamed,” said Sarah Keenan, who 
co-organised the event with seven other members of the alliance. “We want 
everyone to hear these documented incidents of abuse, self-harm, humiliation 
and squalor that is the everyday life for refugees on Nauru.


“The duration, monotony and repetition entailed in the reading of each file 
echoes the normalisation of the violence and tedium endured by refugees in 
indefinite detention,” she said.

The Nauru files <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/nauru-files> – the 
largest cache of leaked documents released from inside Australia’s immigration 
regime – set out as never before the assaults, sexual abuse, self-harm 
attempts, child abuse and living conditions endured by asylum seekers held by 
the Australian government. The picture they paint is one of routine dysfunction 
and deliberate cruelty.

“These detainees must be settled in the Australian community as is their right 
under international law,” said Nadine El-Enany, another alliance organiser. “We 
have chosen to read the report out in front of Australia House because this 
narrative of abuse directly contradicts the image the Australian high 
commission seeks to convey of Australia as a progressive nation and a desirable 
destination for tourists, students, highly skilled workers and international 
investors.

“Nauru Files Reading embodies the ongoing racist violence that has defined the 
settler colony of Australia since its inception,” she added.

The protests are timed to coincide with a national day of action in Australia 
<https://www.facebook.com/events/768130646539128/>, with events planned across 
the country to demand that the government immediately close the camps on Nauru, 
Manus Island and Christmas Island.

The Guardian’s analysis of the files revealed that children were vastly 
over-represented in the reports. More than half of the 2,116 reports – 1,086 
incidents, or 51.3% of the total – involve children, although children made up 
only about 18% of those in detention on Nauru during the time covered by the 
reports, May 2013 to October 2015. The findings came just weeks after thebrutal 
treatment of young people in juvenile detention in the Northern Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/26/abu-ghraib-images-children-detention-australia-public-inquiry>
 was exposed, leading to the Australian prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull,
announcing a wide-ranging public inquiry. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/26/malcolm-turnbull-announces-royal-commission-northern-territory-detention>

Some reports contain distressing examples of behaviour by traumatised 
children. According to a report from September 2014, a girl had sewn her lips 
together. A guard saw her and began laughing at her. In July that year, a child 
under the age of 10 undressed and invited a group of adults to insert their 
fingers into her vagina; in February 2015, a young girl gestured to her vagina 
and said a male asylum seeker “cut her from under”.

In the files, there are seven reports of sexual assault of children, 59 
reports of assault on children, 30 of self-harm involving children and 159 of 
threatened self-harm involving children.

The files raise stark questions about how information is reported on Nauru, 
one of Australia’s two offshore detention centres for asylum seekers who arrive 
by boat. They highlight serious concerns about the ongoing risks to children 
and adults held on the island. They show how the Australian government has 
failed to respond to warning signs and reveal sexual assault allegations – many 
involving children – that have never previously been disclosed.

The most damning evidence emerges from the words of the staff working in the 
detention centre themselves – the people who compile the reports. These 
caseworkers, guards, teachers and medical officers have been charged with 
caring for hundreds of asylum seekers on the island.

 “The Australian government detains refugees indefinitely [on these islands] 
as part of its offshore detention policy designed to deter refugees from 
arriving in Australia by boat,” said El-Enany. “More than 500 refugees are 
detained on Nauru, including many children.

“Refugees on Nauru are regularly subjected to abuse, violence, sexual assault 
and rape. Self-harm and suicide attempts are common,” she said.
 