
The Nauruan justice minister has said police are considering charging a sexual 
assault complainant with making a false statement after the government faced 
widespread criticism for releasing the woman’s name and graphic details of her 
allegations.

In a combative statement issued on Thursday, David Adeang claimed the woman 
had not cooperated with the investigation and “refused to accompany police” to 
the scene of the complaint.

Nauru police close case of alleged rape of Somali refugee citing lack of 
evidence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/12/nauru-police-close-case-of-alleged-of-somali-refugee-citing-lack-of-evidence>
Adeang also hit back at media coverage of the handling of her case, including 
reports by Guardian Australia, claiming that “truth is the real victim here”.

The sexual assault allegations made by a Somali refugee who was previously 
held in the Australian-run detention centrewere first reported by the ABC’s 
7.30 program in September 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-09-28/two-refugees-allegedly-raped-on-nauru/6809956>
.

On Monday the Nauruan government – via its Australian public relations company 
Mercer PR – saidthe police investigation had been dropped, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/12/nauru-police-close-case-of-alleged-of-somali-refugee-citing-lack-of-evidence>
 citing a lack of evidence.But in a move that has been widely condemned as a 
breach of privacy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/13/release-of-name-and-graphic-details-of-alleged-on-nauru-extraordinary>
, the company also released the woman’s name and details of the alleged sexual 
assault.

Adeang said in the statement: “The police investigation has shown there was no 
rape therefore as far as we are concerned the person in question is not a rape 
victim or a victim of any crime.

“It is a lie to say we ‘published’ the name. We did not even use her name in 
our statement. We simply sent a police report to a few media outlets who 
already knew who she was, in the interests of accountability.”

The statement went on to say “the woman concerned may face charges of making a 
false complaint”.

Adeang also used his media statement to condemn the reporting of the woman’s 
story by the ABC and Guardian Australia as “shameful, unethical and dishonest”. 
He said some media outlets in Australia “were not interested in truth”.

“We will reconsider our cooperation with media outlets like the ABC and the 
Guardian who refuse to provide any balance and who have replaced real 
journalism with political activism,” he said.

The government of Nauru <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nauru> is hostile 
to foreign journalists on the island and has a de facto ban on international 
reporters being allowed in.

Why can't we know what's happening on Nauru and Manus Island? | Julian Burnside
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/08/why-cant-we-know-whats-happening-on-nauru-and-manus-island>
The application fee for a media visa was increased to $8,000 in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/09/nauru-visa-to-cost-8000>, a fee 
that is non-refundable if the government refuses to grant it.

On Saturday the Nauruan police executed a search warrant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/13/nauru-police-take-phones-and-laptops-from-save-the-children-staff-and-others>
 on an administrative building at the Australian-run detention centre in an 
attempt to hunt down journalists’ sourcesafter the leaking of internal 
government emails 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/08/nauru-lets-local-journalists-into-centre-but-keeps-8000-fee-for-foreigners>
 about planned visits by local media to the detention centre.

Al-Jazeera also issued a statement on Wednesday after it too faced criticism 
from Nauru over its reportthat the country had banned all media visits 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2015/10/nauru-government-refuses-media-visa-applications-151009043225083.html>
.

An Al-Jazeera <https://www.theguardian.com/media/al-jazeera> spokesman said: 
“Al-Jazeera English strongly deny claims by the Nauru government that they did 
not go through the ‘proper channels’ while trying to obtain a media visa to 
travel the country.

“Al-Jazeera English had gone through all the official procedures and processes 
outlined by the government of Nauru in relation to obtaining a media visa in 
order to enter the country.”

PR firm criticised for release of name and graphic details after alleged rape 
on Nauru
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/13/release-of-name-and-graphic-details-of-alleged-on-nauru-extraordinary>
Mercer PR, which is run by Lyall Mercer, has gone to ground this week. Crikey 
reported 
<http://www.crikey.com.au/2015/10/14/mercer-pr-goes-silent-after-distributing-alleged-rape-victims-name-to-media/>
 that it had deleted a series of blogs and online publications.

The Public Relations Institute of Australia has also condemned the release of 
the sexual assault complainant’s personal details.

Questions continue to be asked about the adequacy of the Nauruan police force 
to investigate serious allegations of sexual assault. On Thursdaythe ABC 
reported 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-10-15/nauru-rapist-called-up-as-a-police-reservist-amid/6856234>
 a man convicted of sexual assault had been allowed to become a police 
reservist.

Despite a series of allegations of assaults on refugees and asylum seekers, no 
one has ever been charged with an offence committed against an asylum seeker or 
a refugee. Some police investigations are ongoing.
 