
At the end of 2007, TomTom was on top of the world. The Dutch satnav maker had 
taken record revenues of €634m (£445m) in the Christmas quarter, sold a record 
4.2m devices, and was making a net profit of €107m, an all-time high. The fall, 
when it came, was going to be hard, and it took less than two years: by the 
first quarter of 2009, revenues had slumped to €213m and it recorded a net loss 
of €37m.

What happened? Corinne Vigreux, the chief executive who is also one of 
TomTom’s four co-founders, puts it down to two factors: “The economic crisis in 
2008 – plus smartphones became popular, and Google began offering navigation 
for free on [Android-powered] phones.”

The arrival of a search engine company in the field of in-car navigation is 
not the sort of threat you would normally plan for. But Vigreux, 50, has seen 
enough change in the technology business to know that “your competitors come 
from different fields – they’re not the ones you expect them to be. Hilton 
Hotels would never have expected their margins would be eaten away by Airbnb. 
Every company starts with a blank sheet of paper, and some of them then arrive 
like a tsunami.”

For TomTom, survival would quickly become a matter of adapting to the new 
reality, in which Google could undermine the paid-for satnav business – which 
was then selling millions of units each quarter – with software that would 
quickly be in everyone’s hands. But where would the money come from?

TomTom had already decided that the future lay in providing map data and 
telematics for vehicle makers. In July 2007, it made a €2bn offer for Tele 
Atlas, the company’s map data supplier, which was one of only two independent 
mapping companies (and also supplied Google). In October 2007, Nokia bid €5.7bn 
for Navteq, the other independent. US-based Garmin tried to snatch Tele Atlas, 
but a brief bidding war saw TomTom prevail with a €2.9bn bid; the deal closed 
in June 2008.

Nokia relaunches its HERE maps and navigation app for iOS
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/11/nokia-here-maps-navigation-app-ios>
But the stock market did not like TomTom’s purchase, which was funded by debt 
and a new share issue. Its shares plunged from their high of €64.80. At the 
start of 2009, the company wrote off more than €1bn on the Tele Atlas purchase. 
Shares hit an all-time low of €2.84.

For Vigreux, however, reinvention and building from the ground up is what she 
is used to. Her first managerial role was running exports at Psion, the iconic 
and hugely influential British technology company, in the 1990s. She travelled 
widely, which was her original aim in getting into business. “North Africa, 
Israel, Europe,” she said, having joined Psion from business school in 1987.

Psion was a stalwart of British technology, producing a much loved handheld 
computer series that rivalled the Palm, from the US, in the 1990s. But the rise 
of mobile phones pushed it to a software-only path: its Symbian software became 
the basis of the first successful range of smartphones, from Nokia.

Vigreux is following a similar route. After four years at Psion – “it was one 
of the most interesting tech startups around; we learned a lot, there was a 
bunch of smart people” – she moved to Holland to join a software distributor 
for the Psion and other handhelds, and then helped set up TomTom in 1991. 
Initially, it made business-facing products for meter reading and barcodes for 
the popular handhelds – Palm Pilot, Compaq iPaq and Psion Series 5. Smartphones 
were not yet in use.

At first, it wrote mapping applications for the handhelds, squeezing data into 
tiny (by today’s standards) amounts of storage. “It was very difficult to put 
everything into one product; we had a city [map] product, but we were already 
very good at compressing data so we could fit it in.”

The company then saw an opportunity to make mapping devices for consumers. 
Before May 2000, civilian GPS systems were accurate to within only 100 metres; 
only the military could get its “full” accuracy of a few metres. But a Bill 
Clinton-enacted change made it open, and Vigreux and the team at TomTom saw an 
opportunity.

Rather than having to rely on people who already owned expensive PDAs, they 
realised they could sell them dedicated objects for less. The first, the TomTom 
GO, cost £499 and was released in March 2004. “And the first touchscreen,” 
Vigreux says proudly. “We created the [satnav] category.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fnavigating-decline-what-happened-to-tomtom-satnav%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03106912695aa67b8fb45524181b27f485468b8e%2F0_12_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Navigating%20decline%3A%20what%20happened%20to%20TomTom%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fnavigating-decline-what-happened-to-tomtom-satnav%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Navigating%20decline%3A%20what%20happened%20to%20TomTom%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fnavigating-decline-what-happened-to-tomtom-satnav%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03106912695aa67b8fb45524181b27f485468b8e%2F0_12_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 The emergence of Google Maps was one of the key reasons for TomTom’s revenues 
and profits plunging after 2007. Photograph: Dado Ruvic/Reuters 
The market exploded; Vigreux and the team, now 40-strong, saw the business 
grow from revenues of €42m to €1.8bn in four years. “We probably drove the 
Ferrari close to the cliff a few times,” she says, laughing. “It’s not so much 
the technology that’s difficult to handle; it’s the part of the iceberg that 
you don’t see – the operations, the planning, the forecasts – and that’s with a 
four-to-six-month lead time for some of the products.” Coping with growth was a 
challenge: “It got faster and faster, without a stop button.”

The abrupt braking, when it came, hit the company hard. In mid-2011, it 
recorded another €500m write-off on the dwindling outlook for the standalone 
satnav market. Tele Atlas services generated much smaller revenues than selling 
physical devices; in retrospect, the purchases of Tele Atlas and Navteq were 
fuelled by legitimate fears that Google and smartphones would change the world 
of mapping, away from high-priced profitable devices to lower-priced services. 
And keeping maps updated is expensive – the world keeps changing. The analyst 
Horace Dediuestimates 
<http://www.asymco.com/2012/12/18/how-much-to-maps-cost-and-what-are-they-worth/>
 that each mapmaker’s annual upkeep costs are at least $1bn.

As a result, TomTom is seeking new sources of revenue beyond in-car satnavs. 
It recently collaborated with Nikeon a sports watch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jul/14/tomtom-multisport-watch-review-running>
 with inbuilt GPS.

However, it is the potential for self-driving vehicles that Vigreux is most 
keen to exploit. She said: “They will have a massive impact on the way we live. 
At present, our cars aren’t used very much in the day; maybe when they can 
drive themselves it’ll be more efficient, and there will be fewer on the road.” 
The key, though, will be the mapping data, and information about road 
conditions. This is where TomTom hopes to eke out an advantage by offering 3D 
features that it can update in real time – quicker than Google.

Meanwhile, Nokia is selling Navteq, rebranded as HERE 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/11/nokia-here-maps-navigation-app-ios>
, with a price tag that could top £2.5bn, and the most likely buyer is a 
consortium of German luxury carmakers: Audi, BMW and the Mercedes-Benz owner, 
Daimler.

Apple maps: how Google lost when everyone thought it had won
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/nov/11/apple-maps-google-iphone-users>
TomTom is a smaller business now: its first-quarter revenues were €205m with 
an operating profit of €21.4m, but net loss of €7m. Despite this, Vigreux says 
she is optimistic about the future. Yet she still frets about the state of 
consumer electronics companies in Europe compared to their rivals in the US. 
Vigreux said: “In Europe, we invented GSM [the system used worldwide for mobile 
phones]. Today everyone uses a phone. Yet there aren’t any big European players 
in the field. Consumer technology makers are disappearing: Nokia, Sagem, 
Philips, Alcatel.” Nokiasold its mobile phone business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/sep/03/microsoft-buys-nokia-handset-business>
 to Microsoft last year – it now makes mobile network equipment.

And she is proud that “we’re the only entrepreneurial consumer electronics 
company to come out of Europe with a global business”. So why the lack of 
others? Waze and DeepMind, two of the most innovative non-US companies (in 
travel and artificial intelligence) were both snapped up by Google. “Maybe we 
sell out too quickly - look at Skype as well,” Vigreux says. “Regulation might 
be part of it, but in the end the technology that consumers believe in and 
demand will win. Look at Uber - it is coming to a market that was 
over-regulated.

“But we shouldn’t look for excuses. Maybe there isn’t the right ecosystem of 
capital, entrepreneurs and universities together. But we have got the talent 
and the creativity.”

Does she support the idea of quotas for women in boardrooms? Vigreux replies: 
“I think some countries do need quotas, just to put it under the spotlight. But 
it’s better just done naturally. If we want more women in the board, then we 
need more executives, so you need more earlier in the organisation, and they 
need a career path through the organisation.”

In fact, she thinks, the lack of talented staff is “the biggest issue most 
organisations are facing. You have to fish in a bigger pond to fill those gaps. 
So of course you should look at women too”.

Vigreux is always watching out for new challengers, having seen Google come 
from nowhere to undermine what was a solid business. But for now, she is 
keeping her balance – and finding a new route through all the change.

****

Corinne Vigreux
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fnavigating-decline-what-happened-to-tomtom-satnav%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92e3bbd6b49dc60c7145dffbf0bd7064a0f0bda0%2F0_298_2333_1400%2F2333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Navigating%20decline%3A%20what%20happened%20to%20TomTom%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fnavigating-decline-what-happened-to-tomtom-satnav%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Navigating%20decline%3A%20what%20happened%20to%20TomTom%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fnavigating-decline-what-happened-to-tomtom-satnav%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92e3bbd6b49dc60c7145dffbf0bd7064a0f0bda0%2F0_298_2333_1400%2F2333.jpg>
 Corinne Vigreux. Photograph: Jerry Lampen/EPA/Corbis 
Born: Lyon, France, December 1964

University: MBA ESSEC Business School, Paris

1987-1993: Psion UK

1994: co-founded Palmtop Software - later rebranded as TomTom

Since 2008: managing director, sales director and chief commercial officer, 
TomTom NV

Recipient of the Legion d’Honneur

Languages: French, English, Dutch, German
 