
You already know, I take it, that you’re supposed to take regular breaks 
throughout the work day. You’ve seenthe stories about how sitting at a desk is 
worse than attacking yourself with an Ebola-infected chainsaw 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2015/10/06/446295001/your-chair-is-killing-you-here-s-what-you-need-to-do-to-stop-it>
; you heard that the Geneva conventions were recently expanded to makeeating 
lunch at your desk a war crime 
<https://www.fastcompany.com/3020008/leadership-now/hate-happiness-then-keep-eating-lunch-at-your-desk>
. You know you should get up, do some yoga poses, nip to the park, perhaps even 
take a nap – all the research shows you’ll be happier and more productive that 
way, plus you’ll get to leave the office earlier, with energy to spare. But you 
don’t actually do these things, do you? Instead, you check Facebook. You read 
football blogs. You distractedly shovel peanuts into the vicinity of your mouth 
while watching videos of excruciating public marriage proposals or skateboard 
accidents on YouTube.

All of which highlights a frustrating irony about rest and recuperation. Why 
should you take a proper, wholesome break? Because you’re tired. And why do you 
fail to do so? Because you’re tired. Making yourself take restorative action 
requires what’s known as self-regulation – and self-regulation, plenty of 
research suggests, is at its lowest when you’re exhausted. (The theory that 
willpower is a “depletable resource” hascome under attack recently 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/cover_story/2016/03/ego_depletion_an_influential_theory_in_psychology_may_have_just_been_debunked.html>
, but the basic correlation between tiredness and poor decisions seems solid.) 
Andas Christian Jarrett explained 
<http://99u.com/articles/54325/a-science-backed-guide-to-taking-truly-restful-breaks>
 at the creativity website 99u.com the other day, it is only relaxing 
activities such as stretching, or social ones such as chatting with colleagues, 
that have been shown to deliver end-of-day energy benefits. “Cognitive” breaks, 
such as checking social media, aren’t really breaks at all; given the load they 
place on your brain, you might as well have continued working.

Is there a bit of Donald Trump in all of us? | Oliver Burkeman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/19/donald-trump-bit-like-us-oliver-burkeman>
The too-tired-to-rest trap is familiar to many of us in the form of “bedtime 
procrastination”, as it was labelled ina 2014 study 
<http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00611/full> – 
“failing to go to bed at the intended time, while no external circumstances 
prevent a person from doing so”. You know the scenario: you’re knackered, and 
ought to sleep, yet travelling from the sofa via the bathroom to the bedroom 
seems like too much effort – while scrolling absent-mindedly through Netflix 
menus feels, in the most superficial sense of the word, relaxing. Not 
surprisingly, the study concluded that bedtime procrastination is associated 
with sleep deprivation, which means you’re even less likely to have the energy 
to haul yourself to bed the following night.

Is there any way out of the trap? Intriguingly, Jarrett points to research 
suggesting it’s best to start taking breaks early in the day 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26375961>, before you feel you need to: 
these apparently pay more dividends in terms of replenishment. Also, focus 
first on getting outside, not only because nature and fresh air are good for 
you, but because there’ll be fewer screens there to distract you. (You don’t 
need self-regulation when the temptation is absent.) Finally, don’t be shocked 
if it doesn’t feel good at first: when you’re all keyed up on cognitive tasks, 
stopping can be more painful than continuing. Yes, you need a break. But don’t 
expect to want one.

oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com>
 