
What are negative interest rates?

Normally savers earn interest when they deposit their money in banks. 
Similarly, commercial banks that lodge money with central banks receive 
interest for doing so. Negative interest rates turn this arrangement on its 
head. Savers have to pay banks for holding their money and central banks 
penalise banks for depositing cash with them.

Why are we talking about them? 

Because central banks are increasingly using them to boost growth and raise 
the level of inflation. At present, it is really only commercial banks that are 
being charged negative interest rates but there is a possibility, if things get 
worse, that they will affect members of the public as well.

OECD calls for less austerity and more public investment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/18/oecd-calls-for-less-austerity-and-more-public-investment>
What’s the rationale for negative rates?


The idea is that negative interest rates provide banks with an incentive to 
lend money rather than to hoard it. The same would apply to members of the 
public, who would be encouraged to spend rather than save.

Isn’t this unusual?

It is, but it reflects the low level of inflation across the global economy 
despite seven years of economic recovery. In the past, interest rates would 
have been strongly positive by this point. Japan has had the longest experience 
with low inflation and deflation, and on Tuesdaythe Bank of Japan introduced 
negative interest rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/16/bank-of-japan-launches-negative-interest-rates-yen-markets>
. It is charging banks 0.1% for their excess deposits.

Is Japan the first country to go negative?

In recent history, the Swedes were first. Between July 2009 and September 2010 
Sweden cut the deposit rate to -0.25% in an attempt to fend off the deep 
recession that followed the 2008 banking crash and global financial crisis. It 
reintroduced them in July 2014 and the deposit rate is currently -1.25%.

Sweden’s central bank became the first country to lend at a negative rate when 
in February 2015 it announced a negative repo rate – its main lending rate to 
commercial banks. Economists point out that this is largely a technicality 
because of the way its banking system operates.



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fnegative-interest-rates-what-you-need-to-know%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39979ff5677eb348ff39d661680d098949a4bcce%2F0_0_902_653%2F902.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Negative%20interest%20rates%3A%20what%20you%20need%20to%20know&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fnegative-interest-rates-what-you-need-to-know%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Negative%20interest%20rates%3A%20what%20you%20need%20to%20know&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fnegative-interest-rates-what-you-need-to-know%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39979ff5677eb348ff39d661680d098949a4bcce%2F0_0_902_653%2F902.jpg>
 Photograph: Morgan Stanley 

Switzerland introduced a negative rate in December 2014. However, it has 
experimented with them in the past; in 1972 it put a 2% penalty charge on 
deposits by non-residents.

Denmark tried to reduce the pressure on its currentcy in July 2012 by having a 
negative deposit rate between July 2012 and April 2014. After a period of being 
back in positive territory, it imposed a -0.75% rate on certificates of deposit 
from September 2014.

Eurozone: the 19 countries in the single currency area have had negative rates 
since June 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/05/european-central-bank-cuts-deposit-rates>
. The deposit rate was set at -0.1% in June 2014 and then cut to -0.2% and to 
-0.3% in December 2015.

 Is anyone else thinking about it?

The eurozone countries could yet get a deeper negative rate after the European 
Central Bank meets next month. Analysts at Morgan Stanley note that even the US 
central bank, the Federal Reserve, is “starting to sound more open to the idea” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/feb/11/market-turmoil-hong-kong-europe-ftse-banks-yellen-live?page=with:block-56bcdd2fe4b0d007e4723c39>
.

There is even some chatter that the Bank of England could end up with negative 
rates, or at least cut them from the historic low of 0.5% – an idearaised by 
its chief economist Andy Haldane last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/18/interest-rates-rise-bank-of-england-chief-economist-andy-haldane>
.

Are negative rates helping growth? 

Analysts at Morgan Stanley think not, warning they are a “dangerous 
experiment”, particularly for the banking sector. “We are concerned it erodes 
bank profitability, creating other systemic risks,” they said.

They acknowledge that when there was first a discussion of negative interest 
rates, it helped bolster sentiment “because it ended the debate on whether 
central banks are running out ammunition”.

That has changed. Michael Pearce, a global economist at Capital Economics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics>, said: “Policy loosening has 
fuelled, rather than soothed, market fears.”

What do negative rates mean for banks? 

If the share-price gyrations of Japanese banks are a gauge, there will be 
considerable turbulence. Analysts at UBS note that following the announcement 
of negative ratesby the Bank of Japan on 29 January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/jan/29/volatile-trading-bank-japan-negative-rates-live>
, Japanese bank share prices fell by around 30%.

Bank shares globally have already been pummelled this year – eurozone banks 
are down 28% – and analysts at Morgan Stanley calculate that bank profits will 
be knocked by between 5% and 10%.

How does it affect bank customers? 

Savings <https://www.theguardian.com/money/savings> rates will remain low and 
banks will look to make profits in other ways. They could push fees for loans, 
such as mortgages, or impose charges on current accounts, which might otherwise 
be seen as “free”.







How might customers react?

There is a concern that customers might make withdrawals of cash, although, 
according to theSwedish central bank 
<http://www.riksbank.se/Documents/Rapporter/Ekonomiska_kommentarer/2015/rap_ek_kom_nr11_150929_eng.pdf>
, there have been no signs of any substantial rise in the use of cash in 
Denmark, Sweden and Switzerland.

This is because the banks did not pass on the negative rates to their 
customers - but that could change if negative rates were imposed for lengthier 
periods.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fnegative-interest-rates-what-you-need-to-know%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1409930f01006324a89753b07b86b8388f012f01%2F0_0_880_595%2F880.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Negative%20interest%20rates%3A%20what%20you%20need%20to%20know&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fnegative-interest-rates-what-you-need-to-know%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Negative%20interest%20rates%3A%20what%20you%20need%20to%20know&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fnegative-interest-rates-what-you-need-to-know%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1409930f01006324a89753b07b86b8388f012f01%2F0_0_880_595%2F880.jpg>
 Photograph: Morgan Stanley 
Customers might also seek out higher returns elsewhere by looking at riskier 
investments.

What would happen if negative rates became common?

According to the Swedish central bank: “The most obvious problem associated 
with negative interest rates is that cash will sooner or later become a viable 
alternative to keeping money in the bank.”

Phasing out cash and replacing it with electronic money or putting a tax on 
money – known as the “Gesell tax” after the economist Silvio Gesell – could 
also be an option. But whether policymakers would want to implement this and 
how it would work in practice is not clear.




 