
With lifesize replicas of Buckingham Palace, a rampaging elephant, about 7,000 
costumes and a £100m budget, The Crown is one of the most lavish television 
dramas ever made.

The two-series biopic, starting with the wedding of the then Princess 
Elizabeth in 1947 and written byPeter Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/peter-morgan> (the writer of the film The 
Queen), charts Britain in the second half of the 20th century. But it will not 
be airing on the BBC; instead it is appearing on the subscription service 
Netflix from Friday 4 November.

Stephen Daldry <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/stephen-daldry>, its 
director, said: “It’s not just the story of the royal family. It’s the story of 
who we are and why we’re here and what we dream of. It’s the story about a 
nation.”

The drama stars Claire Foy as the young Queen and Matt Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/matt-smith>, the former Doctor Who 
actor, as Prince Philip. “When it’s about the royal family, it probably helps 
to have good tailoring and a lot of extras. They did have a lot of people 
around them and you couldn’t make it on the cheap,” observed Smith, who relies 
on a blond wig to make him look the part. “Wigs cost a lot of money.”

Royal drama The Crown shows Queen's father reciting dirty limerick
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/27/the-crown-writer-peter-morgan-ducked-chance-to-meet-queen>


 Netflix has been best known for US commissions such as House of Cards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/house-of-cards> and Stranger Things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/15/stranger-things-review-a-shot-of-80s-nostalgia-right-to-your-heart-winona-ryder>
, but its move into British costume drama demonstrates the changing nature of 
the television industry where the BBC faces increasing competition from better 
resourced and more nimble international rivals.

With a running cost of around £5m an hour, the Crown compares with films such 
as The King’s Speech rather than the typical £1m-per-episode drama budget at 
the BBC or ITV. To make The Night Manager for the BBC, the producer had to 
solicit money from co-production partners AMC.


Danny Cohen, the BBC’s then head of television, has admitted that the 
corporation “couldn’t compete with the amount of money that Netflix were 
prepared to pay” for “a classic BBC subject” 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/tv/news/the-crown-bbc-wanted-to-make-royal-epic-but-could-not-compete-with-netflix-financially-10471342.html>
. Netflix, by contrast, committed to spending a £100m budget within 40 minutes 
of sitting down to discuss the drama.

Keen for half of all its global content to be original, Netflix has not only 
snapped up The Crown but has also bought the cult comedy hitBlack Mirror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/black-mirror> from Channel 4. 
Meanwhile, its rival, Amazon, will launch the Grand Tour later in November, the 
£160m Jeremy Clarkson vehicle as the two aim to develop a new market in 
cut-price subscription television.





Netflix <https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> commissioned two series 
initially – a commitment that Morgan said “took us back a bit”. The series 
currently being filmed ends in the 1960s and Daldry has said he is “assuming we 
will carry on”, with each new series set to cover a decade potentially up to 
the Queen’s 90th.

The economies of scale from a two-series commitment meant replicas sets could 
be built and the directors were able to add to the much-lauded “authenticity”. 
The production includes a vintage train costing £200,000 and filming on 
location at Ely Cathedral.

Bringing the story up to date may yet prove more complicated for other 
reasons. When dealing with the royal family, a senior BBC executive still acts 
as royal liaison officer to request footage or interviews for corporation use. 
Meanwhile, in The Crown, King George VI is portrayed reciting a limerick on the 
morning of his daughter’s wedding that includes the word “cunt”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fnetflix-glittering-crown-bbc-dull-launch-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51ce8971dd2eef8a5d4154068fadc4bce57e995d%2F307_320_1313_787%2F1313.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Netflix's%20glittering%20Crown%20could%20leave%20BBC%20looking%20a%20little%20dull&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fnetflix-glittering-crown-bbc-dull-launch-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Netflix%27s%20glittering%20Crown%20could%20leave%20BBC%20looking%20a%20little%20dull&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fnetflix-glittering-crown-bbc-dull-launch-tv%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51ce8971dd2eef8a5d4154068fadc4bce57e995d%2F307_320_1313_787%2F1313.jpg>
 Peter Morgan (left) and Stephen Daldry, writer and director of The Crown. 
Photograph: David Benett/Getty 
But Morgan – who has successfully dramatised the period around the death of 
Diana, Princess of Wales, in 1997 inThe Queen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/queen> – said at a screening of the first 
episode last week that he had kept his distance from the Palace, even declining 
an opportunity to meet the Queen, while the Palace’s line is that the programme 
is simply “a fictional drama”.

If the programme is recommissioned, a greater challenge is to predict how 
viewing habits are changing. Morgan said he found it harder to predict how the 
global television revolution itself would play out, as the lines blur between 
handheld screens and cinemas. “The way in which we will be watching this a few 
years down the line ... it’s almost as though I’m too unimaginative to 
predict,” he said. “Even if I do continue with this, we will be watching it in 
different way.”

The Poldark prince?

Promotional shots of Matt Smith rowing topless have already prompted tabloid 
comparisons with Aiden Turner, the star of Poldark on BBC1, although the actor 
himself is not so convinced.

The portrayal of Philip as a young Royal navy lieutenant in a rowing race on 
the Mediterranean had prompted the Mail on Sunday to declare,“It’s Philip the 
Poldark prince!” 
<https://www.pressreader.com/uk/the-mail-on-sunday/20161002/281852938064915>

“It’s definitely not,” Smith said, when asked if it was a “Poldark moment”. 
“I’m not in the same shape as Aiden. Hell no! But I think you do see my bottom 
at one point.”
 