
One of pop’s biggest days of the year fell last Thursday, when John Lewis 
unveiledits Christmas ad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/nov/10/meet-buster-the-john-lewis-2016-christmas-advert-video>
. The soundtrack to that ad is considered one of the prime showcase slots in 
the music industry –as Eamonn Forde wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/06/christmas-john-lewis-advertisement-tom-odell-music-industry>
 in the Guardian in 2014: “Winning the ad is the holy grail for sync 
departments and the pitching process is as long as it is secretive, with all 
entrants silenced by hefty non-disclosure agreements.” Yet so often the song 
that accompanies the ad, despite being inescapable for six weeks, is gone from 
our minds like melting snow in January (can anyone remember a single thing 
about Tom Odell’s version of Real Love in 2014?). But the music of adverts need 
not be like that: the adverts we remember might be accompanied by music we 
hate, but there is no danger of us ever forgetting them. These are the advert 
themes we can’t shake (or vac). What are yours?

John Lewis Christmas advert: Buster the boxer is a sledgehammer to 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/10/john-lewis-christmas-advert-buster-the-bouncing-dog-a-sledgehammer-to-2016>
Rowntree’s Tots

I’d love to tell you that my earliest memories are of some wonderful family 
holiday, or of the verdant loveliness of a childhood in the Yorkshire Dales. 
But I can’t: every last one of my earliest memories involves television. They 
start to crowd in from around the time I was three or four: Wizzard on Top of 
the Pops (I was terrified of Roy Wood), Robert Wyatt on Top of the Pops (I was 
intrigued by his wheelchair), the cartoon polar bear who shilled Cresta pop 
with the words “It’s frothy, man <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WdnUo1q2E90>
”, and the song from an advert for Rowntree’s Tots. I can’t remember the 
visuals that accompanied it at all, but a snatch of the melody and the lyrics 
inexplicably clung to me forever afterwards: “Candy Tots, something new / 
They’re dolly mixtures and soft to chew.” It would, in the way of ad music, pop 
into my head unbidden at inexplicable moments, until the day in the 
mid-noughties when I was sent a compilation of the work of late 60s/early 70s 
pop journeyman John Carter, variously the lead singer of the New Vaudeville 
Jazz Band, the brains behind First Class’s fantastic Brian Wilson homageBeach 
Baby <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oeGPpwFpIAA>, and the co-author of Summer 
of Love cash-inLet’s Go to San Francisco by the Flowerpot Men 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=puuWsTitPa4>. I was only half-listening to it 
(as you might expect, given his CV, the musical quality was a bit variable) 
when the Rowntree’s Tots advert came bursting from the speakers: it transpired
Mr Carter knocked out advertising jingles as well 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/anthology-measure-for-measure-mw0000698940>, and 
Rowntree’s Tots had been such a success that a spin-off single with altered 
lyrics was released. A little pathetically, I literally shouted in excitement. 
It would be nice if I could tell you the song was great, but, alas, 30 years 
on, it sounded a bit twee and irritating. Moreover, hearing it again didn’t – 
as I hoped - expunge it from my mind. It’s still rattling around in there, and 
I fully expect to be plagued by a jaunty endorsement of the manifold qualities 
of Candy Tots (long discontinued) on my deathbed.Alexis Petridis
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFai4d6Wb9bM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFai4d6Wb9bM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFai4d6Wb9bM&media=>
 Please Yourself, the spin-off single from John Carter’s original Rowntree’s 
Tots song. 
Shake n’ Vac

Ever since I first heard it as a schoolboy in the early 1980s, the 
irritatingly catchy Shake n’ Vac ad song has lodged in my poor brain like a 
virus, and despite not being on TV since 1989, it still pops into my head. A 
retro, 50s-style rock’n’roll backing accompanies the brutally effective jingle: 
“Do the Shake n’ Vac and put the freshness back / Do the Shake n’ Vac and put 
the freshness back / When your carpet smells fresh, your room does too …” Argh, 
no! The advert itself now looks kitsch and dated: Jenny Logan plays a 
maxi-skirted, high-heeled, bottom-wiggling housewife who sings of the joys of a 
sinister white powder that resembles anthrax, which is sprinkled over a carpet 
and vacuumed up again to leave it sparkling clean. I’ve since resisted the 
tune’s demonic calling and marketing witchcraft in the only way I know, by 
installing laminate flooring.Dave Simpson

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4q8inM0gKVo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4q8inM0gKVo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4q8inM0gKVo&media=>
Carphone Warehouse

Poor old Stereo MC’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2001/apr/04/features11.g21>. Their 
legacy as British hip-hop pioneers, whose 1990 single Elevate My Mind was the 
first UK rap entry on the US Billboard 100, will forever be eclipsed by four 
little words: gonna get myself connected. Yes, the London four-piece were 
indeed the band who soundtrackedthose Carphone Warehouse ads with a funk loop 
nabbed from KC and The Sunshine band affiliate Jimmy “Bo” Horne and some 
sub-Britpop swagger. Like Mansun and soul patches, Connected is a thing of pure 
Nineties naffness – not quite dance but not quite indie, despite frontman Rob 
Birch showcasing a meandering, karaoke Tim Burgess vocal style. Although this 
writer was born two months after its release, its role in the marketing of 
10-tonne Motorolas during my formative years means that – pardon the pun – I 
shall forever feel a connection.Hannah J Davies
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQm8ClRnVxtE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQm8ClRnVxtE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQm8ClRnVxtE&media=>
Milky Way

“The red car and the blue car had a race.” Those words alone are enough to set 
a piece of music racing through the heads of TV viewers of a certain age – the 
music to the ad known as Red Car Blue Car, made for Milky Way in 1989, a tinny 
piece of country rock’n’roll written by Mike Connaris, and a song so infernally 
catchy that when the ad was revived in 2009, there were people who celebrated 
its return. Even more incredibly, when its lyrics were changed and the song 
re-recorded as Home for Christmas Day, it reached No 44 in the charts – in 
December 1991. Yes, even after two years of exposure to the ad, there were 
people who were not yet sick of it. (These, perhaps, were the same people who 
decided they needed to buy a copy of Brian May’s Ford advert,Driven by You 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pT6jkcnaQ7c>. Or who cheered when John Farnham 
performed hisGillette razors track The Best 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ThDBf14qPsc> in concert.) But Red Car Blue Car 
did its job. To this day, when I see a red car and blue car next to each other 
at traffic lights, I wonder if they’ll race, and if the red car will be able to 
do anything but stuff its face. Like “apples, hazelnuts, bananas, raisins, 
coconuts, sultanas <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8bsApDcW1ng>” and “feed me! 
Feed me NOW! <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r94nqVN1G2U>”, Red Car Blue Car 
is now embedded deep within me. It doesn’t make me want to eat Milky Ways, 
though.Michael Hann
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSoXJL2hL6kI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSoXJL2hL6kI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSoXJL2hL6kI&media=>
Müller yogurt

Yoghurt advertising is irritating enough as it is: whether it’s Nicole 
Scherzingerorgasming over a fruit corner 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y1uQTCLx61Q> or some French children being 
intolerably wholesome in the vicinity of a Petits Filous, the flogging of the 
stuff is a small universe of ridiculous commercial fiction. But maybe the 
industry’s biggest crime was to take the transcendent 1968 Nina Simone song 
Ain’t Got No, I Got Life, layer some cow sound effects over it, and turn it 
into a maddening earworm most closely associated with imbecillic milk-based 
joie de vivre. Another unfortunate side-effect of using it to soundtrack a 
series of farm vistas is that it makes you realise how much Simone’s voice 
resembles a sheep’s. And thus, an icon now exists as little more in my mind 
than bleating shorthand for a worryingly fanatical devotion to dairy products. 
Rachel Aroesti
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D90mhLAPG1no&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D90mhLAPG1no>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D90mhLAPG1no&media=>
Huggies Pull-Ups

Morrissey once sang: “The music that they constantly play / It says nothing to 
me about my life.” That has long been the case for me and the song from the 
Huggies Pull-Ups advert, which has been constantly playing in my head now for 
at least two decades despite saying precious little about my life. A quick 
Google suggests it first seeped into my consciousness when I was barely a 
teenager. And yet, despite being free of the need to consider elasticated 
nappy/pant hybrids by, ooh, at least a year or so, the song has remained 
stitched to my eardrums like some kind of audio Celtic symbol. It is, 
undoubtedly, one of the most annoying jingles ever recorded. The lyrics are 
annoying, the tune is moronic and the kid’s voice instilled in me a deep 
loathing of all human beings under the age of five. And yet I’ve never felt 
truly free of its presence. Indeed, if its influence over my daily soundtrack 
had finally started to wane in recent years, then the arrival of my daughter 
this summer meant that it has since returned with a vengeance. Of course, now 
that I’m in a situation where I might actually need to buy “big kid pants”, you 
could argue that the Huggies advert finally does say something to me about my 
life. And does that make it any less annoying? No. No it does not.Tim Jonze
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DavZu_eI02SE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DavZu_eI02SE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DavZu_eI02SE&media=> 