
In order to cram the 1,400-page War And Peace into a stingy six episodes, BBC 
adapter general Andrew Davies says he took out “the history and the 
philosophy”. Yeah, bor-ing! Whiskery Victorian novelist Anthony Trollope makes 
it even easier for a post-DowntonJulian Fellowes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/julian-fellowes>. His Doctor Thorne 
(Sunday, 9pm, ITV), the third in Trollope’s social-rollercoasting Barsetshire 
Chronicles, is so baggy with backstory it actually prompts the author to launch 
into a hand-wringing apology for the fact that it begins with “two long dull 
chapters full of description”.

Rather than cut or prune said expo-dumps, the author self-flagellates at his 
readers: “It can hardly be expected that anyone will consent to go through with 
a fiction that offers so little of allurement in its first pages.” It’s perhaps 
unsurprising, then, that Trollope is conspicuous by his absence on TV, crowded 
out by Austen (more heaving) and Dickens (more satirically grotesque). Who 
remembers He Knew He Was Right, the last dollop of Trollope in 2004? Or the 
all-star, Davies-adapted The Way We Live Now in 2001? In short, there is a 
reason why nobody at the BBC has commissioned a 20-part soap based on 
Trollope’s characters called Trollopian.

As lord and master of one of the biggest ever period brands, Fellowes, a 
self-professed Trollopian, is just the chap to rehabilitate the author. Good 
news for those of us who cannot countenance a Sunday night in front of the box 
without the company of land-rich, cash-poor English nobs in frock coats. 
Fellowes has briskly trimmedDoctor Thorne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-thorne> of its fat, starting 
with the Actual Pivotal Murder that occurs some way into chapter two in the 
book. No spoilers, but it takes place at the Greshamsbury village pump at 
night, an instant improvement on the farm gate in the evening from the novel 
(no sense of the TV audience, those Victorians).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Fdoctor-thorne-julian-fellowes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F566668f873fefffccbb69651f66e7af55c7b4ab8%2F0_60_2304_1382%2F2304.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Never%20mind%20the%20Trollope%2C%20Doctor%20Thorne%20gets%20the%20Fellowes%20treatment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Fdoctor-thorne-julian-fellowes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Never%20mind%20the%20Trollope%2C%20Doctor%20Thorne%20gets%20the%20Fellowes%20treatment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Fdoctor-thorne-julian-fellowes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F566668f873fefffccbb69651f66e7af55c7b4ab8%2F0_60_2304_1382%2F2304.jpg>
 Fiddle faddle… 
These have been dark times for lovers of period pomp since Downton bowed out 
on Boxing Day, leaving 10 million of us bereft, and many bamboozled by the 
fast-forwarded War And Peace on the other side. Although loyal, I admit I’d 
long wearied of Fellowes’s repetition come Downton’s finale (not another story 
about one cook secretly helping another one make a stew!) and wished he’d 
farmed out some of the writing like most showrunning creators. The three-part 
Thorne acts as a short recuperative break for the man who wrote all 52 episodes 
of Downton, bar two early co-writes before megalomania set in. Drone-shot in 
property-supplement Shropshire, High Wycombe and Knebworth, there are 
“allurements” aplenty in this super-bucolic slice of 19th-century parish life: 
bustled women moving around as if on castors; rooms with at least one tiger 
skin rug; and parasols petite enough to be floating in cocktails.

The marquee cast is ennobled by Tom Hollander in an atypically straight role 
as the eponymous “modest country practitioner”, forced to deal with the dark 
secrets of his niece Mary’s (Stefanie Martini) birth; Rebecca Front as the 
snooty, pug-carrying Lady Arabella, hell-bent on her daughters “marrying money” 
after feckless hubby Richard McCabe lost his frilly shirt on the railways; and 
Ian McShane, having a rare old time as the grizzled, landowning boozer Sir 
Roger, rarely out of his nightgown. It’s smashing to see Alison Brie, Trudy 
Campbell from Mad Men, as a visiting Yank – “It is not my beauty but my dollars 
that render me beautiful” – and there’s Downton crossover, too, in Phoebe 
Nicholls, previously the lemon-sucking marchioness of Flintshire.

This is a world of politesse, “fiddle faddle”, “tomfoolery” and “taking 
amiss”, where passionate intent must be read into phrases as innocuous as “Good 
day to you, Madam!” and “Come this minute and make up a hand of whist!” Leanly 
plotted and crowd-pleasing, it ticks all the Sunday night boxes; there’s a ball 
in part three of episode one, and this definitive exchange between the good 
doctor and his niece: “Do you care about bonnets?” “Why shouldn’t I?” And why 
shouldn’t we?
 