 . 
A New History of Life: The Radical New Discoveries about the Origins and 
Evolution of Life on Earth by Joe Kirschvink and Peter Ward [400 pages, 
Bloomsbury Publishing 
<http://www.bloomsbury.com/uk/a-new-history-of-life-9781408835524/>, 2015; 
Guardian Bookshop <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/new-history-of-life.html>; 
Amazon UKhardcover 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/exec/obidos/ASIN/1408835525/livithescieli-21/>; Amazon 
UShardcover 
<http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/160819907X/livingthescie-20/>/kindle US 
<http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00OZM4AN2/livingthescie-20/>]

Publisher’s synopsis: An estimated 4.6 billion years ago, the Earth and Moon 
were formed in a violent impact. On this, many agree, and even more that a long 
time after that, life began. However, few know that the first life on the Earth 
may not have emerged on this planet, but could, in fact, have begun on Mars, 
brought here by meteorites.

In this revolutionary book, leading scientists Peter Ward and Joe Kirschvink 
rewrite the principal account of the history of life on Earth. They show not 
only how the rise of animals was delayed for billions of years, but also what 
it was that first forced fish out of the sea and onto the land.

Together, the two scientists explain how developments in the environment led 
to multiple Ice Ages before the emergence of dinosaurs and other giant animals, 
and what the true cause of these great beasts’ eventual extinction was. 
Finally, charting the course of our own evolution, they explore whether this 
generation will see the end of the human species.A New History of Life proves 
not only that much of what we think we know should be unlearned, but also that 
the true history of life on Earth is much more surprising and wonderful than we 
could ever have imagined.

My first impression: This engaging book focuses upon the newest scientific 
discoveries since Richard Fortey’sLife: A Natural History of the First Four 
Billion Years on Earth, was published more than 20 years ago -- especially 
recent discoveries by researchers in the new fields of astrobiology and 
geobiology. In view of these new findings, the authors pose three main 
arguments: first, the history of life has been affected more by catastrophe 
than by the sum of all other forces combined; second, that three simple gases 
(oxygen, carbon dioxide, and hydrogen sulfide) have had the greatest influence 
over the history of life; and third, the evolution ofecosystems has had the 
greatest influence over the evolution of life. Carefully documented and written 
by two palaeontologists, this book is thoughtful, eye-opening and worth 
reading. Further, Peter Ward has written many award-winning popular science 
books, so you know this book will be a pleasure to read.

Disclaimer: Peter Ward was a professor in the University of Washington Zoology 
Department (now subsumed into theBiology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/biology> Department) where I earned my PhD.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fgrrlscientist%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fnew-books-party-books-that-arrived-recently%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F27%2F1425040022540%2F79fe1090-6539-4aa5-9c3c-e23e1bd14de7-1530x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20Books%20Party%3A%20Books%20that%20arrived%20recently&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fgrrlscientist%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fnew-books-party-books-that-arrived-recently%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20Books%20Party%3A%20Books%20that%20arrived%20recently&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fgrrlscientist%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fnew-books-party-books-that-arrived-recently%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F27%2F1425040022540%2F79fe1090-6539-4aa5-9c3c-e23e1bd14de7-1530x2040.jpeg>
 . 
The Antarctic Dive Guide by Lisa Eareckson Kelley [144 pages, Princeton 
University Press <http://press.princeton.edu/titles/10467.html>, 2015; Guardian 
Bookshop <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/286033/>; 
Amazon UKpaperback 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/exec/obidos/ASIN/0691163448/livithescieli-21/>; Amazon 
USpaperback 
<http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0691163448/livingthescie-20/>]

Publisher’s synopsis: The Antarctic Dive Guide is the first and only dive 
guide to the seventh continent, until recently the exclusive realm of 
scientific and military divers. Today, however, the icy waters of Antarctica 
have become the extreme destination for recreational divers wishing to explore 
beyond the conventional and observe the strange marine life that abounds below 
the surface. This book is packed with information about the history of diving 
in Antarctica and its wildlife, and features stunning underwater photography.

The Antarctic Dive Guide covers 31 key dive sites on the Antarctic Peninsula 
and South Georgia and includes maps and detailed guidance on how best to 
explore each site. Essential information is also provided on how to choose and 
prepare for travel to this remote region, and diving techniques for subzero 
waters. This book is an indispensable resource for anyone considering diving in 
Antarctica, and an exciting read for anyone interested in this little-explored 
underwater world.

This fully revised and updated third edition:

 * Covers 4 new dive sites 
 * Features revised and updated information for the other 27 sites covered 
 * Includes new sections on the Sea Leopard Project and natural product 
chemistry from Antarctic marine organisms 
My first impression: Princeton University Press is one of the best publishers 
for field guides, and this book is a lovely addition to their collection. This 
beautifully illustrated and informative book is crammed with lots of useful 
information, including how to plan your visit, and what to expect whilst diving 
there, the history of diving in Antarctica, how to avoid being attacked by a 
leopard seal (the apex predator in Antarctica), and a large section about 
underwater photography and videography. Includes lots of stunning photographs 
(of course!) and lots of maps and useful icons summarising each dive site so 
you can see key features at a glance. If you are planning to dive in 
Antarctica, or if you (like me) can only DREAM of diving in Antarctica, then 
this is the book for you!

.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..


When she’s not got her nose stuck in a book, GrrlScientist is very active on 
twitter @GrrlScientist <https://twitter.com/GrrlScientist> and lurks on social 
media:facebook <http://www.facebook.com/grrlscientist>, G+ 
<http://gplus.to/grrlscientist>, LinkedIn 
<http://www.linkedin.com/pub/grrl-scientist/15/324/b89>, and Pinterest 
<http://pinterest.com/grrlscientist/>.
 