
There seems to be a strong sense in social care that the chancellor’s failure 
to do anything about its ever-worsening crisis in his autumn statementis the 
last straw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/nov/30/government-inaction-on-social-care-funding-needs-a-radical-response>
. More powerful voices in the sector than ever before have issued statements 
highlighting the catastrophic state of social care, including theCare Quality 
Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/13/social-care-cuts-take-english-service-to-tipping-point-regulator-warns>
, theAssociation of Directors of Adult Social Services 
<https://www.adass.org.uk/adass-responds-to-the-autumn-statement-2016> and the 
Local Government Association 
<http://www.local.gov.uk/web/guest/media-releases/-/journal_content/56/10180/8059398/NEWS>
.

Yet for many service users and their organisations there’s a feeling that 
leaders of social care organisations have been failing to speak truth to power. 
The top-down talk now of the need fora new social movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/apr/18/social-services-leaders-campaign-secure-funding>
 for social care and for radical reform is likely to feel like too little too 
late. This is especially true for the many individuals and families struggling 
with extreme issues and a damaged quality of life; sometimes issues of life and 
death.

But the government’s inaction on social care isn’t surprising in the context 
of its similar inaction on the mental health crisis, the cruelty and failure of 
welfare reforms, and the appalling waste demonstrated in evidence-free policies 
like thetroubled families programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/17/governments-448m-troubled-families-scheme-has-had-little-impact-thinktank>
.

There is a critical point that needs to be acknowledged here. Even with the 
current widespread recognition of the crisis in social care, that doesn’t mean 
there will be any kind of fundamental rethinking over its future or its 
relation to health policy. Nonetheless the need for a “new script for social 
care” was the rallying cry of a national seminar organised by Skills For Care 
in November, where a wide range of stakeholders, including service users, were 
present.

Government inaction on social care funding needs a radical response
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/nov/30/government-inaction-on-social-care-funding-needs-a-radical-response>
Service users and their organisations have long been calling for a fundamental 
rethink. Disabled people and other service users, and their organisations, have 
been a beacon of good sense about what’s needed in social care for decades. 
They have come up with most of the new ideas and have pressed for social care 
to be given priority.

It is perhaps time to put together their proposals to form the basis for a 
“user-led manifesto for social care”. They, together with carers and grassroots 
organisations, could also provide the political force to help make it happen.


It needs to include both short- and long-term measures and we must begin 
immediately, recording the funding gap between meeting people’s needs and the 
money available. Then we will have a clear funding target to aim for.


If we want sustainable social care for the future, quick fixes won’t help, 
although there are plenty being tried – from underfunded personal budgets 
policy to the so-called“three conversations” technique 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/nov/01/the-three-conversations-model-turning-away-from-long-term-care>
. What’s needed instead is a comprehensive new strategy for social care that 
meets the needs of our changing population. I’ve put together some initial 
proposals likely to be included.

A user-led manifesto for change

 * Base the system on a social model and on the values of independent living, 
taking account of the barriers service users face and seek to reduce them with 
support – rather than making people prove dependence.

 * Bring the welfare benefits system in line with these same values of 
empowerment, inclusion and equality, rather than using it to force people into 
the labour market, however inappropriate.

 * Make person-centred support the central goal of social care support and 
equip professionals and other workers to work in this way – challenging 
institutionalising practices.

 * Ensure effective user involvement in all related occupational and 
professional training and education, required and resourced by central 
government, as has successfully been the case with social work in England.

 * Reform employment training and support for disabled people to equalise 
access to and opportunities in the labour market, while recognising this may 
not be a viable alternative for some who can contribute in other ways to their 
communities.

We could all be Daniel Blake: social workers stand with disabled adults
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/dec/02/we-could-all-be-daniel-blake-social-workers-stand-with-disabled-adults>
 * Support the independence of social workers and other key social care 
professional roles to maximise their effectiveness as advocates and expert 
friends for some of the most disadvantaged people in society.

 * Challenge the dominance of traditional institutionalising corporate 
providers in residential and domiciliary services and instead prioritise the 
user-led, community-based small scale support schemes particularly valued by 
service users and carers.

 * Give people a real choice so friends and families can offer unique support 
instead of being dragooned into so-called “caring” roles without choice or 
adequate support.

 * End means-testing and charging for social care services, ultimately the 
most cost-effective way to ensure preventive provision, accessible to all.

 * Prioritise anti-discriminatory practice in social care, ensuring equal 
access to appropriate support and challenging exclusions and barriers in 
relation to ethnicity, age, culture, class, gender and sexuality.

 * Highlight social care as a net wealth creator, enabling service users of 
all ages to contribute to their maximum and have the healthiest quality of 
life, rather than perpetuating its image as a drain on budgets and resources, 
working with people who are presented as dependent and a burden.

 * Minimise the environmental impact of social care policy and practice, 
maximising its global sustainability.

 * Move social care from being a means and needs tested residual service, 
basing it on the same founding principles as the NHS; free at the point of 
delivery and paid for out of general taxation.

 * Return to a system of progressive, rather than regressive, taxation in 
order to equalise its costs, rather than to penalise the worse off.

This is only an initial list. Hopefully you will have your own additions to 
offer. What’s needed most is an open and inclusive debate to advance such a 
manifesto.Social care <https://www.theguardian.com/society/social-care> is just 
too important to us all and in too critical a state to be left to traditional 
experts and ideologically impaired politicians.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 