
A new regulatory system meant to allow staff at betting shops to identify and 
bar problem gamblers has been criticised as ineffectual by addicts and 
campaigners.

From this week bookmakers will have to conduct local area risk assessments to 
explain how they are going to mitigate crime and the effect on vulnerable 
people. Significantly, they will have to share information on problem gamblers 
who have “self-excluded” themselves from betting shops.

The change means that for the first time addicts will only have to fill in one 
form to block themselves from all gambling operators’ shops in an area. The 
move was announced last year by the regulator, theGambling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/gambling> Commission, after industry 
consultation to “strengthen social responsibility”.

The bookies regulator is taking a gamble over protecting the vulnerable | Matt 
Zarb-Cousin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/02/gambling-commission-paddy-power-bookies-regulator-protecting-vulnerable>
At the heart of the debate is the spread of fixed-odds betting terminals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/fixed-odds-betting-terminals-fobts> 
(FOBTs), which are disproportionately found in poorer parts of Britain and 
generated £1.7bn in revenue for bookmakers last year.

Each betting shop is allowed to have up to four FOBTs – described by critics 
as the “crack cocaine of gambling” – that allow stakes of up to £100 to be laid 
on casino games with a maximum delay of just 20 seconds between wagers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fproblem-gamblers-new-regulations-stop-wont-work-campaigners-warn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9d90bfaaaf1010105c426560730728aa2cd8c02%2F0_156_5023_3013%2F5023.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20UK%20rules%20to%20stop%20problem%20gambling%20won't%20work%2C%20campaigners%20say&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fproblem-gamblers-new-regulations-stop-wont-work-campaigners-warn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20UK%20rules%20to%20stop%20problem%20gambling%20won%27t%20work%2C%20campaigners%20say&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fproblem-gamblers-new-regulations-stop-wont-work-campaigners-warn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9d90bfaaaf1010105c426560730728aa2cd8c02%2F0_156_5023_3013%2F5023.jpg>
 A man playing a fixed-odds betting terminal in a branch of William Hill. Each 
betting shop is allowed to have four FOBTs. Photograph: Alex Segre/Alamy 
Gamblers struggling with addiction however, say the scheme will not work. Tony 
Franklin, 44, said he had excluded himself from all bookmakers, but that his 
addiction had cost him his home and job. Last year, after losing thousands of 
pounds in a matter of minutes, he had what he described as a “meltdown and 
collapse”.

Diagnosed by a psychiatrist as having pathological gambling disorder, he was 
signed off work and now lives on benefits. Once a corporate salesman, his 
biggest monthly pay cheque was £13,000.

“I am looking to declare myself bankrupt. With an addiction you cannot control 
your losses. The red mist just comes over me and that’s it, I’m lost,” he said.

Franklin took extraordinary measures to stop his addiction, such as writing to 
betting chain chief executives demanding he be banned from their shops. He even 
got bookmakers to issue trespass notices against him.

Paddy Power 'encouraged gambler until he lost his home, jobs and family'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/29/paddy-power-encouraged-gambler-lost-home-jobs-family-gambling-commission-report>
He said, however, that he was always allowed to bet in the end. “Any 
self-exclusion system based on paper is flawed because it relies on a person in 
one shop recognising you. That just doesn’t happen. I have self-excluded 
myself, taken extreme steps but I still have ended up having a meltdown,” he 
said.

The scheme was trialled in Chatham in Kent last year with mixed results. 
Gamblers were allowed to ban themselves from all betting shops in the town by 
filling in just one form. An investigation by the BBC, however, found that 
eight of the 10 bookmakers did not prevent a journalist from gambling 
<http://www.kentonline.co.uk/medway/news/is-gamblers-pilot-scheme-odds-on-43774/>
 on their premises despite the fact that he had signed up to be excluded.

A spokesman for the Association of British Bookmakers said: “The new 
self-exclusion scheme, rolled out nationally this month, is a significant 
advance on the previous scheme under which a customer had to enter into an 
individual agreement with each betting shop.

“Now there is a freephone helpline with a one-stop process for self-exclusion. 
Given that there are over 8,000 betting shops in the UK, developing a one-stop 
shop for self-exclusion has involved significant investment on the part of 
betting shop operators . We will continue to refine and build on this programme 
over time.”

A spokesman for the Campaign for Fairer Gambling said: “The current system is 
flawed as it relies on staff memorising dozens of self-excluded customers from 
each betting shop. The new system is still paper-based so nothing will improve. 
The only difference is instead of having to go to each bookmaker to fill in a 
separate form, you can now just fill in one form.

“But what good is this when the breach rate is so high as the system relies on 
staff recognition? Surely it’s time for the government and the Gambling 
Commission to wake up to the fact that almost all self-exclusions relate to 
FOBTs, so reducing the maximum stake from £100 a spin would reduce problem 
gambling.”
 