
New Jersey <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/new-jersey> has formally taken 
over Atlantic City, the indebted gambling town where President-elect Donald 
Trump left a legacy of troubled casinos.

The move threatens to lead to privatization of the city’s water 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/06/atlantic-city-bankruptcy-bailout-private-water-flint-trump>
, the undoing of local collective bargaining agreements and public worker 
layoffs in the city of 39,000.

“It’s kind of ironic that it was a day after the elections occurred that they 
decided to rob the city of democratic rights,” said Mary Grant, a researcher 
for Food and Water Watch, an advocacy group. “It’s denying the people a voice 
in their own future, and it will likely result in the handover of their water 
system.”

Both local officials and citizens opposed 
<http://www.nj.com/politics/index.ssf/2016/03/atlantic_city_activist_arrested_at_tense_trenton_m.html>
 the takeover. The city’s Republican mayor, Don Guardian, said he would, “keep 
all of our options on the table”.

Flint warnings as Atlantic City may be forced into state takeover of water
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/06/atlantic-city-bankruptcy-bailout-private-water-flint-trump>
The city has been in dire financial straits since revenues to the state’s 
casino industry plummeted over the last 10 years.Five casinos have closed since 
2014 
<http://philly.curbed.com/2016/8/4/12376514/trump-taj-mahal-closed-atlantic-city-casinos>
, includingtwo low-performing casinos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/02/donald-trump-atlantic-city-casinos-taj-mahal-plaza-bankruptcy>
previously owned by the president-elect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/02/donald-trump-atlantic-city-casinos-taj-mahal-plaza-bankruptcy>
. Revenue at Atlantic City’s casinos fell more than 50% between 2006 and 2015, 
according to theUniversity of Nevada Las Vegas Center for Gaming Research 
<http://gaming.unlv.edu/reports.html>.


New Jersey’s unpopular governor Chris Christie, currently Trump’s transition 
chairman and acandidate for a job in his administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/donald-trump-cabinet-giuliani-christie-reince-priebus>
, personally brokered the deal that lead to Atlantic City’s state takeover.

Christie’s advocacy of privatized water in Atlantic City fits in more broadly 
with calls from Trump’s economic advisers to spur private investment inpublic 
works projects 
<https://www.wired.com/2016/11/trumps-plan-american-infrastructure-get-people-spend-trillion-dollars/>
, by offering$140m in tax credits to private equity holders 
<https://www.wired.com/2016/11/trumps-plan-american-infrastructure-get-people-spend-trillion-dollars/>
. In general,water rates tend to rise after privatization 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10000872396390443816804578002280926253750>. 

“It’s terrible news for Atlantic City,” said Susanna Bohme, associate research 
director at Corporate Accountability International. “Democratic control is 
being eroded overall, which we’ve seen in places like Flint, [Michigan] that 
disproportionately impacts low-income people and people of color, then we also 
know the private water industry is salivating at the idea of taking over the 
utility.

“Clearly, there is a problem with political interference on the part of the 
water industry that is working against the interests of everyday people in New 
Jersey.”

Atlantic City’s prized Municipal Utility Authority, with a widely cited 
<http://www.njspotlight.com/stories/16/09/26/atlantic-city-s-100m-gamble-to-keep-its-water-utility-in-public-hands/>
 estimated worth of $100m, is likely the most valuable asset now in state 
hands. The system would be a prize for corporate water companies, such as 
American Water or the French corporation Suez, both of whom own systems nearby.

“It’s an incredible responsibility, one that I’ve lost sleep over in the last 
few weeks,” said Timothy Cunningham, head of New Jersey’s local finance board, 
according to theAssociated Press 
<http://abcnews.go.com/US/wireStory/jersey-takes-debt-ridden-atlantic-city-government-43422036>
. The board voted 5-0 to takeover Atlantic City’s finances.

Previously, the city presented the local finance board with a long-shot 
five-year plan to stave off bankruptcy, which include selling a vacant former 
airstrip called Bader Field to the Municipal Utility Authority at a price of 
$100m.

American Water has especially deep ties in the region. 

Christie’s Economic Development Authority gave a $164m tax break 
<http://www.njbiz.com/article/20150609/NJBIZ01/150609804/american-water-works-gets-164-million-eda-award-for-camden-hq-project>
 to the company this summer. American Water’s tax break was worth more than 
double the high-stakes $72m loan that allowed New Jersey to eventually take 
over Atlantic City. Suez also got atax break for $5.5m 
<http://www.mysuezwater.com/news/suez-opens-new-north-american-corporate-headquarters-paramus-nj>
.

In recent years, the company has increasingly hired the lobbying firm Optimus 
Partners LLC, owned by Philip Norcross. Norcross is the brother of George 
Norcross, considered south Jersey’s most powerful unelected power broker.

American Water donated $50,000 to the Republican Governor’s Association, while 
Christie led the organization,WNYC reported 
<http://www.wnyc.org/story/nj-offers-tax-breaks-political-donor/>. Both Suez 
and American Water are also on the board ofChoose NJ 
<http://www.northjersey.com/news/christie-s-overseas-travel-funded-by-firms-that-do-business-with-n-j-1.1262316>
, an organization that financed Christie’s trips abroad.

During the time Christie was governor, the state also passed a law removing a 
state consumer advocacy board’s power to fight rate hikes, and removed the 
requirement for a public vote in the event towns wanted to privatize utilities.

Just 19% of New Jersey voters 
<http://www.nj.com/politics/index.ssf/2016/11/see_just_how_low_christies_approval_ratings_have_s.html>
 have a favorable opinion of Christie,after former senior aides to the governor 
were convicted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/04/bridgegate-trial-chris-christie-new-jersey-what-we-learned>
 in a politically motivated revenge scheme the closed down the George 
Washington bridge between New Jersey and New York.
 