
It was once known as the disease of the pharoahs, after evidence of its 
devastation was found in mummified bodies, but after all these centuries, the 
battle against schistosomiasis (also known as bilharzia) seems to be winnable. 
Largely thanks to the drive of Imperial's Professor Alan Fenwick, who directs 
theSchistosomiasis Control Initiative (SCI) <http://www3.imperial.ac.uk/schisto>
, millions of children have been dosed with a drug called praziquantel, which 
prevents infection caused by water-borne parasitic worms from turning into 
severe disease. Infected children can suffer anaemia, stunting and find it hard 
to learn. Some die.

The SCI has evolved since 2002 into a power house against all neglected 
tropical diseases, and its work is respected and paying off. Today the UK's 
department for international development is putting in Â£25 million over five 
years. The money, which will pay for 75 million treatment kits against 
intestinal worms and schistosomiasis, "will help ensure that within five years 
the serious consequences of schistosomiasis will be eliminated from Niger and 
Uganda", says DfID. It will expand the work nationally in Tanzania and Zambia 
and will help begin programmes in four more countries.

International development secretary Andrew Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-mitchell> is presenting this as a 
way to keep children in school - perhaps something that will trigger more 
popular support than the eradication of an obscure disease. It also works in 
terms of the "more bang for the buck" philosophy:

Education is one of the best routes out of poverty, yet millions of children 
are unable to fully benefit from attending school because they are weakened by 
these diseases.

British aid will provide up to 75 million lifesaving treatments - ensuring 
that ill health doesn't stop millions of the most vulnerable children getting a 
basic education and breaking the cycle of extreme poverty.


The grant also ticks other favourite boxes of Mr Mitchell. The SCI works 
strictly to "milestones", handing out more money or drugs only when the last 
target has been met. And the SCI is working with other donors, such as the US 
government, to make sure nobody duplicates anybody else's work.

Fenwick himself has always said this is an incredibly cost-effective 
intervention.

For less than 50p per child per year we can deliver treatments that will put a 
stop to these diseases which affect most developing countries. This represents 
excellent value for public investment in health.
 