


In New York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City, one force 
commands residents’ actions as powerfully as any sleet, snow or sun – the 
traffic.

Since 9 November, the locus of rippling slowdowns is in midtown Manhattan. 

“The first couple days, it was impossible,” said Jonathan, a construction 
superintendent, who did not want his surname used because he was not authorized 
to speak with the media. “All the storeowners were all blocked up.”

Since Donald Trump’s election win, his 68-story tower has become a 
fortress-like impediment on a major crosstown thoroughfare, forcing the city’s 
politicians, police, pedestrians and all things on wheels to adjust to the new 
normal.

Fifth Avenue, a shopping corridor which his tower fronts has been 
intermittently closed and police expect 56th Street to be shut for the near 
future. Media and police have been as ever-present as protesters.

“To the extent that you can avoid the immediate area around Trump Tower, that 
will make your own life easier, and everyone else’s life easier,” MayorBill de 
Blasio <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bill-de-blasio> said at a press 
conference with the New York police department, addressing the jam of barriers 
and blockades around Trump Tower, on 56th Street and Fifth Avenue.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Ftrump-tower-traffic-new-york-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e8ff358ba44bcb95507d25855b72534d5883252%2F0_0_775_620%2F775.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York%20City%20braces%20for%20more%20traffic%20around%20Trump%20Tower%20until%20inauguration&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Ftrump-tower-traffic-new-york-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20York%20City%20braces%20for%20more%20traffic%20around%20Trump%20Tower%20until%20inauguration&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Ftrump-tower-traffic-new-york-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e8ff358ba44bcb95507d25855b72534d5883252%2F0_0_775_620%2F775.jpg>
 Location of Trump Tower in Manhattan. Photograph: Mapbox, OpenStreetMap 
On the eve of Thanksgiving, it’s not just drivers hitting bottlenecks – 
pedestrians are screened before shopping along the avenue. Patrons of high-end 
stores such as Gucci and Tiffany & Co, both in the base of the tower, are
questioned before entering 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/17/nyregion/shopping-at-gucci-tiffanys-you-may-proceed-to-trump-tower.html>
. The tower has been the scene of severalimpromptu protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/11/trump-tower-protesters-new-york-security>
.

“I’m glad they are out in force, with all the terrorism and stuff,” said Janet 
Wilson, 46, who was visiting New York from Savannah, Georgia.

“There is an active threat,” said Garry Wilson, also 46, mentioning the 
Thanksgiving Day parade that travels down the next avenue to the west on 
Thursday.

“There is?” his 18-year-old daughter Caitie Wilson asked. Her father nodded, 
before they all headed into Tiffany & Co.

Drivers are always advised to avoid Manhattan during the holiday season, but 
De Blasio gave special emphasis to avoiding the area around Trump’s home.


“If people were to specifically avoid that area to the maximum extent 
possible, that’s going to help us to manage the situation as well as we can,” 
De Blasio said. He told drivers “to not bring cars into midtown Manhattan 
unless you absolutely have to”.

Mayor Bill de Blasio vows to defend New Yorkers from Trump presidency
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/21/bill-de-blasio-defend-new-york-trump-presidency>
Roughly 50 additional New York City police officers are on duty around the 
tower, directing traffic, observing as plainclothes and perched on roofs since 
the election, De Blasio said. All told, Trump’s protection could cost the city 
as much as $1m per day, according to a report byCNN Money 
<http://money.cnn.com/2016/11/21/news/protecting-donald-trump/index.html>.

“I think, in a weird way, they think he’s downstairs serving coffee,” said one 
officer, referring to the president-elect. He did not want to give his name 
because he was not authorized to speak to the media.

“If one were to place a location to create gridlock, this is as good as any in 
midtown Manhattan,” said Sam Schwartz, former New York City traffic 
commissioner, about Trump Tower. He now runs an engineering consulting company, 
Sam Schwartz Engineering.

 Schwartz explained a freeze is implemented whenever a president moves. “A 
freeze is exactly what it sounds like – nothing can move along the route except 
for the motorcade, and even a pedestrian could not get across the street.”


Schwartz recounted a time when, as traffic commissioner, a pedestrian was hit 
and killed during a freeze for President Ronald Reagan’s motorcade. The woman 
jumped boundaries, was hit by a car, and police “essentially pushed her to the 
side until the motorcade passed, just in case it was a ruse”, he said. “It’s 
that severe.”

In Trump’s situation, the security apparatus surrounding this building has 
shut down 56th Street, a major funnel for the Ed Koch Queensboro bridge, and 
Fifth Avenue intermittently, one of the city’s most traveled bus routes. And 
the prospect of a Trump presidency, which moves often between New York and 
Washington DC, presents plenty of opportunity for freezes.

Dear Melania Trump: please leave New York when your husband does | Dave Infante
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/22/melania-trump-new-york-city-security-trump-white-house>
In addition to normal trips Trump may decide to take into New York, his wife 
Melania and 10-year-old son Barron now expect tolive in New York 
<http://nypost.com/2016/11/20/melania-and-barron-trump-wont-be-moving-to-the-white-house/>
 at least temporarily.

Many of Trump’s typical haunts are in and around New York, such as the 21 Club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/21-club-new-york-trump-manhattan>
, where he made an unexpected outing to celebrate his election (leaving the 
press corps behind),Jean-Georges 
<http://tmagazine.blogs.nytimes.com/2008/07/01/on-the-qt-donald-trump/>, 
another Trump building tenant he cites as a favorite. Trump also enjoys fast 
food, such asMcDonald’s 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/food/trump-can-afford-to-eat-the-finest-food-instead-he-eats-the-most-generic/2016/03/24/63aedb18-eaf0-11e5-bc08-3e03a5b41910_story.html>
. He once famously ate atFamous Famiglia’s 
<http://www.eater.com/2011/6/1/6677635/sarah-palin-and-donald-trumps-pizza-party-at-famous-famiglia>
 near Times Square. Ivanka Trump now also receives Secret Service protection at 
one of her favorite restaurants,Lucali 
<http://guestofaguest.com/new-york/restaurants/donald-trumps-definitive-nyc-dining-guide&slide=7>
, in Brooklyn.

“The details of his future plans are unknown, but in the next 65 days, he will 
certainly be here very regularly,” De Blasio said, referring to the time before 
inauguration day. He then recalled a day when Pope Francis, the United Nations 
and President Obama all visited New York at once, a situation he said the city 
handled well. “The NYPD is up to the challenge, and the city of New York is up 
to the challenge.”

Jonathan, the construction superintendent, devised another way to avoid 
traffic – ride your bike. He drives into the city from Connecticut, leaves his 
truck at a garage on 38th Street and 8th Avenue, and cycles midtown “to avoid 
traffic”.
 