
Sherlock
 8.30pm, BBC1

Did you miss him? The clever man in the coat (played by Benedict Cumberbatch) 
returns with his crime-fighting family, now including John and Mary’s baby. But 
cute it’s not. Keep your eyes on the rug, because Moffat and Gatiss hold its 
edge, waiting for the right moment to yank it from under you. The Six Thatchers 
sees Sherl on the trail of a smashing bust (well, six of them). Who is going 
around the country, destroying effigies of Maggie Thatcher and why?Julia Raeside

Alan Rickman: Talking Pictures
 2.40pm, BBC2 

The death of Alan Rickman on 14 January 2016 robbed us of a brilliantly 
versatile actor every bit as comfortable in Chekhov plays as he was in 
Hollywood blockbusters. Many people think of him in connection with Die Hard 
and Harry Potter, but his career also encompassed Shakespeare and Trollope; 
Coward and Ibsen. This doc, featuring interviews recorded at various stages in 
his career, bears witness to a life well lived.Phil Harrison

World’s Strongest Man 2016
 7pm, Channel 5

Pun-toting podcaster James Richardson presents final-day action at the annual 
muscle hustle, from Botswana’s Chobe national park. With 10 contenders 
clamouring for the title, the final promises to determine the daddy of the 
Deadlift, the king of the Keg Toss and the premier of the Power Stairs. All 
broadcast on a day when much of the viewership can barely lift themselves from 
the sofa to grab a Quality Street.Mark Gibbings-Jones

Titanic: the New Evidence
 8pm, Channel 4

Why did RMS Titanic steam at full speed through an area where there were known 
to be icebergs? And why did the liner, still afloat two hours after its 
collision, suddenly start to sink so rapidly? According to journalist and 
Titanic expert Senan Molony, an answer to both these questions lies in a fire 
smouldering in the ship’s boiler rooms, a blaze allegedly concealed from its 
passengers. In a one-off documentary, he shares his thinking.Jonathan Wright

Mrs Brown’s Boys New Year Special
 10pm, BBC1

In a second interminable festive instalment of Mrs Brown’s Boys, Agnes’s 
grandson Bono is being bullied, so, erm, she decides to threaten to stab the 
bully in question at the school gates. Unsurprisingly, that inflames the 
situation, so a mediation session with the boy’s mother is called, prior to 
which Agnes gets stoned on Grandad Brown’s medical marijuana. As ever, the best 
bits are when the cast – mercifully – forget their lines.Ben Arnold

Hawaii Five-0
 9pm, Sky1

Season seven begins with a typically workaday case: a vigilante turns serial 
on serial killers, leaving chess pieces in the victims’ mouths. The most 
notable aspect of this episode, however, is the opening scene, in which 
McGarrett – recovering from last season’s operation – visits a chapel and 
strikes up a conversation with a ghostlike stranger who refers to having worked 
for the police. Could it be the original McGarrett, the late Jack Lord? Spooky.
David Stubbs

Ancient Secrets Day
From 6am, PBS America

Chill and learn with PBS’ thorough documentaries, mixing standard history-show 
fare (dramatic reconstructions, talking heads) with big experiments and 
restorations. Among them, Secrets Of The Parthenon – in which we join a team of 
architects preserving the Acropolis temple – digging for origin-story clues in 
Secrets Of Stonehenge, and Secrets Of The Colosseum, which winches a live wolf 
into the ruins of the amphitheatre.Jack Seale

Film choices
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fnew-years-days-best-tv-sherlock-worlds-strongest-man-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5516acb104e0bde7a81a7f4f650675b0ab75d6d%2F0_376_1818_1090%2F1818.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20Year's%20Day's%20best%20TV%3A%20Sherlock%3B%20World's%20Strongest%20Man%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fnew-years-days-best-tv-sherlock-worlds-strongest-man-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20Year%27s%20Day%27s%20best%20TV%3A%20Sherlock%3B%20World%27s%20Strongest%20Man%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fnew-years-days-best-tv-sherlock-worlds-strongest-man-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5516acb104e0bde7a81a7f4f650675b0ab75d6d%2F0_376_1818_1090%2F1818.jpg>
 Schmaltz of gigantic proportions … Spielberg’s family classic. Photograph: 
Allstar/Cinetext/UNIVERSAL 
ET: The Extra-Terrestrial (Steven Spielberg, 1982) 4.30pm, ITV
Spielberg’s consummate sci-fi fairytale about lonely earthboy Elliott (Henry 
Thomas), who befriends a cute stranded alien and helps him go home is schmaltz 
of galactic proportions. But it’s hard not to sob when ET’s little heart starts 
a-glowing again; or to cheer when he takes the young bikers on a flight to 
freedom. A perennial family treat.Paul Howlett

Mission: Impossible – Ghost Protocol (Brad Bird, 2011) 9pm, Channel 4
Tom Cruise pits his Impossible Missions team against terrorist Michael 
Nyqvist, who plans a nuclear armageddon. It’s the same old stuff, but Brad 
Bird, director of The Incredibles, excels in the action sequences, from the 
Russian prison breakout to a stunning scene 100 storeys up Dubai’s Burj Khalifa 
skyscraper. Simon Pegg’s nerdy techie Benji lightens the mood.PH

The Pirates! In an Adventure With Scientists! (Peter Lord, Jeff Newitt, 2012) 
11.10am, BBC1
Another wonderful fantasy from Aardman Animations, in which the Hugh 
Grant-voiced Pirate Captain sets sail to beat rivals Black Bellamy (Jeremy 
Piven) and Cutlass Liz (Salma Hayek) to the Pirate of the Year award. When he 
happens on Charles Darwin (David Tennant) aboard the Beagle, all sorts of 
landlubberly machinations threaten to sink his plan, in an irrepressibly funny 
and witty adventure.PH


Today’s best live sport 

Premier League Football: Watford v Tottenham Hotspur 12.30pm, Sky Sports 1 
From Vicarage Road. Followed by Arsenal v Crystal Palace.

 Racing: Cheltenham 1pm, ITV Coverage from the cards at Cheltenham and 
Musselburgh, as the sport returns to ITV for the first time since 1985.

World Darts Championship 7pm, Sky Sports 1 Day 14 of the contest from London, 
featuring the semi-finals.
 