
These days it’s rare to hear of new ways to give your finances a boost, but 
those keen to keep their cash out of the taxman’s grasp can take advantage of 
some major changes this year. From 6 April you will be able to place up to £15, 
240 in brand new financeIsas <https://www.theguardian.com/money/isas>. There is 
also a new savings allowance, and householders can also benefit from a massive 
rise in how much they can earn tax-free by taking in a lodger.

Innovative Isa 

The “innovative finance” Isa allows savers to slot peer-to-peer loans (dubbed 
P2P) into these tax-efficient wrappers. Through P2P you lend money to 
individuals or small businesses over the internet, with your savings matched to 
a suitable borrower. Instead of a bank paying interest on your cash, you earn 
it from the borrowers.

The biggest providers include Zopa <http://www.zopa.com/>, RateSetter 
<https://www.ratesetter.com/> and Funding Circle 
<https://www.fundingcircle.com/uk/>, and the sector is expected to grow. 
RateSetter is advertising rates up to 5.9%, and the longer you tie up your 
cash, the more interest you’ll earn. You can choose terms of one month to five 
years.

Jochem van Ast, an opera singer and office manager from north-west London, 
plans to use the new Isa and invest the full £15,240 in April. He began 
investing in P2P five years ago, and has 45% of his savings in this sector. “I 
started by dipping my toe in and putting small sums in to see if I was 
comfortable and confident with the area,” he said. He began with Zopa but is 
currently investing with RateSetter. “I like that it’s real and tangible - 
lending to individuals - and now that I can shield my money from the taxman and 
avoid having to list this investment on my tax return, all the better.” Van Ast 
says he has typically earned around 6.1% on his cash. “I’ve chosen a five-year 
term as this offers the best rate, and the money is for the long-term.”

However, beware of potential pitfalls: there is no cover from the Financial 
Services Compensation Scheme (FSCS), although P2P lenders have their own 
safeguards in place. Sometimes borrowers default on loans, but both RateSetter 
and Zopa have a pot of money to cover such losses.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fnew-year-maximise-money-isas-peer-to-peer-savings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F701fdf347f4d16329533a4385e96c35d86da99a9%2F0_182_4070_2442%2F4070.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20year%20brings%20new%20ways%20you%20can%20maximise%20your%20money&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fnew-year-maximise-money-isas-peer-to-peer-savings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20year%20brings%20new%20ways%20you%20can%20maximise%20your%20money&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fnew-year-maximise-money-isas-peer-to-peer-savings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F701fdf347f4d16329533a4385e96c35d86da99a9%2F0_182_4070_2442%2F4070.jpg>
 Jochem Van Ast enjoys the ‘tangible’ aspect of peer-to-peer lending – plus the 
fact that, from Aoril, his savings can go into an Isa Photograph: Sophia Evans 
for the Observer 
Property perks

If you’ve got one or more spare rooms in your home, you could rake in tax-free 
cash from renting these out. At the moment, anyone who rents out a room on 
which the rental income exceeds £4,250 a year must pay tax on the amount above 
this, but from April the tax-free allowance rises to £7,500 – the first time 
the threshold has moved since 1997. The limit is the same even if you let the 
room for less than a year.

To qualify, you must live in the property with the tenant for at least part of 
the time, and it must be your “principal place of residence”, which essentially 
means it’s your main home.

The move will mean the majority of lodger landlords will avoid paying tax 
altogether. Lodger landlords earn on average £8,335 a year in London, and 
£6,071 across the rest of the UK, according to house-sharing websiteSpareRoom 
<https://www.spareroom.co.uk/>.

If your rental income goes over that amount you’ll have to fill in a tax 
return. And there’s a fine line between taking in occasional B&B guests and 
running a business, so speak to an accountant if you are unclear about the tax 
rules and are regularly taking in paying guests.

Incentivising homeowners to let their spare rooms will increase the supply and 
reduce pressure on rents

It’s not just homeowners who can benefit from this: people renting a property 
can sublet and take advantage of rent-a-room tax benefits – although tenants 
need to check that their lease allows them to take in lodgers.

Matt Hutchinson, director of SpareRoom, says: “Rents have more than doubled 
since 1997 so an update was long overdue. It’s great news for renters. There’s 
a huge shortage of affordable housing in the UK, leading to a massive imbalance 
between supply at demand – and driving rent prices beyond the reach of many 
working people. Incentivising homeowners to let their spare rooms will increase 
the supply and reduce pressure on rents.

“It’s also great for homeowners. When interest rates finally go up a regular 
tax-free income from their empty rooms could make a big difference.”

Savings boost 

A revolution in the savings world will see all cash accounts pay interest 
without tax deducted, and the introduction of a new personal savings allowance. 
“This is in addition to the existing personal income tax allowance,” says Danny 
Cox from financial advisersHargreaves Lansdown <http://www.hl.co.uk/investing>. 
At present, unless your total income is lessthan £15,600 a year, you pay 
interest on your savings income at your personal rate. But from 6 April savers 
gain a tax-free allowance of £1,000 on the interest earned on their cash, 
falling to £500 for higher-rate taxpayers. So you can earn this much interest 
before handing over a penny to the taxman, with estimates that the change will 
see 95% of people paying no tax at all on their savings.

For a basic-rate taxpayer to hit their allowance limit they would need a 
£40,000 savings pot earning 2.5%, according to Andrew Hagger, financial expert 
atMoneyComms <http://moneycomms.co.uk/>. This allowance is on top of the 
£15,240 that every adult can save into a cash Isa, where interest is paid 
tax-free. The change is a big boost for smaller savers. “Maybe the government 
felt it had to do something to help those with smaller sums put away, as 
they’ve drawn the short straw for years,” says Hagger. “With this allowance 
savers immediately get a 20% boost in interest. For people with larger savings 
balances Isas will remain a more attractive option.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fnew-year-maximise-money-isas-peer-to-peer-savings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb58ab8013fd5ab1dc6a62f75a85a0c8a56a5e4f9%2F24_127_2808_1686%2F2808.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20year%20brings%20new%20ways%20you%20can%20maximise%20your%20money&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fnew-year-maximise-money-isas-peer-to-peer-savings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20year%20brings%20new%20ways%20you%20can%20maximise%20your%20money&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fnew-year-maximise-money-isas-peer-to-peer-savings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb58ab8013fd5ab1dc6a62f75a85a0c8a56a5e4f9%2F24_127_2808_1686%2F2808.jpg>
 All cash accounts will pay interest without tax deducted. Photograph: Gareth 
Fuller/PA 
Martin Bamford, from financial adviser Informed Choice <http://www.icfp.co.uk/>
, says: “We are still waiting for some of the final details about the specific 
assets covered by the new allowance, although it appears it will cover interest 
from P2P lending and possibly also interest from corporate bonds and gilts.”

He adds: “It is unlikely to make cash Isas obsolete as for most savers it will 
still make sense to use your Isa allowance first, and then your personal 
savings allowance. Your Isa allowance is cumulative and can protect a 
significant-sized savings pot from tax in the future, whereas the personal 
savings allowance is an annual benefit which becomes less valuable when 
interest rates rise in the future. Higher and additional rate taxpayers in 
particular will definitely want to make best use of their Isa allowances. Cash 
Isas also have the distinct advantage of being free of inheritance tax for 
married couples and civil partners.”

ISA FLEXIBILITY

From April savers can withdraw cash from an Isa and put it back in again 
without using up their annual allowance. This means your Isa will work in 
practically the same way as an ordinary savings account. Danny Cox from 
advisers Hargreaves Lansdown says: “This allows savers the opportunity to use 
their Isa savings to cover short-term needs, but replace them in time to retain 
the tax benefits. Investors should use the increased transfer flexibility to 
ensure they have the right mix of Isa savings and investments. Stocks and 
shares Isa can now be transferred to cash Isas, giving savers and investors the 
full flexibility to move their Isa savings into the account which suits them 
best.”

Andrew Hagger from MoneyComms adds: “It’s as if the government is generally 
trying to simplify sIavings to take away some of the complexity, and encourage 
people to put money away.”
 