
Pleased To Meet You

It specialises in gin cocktails and looks like a colonial-era country club, 
but Pleased To Meet You (PTMY) is one of Newcastle's foremost hotspots for 
craft beers. Fifteen craft keg and six cask pumps run the gamut of cutting-edge 
breweries from Flying Dog to Thornbridge, with local outfits, such asTyne Bank 
<http://www.tynebankbrewery.co.uk/>, Mordue <http://www.morduebrewery.com/> and 
Anarchy Brewing <http://www.anarchybrewco.com/> well represented (look out for 
the latter's sherbety, gooseberry-sharp Citra Star). A vast bottled beer list 
reads like a Who's Who of new-wave UK microbreweries:Kernel 
<http://www.thekernelbrewery.com/>, Partizan <http://www.partizanbrewing.co.uk/>
,Red Willow <http://www.redwillowbrewery.com/>, Wild Beer 
<http://wildbeerco.com/> but includes clear, intelligent definitions of obscure 
beer styles for the novice drinker. Naturally, the price of some of the keg and 
rarer bottled beers will make your eyes water, as much as your mouth. PTMY has 
two sister bars in Newcastle:Redhouse <http://www.theredhousencl.co.uk/> and 
Lady Grey's <http://www.ladygreys.co.uk/home/>, both of which provide plenty of 
boozy entertainment for beer snobs.
• 41-45 High Bridge, 0191 340 5137, ptmy-newcastle.co.uk 
<http://ptmy-newcastle.co.uk/>. Open daily 11am-1am, pint from £3.10

Bridge Tavern
 The Bridge Tavern, Newcastle 
Under the stanchions of the Tyne bridge, this smart brewpub feels part 
gentlemen's club, part New York beer bar. Obviously, the ales brewed in the 
pub's 360-pint kit – the gleaming copper tuns are visible at one end of the 
room – are the main attraction. A sample half of Gold Dust (£1.70, a sweet, 
melon-tinged, crisply bitter pale ale, made with Pacific Gem hops) was A1. 
Outside of its house beers, the Tavern's 10 cask pumps feature a UK-wide 
selection of new-wave breweries, fromBristol Beer Factory 
<http://www.bristolbeerfactory.co.uk/> to Manchester's Blackjack 
<http://www.blackjackbeersltd.co.uk/brewery>. It also carries a few keg beers 
and a less interesting selection of bottled world beers. Food is as important 
as ale here, and the menu includes excellent beer snacks, such as pig's head 
croquettes with a sharp, caper-spiked mayo (£3). On a freezing day, all of it – 
food, good beer, warmth from the newly-stoked woodburner – was very welcome.
• 7 Akenside Hill, 0191 261 9966, thebridgetavern.com 
<http://www.thebridgetavern.com/>. Open Mon-Thurs midday-midnight, Fri-Sat 
midday-1am, Sun midday-11pm, pint from £3.20

The Cluny
 The Cluny bar, Newcastle 
The Head of Steam group owns several top-ranking ale houses in Newcastle, 
including the Cluny. There's the group's eponymous bar (The Head of Steam 
<http://www.theheadofsteam.co.uk/newcastle-outlets-the-head-of-steam/>) that 
you'll find opposite the train station andTilley's Bar 
<http://www.theheadofsteam.co.uk/newcastle-outlets-tilleys-bar-location-and-about-u/>
 on Westgate Road, whose 150-strong bottled beer menu is, reputedly, a real 
page-turner. However, theHead of Steam pubs were recently sold to Camerons 
Brewery 
<http://www.chroniclelive.co.uk/news/north-east-news/head-steam-pub-chain-sold-6369602>
, a big regional pub company and brewer, based in Hartlepool. Camerons is 
promising that there will be no radical changes at the Head of Steam sites. 
Apparently, buying them is part of its strategy to acquire a larger estate of 
pubs that will focus on selling quality cask ales and craft beers. We will have 
to wait to see how that pans out but, judging by the wishy-washy Cameron's IPA 
(half, £1.45) that I tasted in the Cluny, it will have to seriously up its game 
if it hopes that its beers are going to be taken seriously in establishments 
like this.

Tucked away amid the creative industries that have sprung up in the Ouseburn 
valley, the boho Cluny – also a live music, comedy and theatre venue – is a bit 
of a bind to get to from town, particularly on foot. But it is worth the 
effort. It serves seven cask ales and a raft of keg and bottled craft beers, 
many of them from US breweries (for instance,Fordham 
<http://www.fordhambeers.co.uk/>, Rogue <http://rogue.com/>, Old Dominion), 
which have yet to gain widespread exposure in the UK. Look out, also, for 
frequent in-house beer festivals, which have previously included a Black Sheep 
Week and a Northern Irish beer showcase.
• 36 Lime Street, Ouseburn, 0191 230 4474, thecluny.com 
<http://www.thecluny.com/>. Open Mon-Thurs 11.30am-11pm, Fri 11.30am-midnight, 
Sat midday-midnight, Sun midday-10.30pm, pint from £2.85

Alvinos
 Alvinos, Newcastle 
If you want twinkling, minimal techno and a game of pinball with your pint 
(and who doesn't?), then this late-night Pilgrim Street bar will hit the spot. 
It is big on cocktails, but also committed to craft beer in the shape of 
draught Brooklyn lager; a guest keg pump that features hip British micros such 
asMagic Rock <http://www.magicrockbrewing.com/> and Camden Town 
<http://www.camdentownbrewery.com/>; and a small, evolving range of bottles and 
cans that features transatlantic trendsetters as geographically diverse asSan 
Francisco's Anchor Steam <http://www.anchorbrewing.com/> and Buxton Brewery 
<http://www.buxtonbrewery.co.uk/>. A half of Beavertown's American pale ale, 
Gamma Ray, was, as ever, brilliant – full of tropical fruit flavours, 
unapologetically bitter – and very bloody expensive (£2.80). Erdinger and 
Timmermans fruit beers are also available on draught.
• 88 Pilgrim Street, 0191 261 5656, alvinosbar.co.uk 
<http://www.alvinosbar.co.uk/>. Open Mon-Tues 10am-midnight, Wed-Thurs 
10am-1am, Fri-Sat 10am-2am, Sun 5pm-midnight, pint from £3.80

Bacchus

Inspired by the grand ocean liners that were once built in Newcastle's 
shipyards, Bacchus aims for 1930s art-deco glamour but, ultimately, looks a bit 
naff. Its beer range, however (16 cask and craft keg lines, as well as treats 
such as Budvar's yeast beer andLa Chouffe <http://www.achouffe.be/en>), is bang 
up to date. The bottled menu is packed with interesting, on-trend ales, be it 
five choices from a mainstay like Brooklyn Brewery, or beers from the 
lesser-spotted Dutch outfit, Emelisse, or Norwegian Haand. If you want to 
explore all this in depth, best bring your credit card: £4.50 for a half of the 
Brodie-Mikkeller collaboration, Big Mofo Stout, is an example of how crazy the 
prices can get. Not that you have to spend that much; Anarchy's pale and 
invigoratingly bitter Blonde Star was a very refreshing £2.85 a pint.

Bacchus is part of the Sir John Fitzgerald group, which owns a couple of other 
notable Newcastle pubs. The Grade II-listedCrown Posada 
<http://www.crownposadanewcastle.co.uk/> is a historic local landmark, whose 
cask-ale range focuses on north-east breweries. AtBodega 
<http://thebodeganewcastle.co.uk/>, one of its many pumps is set aside for 
special and/or limited beers from Peterborough's excellentOakham Ales 
<http://www.oakhamales.com/>.
• 42-48 High Bridge, 0191 261 1008, thebacchusnewcastle.co.uk 
<http://www.thebacchusnewcastle.co.uk/>. Open Mon-Sat 11.30am-midnight, Sun 
midday-11pm, pint from £2.85

The Tyne Bar
 The Tyne Bar, Newcastle 
Established in 2000, Northumberland brewery Wylam 
<http://www.wylambrewery.co.uk/> is light on its feet. Its range of 
established, traditional English bitters please an older crowd while, in beers 
such as its new Jakehead IPA, it warmly embraces the big, punchy flavours, 
heavy-hopping and keg dispense that the craft beer scene has ushered in. Bar/ 
live music venue the Tyne is Wylam's Newcastle "brewery tap". It also serves 
two Samuel Smith lagers and Blue Moon wheat beer on draught. Prices are keen, 
the vibe easy-going and, on cask, Wylam's Tyne Craft pale ale was in fine form. 
Its caramel body gives way to exotic fruit flavours and it tops-out with a 
satisfying bitterness.
• Maling Street, 0191 265 2550, thetyne.com <http://www.thetyne.com/>. Open 
Mon-Thurs midday-11pm, Fri-Sat midday-midnight, Sun midday-10.30pm, pint from 
£2.85

The Trent

This is a brewpub that, unfortunately, was out of its own Leazes Lane Brewery 
beers, on this visit. But no fear, this student-friendly bar (arty murals on 
the stairs, pool table on the first floor, decent music), has five cask pumps 
that rotate beers from local breweries, many of these newer, smaller outfits 
such asFirebrick <http://firebrickbrewery.com/>, Black Hill 
<http://www.blackhillbrewery.com/> and Three Kings 
<http://www.threekingsbrewery.co.uk/>. The friendly staff are at the ready with 
tasters and recommendations, and cash-strapped beer-lovers note: at the time of 
writing, cask beers are £2 a pint, 8pm-9pm daily, and just £1 a pint on the 
first Sunday of each month. Newcastle United's St James' Park looms over the 
streets opposite and, obviously, the Trent is hammered on match days.
• 1-2 Leazes Lane, 0191 261 2154, facebook.com/TheTrent1861 
<https://www.facebook.com/TheTrent1861>. Open Mon-Sat 1pm-11pm, Sun 6pm-11pm, 
pint from £2.90

The Cumberland Arms

The Cumberland Arms caters to several generations of ale drinkers with, 
seemingly, effortless ease. With its stained-glass windows, open fires and 
back-room folk nights, it is sure to please traditionalists. Yet, its craft keg 
beers and upstairs gig space ensure that it is down with "the kids". Or, 
certainly, thirtysomething blokes who like guitar bands and hoppy beers. Its 
seven cask pumps tend to feature regional breweries (for example,Hadrian & 
Border <http://www.hadrian-border-brewery.co.uk/>, Allendale 
<http://www.allendalebrewery.com/>, Big Lamp <http://biglampbrewers.co.uk/>, 
Jarrow <http://www.jarrowbrewery.co.uk/>), while its keg lines are devoted to 
taste-making breweries from further afield, such asMoor <http://moorbeer.co.uk/>
, Magic Rock and Berkshire'sSiren <http://www.sirencraftbrew.com/>. As if that 
wasn't enough, behind the Cumberland Arms, a shipping container is being 
converted into a microbrewery, which will produce contemporary keg and bottled 
beers for the pub. It also has an excellent real cider selection; it is 
dog-friendly; and, in summer, it is a great place to watch the sun set. The pub 
even provides "snugglepacks", for when it gets a bit chilly out in the beer 
garden. How's that for service?
• James Place Street, Ouseburn, 0191 265 6151, thecumberlandarms.co.uk 
<http://www.thecumberlandarms.co.uk/>. Open Mon, Tues, Thurs 3pm-11pm, Wed and 
Fri 3pm-midnight, Sat midday-midnight, Sun midday-11pm, pint from £2.80

Free Trade Inn
 The Free Trade Inn, Newcastle 
How could you not love a pub which, on its Facebook page, describes itself as 
"an absolute dump"? True, it's pretty bare bones in here: distressed wood, 
peeling walls, several layers of graffiti in the toilets, but the kind of 
prissy drinkers who might be put off by that will miss out on fine views down 
the Tyne; tasty pies from theAmble Butcher 
<http://www.theamblebutcher.co.uk/home.html> (from £2.50); and – certainly on 
the Friday afternoon that I visited – a welcome, crunching soundtrack of 
hard-hitting hip-hop. The pub's 13 beer pumps (it is big on real cider, too) 
are split between keg and cask, and among the familiar breweries listed, you 
may well find a few that you don't recognise. Crewe'sOff Beat 
<http://www.offbeatbrewery.com/>, East Sussex brewery, Burning Sky 
<http://www.burningskybeer.com/>, and Kelso's Tempest 
<http://www.tempestbrewco.com/> were all new names to me. The Free Trade hosts 
"tap takeovers" by individual breweries and also mini-beer festivals, such as 
its London event (27 February-2 March), which will feature all the capital's 
key micros, includingRedchurch <https://theredchurchbrewery.com/>, Pressure Drop
 <http://pressuredropbrewing.co.uk/>, Weird Beard <http://weirdbeardbrewco.com/>
 et al.
• St Lawrence Road, Ouseburn valley, 0191 265 5764, 
facebook.com/TheFreeTradeInn <https://www.facebook.com/TheFreeTradeInn>. Open 
Mon-Thurs, Sun 11am-11pm, Fri-Sat 11am-midnight, pint from £3.10

The Broad Chare
 Photograph: The Broad Chare 
Oddly, the cask board at this handsome gastropub lists 10 beers. At a glance, 
on a busy Friday lunch time, not noticing that some are marked "on" and some 
not, you might assume that all of them are available. In fact, only four are 
served at one time. Any disappointment will evaporate the moment you open the 
bottled-beer menu, an idiosyncratic tome that mixes many groundbreaking or 
unusual beers – barrel-aged stout from Mikkeller; various unfiltered Bernard 
lagers; Brooklyn's 750ml sharing "Local" beers; bottles from relatively obscure 
breweries, such as Founder's, and Italian companyGjulia 
<http://birragjulia.com/en/> – with enduring favourites, such as Black Sheep, 
Worthington's White Shield and, of course, Newcastle Brown Ale. In the same 
way, the cask list nods to tradition (Bass, Taylor's Landlord), while 
showcasing new names such asLate Knights <http://www.lateknightsbrewery.co.uk/> 
and its promising, bittersweet Wormcatcher IPA (half, £1.75). Owned by 
Newcastle's best known chef, Terry Laybourne, food is the primary draw at the 
Broad Chare but the bar area is very much a drinking space. Walking back up 
into town from the Tyne quayside, dedicated hop-heads may also want to pop into
Brewdog <http://www.brewdog.com/bars/newcastle> on Dean Street.
• 25 Broad Chare, 0191 211 2144, thebroadchare.co.uk 
<http://www.thebroadchare.co.uk/>. Open daily 11am-11pm, pint from £3.40

Train travel between Manchester and Newcastle was provided by First 
TransPennine Express (tpexpress.co.uk <https://www.tpexpress.co.uk/>). Thanks 
to Alastair Gilmour, editor ofCheers North East 
<http://www.cheersnortheast.co.uk/>, for various tips and pointers. Gilmour 
also organises bespoke beer tours of the region and beyond, email:
alastair@cheersnortheast.co.uk <mailto: alastair@cheersnortheast.co.uk>. For 
Newcastle visitor information, seenewcastlegateshead.com 
<http://www.newcastlegateshead.com/> 
 