
For NFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> teams, the playoffs represent 
the culmination of months of hard graft. But here on the Guardian sport blog, 
they simply represent a fresh start. Our regular season Pick Six contest is at 
an end, but now it is time for the Pick the Playoffs to begin.

First, though, we must crown our regular season champion. In past years, this 
has often been a close-run thing, but this time it was not at all;castigers has 
led the way for weeks and held off one final late push from the chasing pack to 
finish two points clear in first place. Let’s have everyone on their feet to 
whoop, holler, and applaud. And maybe leave a nice congratulatory message in 
the comments section below.

And then, when you’re done there, you can get on with making your picks for 
the Wild Card round. I’ll post the final Pick Six standings down there shortly 
as well.

Oakland Raiders @ Houston Texans (Saturday 4.35pm ET/9.35pm GMT)

A rookie quarterback, making his starting debut in a road playoff game against 
the stingiest defense in the league. What could possibly go wrong? The Raiders 
confirmed on Wednesday that fourth-round pick Connor Cook would be behind 
center for their visit to Houston, with both of the team’s top two 
signal-callers – Derek Carr and Matt McGloin – out injured.

Cook did show some promise after entering week 17’s game against Denver off 
the bench, and could turn out to be a more effective player than Brock Osweiler 
– himself only back in the Texans’ starting lineup because the man who replaced 
him, Tom Savage, is out with a concussion. But Houston should at least be able 
to run the ball against an Oakland defense that made Justin Forsett look like 
Terrell Davis last weekend. I doubt the Raiders will enjoy similar success 
against opponents who give up fewer than 100 yards per game on the ground.

Texans to win

Detroit Lions @ Seattle Seahawks (Saturday 8.15pm ET/Sunday 1.15am GMT)

You know the outlook must be bleak when even your hometown media 
<http://(http://www.freep.com/story/sports/nfl/lions/2017/01/02/detroit-lions-no-chance-seahawks/96076824/>
 see no chance of a victory. The Detroit Free Press put the Lions’ chances of 
beating Seattle at less than 0.01%, and that is hardly the most damning figure 
available. Jim Caldwell’s team are 0-5 against opponents who made the playoffs 
this season, 0-4 in outdoor games and 0-3 since Matthew Stafford dislocated his 
middle finger.

This is not the most impressive version of the Seahawks that we have seen in 
recent years, with a 3-3 record over the past six weeks and an offense that has 
been held under 10 points on three separate occasions. An injury to Earl Thomas 
has significantly diminished their defense, even if he does say so himself.
Earl Thomas (@Earl_Thomas) 
Of course it would be different.. we would have a first round bye I guarantee 
you that.https://t.co/mTS3ITnw01 <https://t.co/mTS3ITnw01>
 <https://twitter.com/Earl_Thomas/status/816052216687562753> January 2, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/Earl_Thomas/status/816052216687562753> 
But they have never lost a home playoff game with Russell Wilson at 
quarterback. I cannot envisage this being the first.

Seahawks to win

Miami Dolphins @ Pittsburgh Steelers (Sunday 1.05pm ET/6.05pm GMT)

The oddsmakers in Las Vegas have this pegged as the most uneven matchup of 
Wild Card weekend – with Pittsburgh a 10-point favourite. I’m not convinced the 
gulf will be that wide – Miami did beat these same opponents in week six, after 
all – but I’m not bold enough to call for an upset here, either.

Many things have changed since that October matchup. The Dolphins have lost 
center Mike Pouncey – who helped pave the way for Jay Ajayi’s 204-yard day – as 
well as safeties Reshad Jones and Isa Abdul-Quddus – each of whom intercepted 
Ben Roethlisberger – to season-ending injuries. At time of writing it remains 
unclear whether their own starting quarterback, Ryan Tannehill, will be ready 
to go. The Steelers, by contrast, are just about as healthy as they have been 
all season.

Steelers to win

New York Giants @ Green Bay Packers (Sunday 4.40pm ET/9.40pm GMT)

In both 2007-08 and 2011-12, the Giants crept into the postseason as unfancied 
underdogs but finished up by upsetting heavily-favoured New England teams in 
the Super Bowl. On each occasion, their path to a title went through Green Bay. 
With the Patriots once again looking unstoppable in the AFC, plenty of 
commentators have already pointed to this matchup and asked whether the same 
story could play out a third time.

It is far from unthinkable. The Packers’ secondary is a mess, with Quinten 
Collins entering into the NFL’s concussion protocol and fellow cornerback 
Makinton Dorleant placed on injured reserve following injuries sustained in the 
week 17 win over Detroit. They are running out of bodies to cover Odell Beckham 
Jr with, but even if the Giants can exploit these weaknesses, can they truly 
keep up with Aaron Rodgers? He has now thrown for 15 scores and no 
interceptions over the past six games. The only teams that have beaten Green 
Bay since week three have all put at least 30 points on the board.

Packers to win
 