
Sometimes, you just need to punch adversity in the face. That’s what Geno 
Smith has done,in the too-perfect words of Brandon Marshall 
<http://www.espn.com/blog/new-york/jets/post/_/id/64087/jets-brandon-marshall-says-geno-smith-punched-adversity-in-the-face>
, and it’s also what participants in our Pick Six contest did, roaring back 
from a frustrating fortnight with some monster scores in week six.

A whopping 15 people called all six games correctly, so let’s have a toast to 
each and every one ofamwill, BaffledBySaussey, Cameldancer, carloscontrole, 
cockfarmer, GoCards, Hobble, ID1704972, James Selwood, Lekeg, Mark Lewis, mercat
,Omre94, pauln1, and Uma Blue. I’ll have the overall scores up in the comments 
section shortly, but until then, here are this week’s games:

New York Giants @ Los Angeles Rams (Sunday 9.30am ET/2.30pm BST)

The last time the Rams came to London, they wound up losing 45-7 to New 
England. That remains the most lopsided game in the 10-year history of the 
NFL’s International Series. Their opposition might look a little less daunting 
this time around, but the combination of an eight-hour time difference from Los 
Angeles and an early kickoff (it’ll be 6.30am in California when this game 
begins) presents a whole different set of challenges. Perhaps Jeff Fisher’s 
decision to bring his team over early in the week will allow players to fully 
adjust. But even if they do, can we trust Case Keenum – coming off an 
admittedly impressive performance against Detroit – to keep up with Eli Manning 
now that Odell Beckham Jr has woken up?  Giants to win

Roger Goodell on NFL TV ratings slump: 'We don't think we've lost viewers'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/19/roger-goodell-tv-ratings-slump-viers>
Minnesota Vikings @ Philadelphia Eagles (Sunday 1pm ET/6pm BST)

Sam Bradford’s trade to the Vikings looks like one of those rare examples of a 
deal that worked out for everyone. He has helped Minnesota to become 2016’s 
last undefeated team, whilst the Eagles can look forward to building an even 
stronger supporting cast for the impressive Carson Wentz in next year’s draft. 
The one concern I have with Philadelphia right now relates to the offensive 
line. Halapoulivaati Vaita struggled mightily at right tackle after stepping in 
for the suspended Lane Johnson last week. He could be in for a long day against 
a defense that has compiled 19 sacks in five games.  Vikings to win

Indianapolis Colts @ Tennessee Titans (Sunday 1pm ET/6pm BST)

Five long years have passed since Tennessee last beat Indy. That was back in 
the dark days that went between Peyton Manning’s neck injury and the drafting 
of Andrew Luck. But could this be the occasion when that run comes to an end? I 
like DeMarco Murray’s chances of having a strong day against the league’s 
25th-ranked rush defense, and this has the makings of yet another painful 
afternoon for Luck. The most sacked quarterback in the league is up against a 
defense that has got to the opposing passer six times in each of its past two 
games.  Titans to win

Baltimore Ravens @ New York Jets (Sunday 1pm ET/6pm BST)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fnfl-weekend-preview-cardinals-to-beat-the-seahawks-despite-palmers-struggles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96089fe1686889854ffe392206934e42d4fa27fc%2F0_91_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=NFL%20weekend%20preview%3A%20Cardinals%20to%20beat%20the%20Seahawks%20despite%20Palmer's%20struggles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fnfl-weekend-preview-cardinals-to-beat-the-seahawks-despite-palmers-struggles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=NFL%20weekend%20preview%3A%20Cardinals%20to%20beat%20the%20Seahawks%20despite%20Palmer%27s%20struggles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fnfl-weekend-preview-cardinals-to-beat-the-seahawks-despite-palmers-struggles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96089fe1686889854ffe392206934e42d4fa27fc%2F0_91_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Geno Smith returns as the Jets starter against the Ravens. Photograph: Norm 
Hall/Getty Images 
Could we see two quarterbacks making their first starts of the season at 
MetLife Stadium?Geno Smith’s promotion for the Jets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/19/geno-smith-ryan-fitzpatrick-jets-nfl>
 has divided opinion in New York, but the Ravens might be obliged to make a 
change of their own after Joe Flacco missed practice on Wednesday and Thursday 
with a sore shoulder. Ryan Mallett started two games for Baltimore last season 
after joining the team in December, and even helped them to a win over the 
Steelers, but his performance overall was underwhelming. Such uncertainty at 
the most important position on the field has me tilting the Jets’ way, hard 
though it is to feel good about backing Geno.Jets to win

Tampa Bay Buccaneers @ San Francisco 49ers (Sunday 4.25pm ET/9.25pm BST)

Carlos Hyde’s productivity in the running game was just about the one thing 
San Francisco had going for them – until he showed up at practice this week 
with his arm in a sling. He will miss out on what could have been a favourable 
matchup against a Tampa Bay team that has been playing without three starting 
defensive linemen. Gerald McCoy may return on Sunday, but Robert Ayers and 
Clinton McDonald are unlikely to join him. Perhaps Colin Kaepernick will find 
opportunities to run against their replacements, but I am less convinced that 
Hyde’s replacement, Mike Davis, can do the same. The Bucs have lost both of 
their own top two tailbacks, but Jacquizz Rodgers showed last week that he can 
keep things ticking over at a modest clip. Against a 49ers defense that has 
surrendered more than 100 rushing yards to five different players in as many 
games, that might be good enough.Buccaneers to win

Seattle Seahawks @ Arizona Cardinals (Sunday 8.30pm ET/Monday 1.30am BST) 

The Cardinals have finally clawed their way back to .500 after an almost 
catastrophic start to the season. But the schedule does not get any easier from 
here, with road games against the Panthers (OK, that one’s not looking quite so 
daunting as it once did), Vikings and Falcons in the next month. Winning this 
game, at home, feels imperative, but recent history is against them. The 
Seahawks have come out on top in all of their last three visits to Arizona, and 
by a combined margin of 105-34. Of even greater concern is the erratic form of 
Carson Palmer, who has struggled to hit the deep ball and been picked off five 
times in as many starts. But there has been a hint of an offensive shift from 
Bruce Arians in the last fortnight, towards shorter passes and heavier reliance 
on the run. The Seahawks defend the latter as well as anyone, but David Johnson 
does not look like an easy man to slow down right now.Cardinals to win
 