
Every pregnant woman and new mother will in future get specialist NHS help for 
psychological problems related to childbirth, as part of whatDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> will call a “revolution” in 
Britain’s treatment of, and willingness to discuss, mental illness.

The prime minister will pledge on Monday to end the postcode lottery under 
which three-quarters of the 40,000 women a year who experience conditions such 
as postnatal depression do not receive vital treatment intended to keep 
families together, protect babies and reduce the risk of maternal suicide.

The prime minister will also urge Britain to have a much more honest national 
debate about mental illness and stop sufferers feeling ashamed.

“Mental illness isn’t contagious. There’s nothing to be frightened of,” 
Cameron will say in a major speech on vulnerable groups and tackling poverty. 
“As a country, we need to be far more mature about this. Less hushed tones, 
less whispering; more frank and open discussion.

“We need to take away that shame, that embarrassment, let people know that 
they’re not in this alone, that when the clouds descend, they don’t have to 
suffer silently. I want us to be able to say to anyone who is struggling, ‘talk 
to someone, ask your doctor for help and we will always be there to support 
you’.”

Mothers of premature babies also need care – as I know too well | Joanna 
Moorhead
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/19/mothers-premature-babies-postnatal-depression-mental-health>
Pledging a huge expansion of services to tackle the huge unmet need in 
maternal mental health, Simon Stevens, chief executive ofNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> England, told the Guardian: “At the 
moment about 40,000 women who are pregnant or within the first year of having 
their baby have a severe mental health problem. But of those 40,000 only about 
10,000 are at the moment getting access to specialist perinatal mental health 
services. Three out of four are missing out. But by the end of the decade we 
are going to make that a universal offer, so all 40,000 will get access to a 
local specialist team.”

Guaranteeing care for every mother who needs it by 2020 will tackle what the 
Maternal Mental Health Alliance <http://maternalmentalhealthalliance.org.uk/> – 
a coalition of more than 60 organisations that work on the issue – claims are 
“shocking gaps” in “patchy” NHS maternal mental health services.

“If untreated, these perinatal mental illnesses can have a devastating impact 
on the women affected and their families. In the UK, mental health in pregnant 
and postnatal women often goes unrecognised, undiagnosed and untreated,” it 
claims.

Urgent action is needed on maternal mental illness because “if untreated this 
can turn into a lifelong illness, proven to increase the likelihood of poor 
outcomes to the mother or new baby”, Cameron will say.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-cameron-revolution-maternal-mental-health%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27e76aae234c7f7caaf6520033758703e75257f9%2F0_375_5612_3369%2F5612.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=NHS%20to%20give%20specialist%20help%20to%20tackle%20mental%20strain%20of%20childbirth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-cameron-revolution-maternal-mental-health%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=NHS%20to%20give%20specialist%20help%20to%20tackle%20mental%20strain%20of%20childbirth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-cameron-revolution-maternal-mental-health%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27e76aae234c7f7caaf6520033758703e75257f9%2F0_375_5612_3369%2F5612.jpg>
 Paul Farmer, chief executive of Mind, heads the mental health taskforce that 
recommended the changes. Photograph: Graham Turner for the Guardian 
In his speech, Cameron will announce that the NHS will put £290m into creating 
new community perinatal mental health teams and more beds in mother-and-baby 
units. They help women battling post-traumatic stress disorder, postpartum 
psychosis and other serious similar conditions. There are about 120 in England 
but experts such as Andy Bell, deputy director of the Centre for MentalHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health>, say 60 more are needed.

Suicide is the second biggest cause of maternal death after sepsis, a violent 
immune reaction caused by serious infection 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/Blood-poisoning/Pages/Introduction.aspx>. A 
recent major inquiry into such deaths found that mental health problems were 
involved in 23% of them and that one in seven is from suicide. More than 100 
suicides occurred between 2009 and 2013, it found.

Dr Dan Poulter, the Conservative MP who was minister for maternity care until 
last May, said: “It’s frankly unacceptable that mental health is the second 
commonest cause of maternal death.

“Mental health has been the Cinderella of the NHS and perinatal mental health 
services haven’t historically received the investment attention they needed. If 
they’d had that, we’d have been able to identify more mums at risk and prevent 
many of these deaths from suicide.

“Expanding services like this will save lives. The prime minister’s 
heavyweight support is very welcome,” added Poulter, who is training to be an 
NHS psychiatrist.

Is perinatal anxiety a bigger problem than postnatal depression?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/23/perinatal-anxiety-postnatal-depression>
Stevens said that, while childbirth is a source of happiness for most parents, 
“sadly for tens of thousands of new mums it’s a time of acute mental distress.
Postnatal depression <https://www.theguardian.com/society/postnatal-depression> 
has been swept under the carpet for too long, despite modern treatments proven 
to work.

“Over the past year, I’ve spoken to many mothers who’ve had both good 
experiences and bad, and it’s no exaggeration to say that if the NHS is to be 
true to its ‘cradle to grave’ promise to patients we need to raise our game on 
maternal mental health,” he added.

Prof Sir Simon Wessely, president of the Royal College of Psychiatrists, said: 
“Suicide in anyone is a tragedy, but the impact on a new family is probably as 
bad as it gets, so extending quality mental health to all, and not just some, 
of those new mothers with serious depression or psychosis is clearly the right 
thing to do.”

 One in four people suffers mental ill health such as anxiety or depression at 
some point, while suicide is the biggest killer of men under 50, and evidence 
suggests mental health is the public’s No 1 concern about NHS care.

The NHS plans to push through major improvements in other areas of mental 
health care, Stevens said. It will put almost £250m into ensuring that at least 
half of all hospital A&E units in England have specialist mental health 
personnel on duty around the clock – liaison psychiatry services, usually 
involving psychiatrists and mental health nurses. Fewer than one in 10 do so 
now. Those suffering mental illness are three times more likely to end up in 
A&E, evidence shows.

My daughter’s mood swings exhaust me
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/01/my-daughters-mood-swings-exhaust-me>
Another £400m will go into expanding the still small number of teams of 
psychiatric specialists based outside of hospitals who help people having a 
mental health crisis, such as a psychotic episode or those at serious risk of 
suicide. By 2020 every part of England will have one, Stevens promised. “Social 
care services, the ambulance service and the police will give families a place 
they can refer to and help support people at home rather than them just ending 
up on the streets, in a police cell or off to the A&E department.”

NHS mental health trusts will also in future be paid to ensure that patients 
they are looking after also receive regular check-ups of their physical health, 
which until now has too often been neglected, he added. Many people’s mental 
health problems contribute to them having worse physical health than the 
general population because they do not manage their condition well.

Some of the millions of people who are suffering psychologically, often with 
anxiety and depression, due to them having long-term conditions such as 
diabetes and heart failure, will also be offered cognitive behavioural therapy 
to help them through an expansion of “talking therapies”.

Stevens said 600,000people who were unemployed and had mental health problems 
would be among the first to benefit, to help them back into work.
 