
There has only ever really been one director of Tate, and that has been 
Serota. Sat facing him at a recent dinner, I was asked by a European collector 
how it was that I had been seated opposite God. Before Serota, there was only 
the Tate at Millbank. No Tate Modern nor St Ives. Tate Liverpool opened just as 
he joined in 1988. Since then, he has successfully reinvented the Tate name, 
steering a somewhat fusty and guarded institution into the 21st  century. 
Directors of Tate’s branches have come and gone. Serota has remained. He has 
largely invented the rolefrom which he now steps down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/08/sir-nicholas-serota-appointed-chairman-arts-council-england-tate>
.


Serota has good relationships with artists, has names and faces at his 
fingertips and a prodigious memory, filing away stories and foibles, social 
connections and networks. You are as likely to find him trawling small 
galleries on a weekend and showing up at openings in London’s East End, in 
Nottingham, Newcastle or Glasgow, as you are at the world’s biennales.

Nicholas Serota: art's modern champion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/08/how-nicholas-serota-art-modern-champion-tate-arts-council-england>
He runs a huge, multilevelled bureaucracy, but never forgets what the art 
itself needs. Good at fighting his corner with a succession of governments, he 
is equally adept at schmoozing collectors around the world in order to procure 
loans and donations. Best of all he likes the company of artists of all kinds, 
and enjoys curating exhibitions. His career – at Oxford’s Museum of Modern Art 
and running the Whitechapel – before he replacedAlan Bowness 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alan_Bowness> as director of Tate, was more 
about collaborating with artists than building a collection. Bringing Jasper 
Johns’s drawings to Oxford, or mounting major shows by Gerhard Richter and Eva 
Hesse at the Whitechapel, he was making exhibitions that Tate, at that time, 
did not have the vision to do.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fnicholas-serota-who-next-tate-director%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80b8937733934388298dcfdb14205073cf6c27d3%2F0_0_3052_2148%2F3052.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicholas%20Serota%3A%20even%20he%20was%20shocked%20by%20the%20success%20of%20Tate%20Modern&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fnicholas-serota-who-next-tate-director%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicholas%20Serota%3A%20even%20he%20was%20shocked%20by%20the%20success%20of%20Tate%20Modern&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fnicholas-serota-who-next-tate-director%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80b8937733934388298dcfdb14205073cf6c27d3%2F0_0_3052_2148%2F3052.jpg>
 Tate Modern became a major tourist attraction as well as a gallery. 
Photograph: Andrew Winning/Reuters 
The success of Tate Modern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jun/21/how-we-made-tate-modern-herzog-de-meuron-nicholas-serota>
, which he had the ambition and the clout to get housed in the former Bankside 
Power Station, is down to Serota. So too is the desire to make it one of the 
world’s great museums. He has made Tate truly international. The popularity of 
Tate Modern took Serota by surprise. No one expected such numbers. Serota 
thought he had an art museum; what he got was a major tourist attraction. But 
he never forgot that Tate must stay serious, as well as providing the public 
with an experience of art on its own terms. Serota is respected because he also 
respects art, embracing and fostering the new, and its antithetical demands.


Tate Modern’s Turbine Hall  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/oct/16/tate-moderns-turbine-hall-of-fame-the-best-and-worst-artworks-so-far>
commissions (first with the support of Unilever, now with Hyundai) have also 
been a midwife to ways of making art that are ever more theatrical, sometimes 
even grandiose. Their success has been emulated worldwide, most notably at
Paris’s Monumenta 
<http://www.grandpalais.fr/en/event/monumenta-2016-huang-yong-ping> in the 
belle epoch Grand Palais, and atPark Avenue Armory 
<http://www.armoryonpark.org/programs_events/detail/martin_creed> in New York.


It was perhaps predictable that Serota would announce his departure after the 
recent opening ofTate Modern’s extension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jun/14/tate-modern-switch-house-review-brain-fizzing-art-pyramid>
, and the appointment ofFrances Morris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/16/tate-modern-director-frances-morris-interview>
 as its director. But in the light of the Brexit referendum, andlast week’s 
surprise announcement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/05/german-v-and-a-director-martin-roth-quits-brexit-vote>
 of the departure of the V&A’s German director Martin Roth, his resignation 
feels precipitous. The announcement of Brexit shocked Serota, coming the week
the extension of Tate Modern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jun/14/tate-modern-switch-house-review-brain-fizzing-art-pyramid>
 opened.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fnicholas-serota-who-next-tate-director%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbec054da66454f7c7926da2f9154832da558437a%2F0_0_5755_3840%2F5755.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicholas%20Serota%3A%20even%20he%20was%20shocked%20by%20the%20success%20of%20Tate%20Modern&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fnicholas-serota-who-next-tate-director%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicholas%20Serota%3A%20even%20he%20was%20shocked%20by%20the%20success%20of%20Tate%20Modern&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fnicholas-serota-who-next-tate-director%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbec054da66454f7c7926da2f9154832da558437a%2F0_0_5755_3840%2F5755.jpg>
 Tate Modern’s Switch House extension opened in June. Photograph: Jeff 
Blackler/Rex/Shutterstock 
First look: inside the Switch House – Tate Modern's power pyramid
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/may/23/first-look-inside-tate-moderns-power-pyramid>
How can Tate keep up with other museums around the world in terms of its 
collection? The provision of international collaborations may well be affected. 
Loans may be more difficult to procure. London, as a capital of international 
art, and as home to young artists from around the world who have enriched our 
cultural life (winners of Tate’s Turner prize have included German artists
Wolfgang Tillmans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2016/apr/26/anti-brexit-posters-wolfgang-tillmans-eu-referendum>
 andTomma Abts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2006/dec/05/turnerprize2006.topstories3> and 
French artistLaure Prouvost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/nov/15/laure-prouvost-i-feel-i-have-lived-many-lives-interview>
), is in doubt.

Who will fill Serota’s shoes, and have the political and cultural nous to 
maintain Tate’s global significance? The institution doesn’t just reflect the 
importance of visual art (and art that, increasingly, goes beyond the visual), 
it encourages it. The entertaining parlour game of who would replaceChris Dercon
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/apr/24/tate-modern-boss-chris-dercon-berlin-volksbuhne-theatre>
 as director of Tate Modern (Tate curator Morris got the job), orPenelope Curtis
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/oct/09/tate-britains-loss-of-penelope-curtis-is-portugals-gain>
 as director of Tate Britain (Alex Farquharson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jul/29/tate-britain-appoints-alex-farquharson-director>
 from Nottingham Contemporary), are small beer compared to who might replace 
Sir Nick.


Who'd want the job now? The pay is poor, the politics frightening in light of 
Brexit and Britain's cultural conservatism

I can think of no one in the UK who can direct Tate as Serota has done. 
Looking at museum chiefs around the world, I ask myself: who would want the 
job? Who would want to come to London now? The pay (compared with Tate’s peer 
institutions around the world) is poor; the politics frightening in light of 
Brexit, recession, and Britain’s increasing cultural conservatism and 
insularity.


Serota has managed to rise above most of the controversies that have marked 
his leadership, including the ongoing protests aboutTate’s sponsorship by BP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/11/bp-to-end-tate-sponsorship-climate-protests>
. The museum itself was founded on money derived fromHenry Tate’s fortune in 
the sugar trade 
<http://www.historytoday.com/richard-cavendish/founder-tate-gallery-dies> and, 
ultimately, from slavery. Tate cannot survive on public money alone, but the 
origin of private sponsorship is an increasingly contentious ethical issue. The 
institution needs the goodwill of artists and of the public, many of whom find 
such sponsorship deals morally repugnant and unjustifiable.

Like all British museums, Tate finds it increasingly difficult to fund 
purchases in the overheated art market. It also faces criticism about the pay 
offered to its curatorial and programming staff. Where is the money to come 
from, to attract the best and the most ambitious? Tate’s new director will have 
to deal with all of this, and run a museum too.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fnicholas-serota-who-next-tate-director%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3edfd1aef1f982b6f6d2e1be4f50c7cc64ad05a7%2F0_0_1447_1023%2F1447.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicholas%20Serota%3A%20even%20he%20was%20shocked%20by%20the%20success%20of%20Tate%20Modern&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fnicholas-serota-who-next-tate-director%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicholas%20Serota%3A%20even%20he%20was%20shocked%20by%20the%20success%20of%20Tate%20Modern&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fnicholas-serota-who-next-tate-director%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3edfd1aef1f982b6f6d2e1be4f50c7cc64ad05a7%2F0_0_1447_1023%2F1447.jpg>
 Sigmar Polke’s Alice in Wonderland at Tate Liverpool, 1995. Photograph: Tate 
Photography/© Estate of Sigmar Polke/DACS 2014, photograph © Tate Photography 
Serota’s five greatest Tate hits

Richard Serra: Weight and Measure (Tate Britain, 1992 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/serra-weight-and-measure-p20144>)
In the winter of 1992, the American sculptor installed two large blocks of 
forged steel on the floor of Tate. Two massive, imponderable blocks occupied an 
otherwise empty space. Set at a distance from one another (their weight of 35 
and 39 tons supported beneath the floor), they created an almost living 
tension. I thought of them when Martin Creed has his runnerstraversing the same 
space 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/context-comment/video/tateshots-martin-creed-work-no-850/>
 in 2008, and whenMark Wallinger’s State Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/jan/16/humanrights.politicsandthearts> 
was there in 2007. Serra’s work continues to weigh and measure everything that 
has been here since. The force field is still there.

Sigmar Polke: Join the Dots (Tate Liverpool, 1995 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/jun/16/sigmar-polke-sorry-i-missed-you>
)
Polke has had three big Tate shows, the last a retrospective at Tate Modern in 
2014. This, the German artist’s first major UK retrospective, was a dizzying 
revelation of dots, devils, tea-towels, kitsch and capitalist realism. The best 
show Tate Liverpool has ever had.

Bridget Riley (Tate Britain, 2003 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2003/jun/24/artsfeatures.tatebritain>)
A wonderful retrospective in Tate Britain’s top-lit galleries, this gave us 
the full measure of Riley’s talents, and the rigours and pleasures of a painter 
who is so much more than an Op Artist of the 1960s. Her late wall drawings were 
a revelation.

Doris Salcedo Shibboleth (Turbine Hall, Tate Modern, 2007 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2007/oct/10/art>)
The Turbine Hall commissions have delighted and confounded audiences ever 
since Tate Modern opened. From Juan Muñoz’s 2001 Double Bind to the forthcoming 
work by the brilliant Philippe Parreno, the Turbine Hall remains one of art’s 
great challenges. In 2007, Salcedo dug a crevasse the length of the Turbine 
Hall, a great fissure with a resounding presence. Shibboleth was a gesture that 
felt as baroque as it was minimal, leaving its scar, and an invitation, in the 
concrete to this day.

Henri Matisse: The Cut-Outs (Tate Modern, 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/mar/29/henri-matisse-cutouts-tate-modern-nicholas-serota>
)
Co-curated by Nicholas Serota and Nicholas Cullinan of MoMA (now director of 
London’s National Portrait Gallery), this compendious exhibition of Matisse’s 
late work received more than half a million visitors, the largest ever for any 
Tate show. It deserved it. Matisse’s vitality never flagged, and the cut-outs 
were both a surprise and joyous summation of the French colourist’s long career.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fnicholas-serota-who-next-tate-director%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcbafe54491bb09c890645e5875b639baa01b9685%2F0_0_3504_2332%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicholas%20Serota%3A%20even%20he%20was%20shocked%20by%20the%20success%20of%20Tate%20Modern&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fnicholas-serota-who-next-tate-director%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicholas%20Serota%3A%20even%20he%20was%20shocked%20by%20the%20success%20of%20Tate%20Modern&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fnicholas-serota-who-next-tate-director%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcbafe54491bb09c890645e5875b639baa01b9685%2F0_0_3504_2332%2F3504.jpg>
 Henri Matisse: The Cut-Outs exhibition, at Tate Modern in 2014. Photograph: 
Guy Bell/Rex  