
Nicholas Lyndhurst will return to BBC1 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc1>
 in a revival of its 1990s time travel sitcom, Goodnight Sweetheart.

The comedy will return as a one-off special as part of the channel’s landmark 
sitcom season celebrating 60 years of laughter.

Lyndhurst, who is still best known for his role as Rodney in Only Fools and 
Horses, and latterly in BBC1 drama New Tricks, starred in Goodnight Sweetheart 
as accidental time traveller Gary Sparrow who ended up in second world war 
London.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhhsGRaPxWZk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhhsGRaPxWZk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhhsGRaPxWZk&media=>
 Who do you think you are, Rodders? Doctor Who? 
In the new episode, written by its original creators Laurence Marks and 
Maurice Gran, he ends up “somewhere he has never been before” after he is 
catapulted back into 21st century life.

The BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> sitcom season will also see 
revivals of classic comedies including Are You Being Served?, Porridge and a 
Keeping Up Appearances prequel, Young Hyacinth, along with a handful of new 
shows.

Leave my pussy alone! The bizarre return of Are You Being Served?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/feb/16/are-you-being-served-makeover-mrs-slocombe-mr-humphries>
Lyndhurst will return to the role but it is not known if Dervla Kirwan, who 
played Gary Sparrow’s love interest, will also be back. The BBC said further 
casting would be announced in due course.

Marks and Gran’s other TV credits include The New Statesman, featuring Rik 
Mayall as Alan B’Stard, and Birds of a Feather, recently revived by ITV.

Shane Allen, controller of BBC comedy commissioning said: “The whole sitcom 
season is geared towards giving comedy royalty their due recognition and in 
Goodnight Sweetheart we have heavyweight writing and performing talents 
reunited in this hugely popular and fondly remembered show.

“The conceptual update is sublime and it was heart-skipping stuff to read – 
it’s an absolute belter.”

Jon Rolph, executive producer of Goodnight Sweetheart, added: “I’ve long been 
keen to catch up with the life and various times of Gary Sparrow, so it’s an 
absolute delight to see Goodnight Sweetheart take its place in the landmark 
sitcom season.”


Goodnight Sweetheart ran on BBC1 for six series, from 1993 to 1999.
 