
An anti-migrant poster unveiled by Nigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage> has been reported to the 
police with a complaint that it incites racial hatred and breaches UK race 
laws. On Thursday night Dave Prentis, of the Unison union, said he had written 
to the Metropolitan police about the poster, which shows a queue of mostly 
non-white migrants and refugees with the slogan “Breaking point: the EU has 
failed us all.”

Prentis described the Ukip poster as a “blatant attempt to incite racial 
hatred”. He said: “This is scaremongering in its most extreme and vile form. 
Leave campaigners have descended into the gutter with their latest attempt to 
frighten working people into voting to leave the EU.


“To pretend that migration to the UK is only about people who are not white is 
to peddle the racism that has no place in a modern, caring society. That’s why 
Unison has complained about this blatant attempt to incite racial hatred and 
breach UK race laws.”

Earlier, controversy over the poster had prompted Boris Johnson to distance 
the official leave campaign from Ukip. A string of politicians from Nicola 
Sturgeon to Yvette Cooper also condemned the poster.

Within hours, Twitter users had pointed out the image’s inadvertent similarity 
to Nazi propaganda footage of migrants shown in a BBC documentary from 2005.

Johnson, who leads the official Vote Leave campaign, said the poster was “not 
our campaign” and “not my politics”. Drawing a distinction between his own view 
and those of Farage, he suggested that leaving the EU would be a way of 
“spiking the guns” of anti-immigrant feeling. “If you take back control, you do 
a great deal to neutralise anti-immigrant feeling generally,” he said, after 
reporters showed him a picture of the poster. “I am passionately 
pro-immigration and pro-immigrants.”

Farage has repeatedly praised Johnson in recent weeks, going so far as to 
suggest that he would take a job in a government led by Johnson if he took over 
after a vote to leave. The official campaign, however, has been less than happy 
to be associated with Ukip and Leave.EU, which have repeatedly been accused of 
stoking anti-immigrant feeling and using racist tropes. Vote Leave is 
campaigning separately from Ukip, but it does include the party’s only MP, 
Douglas Carswell, who shared a platform with Johnson last week.

Farage unveiled the poster in Westminster with the subheading: “We must break 
free of the EU and take back control of our borders.” The photograph used was 
of migrants crossing the Croatia-Slovenia border in 2015, with the only 
prominent white person in the photograph obscured by a box of text.

Challenged about its message, Farage said: “This is a photograph – an 
accurate, undoctored photograph – taken on 15 October last year following 
Angela Merkel’s call in the summer and, frankly, if you believe, as I have 
always believed, that we should open our hearts to genuine refugees, that’s one 
thing.

“But, frankly, as you can see from this picture, most of the people coming are 
young males and, yes, they may be coming from countries that are not in a very 
happy state, they may be coming from places that are poorer than us, but the EU 
has made a fundamental error that risks the security of everybody.”
Brexit explained: campaign funds 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/06/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=campaign_funds>
When it was suggested to him that the people were refugees, he said: “You 
don’t know that. They are coming from all over the world. If you get back to 
the Geneva convention definition, you will find very few people that came into
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> last year would actually 
qualify as genuine refugees.

“We have just had – in the last two weeks, the Dusseldorf bomb plot has been 
uncovered – a very, very worrying plan for mass attacks along the style of 
Paris or Brussels. All of those people came into Germany last year posing as 
refugees. When Isis say they will use the migrant crisis to flood the continent 
with their jihadi terrorists, they probably mean it.”


A Ukip spokesman said the comparison with Nazi propaganda was invidious and 
“those making them should remember Godwin’s law”, an internet adage that heated 
discussions tend eventually towards someone bringing up the Nazis, and that 
those who do have lost the argument.

Cooper, the Labour MP for Pontefract and Castleford, who has campaigned on 
behalf of refugees, said: “Just when you thought leave campaigners couldn’t 
stoop any lower, they are now exploiting the misery of the Syrian refugee 
crisis in the most dishonest and immoral way.”


Caroline Lucas, the Green party MP for Brighton Pavilion, said: “Using the 
innocent victims of a human tragedy for political propaganda is utterly 
disgusting. Farage is engaging in the politics of the gutter.” Nicola Sturgeon, 
the SNP leader, said the poster was disgusting.

Neil Carmichael, the Conservative MP for Stroud, said: “It’s disappointing to 
see Ukip jumping on the refugee crisis to further their own political aims. 
Britain can only deal with the issue of immigration by working together with 
European countries that face the same challenges.”

A spokesperson for Getty Images confirmed that the picture had been licensed 
from them and was taken in Slovenia in 2015 by its staff photographer Jeff 
Mitchell. “It is always uncomfortable when an objective news photograph is used 
to deliver any political message or subjective agenda. However, the image in 
question has been licensed legitimately,” they said.

“Editorial integrity is of the utmost importance to Getty Images, and our 
photographers are passionate about documenting the global news agenda and 
covering issues from an objective and impartial standpoint. Our images are 
syndicated to almost 1 million customers around the world – whether that be to 
media, business and brands, or in this case, political parties.”

Farage has made a series of interventions in the referendum campaign, 
including leading a flotilla of fishing boats up the Thames to Westminster on 
Wednesday to promote Brexit. Remain campaigners, however, have repeatedly 
criticised Ukip for the anti-migrant tone of some of its material, particularly 
in relation to the possibility of Turkey joining the EU.

What has the EU ever done for my … security?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/16/what-has-the-eu-ever-done-for-my-security>
The archbishop of Canterbury, Justin Welby, told MPs on the home affairs 
select committee this month that he utterly condemned Farage’s comment that 
sexual assaults by migrants were the “nuclear bomb” of the EU referendum. He 
said Farage was guilty of “inexcusable pandering to people’s worries and 
prejudices, that is, giving legitimisation to racism”. The Ukip leader was 
“accentuating [people’s] fear for political gain, and that is absolutely 
unacceptable,” he said.

Asked about the archbishop’s criticism, Farage dismissed his comments about 
migrants as a minor issue in the wider context of the referendum.

Leave.EU, which is funded by Ukip’s biggest donor, Arron Banks, has been 
repeatedly criticised for the tone of its campaign material regarding 
immigrants, which includes a video that remain campaigners said demonised 
Turkish people.
 