
Cecil Taylor died in 1981 at the age of 52 leaving, in the words of his son 
Avram: "Two wives, four children, two houses, over 70 plays, a guitar, a piano 
and his personal library." Aside from being the only playwright of his 
generation to be known by his initials, CP, rather than his given name - a 
phenomenon that Avram cannot explain - he also wrote Good, arguably the 
definitive piece written about the Holocaust in the English-speaking theatre.

The subject embraced many of the enduring preoccupations of a Glaswegian 
Jewish Marxist with an intellect honed when the Clyde was at its reddest. 
Produced by the Royal Shakespeare Company in 1981 and subsequently seen all 
over the world, Good is a vivid and complex examination of Brecht's dictum that 
for evil to prosper, good men must do nothing. The central character, Halder, 
is a professor of literature: a good, liberal-minded, music-loving man who step 
by carefully rationalised step ends up embracing the final solution. The play 
opens with a popular song of the 1930s, I'm Always Chasing Rainbows, stolen, as 
Halder swiftly reminds us, from Chopin. The message is clear: if art and music 
are corrupted, the rest must follow.

The problem with creating a classic is that the rest of a considerable life's 
work tends to be overlooked, including the unique circumstances that made it. 
Taylor left school at 14, irked, among other things, by the necessity of 
wearing a tie. Sartorial elegance never stood high on his list of priorities. 
He worked as an electrician and television engineer and moved to Newcastle in 
1955 as a travelling salesman.

From the 1960s onwards he was to become a seminal figure in the cultural 
renaissance of the north-east, alongside the novelist Sid Chaplin, poets such 
as Basil Bunting and Tom Pickard, and even local government - the Northern Arts 
Association, brainchild of the flawed leader T Dan Smith, was the first of its 
kind anywhere in the land.

In 1962, Taylor's play AA Went Tae Blaydon Races, opened the new Flora Robson 
Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>, later demolished for road 
improvements that haven't significantly improved the traffic flow. The play was 
a historical drama about a miners' strike - what else? - and Taylor thought: 
"The audience that saw a play of mine on Tuesday night would rise up en masse 
on Wednesday morning and set up the workers' state." Like many before and 
since, he later scaled down his ambition to communicating, "my narrow, odd 
vision of the world as I see it at the time of writing ... always in the hope 
that my audience might feel a bit less on their own in this big world, as I do 
when I read a real book or see a real play".

During the 1960s and 1970s he worked tirelessly in the north-east as what can 
only be described as a community playwright: with kids in schools and youth 
theatres, students, people with learning disabilities and as a mentor of 
would-be writers. The playwright Tom Hadaway was working on the North Shields 
fish quay when they first met. He recalls: "As someone who had done nothing 
more pretentious than the gutting of fish, I stood in awe of him. But his 
intellect was never a barrier. 'Ye dinna take the skin off haddock, di ye, 
Tommy? The flavour's unner the skin in the fat. Only need a stiff brush tae get 
the scales off.' How did he know that? Unless he knew everything? He was just a 
natural working-class thinker, following the common stock of knowledge. 
Essentially a simple, uncluttered man, with a great love of nature."

When Hadaway's first play was produced at the People's Theatre in Newcastle, a 
local critic wrote that he was "attempting to paint with oil when he has not 
yet mastered crayon". Taylor was quick to support the fledgling dramatist.

"He's telled ye the truth, Tommy. An' any man prepared ti tell ye truth is 
doing ye a gud turn. All ye hev ti do is survive it."

"But what if I don't survive it?" 

"Then maybe he's done the rest of us a gud turn." 

They laughed, Tom carried on writing and has been painting in oils to this day.

The love of music is crucial. Taylor sang constantly, and played the piano and 
guitar, though apparently with more enthusiasm than artistry. Play titles such 
as A Nightingale Sang and Bring Me Sunshine, Bring Me Smiles tell their own 
story. It can only have been the musical ear that enabled Taylor to write in 
countless distinctive voices: the more-or-less standard cadences of the RSC 
plays; the totally unique Glaswegian/Jewish of the blood line, which reached 
early fruition in his 1966 play, Bread and Butter; and the notoriously tricky 
accents of the north-east, where speech patterns change almost street by 
street. He took them all on and they still remained unmistakeably Taylor.

 Bread and Butter was first seen at the Jeannette Cochrane Theatre in London, 
having been turned down by the Citizens' Theatre in Glasgow. It tells the tale 
of two Jewish couples living in the Gorbals between the years 1931 and 1965, 
with all the personal and political dimensions those dates imply. It's funny 
and contradictory, joyous and bleak, and, like all Taylor's work, prodigiously 
generous with its humanity.

The generosity informed his life as well as his work: the two were 
indivisible. Max Roberts, now artistic director of Newcastle's Live Theatre, 
recalls his student days in the 1970s when Taylor involved himself in a series 
of projects inspired by the dramatic changes taking place in local communities. 
A characteristic adventure was The Killingworth Play. Killingworth is a 
satellite town north of Newcastle created in part to accommodate people moved 
from slum clearance projects in Byker, at a time when government at all levels 
still used words such as "slum" and "clearance".

Cecil talked to children in the schools and discovered one of the side-effects 
of the move was that pets weren't allowed in council property and so their dogs 
and cats wouldn't be allowed to move to Killingworth. This became the story of 
the play, later produced by the students. He wrote a series of such pieces: The 
Spittal Tongues Play, The Hoppings Play and Operation Elvis, which saw an early 
stage appearance by the young Tim Healy.

Live Theatre was formed in 1973 with the aim of providing "theatre for 
working-class audiences on Tyneside about their own experiences and performed 
by working-class actors". Making due allowances for the high-mindedness that 
generally lurks around artistic manifestoes, for the past 30 years it has 
delivered a great deal more than its political equivalents. Under successive 
directors Paul Chamberlain, Teddy Kiendl and Max Roberts, an extraordinary 
series of playwrights have emerged and prospered: Tom Hadaway, Leonard Barrass, 
Phil Woods, Lee Hall, Peter Straughan, Sean O'Brien, Michael Chaplin and Julia 
Darling, among others, with the next generation galloping up on the rails.

None of this would have happened without Cecil Taylor as founding father and 
inspiration and his no-frills style of narrative, with songs and direct address 
to the audience, has informed much of the Live Theatre tradition. His 
contribution is all the more remarkable because he was juggling parallel 
careers in radio, television and in the more mainstream areas of theatre, 
notably with the RSC and the Traverse in Edinburgh, where he was a de facto 
resident playwright.

The common factor in all the work is the simplicity that underpins true 
sophistication. In his later years he lived contentedly in the village of 
Longhorsley in Northumberland, where he worked in a shed in his back garden. 
When a television documentary was made about him the interviewer sat alongside 
him but the cameraman had to film them through the window. He saw things truly 
and clearly. His dedication to the published version of Good reads: "In memory 
of my father, Max George Taylor, a refugee from antisemitism in Czarist Russia."

He was always more interested in his characters than he was in himself, 
whether it was a kid in Byker with an Elvis obsession, Morris and Sharon 
growing up in the Gorbals or Professor Halder, discovering that in Nazi Germany 
liberalism is not enough. His enduring passion was for the audience. After all, 
the characters in a play are simply those members of the audience the 
playwright has chosen to write about.

Here he is, quoted once more by Tom Hadaway: "Thor all oot there. Millions o' 
brain cells. Millions o' them. Aal workin' fer ye. No bein' carried along. But 
racin' ahead. C'mon! Hurry up! We got that! Catch us up! Gi' them credit. 
They're on yor side. Don' treat them like they're thick."

We need Cecil Taylor. He's our bread and butter. 

Â· Bread and Butter opens at the Tricycle Theatre, London NW6, on November 9.
 