
What is it? Proof that subtitled dramas can be stupid.

Why you’ll love it: Thanks to shows such as The Killing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-killing> and The Returned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-returned>, European dramas have 
gained a reputation for non-stop prestigious solemnity. These shows unfold with 
novelistic poise, lingering on details that would have once been brushed aside. 
They rely on the audience to remember subtle plot points from distant episodes. 
These shows are beautiful, but they’re also hard work.

No Limit <http://www.channel4.com/programmes/no-limit> is the exact opposite: 
ifBorgen <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/borgen> redefined the 
complex nature of political drama, this is outside in the garden eating 
wallpaper paste. It is sitting in a hospital waiting room with a saucepan on 
its head. It is the GIF ofthe dog humping a fallen trampolinist 
<http://giphy.com/gifs/fail-dog-fall-s6Bv0O6E4SfzW>. It is perfectly, totally 
dumb.

Unsurprisingly – at least to anyone who’s seen Taken 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/taken> or Lucy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/lucy> – No Limit is the brainchild of Luc 
Besson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/luc-besson>. It’s a French spy 
thriller about a soldier named Vincent Liberati who is diagnosed with a brain 
tumour and coerced into covertly joining the secret service in exchange for an 
experimental new drug treatment that will extend his life. But you know what? 
You can forget that. Liberati’s diagnosis comes roughly a minute into the very 
first episode, then he becomes a government spy about 30 seconds after that, 
and then the whole thing barely gets mentioned again for the rest of the 
series. It’s the flimsiest peg imaginable for a lot of silly action.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fno-limit-luc-besson-non-stop-whirlwind-of-silly-gratuitous-stunts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F840c510039656ba7462256f0a29d0dbc8210a014%2F209_0_2384_1431%2F2384.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20Limit%3A%20a%20non-stop%20whirlwind%20of%20silly%20action%20and%20gratuitous%20stunts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fno-limit-luc-besson-non-stop-whirlwind-of-silly-gratuitous-stunts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20Limit%3A%20a%20non-stop%20whirlwind%20of%20silly%20action%20and%20gratuitous%20stunts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fno-limit-luc-besson-non-stop-whirlwind-of-silly-gratuitous-stunts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F840c510039656ba7462256f0a29d0dbc8210a014%2F209_0_2384_1431%2F2384.jpg>
 A whirlwind of gormless stuntwork … Vincent Liberati only walks anywhere if 
he’s ruled out parkour. 
This show is designed to wash over you. It’s Knight Rider 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0083437/>. It’s Magnum, PI 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0080240/>. It’s fast-paced and unchallenging and 
relentlessly glib. Liberati – played wonderfully by Vincent Elbaz – is a 
sociopathically nonchalant Jack Bauer. Where Bauer wears the weight of the 
entire world on his shoulders, Liberati’s stock response to danger is a 
one-liner and a gallic shrug. In an early episode in a hunt for a dangerous 
drug dealer, he forces a baddie to fix his boiler. He runs over his own 
assistants without a hint of existential angst. He takes his teenage daughter 
shopping with gangsters tied up in his boot.

The closest No Limit ever comes to the golden age of TV is Liberati’s 
relationship with his daughter Lola. Although they start out estranged, they 
grow closer over the course of the series. But Lola is very much a stock 
temperamental teenager in the vein of Kim from24 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/24> or Dana from Homeland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/homeland>. She sneaks out to clubs. 
She smokes pot. She often seems to exist only to blunder into scrapes her dad 
can rescue her from. It’s a tired old trope, and No Limit adds nothing to it.

Not that this matters much, because you’ll watch it for the action. 
Thankfully, it’s pretty much non-stop, to the point of outright gratuity. 
Liberati only walks anywhere if he’s ruled out the possibility of parkour, and 
he only parkours if he’s certain he can’t scuba dive. He fires himself out of 
torpedo tubes. He hijacks helicopters. The whole thing is a whirlwind of 
gormless stuntwork. Escapism is by no means a dirty word, and No Limit revels 
in it.

Where: Walter Presents (All 4) 
Length: 22 hour-long episodes. 
Stand-out episode: The first epiode sees Liberati endure misfortunes only to 
shrug them off as if nothing had happened.
If you liked No Limit, watch: 24 (Now TV)
 