
Around this time of year, there’s always at least one article grumbling about 
the latest additions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/australia-culture-blog/2014/aug/12/australias-national-dictionary-editor-on-the-heat-about-youse>
 to theOxford Dictionaries <http://www.oxforddictionaries.com>. The complaints 
are usually couched in terms of fear that we are seeing the demise of the 
English language as we know it.

I used to skim read it with an air of indifference and conclude that the 
writer really should just get over it. The world changes, gramps, move with the 
times. New words are good. New words prove that language is alive.

This year, I’m the one who’s changed. I’ve turned into that grumbling pedant. 
Hand me my crocheted rug, my narrow, unchangeable views and a platform on which 
to lay them all out. This year’s new offerings 
<http://blog.oxforddictionaries.com/2014/08/oxford-dictionaries-update-august-2014/>
 convince me of one thing only: that the Oxford office has completely lost the 
plot.

That, or its entire editorial staff has been mysteriously replaced by 
12-year-old girls. They’re the only people in the world I can imagine using 
some of the words seemingly cherry-picked from our collective mutterings. Some 
of the recent additions aren’t even real words. They exist, yes, but no one 
uses them to mean what they are supposed to mean on paper.

Let’s start with chillax. Who says this straight-faced? It should only ever 
come from the mouth of a fictional guy wearing short, fluorescent, scoop 
running shorts with built in mesh jocks. The kind of guy who will stand with 
one leg up on the chair while talking to you and be the first to offer you a 
neck massage the minute you complain of tightness in the shoulders, then give 
you aTony Abbot style sleazy wink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/22/sex-hotline-pensioner-labels-abbotts-wink-sleazy-slimy>
. In other words, people chillaxing don’t really exist. They are a figment of 
our collective comedic imagination.

As for amazeballs, I’ll accept that this one did do the rounds for a bit, but 
only ever used ironically. Meant for realz, it was the domain of nine-year-olds 
and 30-something ladies describing some sort of glitter cupcake. That’s it. 
Already it’s a word that’s got the whiff of old socks about it. I give it two 
months, max and then we’ll never hear of it again.

Next up is the listicle, a word that describes a style of numbered list article
 <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/aug/06/i-can-live-without-lists>
 favoured by clickbait websites, and the odd global newsbrand. Cough. No one in 
the history of the world, ever, has said listicle out loud, and if they did, 
they’d have the sort of voice that finishes sentences with an upward 
inflection. Dare to utter this word at a place where they write real words, and 
you’d be promptly marched out of the building.

If Oxford are adding words to poke fun at the people we imagine might say 
them, then why on earth don’t we add all those excellent terms from our 
childhood that had no meaning beyond their moment in time? Like rack off or 
pash? Pop those in your dictionary pipe and smoke them, why dontchya, Oxford? 
And add dontchya while you’re at it.

Most infuriating of all: now these words have been absorbed into the wider 
lexicon, the autocorrect on my phone happily lets me chillax, but still insists 
on autocorrecting my favourite curse word when you, me and the ducking lamppost 
knows exactly what I’m trying to write. I give up. Sigh. Whatevs bitchez. I 
can’t even.
 