
Back in May I applied to National Savings & Investments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/moneyinvestments> to open a 65+ Bond valued 
at £20,000, in the joint names of my husband and myself. All was satisfactorily 
put in place until, after a holiday, we realised time was short to meet the 
deadline for the return of the necessary ID documents. The day before the 
deadline I sent them via registered mail, and received a letter from NS&I 
confirming they had arrived in time.

But five days later we received a second letter from NS&I stating that the 
necessary documents had not been received in adequate time, and as a result we 
had missed out on the bond.

I feel NS&I should admit that they failed to meet their contract and reinstate 
the application for the bond. If this was anything other than a government 
organisation I would expect compensation for the three hours that I have spent 
talking to their staff. What do you think?MH, Tewin, Herts

The NS&I’s pensioner bonds, as they have become known, were incredibly popular 
following their launch in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jan/15/demand-pensioner-bonds-crashes-national-savings-site>
 because they dwarfed the other savings rates on offer, until they were 
withdrawn just after you applied. NS&I couldn’t cope initially, although we 
understood that those problems were long since passed.

According to NS&I, your bond was rejected because of a mix up. It requires two 
forms of ID for it to establish who you are, and was under the impression that 
you had only sent one in the case of your husband. However, it has since been 
able to confirm his identity electronically, and as a result it has agreed to 
reinstate your three-year bond. It has also arranged for a goodwill payment of 
£75 to be sent to each of you to apologise for the misunderstanding.

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at 
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <mailto:consumer.champions@theguardian.com> 
or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
 