
Standing next to a stack of speakers on All Saints Road, DJ Alistair Roberts 
of Rapattack, one of 38 sound systems at theNotting Hill carnival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/nottinghillcarnival> this year, went 
through the paperwork he has to fill out before he can play a single tune.

Events notice, bar licence, risk assessment, a site plan, premises licence, 
licence to play in the street. “Back in the day, we used to string up on any 
street we wanted and just play,” Alistair said. “Now everything’s regulated so 
we have protocols with the police.

“You can’t even give out leaflets in the street within the carnival footprint. 
We have to get a licence to give out fliers in your spot … We can’t even sell 
our own CDs without a licence.”

More than a million people are expected on the streets this bank holiday for 
the Notting Hill carnival, Europe’s biggest street party. The event, which is 
celebrating its 50th year, has grown from a Caribbean street party into a 
triumph of British multiculturalism.

But limits to the festivities, which correlate with the gentrification of W11, 
have led to feelings that bureaucracy is strangling the event. “It’s not a 
natural flow, whereas before it was a natural flow,” said Joe 90, a veteran MC.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fnotting-hill-carnival-revellers-complain-of-bureaucracy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6606dcc215c43424ddf29d94ff6faafea6d31990%2F272_568_4911_2947%2F4911.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Notting%20Hill%20carnival%20revellers%20complain%20of%20bureaucracy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fnotting-hill-carnival-revellers-complain-of-bureaucracy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Notting%20Hill%20carnival%20revellers%20complain%20of%20bureaucracy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fnotting-hill-carnival-revellers-complain-of-bureaucracy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6606dcc215c43424ddf29d94ff6faafea6d31990%2F272_568_4911_2947%2F4911.jpg>
 Houses in Notting Hill boarded up before the carnival. Photograph: Neil 
Hall/Reuters 
Old carnival ravers remember how the party started on Friday night and kept 
going until Tuesday morning. Sound systems would play until after midnight, as 
the parade snaked repeatedly around W11 and locals sold food and drink from 
their front gardens.

This Sunday, sound systems will shut down at 7pm; illegal trading – even 
selling whistles – can get you thrown in jail. The curbs come amid criticisms 
over crime at carnival –last year saw a record number of arrests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/sep/01/notting-hill-carnival-surge-knife-crime>
 – and a perceived “invasion” of revellers into one of London’s wealthiest 
areas. Many homes and businesses are boarded up for protection.

Lady Victoria Borwick, the Conservative MP for Kensington, told London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> Live last week: “There are many people 
now who just feel wouldn’t it be nice to have a carnival where [businesses] 
could stay open; or, alternatively, has carnival outgrown this area?”

Such complaints are not new. Businesses have boarded up their premises since 
1977, a year after rioting broke out at carnival, the local shopkeeper Lee 
Harris said. He remembered how police had been forced to use bin lids to 
protect themselves from volleys of bottles and stones. But with 7,000 officers 
on the streets this year, a repeat is unlikely.

Some local residents told the Guardian of problems with the event. “People use 
the basements as a toilet, throw rubbish down, bottles,” one Westbourne Park 
Road homeowner said. But even doors away, neighbours took a different view. 
Nadja Omoregie, 31, was helping to transform the front of her family home into 
a bar.

“They’re speaking as if to say that’s what everyone really feels and it’s not 
the truth,” she said. “If you just walk around the area you can feel the 
euphoric feeling, and everybody’s really quite happy.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fnotting-hill-carnival-revellers-complain-of-bureaucracy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8831a57440ec0cfebdd5d107bd51e3163bb6159%2F0_348_5226_3136%2F5226.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Notting%20Hill%20carnival%20revellers%20complain%20of%20bureaucracy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fnotting-hill-carnival-revellers-complain-of-bureaucracy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Notting%20Hill%20carnival%20revellers%20complain%20of%20bureaucracy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fnotting-hill-carnival-revellers-complain-of-bureaucracy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8831a57440ec0cfebdd5d107bd51e3163bb6159%2F0_348_5226_3136%2F5226.jpg>
 People stock up a street stall before the carnival. Photograph: Neil 
Hall/Reuters 
Femi Williams, 51, of the 90s acid jazz group Young Disciples, who was 
watching sound systems set up, said the first airing of his seminal track 
Apparently Nothin’ came at carnival. The party, he said, is “just what the 
community is, it’s just what life has been here for more than 50 years. This is 
just an official recognition of that.”

Critics could just as well criticise the cost of the Queen’s birthday, he 
added. “We justify that by saying the queen brings a lot of people to the 
country. Well, so does carnival.”

Around the corner, on Lancaster Road, Anna Clayden, 52, sat with friends on 
the steps to the home where she has lived for the past 37 years. She said 
carnival was a symbol of one of the things modern Britain has got right.

“This country does well at multiculturalism, although some people here might 
think it’s a problem. When you look at other countries, what’s going on in 
Europe at the moment, what’s going on in America, why would you want to close 
down something like carnival that’s a success?”
 