
The UK release this week of the Oscar-nominated The Big Short 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/21/the-big-short-review-steve-carell-ryan-gosling-2008-financial-crisis>
, based on Michael Lewis’s book of the same name, is a fitting bookend to a 
time when we still believed that the broken financial system might be fixed. 
But the banks have won. Not a single “top banker” has been jailed and few, if 
any, have had to return undeserved bonuses. Measures taken since 2008 are being 
watered down before our eyes and, most dangerous of all, the deeper causes of 
the crash remain essentially intact. TheOccupy movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/may/24/giles-fraser-occupy-london-st-pauls-protest-drama-temple-donmar>
 should call a reunion so we can have a ceremony to bury all remaining hope.

The Big Short review – Ryan Gosling and Christian Bale can't save this 
overvalued stock
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/21/the-big-short-review-steve-carell-ryan-gosling-2008-financial-crisis>
The Big Short uses the story of a handful of US finance geeks to explain the 
2008 crash. In the preceding years they gradually work out that the most senior 
managers in most banks have no idea what is going on in their organisations. 
The geeks focus on one small unit where ever more complex financial products 
are being built, sold or left on the banks’ balance sheets. The products are 
lucrative but they are also far more risky than top management are being told 
or understand. Seeing their warnings to regulators and other “experts” ignored, 
the geeks decide to make a fortune from the coming implosion of those complex 
financial products: the Big Short.

Hollywood blockbusters such as Wall Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/07/wall-street-money-never-sleeps-review>
,American Psycho <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/apr/21/breteastonellis> 
andThe Wolf of Wall Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/16/wolf-of-wall-street-review> 
painted a picture of bankers as coke-snorting psychopaths and greedy gambling 
addicts. But as The Big Short makes clear, the problem was less greed than 
wilful and culpable incompetence on the part of the most senior bankers. 
Someone who is greedy knowingly takes risks in order to satisfy that greed. 
That is giving far too much credit to top management in almost all the major 
banks before 2008.

Alistair Darling was chancellor in 2008 and got a close look at top management 
in the big British banks. In his memoirsBack from the Brink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/sep/07/alistair-darling-back-from-brink-review>
, Darling has this to say: “They didn’t understand what they were doing, the 
risks they were taking on, or, often, the products they were selling … The top 
management in banks both here and in the US failed to understand – or even ask 
– what was apparently making them so much profit and what were the risks.”

In the new set-up of the 80s and 90s bonuses stayed but the risk of being 
ruined personally was quietly shelved

Or even ask. That is the key to understanding why the causes of the crash 
remain unaddressed. Why would top management not even ask? Two words: personal 
liability. Traditionally, the truly risky activities in finance happened in 
firms organised as partnerships. Top management were personally liable, meaning 
that if things went well, managers might get to buy a wonderful extra house – 
the bonus. But if things went wrong, they might have to sell their house – the 
malus.

This system exerted a powerful discipline. Management had every incentive to 
be on top of what its people were doing, to not let the organisation grow to an 
unmanageable size and to give lots of power to its risk and compliance officers 
– those with the task of blocking reckless or illegal plans. There was an 
equally strong incentive to reward and encourage loyalty: the Thursday 
after-work celebration to mark staff members’ 15, 20 or 25 years of service was 
a fixture.

But in the 80s and 90s waves of deregulation hit. Firms were allowed to list 
on the stock exchange or be taken over by a publicly listed bank, putting an 
end to personal liability. Even worse, in this new set-up the bonuses stayed 
but the risk of being ruined personally when the firm went down was shelved.

Now risk and compliance staff stopped being the eyes and ears of top 
management. They became, in current City and Wall Street parlance, “box 
tickers”, “cost centres”, “linesmen” or “business blockers”. Meanwhile the “20 
years’ service” parties have become a thing of the past, as loyalty has been 
replaced by “liquidity”. Within five minutes, and without prior warning, banks 
can get rid of bankers and do so all the time: “executions”, they call this 
process in the City, or “waves” and “culls”. On the other hand, banks know that 
competitors can poach their people at any time. Zero loyalty cuts both ways.

This blueprint for short-termism defines the modern, publicly listed megabank. 
The biggest are global empires with hundreds of thousands of employees, engaged 
in widely different activities, often of great complexity. The Big Short makes 
clear that before 2008 the top people had no idea what was really happening 
down the ranks. And why would they? They were not personally liable and as long 
as things went well they were cashing in life-changing rewards. At worst they 
would lose their jobs and stock options. What kind of deterrent is that?

And now? The major banks are still publicly listed, and bankers as well as 
compliance staff can still be fired in five minutes. There was some reason for 
hope when the UK government promised a new law making it possible to prosecute 
top bankers for reckless behaviour. But in May 2015 the Conservatives won the 
election and George Osborne quickly moved to dilute the measure. It was fatal. 
He went on todeclare “a new settlement” 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/economics/11666789/I-want-Britain-to-be-the-best-place-for-global-bank-HQs-George-Osbornes-Mansion-House-speech-in-full.html>
 with the banks,forced out his toughest regulator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/17/city-watchdog-chief-quits-fca-george-osborne>
 andscrapped a review of banking culture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/31/banking-culture-review-john-mcdonnell-urges-george-osborne>
.

The Big Short is well worth seeing. But when you leave the cinema you find 
yourself back in the UK, where the banks are still being given exactly what 
they want. It might as well be 2006.

 * Swimming With Sharks by Joris Luyendijk (Guardian Faber, £12.99). To order 
a copy for £6.99, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/297220/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min. p&p of £1.99.
 