
A court in Australia has ordered drug giant Reckitt Benckiser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/reckittbenckiser> to stop selling some of 
its popular Nurofen painkiller brands after finding tablets marketed for 
specific complaints such as back pain or migraines contained exactly the same 
active ingredient.

The Australian federal court ruled that the British-based multinational had 
made misleading claims when selling its Nurofen Back Pain, Nurofen Period Pain, 
Nurofen Migraine Pain and Nurofen Tension Headache products.

Nurofen manufacturer sued over false claims on packets
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/05/accc-sues-reckitt-benckiser-over-false-claims-on-nurofen-packets>
While these were marketed as formulated to treat a specific type of pain, and 
cost about double the price of standard Nurofen, tablets from the so-called 
Nurofen Specific Pain range were all found to contain the same active 
ingredient, 342mg of ibuprofen lysine, equivalent to 200mg of ibuprofen.

The court ordered that the products should be removed from shops within three 
months. A subsequent court hearing will decide on a possible fine for the 
company.


The ruling followed legal action launched this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/05/accc-sues-reckitt-benckiser-over-false-claims-on-nurofen-packets>
 by the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC), which argued 
that even though the tablets all contained the same generic ingredient they 
were priced “significantly above that of other comparable analgesic products”.

The ACCC’s chairman, Rod Sims, said 
<https://www.accc.gov.au/media-release/court-finds-nurofen-made-misleading-specific-pain-claims>
 on Monday that the watchdog had been concerned people might have bought the 
products “in the belief that they specifically treated a certain type of pain, 
based on the representations on the packaging, when this was not the case”.

Sims said price sampling by the ACCC before the start of the court case found 
the Nurofen Specific Pain products were being sold at almost double that of 
Nurofen’s standard ibuprofen.

He said: “Truth in advertising and consumer issues in the health and medical 
sectors are priority areas for the ACCC, to ensure that consumers are given 
accurate information when making their purchasing decisions.

Placebo-nomics: how bad was what Nurofen did?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/shortcuts/2015/dec/14/how-bad-was-what-nurofen-did-austalian-courts>
“Any representations which are difficult for a consumer to test will face 
greater scrutiny from the ACCC.”

The Nurofen brand is also used in the UK and New Zealand. While many of the 
same pain-specific Nurofen products are sold in Britain, and also all contain 
342mg of ibuprofen lysine, the British government’sMedicines and Healthcare 
Products Regulatory Agency 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/medicines-and-healthcare-products-regulatory-agency>
 (MHRA) said it currently had no concerns about the issue.

An MHRA spokeswoman said: “For over-the-counter medicines, informative names 
are permitted to help patients select an appropriate product without input from 
a healthcare professional.”

The MHRA has no remit on medicine pricing, and tends to intervene only when a 
product’s name or description makes a medically misleading claim.

The Consumers’ Association in the UK said it had no comment to make as it had 
not looked at the issue.

Aomesh Bhatt, head of regulatory and medical affairs for Reckitt Benckiser in 
Europe, said the company did not set out to mislead consumers and was 
cooperating with the ACCC and the federal court. It was, he said, an 
“Australia-only issue” with no implications for UK sales.

Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s World at One 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b06rxb2x>, Bhatt explained the company’s 
reasoning for branding the same ingredient under multiple names: “Consumers 
want the navigation in a grocery environment, where there’s no healthcare 
professional to assist in the decision-making. We know that 90% of consumers 
look for a specific type of product for their individual pain.”

The company has been ordered to publish website and newspaper articles to 
clarify its status, implement a consumer protection compliance programme and 
pay the ACCC’s costs.

The company’s Australian website has already been changed. A section 
describing the four types of pill 
<http://www.nurofen.com.au/our-products/general-pain/nurofen-caplets-for-general-pain/>
 connected to the case describes them as “for general pain” and says: “Any of 
the four products shown on this page have the same ingredient and can be taken 
to provide effective temporary relief of pain and/or inflammation associated 
with either migraine, tension headache, back pain or period pain.”
 