
A nurse who was lauded by the government as one of Britain’s heroes of the 
Ebola epidemic is facing a disciplinary tribunal, accused of concealing the 
high temperature of her colleague Pauline Cafferkey, who developedEbola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ebola> on her return from Sierra Leone.

Senior sister Donna Wood was the face of the volunteers in Medics Behind the 
Mask <https://social.shorthand.com/DFID_UK/jyKgB1dcdtf/medics-behind-the-mask>, 
an online feature made by the Department for International Development. She and 
Cafferkey were among the first 70 volunteers to leave the UK and spend 
Christmas 2014 in the Ebola treatment units of Sierra Leone, and were publicly 
thanked by Justine Greening, the then international development minister.

But Wood’s career could end over events at Heathrow airport when the 
volunteers flew home on 28 December 2014. All the returnees had to be screened 
to ensure they did not have a high temperature that might be the first sign of 
Ebola fever. Chaotic conditions and long delays were described in the screening 
unit, with too few staff to process the exhausted volunteer nurses and doctors, 
so they took each other’s temperatures.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fnurse-faces-tribunal-over-pauline-cafferkey-temperature-reading-ebola%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F176e604f996125026ecee204dd54762a337b0a94%2F823_0_1600_2000%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nurse%20faces%20tribunal%20over%20Pauline%20Cafferkey%20temperature%20reading&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fnurse-faces-tribunal-over-pauline-cafferkey-temperature-reading-ebola%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nurse%20faces%20tribunal%20over%20Pauline%20Cafferkey%20temperature%20reading&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fnurse-faces-tribunal-over-pauline-cafferkey-temperature-reading-ebola%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F176e604f996125026ecee204dd54762a337b0a94%2F823_0_1600_2000%2F1600.jpg>
 Pauline Cafferkey after being cleared of misconduct charges. Photograph: Jeff 
J Mitchell/Getty Images 
When Cafferkey’s temperature was found to be high, Wood is alleged to have 
recorded it on the form as normal, saying they would then “get out of here and 
sort it out”. They were then allowed to leave the screening area.


Cafferkey later told another volunteer she had a high temperature and returned 
to the screening area, but she had taken paracetamol and her temperature was 
found to be within the normal range, so she was cleared to fly to Scotland, 
where she was taken ill.

Cafferkey was accused by the Nursing and Midwifery Council of misconduct, but 
wascleared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/14/ebola-nurse-pauline-cafferkey-not-guilty-of-misconduct>
 on the grounds that she had already become too ill to understand the 
implications of her actions.

After she became ill the RAF flew her to a special isolation unit at the Royal 
Free hospital in London. Cafferkey came close to death but recovered. She then 
nearly died again when she later developed meningitis as a result of the Ebola 
virus.

Before travelling to Sierra Leone, Wood was a senior sister at Haywood 
hospital in Burslem, near Stoke on Trent, and had been nursing for 29 years.

“I’ve always been a caring person – that’s what my mother said. So it always 
felt like nursing was my vocation. It always will be,” she is quoted as saying 
on the DfID website.

“I’d been following the stories on the news and I felt I had to do this 
straight away. I could use the skills I’ve got to make a difference and join a 
team to help bring the disease under control … You don’t think of it as being 
heroic. It’s just what we do.”

The misconduct hearing is scheduled to last for eight days.
 