
Comedian Jimmy Carr <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jimmy-carr> has been 
cleared of breaching broadcasting regulations after referring to the pope as 
"king of the paedophiles", but BBC1's Saturday Kitchen Live has been censured 
after a chef swore when he spoiled an omelette.

Saturday Kitchen Live chef, Tom Kime, said "fucking hell" under his breath 
when he realised his omelette was sticking to his frying pan in an edition of 
theBBC1 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc1> show broadcast on 5 December 
last year.

The BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> said the programme's 
presenting and production team had not heard Kime make the comment until 
alerted after the show, so had not apologised on air.

Later the BBC confirmed to media regulator Ofcom that Kime would not be 
returning to the show, and apologised to viewers who had contacted the 
broadcaster to complain.Ofcom <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom> said 
the broadcast breached rules which prohibit the broadcast of the most offensive 
language before the watershed.

A total of 25 viewers complained to Ofcom after Carr made the comment on his 
Channel 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> quiz show Eight Out of 
10 Cats on 2 February. However, the regulator cleared the broadcaster of 
breaching regulations on religious offence.

In a separate incident, six viewers complained to Ofcom about an incident on 
ITV1'sAlan Titchmarsh <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/alan-titchmarsh>
 Show after the daytime programme featured a package on sex toys in the run-up 
to Valentine's Day on 10 February. The regulator said it had not breached 
broadcasting rules on sex and nudity.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 