
Media regulator Ofcom <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom> may not be 
ready to take on its new BBC watchdog role until at least next April, three 
months after the corporation’s new charter is due to begin.


Ofcom will take over large parts of the regulation of the corporation from the 
BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Trust, which will be abolished 
under the terms laid out by the government’s white paper on the future of the 
corporation.

BBC Trust chair Rona Fairhead said earlier this month that the timetable for 
the transfer of powers was “very, very tight”.

“I think it’s looking very tight but they are working as hard as they possibly 
can, we are still aiming for that,” Fairheadtold MPs on the House of Commons 
culture, media and sport select committee on 6 July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/06/rona-fairhead-assured-by-bbc-dg-after-chris-evans-allegations>
.

Fairhead said the trust was still working through with Ofcom and the 
government how the transition would take place. If Ofcom is not ready to take 
over the new responsibilities by 1 January, sources said it would not delay the 
new charter, only one aspect of it.

“If hope if there is an extension it would be short because we are in a 
position of uncertainty and as an organisation you want certainty,” said 
Fairhead, who will be chair of the BBC’s new unitary board.

A report in the Financial Times 
<https://next.ft.com/content/a3a58d72-4ff2-11e6-88c5-db83e98a590a> said 
“several officials” had confirmed that Ofcom would not be ready by 1 January 
2017.

BBC white paper: key points at a glance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/12/bbc-white-paper-key-points-john-whittingdale>
The government’s white paper, published in May, acknowledged that the 
“fundamental changes to governance and regulation will require time for the 
bodies involved to implement”. However, it did not set out a timeline for the 
switch.

A spokesman for Ofcom said: “We’re currently discussing a transition timetable 
with the government, BBC and BBC Trust. As the government has recognised, these 
are fundamental changes that will require time to implement, given their 
complexity and the need for a smooth transition.”

A government spokesman said: “We are working through the issues with relevant 
parties and no decisions on timing and transition arrangement have been made 
yet. We will set out further details on transition in due course.”
 