
The winner of our Young Chef of the Year Award does not do doubt. Dan Smith 
always knew that the professional kitchen was where he needed to be, from the 
moment he set foot in one aged 15. “I just loved being part of a team. It was 
about process.” Asked what he likes most about being a chef, he says simply, 
“Everything.” Everything? “I love being able to take a humble vegetable and 
turn it in to something amazing. Food is emotional. It’s powerful.”

Today, aged just 24, he is sous chef at Isaac McHale’s multi-award-winning 
Clove Club, inside the former Shoreditch Town Hall. Regularly he runs service. 
Among the team working for him is April Lily Partridge, who won the OFM Young 
Chef Award in 2014, and who nominated Smith for this year’s title. “I met him 
on the first day of my stage here,” she says, recalling the work experience she 
did at the Clove Club over a year ago. “He was clearly such a talent. You could 
see that he could do any section in the kitchen and make it look effortless.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fthe-uks-best-young-chef-on-the-joy-of-nature-to-plate-cooking-in-central-london-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20UK%E2%80%99s%20best%20young%20chef%20on%20the%20joy%20of%20%E2%80%98nature%20to%20plate%E2%80%99%20cooking%20in%20central%20London%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fthe-uks-best-young-chef-on-the-joy-of-nature-to-plate-cooking-in-central-london-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20UK%E2%80%99s%20best%20young%20chef%20on%20the%20joy%20of%20%E2%80%98nature%20to%20plate%E2%80%99%20cooking%20in%20central%20London%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fthe-uks-best-young-chef-on-the-joy-of-nature-to-plate-cooking-in-central-london-video&media=>
The UK’s best young chef on the joy of ‘nature to plate’ cooking in central 
London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/video/2016/oct/16/the-uks-best-young-chef-on-the-joy-of-nature-to-plate-cooking-in-central-london-video>
Indeed. Through a lunch of complex but forceful dishes he works the pass in 
the open kitchen, with huge economy of movement and poise. There’s a tiny crab 
tart under a spiced hollandaise flavoured with the brown meat and the best 
buttermilk fried chicken; there’s flamed mackerel, there’s roast duck, and, 
alongside it, a consommé of the bird with a 100-year-old Madeira in its depths. 
“When he’s on the pass,” Partridge says, “he’s so smooth.”

Former London supper club enters world's best restaurant list
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/14/former-london-supper-club-clove-club-worlds-50-best-restaurant-list>
Some cooks look flustered and wrung out after service. When Smith sits down to 
talk he looks relaxed and at ease. This restaurant and this level of 
responsibility is clearly right for him. “I’ve always felt a little older than 
my years,” he says. Plus, he’s already been in the business for eight years. 
Aged 15, he worked in a local restaurant in his home town of St Albans. At 16, 
he left school for the full-time course at Westminster Kingsway College, but 
worked nights in another local restaurant “for beer money”. He cites his mother 
as a massive influence. “She didn’t just do the same old dishes every night. 
There was something different on the table every night.” Plus his parents were 
able to indulge his interests. He celebrated his 17th birthday with a trip to 
the Fat Duck. For his 18th it was back to Bray and the Waterside Inn.

After a working trip around Australia with his chef girlfriend, whom he met at 
Westminster, Smith returned to London for a brief stint working with Jason 
Atherton. He arrived at the Clove Club three years ago, six months into its 
life. “I’ve pretty much grown up with this restaurant,” he says. “It’s 
ingredient-driven. The food is complex but the place is informal.” And it’s big 
on skills: they don’t just make their own bread. They cure their own meats, 
butcher their own animals, churn their own butter and temper their own 
chocolate.

For his part, McHale says that he realised his young employee was the real 
thing during a trip to cook in Mexico City. “He was just on it. Frankly, he 
could have done the whole event without me being there.” And so to the 
inevitable question. What’s the plan? “I want my own place,” Smith says. “A 
similar style of food to this but more of a pub setting. I’d like to be as 
close to self-sufficient as possible, growing our own ingredients.” As to 
employees, he’s not going to have a problem. “I’ve already told him I’ll come 
and work with him,” says Partridge with a grin. That’s a serious recommendation 
from one OFM Young Chef of the Year to another.
 