Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F3YTgwY1Ld5s%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F3YTgwY1Ld5s%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F3YTgwY1Ld5s%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
 Reading on mobile? Watch here
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3YTgwY1Ld5s>
Paul Simon's English period – the year or two in the mid-60s he spent touring 
folk clubs here as a relative unknown – inspired some of Simon & Garfunkel's 
best-loved work, including Homeward Bound and Kathy's Song. But my favourite 
from this fertile time is A Most Peculiar Man, the understated story of a 
suicide thatfirst appeared <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=te7fRv1gycs> on 
Simon's little-heard 1965 solo debut The Paul Simon Songbook.

Songbook was an acoustic album recorded in London to capitalise on the 
excitement starting to build around Simon as he roamed Britain following the 
failure of his debut album with Garfunkel, Wednesday Morning, 3AM, a period of 
self-imposed exile that came to an abrupt end when a version of The Sound of 
Silence – overdubbed with electric instrumentation by producer Tom Wilson 
without the knowledge of either Simon or Garfunkel – became a No 1 hit back 
home in America. Simon returned to the US and reunited with Artie, and the rest 
is history.

The version of A Most Peculiar Man on The Paul Simon Songbook 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=te7fRv1gycs> is a gentle, echoey lament 
arranged purely for guitar. But, like other songs from that album, it was
rerecorded with a full band <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3YTgwY1Ld5s> 
following the success of The Sound of Silence for Simon & Garfunkel's 
subsequent album Sounds of Silence, complete with metronomic percussion, an 
incongruously jaunty bassline and Byrds-like guitar figures.

Simon explained the genesis of the song on the Live from New York City, 1967 
album: "I wrote this song when I was living in England. The seeds of the song 
were planted one day when I saw an article in a London paper about a man who 
had committed suicide. Four lines in the paper ... And I thought: 'That's a 
very bad way to go out. Bad eulogy. Four lines.'"

Simon approaches this subject in characteristically elliptical fashion, 
withholding the fact of the suicide until the last verse and building up a 
picture of the deceased almost entirely through the eyes of the man's baffled 
and unfeeling neighbours. He starts the song taking their description of him as 
"a most peculiar man" at face value, but the phrase becomes more and more 
grimly ironic with each repetition as Simon runs through their evidence: that 
he lived alone, had no friends, "seldom spoke", that "he wasn't like them".

The last verse pulls back to reveal that the man has killed himself, and once 
he has got on to this topic Simon can't seem to let it go, unexpectedly 
elongating the verse by repeating the melody of the second line over and over, 
providing more and more detail, even briefly allowing us to see things from the 
dead man's point of view for the first time – until finally he returns to the 
conventional melody line and the bathetic response of the neighbours, who take 
refuge in formal, official language: "Mrs Riordan says he has a brother 
somewhere / Who should be notified soon." Garfunkel helps build the tension, 
his harmony lines veering gradually away from the main melody before both 
singers snap back into lockstep for the final refrain.

The song explores typical Simon themes such as the alienation of 1960s youth, 
but more surprising is that for all Simon's embrace of England during this 
period ("It's all right, ma," he sneers to his fellow Americans during A Simple 
Desultory Philippic, "it's just something I learned over in England"), A Most 
Peculiar Man actually paints a rather dreary and joyless picture of 1960s 
Britain, with its cramped, colourless houses and atomised community. It's 
interesting to compare the lonely, oppressive atmosphere created here with the 
hysterical, wild, excited reaction to a suicide in the New York-set Save the 
Life of my Child.

It's probably fair to say that Simon & Garfunkel can be a bit po-faced at 
times, so as a useful corrective I recommend checking out "The Most Peculiar Man
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=X9kUyiZxMmE>", a 
YouTube video its creator cheerfully describes as "a crappy animation made to 
go along with A Most Peculiar Man by Simon and Garfunkel". If that doesn't put 
a smile on your face, you must be a bit peculiar.
 