
Did you always find music a living entity – in the sense that you were always 
a composer, never content with performing only what already existed?

Yes, I've done a lot of thinking about this. Although there wasn't actual 
parental pressure, I was immersed in music from the beginning and it never 
occurred to me that not everybody thought it was the most important thing in 
life.

I don't think it was brainwashing – my father was principal double bass of the 
London Symphony Orchestra <http://lso.co.uk/> for most of my childhood and 
there were always musicians dropping in. The LSO used to record for the Mercury 
label at Watford Town Hall which was close by us so some of them would come 
back at lunchtime. That orchestra was extraordinary at that time, with players 
like Barry Tuckwell (horn), who was our lodger for a while, Gervase de Peyer 
[clarinet], Hugh Maguire, Erich Gruenberg (leaders) and, as leader of the 
seconds,Neville Marriner <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neville_Marriner> [not 
yet a conductor]. So it was part of my life. Apart from the usual enthusiasm 
for toy trains and model aeroplanes, my favourite objects as a child were 78s. 
I liked watchingthe [HMV] dog 
<http://www.fwi.co.uk/blogs/lincolnshire-farming-blog/hmv1.jpg> go round and 
round! Apparently I could tell the music from the shades and widths of the 
grooves before I could read the labels!

Did you know what you were listening to? Can you remember what those works 
were now?

Absolutely. Some that stand out were Stokowski conducting bits of Sleeping 
Beauty, Lauritz Melchior singing Siegfried's Forging Song, Bruno Walter 
conducing Song of the Earth with a picture of Mahler on the label, Koussevitzky 
doing Daphnis and Chloe, Ansermet's Petrushka and so on. But there was also the 
music that orchestral players in London were just getting to know at the time, 
the late 1950s and early 1960s: Mahler, Schoenberg, later Stravinsky. We had 
incomplete bits too, I remember, which still give me an odd perspective today: 
sides three and four of Elgar conducting Falstaff, sides seven and 16 of Mahler 
Two with Ormandy, sides four and five of Stokowski's Rite of Spring! Maybe 
that's the root of why I'm prepared to release pieces as fragments sometimes.

When did you start writing music? 

The moment I could read it, which was really as soon as I had piano lessons – 
with Robin McGee who was later bass player of the London Sinfonietta – he 
taught me in exchange for lessons from my Dad. If I never made the decision to 
be a musician, I did make the active choice of being a composer. Once I was 
reading music, I began to imitate it. I was a terrible piano student but it was 
clear I was more keen on making up my own stuff. Dad probably thought it would 
eventually go away at first. He always wanted me to become a conductor. After a 
while he asked a couple of people what to do, and they said I'd better have 
some lessons, so off I went to the Watford School of Music where, luckily, my 
teacher was John Lambert, who had been a student of Nadia Boulanger. I 
continued with him privately until I was 16 or 17.

Two things happened in your early-mid teens: you met Britten and your First 
Symphony [now withdrawn] was performed by the LSO, conducted by you. Were these 
privileges? Traumas?

Dad was working at Aldeburgh at the time. In fact the bass part of Curlew River
 <http://www.brittenpears.org/page.php?pageid=478>was written for him. Of the 
various people he asked for advice about me, Britten was one. He invited me to 
tea – of course I was terribly shy – and treated me seriously: was I doing 
counterpoint? Did I plan my pieces carefully? That kind of thing. He was very 
good at making you feel what you were doing was important, and as if you might 
be having the same sort of problems he had. I didn't have lessons, just one or 
two meetings of this sort. But he kept a watchful eye from afar. When I arrived 
at the Festival Hall for the infamous premiere of my symphony he had sent a 
telegram, and afterwards he was the first person who offered me a commission, 
for the 1969 Aldeburgh festival.

Why infamous?

It's a sort of wound that has never really healed, an occurrence I wish would 
be calmly forgotten and put away. I never seem to be able to get rid of the 
bloody thing! I do think it's pretty remarkable that a kid of 14 actually wrote 
such a thing – though it's VERY withdrawn now. It was very good for me that I 
heard it – these days one would have sent it off to be done in a workshop, 
quietly, and that would have been the end of it. But with the LSO it became a 
nine-day wonder – press photographers on the doorstep next morning and all 
that. My inclination at such times is to flee as a result. It wasn't until I 
got a fellowship toTanglewood <http://www.tanglewood-music.com/>, where I was 
greatly encouraged byGunther Schuller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/aug/12/gunther-schuller-interview-tom-service>
, that I felt in an environment where I was judged for what I actually did, 
rather than as a result of my background. Dad was chairman of the LSO at the 
time, as well as principal bass. It probably wasn't the cleverest psychological 
ploy and I suspect some of my more troublesome personality traits can be traced 
back to that time. My rather extreme capacity for self-criticism, for a start …

You have always kept parallel lives as conductor and composer, and managed a 
substantial corpus of published work – you're currently working on Opus 35. 
Aims? Regrets?

I wish I had written a hell of a lot more than I have done, and I hope I will 
be able to do a lot more. I'd like to get to 50 pieces, ideally, though I don't 
know why. I certainly wish I could afford to keep the two roles, conducting and 
composing, in better balance. One of the defining events of the past decade was 
that my daughter Sonya's mum, Sue, died [in 2003. He wrote a requiem, Songs for 
Sue, in 2006]. Then two years later I got quite ill, too, and I became much 
more aware that time will eventually run out. Family becomes very important at 
such times. Sonya – whose birthday is the day after mine – is now a mezzo, 
training in Baltimore with Phyllis Bryn-Julson and John Shirley-Quirk. Earlier 
this year she sang [Pierre Boulez's] Le Marteau sans maître! What do they say – 
what goes round comes round?

You have acknowledged a difficulty finishing commissions. Why?

I find it hard psychologically to switch from the conducting persona to being 
at home alone. It's almost schizophrenic … I like conducting, and working with 
other people, it's a very good way of stopping yourself being solipsistic, 
which is a tendency I can't bear. But I'm not a composer who can just sit down 
and dash something off. I need lots of time to think, and these days I won't 
let go unless I've really done what I set out to do. I was very pleased
Ophelia's Last Dance 
<http://www.fabermusic.com/news/story/knussens-new-work---ophelias-last-dance.aspx?ComposerId=376>
 went down well and has been recorded. There's been a big piece for the 
Cleveland Orchestra on the back burner for several years, and I'm now working 
on a piano concerto forPeter Serkin 
<http://www.cmartists.com/artists/peter-serkin.htm>, partly inspired by Kabuki 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kabuki>, which I hope to finish very soon.

Do you go along with the current fashion for finding new ways of getting 
audiences – for new music, as well as mainstream concerts?

Any attempt to get bigger audiences for new music is good. But the popular 
image of classical music is still so hung up on anachronistic appearances – 
tenors in white tie and tails, concerts being introduced by ladies in long 
frocks. I'd get rid of all that. It's a good idea if people wear roughly the 
same thing, I suppose, but they don't have to cling on to Edwardian nonsense. 
These days I much prefer listening at home. I get terribly nervous at other 
people's concerts! But there's also the amazing pleasure now of so manyProms  
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/proms>on TV, especially since BBC4 – and that's a bonus 
for me living far from London.

You live in Snape, close to the home of the Aldeburgh festival 
<http://www.aldeburgh.co.uk/> and all those associations with Britten and your 
childhood …

Yes, it's chance really. I was working at the festival and needed a base. I 
stayed. It's not just because it happens to be within reach of my favourite 
concert hall [Snape Maltings 
<http://www.snapemaltings.co.uk/discover/aldeburgh-music/>], or because of the 
Britten associations. I live here because it's very beautiful and quiet, and 
the small town atmosphere is not unlike like growing up in the suburbs 50 years 
ago. But I live alone now and get quite lonely, so I may not stay forever.

Is "new music" in a different state from when you were growing up as a 
composer? If so, how?

At that time it was obvious who the important composers were. Stravinsky was 
still alive, Britten, Shostakovich and Copland were in their prime, as were 
Tippett and Messiaen. A new group were making their mark: Max[well Davies], 
Sandy Goehr, Birtwistle, Richard Rodney Bennett, Nicholas Maw. There was a 
clear path ahead, not really in terms of style but in standards and degrees of 
seriousness. Now, for a young composer, I think it must be terribly hard to 
work out what your route should be, unless you have an entirely personal and 
strong vision – which mostly you don't when you're starting out and few people 
have anyway. Colin Matthews and I run the Composition and Performance course at 
Snape. It's very encouraging to see how many different approaches there are 
among young composers. We try not to get in their way, and keep the advice 
strictly practical.

One great gift you have given, and continue to give, the music world is your 
enduring support for younger composers, among them George Benjamin, 
Mark-Anthony Turnage, Julian Anderson.

I've tried to make up for all the ridiculous privileges I've had myself – 
growing up "in" an orchestra, having my music played publicly at an absurd age 
– so in a way I'm paying my dues, but I'm happy to. I don't like selfish, 
isolationist attitudes and I really am interested in what others are doing. It 
was particularly nice for me to helpMinna Keal 
<http://www.musicweb-international.com/keal/index.htm> [1909-1999] get her 
works performed in her 70s – the opposite end of life from my own start. If 
you've got an ability you should use it to help your colleagues, anyway. 
There's some wonderful young talent coming up these days: Helen Grime, Luke 
Bedford, Ryan Wigglesworth, Charlotte Bray, Sean Shepherd for starters.

What inspires you outside music?

I'm crazy about art – though I have no aptitude for it at all. I'm a fanatical 
gallery-goer when I'm on tour. I'm nuts about the Flemish Renaissance painter
Joachim Patinir <http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/artists/joachim-patinir>, a 
contemporary of Dürer. He's a large-scale miniaturist! And the Russian 
illustratorIvan Bilibin <http://www.bpib.com/illustrat/bilibin.htm>. More 
recently I've discoveredGeorges de la Tour 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Georges_de_La_Tour>, and have come to appreciate 
Goya <http://www.franciscodegoya.net/> hugely, in much the same way that I've 
come to love Beethoven much more than I did …And yes, you could say it all 
relates to how I think about music. It's no coincidence that I did my operas 
with an artist [Maurice Sendak 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/05/09/books/maurice-sendak-childrens-author-dies-at-83.html?pagewanted=all>
]. I'm thrilled they're being staged atAldeburgh 
<http://www.aldeburgh.co.uk/events/where-wild-things-are-higglety-pigglety-pop> 
andthe Barbican <http://www.barbican.org.uk/music/event-detail.asp?ID=13031>, 
for the first time sinceGlyndebourne 
<http://glyndebourne.com/where-wild-things-are>, by and for a new generation 
who didn't see them the first time. And for once I can sit back and watch. 
That's a wonderful 60th birthday present.

This is a longer version of an article which appeared in the June issue of BBC 
Music Magazine <http://www.classical-music.com/>.
 