
Perhaps it is true, as the away enclosure alleged with their gloating cries of 
“you’re not special any more”, that José Mourinho’s powers are diminishing. Yet 
there is another way of looking at it and maybe, to give him the benefit of the 
doubt, this result felt more like a case ofArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> finally showing the kind of 
durability that is necessary for any team with authentic title aspirations.

For a long time, it had felt as though it was shaping up to be the most 
satisfying result of Mourinho’s new employment, but ultimately it was another 
occasion of steep frustration forManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> and their glowering 
manager, and a reminder of why Arsenal have become so difficult to beat in 
2016, with only one league defeat on their travels since the start of the year.

Arsène Wenger rescued at the end from midfield muddle of his own making | 
Barney Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/19/manchester-united-arsenal-arsene-wenger-jose-mourinho>
Arsenal had been strangely subdued until Olivier Giroud combined with another 
substitute, Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain, to head in the goal that left a sudden, 
damp silence in the home stands and Arsène Wenger, once again, will have to 
imagine what it feels like to beat one of Mourinho’s teams in a league fixture. 
His 12th attempt did at least end satisfactorily, whereas hisbête noire, who 
had spent parts of the first half sniping in the Frenchman’s direction, talked 
darkly of it feeling like a defeat, while still making sure he got in the last 
word. “Finally, I lost against Arsène,” was Mourinho’s parting shot, then 
repeating it for added effect.

Mourinho was entitled to be crestfallen because Juan Mata’s expertly taken 
goal, midway through the second half, had put United in command on an afternoon 
that finished with their manager also announcing they should officially be 
known as “the unlucky team in the Premier League”. United often looked the more 
dangerous side and, until the late drama, the best it really got for Arsenal 
was an exquisite, yet inconsequential, nutmeg from Mesut Özil on Michael 
Carrick. Theo Walcott flickered only sporadically.

Aaron Ramsey struggled to have a telling impact on the left and, though Alexis 
Sánchez worked tirelessly, it was perplexing to see Wenger’s team look so meek 
against a side missing three-quarters of their usual defence.

The flipside for Arsenal is that it is not a bad thing for a team to avoid 
defeat on the days when they struggle to be at their more cohesive and Wenger 
can be hugely encouraged by the fact Giroud’s late feat of escapology means 
they have lost only one of their last 22 top-division fixtures. “There is 
something in our squad that is remarkable,” Wenger said. “It is great 
resilience and a never-give-up attitude.”

It is also the first time United have drawn three successive home games in the 
league since 1992 and, with the previous assignments coming againstBurnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/29/manchester-united-burnley-premier-league-match-report>
 andStoke City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/02/manchester-united-stoke-city-premier-league-match-report>
, Old Trafford has seen more disappointment than its regulars probably imagined 
from Mourinho’s opening months in the dugout. Once the frustration subsides a 
little, however, they can at least be encouraged by what Mourinho described as 
a performance of “amazing control”. Mata had a splendid game, as did his 
compatriot Ander Herrera, whereas Paul Pogba is showing now why he was the 
priority signing in the new manager’s first transfer window.

Pogba started in central midfield but took up a more advanced role after Wayne 
Rooney’s 63rd-minute introduction led to a change of order in the attacking 
positions. Rooney played at the forward tip, Marcus Rashford took over from the 
substituted Anthony Martial on the left, and Pogba was involved in the move, 
five minutes later, that finished with Mata cracking in a low shot from 
Herrera’s cutback.

Southampton v Liverpool, Crystal Palace v Man City and more – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/nov/19/southampton-liverpool-crystal-palace-man-city-and-more-live>
Wenger talked afterwards about his side having a “mental block” on their 
visits to Old Trafford, this being the 10th successive occasion in the league 
that they have returned without winning. “We did not play with our usual 
style,” the Arsenal manager added. Unfortunately for United, Rashford’s move to 
a wide position also meant the teenager taking on defensive responsibilities 
and he did not see them through when Oxlade-Chamberlain went past him to clip 
over the right-wing cross for Giroud’s goal.

The equaliser brought back into focus the 35th-minute incident that left 
Mourinho on the point of spontaneous combustion on the touchline, adamant that 
the referee, Andre Marriner, was mistaken to give Nacho Monreal the benefit of 
the doubt for his challenge on Antonio Valencia inside the penalty area.

Mourinho might have had a case given that Monreal, losing his balance, held 
out his right arm and leant into Valencia. United’s manager could be seen 
screaming to the skies, charging out of his technical area and so anguished 
that, at one point, he held his hand over his eyes as if to signal that he 
could no longer bear to watch what these wretched referees would do to him 
next. A more considered view would be that it was a difficult incident to judge 
and, though United probably had grounds to feel aggrieved, it would be 
exaggerating to think of it as an obvious penalty.

“My view is that it was not a penalty, and you will not be surprised by that,” 
Wenger said. “Mourinho’s view is that it was a penalty, and you will not be 
surprised by that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fmanchester-united-arsenal-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0677386b15f0fbb52f41205bb695253456bc303%2F0_0_3221_2303%2F3221.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Olivier%20Giroud%20denies%20Manchester%20United%20and%20rescues%20point%20for%20Arsenal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fmanchester-united-arsenal-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Olivier%20Giroud%20denies%20Manchester%20United%20and%20rescues%20point%20for%20Arsenal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fmanchester-united-arsenal-premier-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0677386b15f0fbb52f41205bb695253456bc303%2F0_0_3221_2303%2F3221.jpg>
 Juan Mata celebrates after putting Manchester United in front against Arsenal. 
Photograph: Shaun Botterill/Getty Images  