
What is it about the mental health debate that makes me go all Malcolm Tucker, 
effing and blinding at the gap between what politicians say about it and the 
reality on the ground? And why do I want everyone else to get as angry as I am 
about it? Because every time there ispressure on health spending 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/11/nhs-fail-winter-without-cash-injection-hospital-doctors-tell-theresa-may>
, mental illness slips down the priority queue.

We are frankly light years away from the parity between mental and physical 
healthcare that is set out – in law – in theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> constitution. In the last week, I 
have spoken to a mother at her wits’ end because her daughter is being treated 
in Scotland when she lives 80 miles south of the border; a young man I 
persuaded to get help for his anxiety and depression who has been given some 
pills and told he might get cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) in six months; 
a student who has dropped out of education after two failed suicide attempts, 
one of which followed a long wait in a crowded room waiting to see an 
overstretched university psychiatrist.

I recently got a letter from someone who said that my urging people to be open 
in a radio interview had led him to seek help for what he worried was a drink 
problem. But when he got to his GP he was told the alcohol support service had 
been cut and was instead given a list of local Alcoholics Anonymous meetings. 
It makes you wonder what is the point of fighting to change attitudes if the 
services are not there to help people who, despite all the stigma and taboo, 
make that first step to be open about a mental health problem.

May and Cameron presided over 8% cuts in spending on mental health, and the 
loss of more than 6,000 mental health nurses

There are of course many people who do get good treatment. But my worry is 
that the battle against stigma is seen as a substitute for the services we 
need, rather than an accompanying policy goal, and a genuine government 
priority.

So for all Theresa May’s fine words 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/we-will-reduce-stigma-mental-illness-theresa-may>
, andDavid Cameron’s before her 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/11/david-cameron-revolution-maternal-mental-health>
, they have presided over8% cuts in real spending on mental health 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-32596748>, the loss of more than 6,000 mental 
health nurses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/01/number-mental-health-nurses-nhs-drops-sixth-tories>
 and a fall to a lower per-capita number of psychiatric beds than France, 
Germany or the OECD average.

According to findings from mental health research charity MQ 
<https://www.mqmentalhealth.org/news-blog/post/mqs-campaign-swears-to-take-on-crisis-in-young-peoples-mental-health>
, more than four out of 10 people believe that mental illnesses such as anxiety 
and depression are now an inevitable part of life. Even with more prevalent 
physical illnesses we don’t have the same expectation, because we just don’t 
think about mental health in the same way. That has consequences for care, and 
the pressures politicians feel to provide it.

Sadly, young people seem to be hardest hit; only one in four young people 
referred to a professional actually gets the treatment they need. When you 
consider that 75% of mental illness starts before the age of 18, that’s a lot 
of young people surrounded by their own concerns and the inabilities of others 
to help them. Yet where is the anger? Suicide isthe biggest killer of young men 
in Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/may/18/men-suicide-mental-health>
 – replace “suicide” with any physical illness or any other aspect of our 
national life, and you would have outrage aplenty. Walk past all those people 
living on the streets, as we all do, and imagine they were lying there 
untreated, not with a psychiatric illness but a broken leg or a heart attack – 
we would have an ambulance there in no time.

Related: Theresa May's mental health pledges don't roll back years of Tory 
cuts | Hannah Jane Parkinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/09/theresa-may-mental-health-pledges-cuts>

The demand for parity must include research. To make progress, we need 
research that focuses on mental illness in young people. You only need to 
consider the progress in HIV treatment over the past 20 years to see that 
research is a huge part of the answer.

May is right that mental health care is not all about the money. But a lot of 
it is. For every person affected in the UK we spend just £8 on research. For 
dementia – £110. For cancer – £178. Good for cancer. The impacts of mental 
health problems can last a lifetime. If we were funding mental health research 
like we have other physical illnesses, things would look very different.

If you bump into May or Jeremy Hunt, point out that by not investing in care, 
by not investing in research, by not taking seriously the growing mental health 
needs of younger people in particular, we are storing up much bigger problems – 
and costs – for the future. That much, surely, is so obvious, it’s unbelievable 
we even have to say it.

Malcolm Tucker coined the phrase “not my fucking problem”. This is our 
problem, because we all have mental health and we need to do a better job of 
getting the services, understanding and research we need.
 