
It’s the lumberjacks of South Dakota that I feel sorry for. Well, them and the 
Texan steer wrestlers. There they are, grinding through the toughest, manliest 
jobs known to manly men. And then they look up from breaking some poor 
alligator’s face, or whatever it is they do on their lunch break over mouthfuls 
of boar gristle, and what do they see? Their president-elect whining about 
someone being mean about his restaurant, orgloating over The Apprentice’s 
ratings dip <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/817348644647108609> 
under Arnold Schwarzenegger. That’s not really the strongman you were 
expecting, is it?

The definition of a “baby man”, according to the Urban Dictionary 
<http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=babymen&defid=6567249>, is: “A 
fully grown man that by all appearances looks normal. However, once you get to 
know him, you realise he’s a big baby trapped in a man’s body.” Apart from the 
bit about normal appearance, Donald Trump fits this description perfectly, and 
much has been said already about his toddler tendencies. But the depressing 
truth is that Trump is no anomaly. The baby man’s passage from fringe to the 
mainstream has been happening for some time, with the past 12 months a breakout 
year.

We had former pharmaceuticals boss and crybaby Martin Shkreli leaking a 
Wu-Tang Clan album out of petulance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/09/martin-shkreli-wu-tang-clan-album-donald-trump>
 – such a naughty boy! We had José Mourinho concluding his slow descent from 
mind-games maestro to dressing-room diddums. We had Arron Banks – less a baby, 
more a kind of terrible twos in adult form – publishing a book calledThe Bad 
Boys of Brexit 
<https://www.bitebackpublishing.com/books/arron-banks-brexit-diaries> without 
irony. We hadJustin Bieber screaming because his fans were screaming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/oct/24/justin-bieber-walks-off-stage-in-manchester-after-fans-wont-stop-screaming-video>
. We had Piers Morgan. Oh, God, did we have Piers Morgan.

These baby men all have several things in common: they are all loaded, they 
are all in positions of privilege, and they should all be far happier with 
their lot. And yet, unable to achieve the constant praise and warm blankie they 
require, they yell for constant attention instead, even if they have to slander 
recently bereaved husbands or war heroes to get it. Why are we tolerating this 
widespread immaturity and not just sending them to bed with no pudding?

It wasn’t long ago that these big bubbas were nothing more than fringe 
figures, mocked for their inability to disguise the fact they had failed to 
reach full emotional maturity. They were theSteve Brookstein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/dec/05/steve-brookstein-x-factor-interview-simon-cowell-is-irrelevant>
s of the world, and you could rightly poke fun at them freely, safe in the 
knowledge that they would never amount to anything more powerful or important 
than, say,Toby Young 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/29/toby-young-head-new-schools-network-nsn-free-schools>
. These days, though, the baby man has started to be taken seriously, his 
tantrums broadcast as fact. It’s as if Young were not some hilarious goo-goo 
gah-gah pastiche but actually the godfather of a new generational mindset.

With these new manfants suddenly taking the reins of power, being a pathetic 
mewling mess has become socially acceptable. In the UK, we havethe Brexiteers 
yelling “You lost, get over it!” 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/06/24/dear-remainers-you-lost-stop-whinging-on-facebook/>
 whenever they are faced with a tricky argument. In the US, there are the
#ProudBoys <https://twitter.com/hashtag/proudboys?lang=en>, a sort of baby-man 
movement created for failed jocks who need constant reassurance that daddy 
loves them.

Where did this collective insanity come from? Social media seems largely to 
blame, which is no surprise, as most parents know that handing their mobile 
phones to an infant usually results in disaster. Controversies such as 
#Gamergate showed these crybabies that not only were people willing to listen 
to their performative whingeing, but positively indulge it. Victim culture, a 
term frequently thrown at actual victims by the right, has been taken onboard 
wholesale by the very men least likely to be victims of anything. “But, mummy,I 
want to be the snowflake!” seems to be their hidden mantra.

In a way you could say it is subversive – maybe these baby men consider 
themselves to be rejecting gender norms, and simply didn’t realise that the 
point of throwing off the shackles of masculinity was to find untapped stores 
of strength and self-fulfilment, rather than simply act like two-year-olds who 
need changing.

Which leaves me wondering where all the traditionally macho men are? You know, 
the ones who boast about pulling themselves up by their bootstraps and can’t 
stand whingers and wimps? Surely some of these guys still exist, and voted 
Republican or for Brexit? So how do they feel about being led to the 
battlefield by men whocry at mean impressions on TV 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/arts-and-entertainment/wp/2016/11/20/fake-donald-trump-returns-to-snl-and-the-real-one-is-not-happy/?utm_term=.2d56de1da9d6>
? Are they glad to let oligarchs, conspiracy theorists and foreign powers 
infiltrate their lives while their so-called leaders are too busy crying on 
Twitter to stop them?

I never thought I would be calling for the day when men were men, but liberal 
democracy hasn’t done a very good job at stopping the overgrown tots, has it? 
If we have any chance of saving 2017, it feels like someone stubbly with a 
roll-up dangling from their mouth needs to grab these babbas by the scruffs of 
their necks and shake some backbone into them. Or at least give them all a 
smacked bot-bot. Because the baby men will soon be crawling over the nuclear 
codes like it’s a Learn’n’Groove musical-activity table. And when that happens, 
curling up in the foetal position, soiling our pants and crying for mummy will 
seem like the logical response for everyone.
 