
I'm 24 and male – not your typical One Direction fan. The majority of my fan 
club <http://www.onedirectionfanclub.co.uk> members are teenage girls, but we 
do have a lot of mums, as well as women in their 20s and 30s, from as far away 
as the Philippines and even Australia. Guys my age are less common.

When I heard a film was coming out about the band 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/29/one-direction-this-is-us-review>, 
I was excited. You always leave a One Direction gig on a high. So I was 
disappointed to see how little live music we actually get in this film – most 
of it was shot backstage, to show the reality of life on the road.

Still, it was good to see how hard the boys actually work: in one scene, poor 
Zayn falls asleep for 10 minutes, and then they want him to wake up and 
instantly record an album! You get a sense, too, of how hard it is to be 
famous: the tours, time-zones, the not being able to sleep because you're still 
full of adrenaline. To anyone who saysOne Direction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/one-direction> are fake because they were 
formed through a reality show, I'd say: just look at the effort they put in. 
They're just decent, normal guys, working their asses off, for their families 
as well as their fans. Zayn has already bought a new house for his mum.

Some critics have mentioned the fact that the boys are half-naked a lot in the 
film. But I didn't think any of this was out of context – all you get are a few 
brief scenes of them changing for a photo-shoot, or Harry exercising at a 
stadium with his top off. Niall is in the studio in his boxers, but he says 
that's just how he likes it.

It's weird to think that the boys can't really go out because they'll be 
mobbed by fans. Some Directioners have a reputation for threatening behaviour, 
but that's just a minority. I monitor my chatrooms carefully, and anyone who 
behaves in an abusive or threatening manner will be banned. Ultimately, what 
really defines a Directioner is our loyalty to the band. After all, they could 
never have got where they are without their fans.

Ryan Clarke runs the One Direction Fan Club <http://onedirectionfanclub.com/>. 
One Direction: This Is Us is out now.
 