
Hometown: Brooklyn.

The lineup: Daniel Lopatin (music, production).

The background: Having Antony Hegarty as our temporary editor this week at 
theguardian.com/music <https://www.theguardian.com/music> has been an education 
because the acts he's chosen as New Bands have been so varied and vital – and 
from areas that even a column such as this, with a history of lionising the 
esoteric (and we don't meanLady Gaga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/nov/10/new-band-lady-gaga>), might 
consider arcane. It's also been expensive, since each of his choices has 
necessitated a phone call to the person in question to get them to explain what 
the hell they're about. On the other hand, although it may have cost us a small 
fortune with them being New York acts, at least our understanding of the city's 
neo-classical electronic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/oct/11/new-band-william-basinski> and 
avant-funk pop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/oct/12/new-band-jessica-6> scenes has 
never been greater.

We had already heard various murmurings about his third pick of the week, 
Oneohtrix Point Never <http://www.myspace.com/pointnever>, a highly unusual and 
experimental NYC musician who was said to be operating at several removes from 
today's vaguely interconnected chillwave and witch house/drag scenes. There was 
also anarticle written by Guardian contributor Simon Reynolds 
<http://www.villagevoice.com/2010-07-06/music/brooklyn-s-noise-scene-catches-up-to-oneohtrix-point-never/>
 for the Village Voice earlier this year that discussed Oneohtrix's Daniel 
Lopatin and his numerous projects. Via his YouTube alias,sunsetcorp 
<http://www.youtube.com/user/sunsetcorp>, there was his version – or "echo 
jam", as Lopatin labels it <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-RFunvF0mDw> – of 
Chris de Burgh's ghastly 80s hit Lady in Red, which used various synth and 
looping techniques to transform it into a work of such disarming, heart-rending 
beauty that it prompted comments ranging from "the single greatest experience I 
have ever had" to "the sole reason YouTube should exist".

Then there was Lopatin's work as Oneohtrix Point Never – particularly the 
Returnal album <http://pitchfork.com/reviews/albums/14326-returnal/>, with its 
title suggestive of an artist operating in the hauntological field of memory 
evocation. This was something else entirely. The approach was to use keyboards, 
effects and vocals to create everything from moments of serene transcendence 
worthy of a BBC2 arts show to tracks such asNil Admirari 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yDDUmFU7cuU&feature=related>, which sounds 
roughly likekid606 <http://www.myspace.com/kid606> blowtorching his way through 
Einstürzende Neubauten's <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pm_aut6RDAY> back 
catalogue.

"I've got more in common with the American noise scene, to be honest," Lopatin 
told us from his hotel room in Portugal, where he is currently on tour. 
"Especially a band such asDouble Leopards 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IROd8lE7y4k> who were from the 2000s and were 
the next logical step from hardcore – a combination of German experimental 
stuff and the Grateful Dead. It was droning put into the context of extended 
jamming. But it was really un-macho – they used to sit down and play. We called 
it floorcore. It was super-reverby, gauzy and dark."

Lopatin talks in terms of "finding ways to stay somewhere in the dead zone 
between really aestheticised genres" and describes Returnal as "an allegory or 
metaphor for cyclical things that happen in nature". He enjoyed the debate 
elicited by his De Burgh "echo jam": "Some called it complete garbage, others 
said it changed their life. It was insane," he says. "I like curating moments 
in pop that deserve to be turned into mantras." He draws parallels between a 
good blast of noise and the soothing balm of hymns. To him, they're just 
different types of "amorphous, rhythmless ambient music".

"I was in a cathedral yesterday, watching people sing as a collective break 
from the overall impending doom and gloom of everyday life, and it was the same 
kind of trip offered by my music," he says. "Sometimes my music can be 
unnerving, but it tends to create an environment where you can hear yourself 
think. I can relate to people that go to church regularly, to a place of 
worship, where you can get away from your life and listen to extremely slow, 
repetitive music, to give yourself some solace and engage with ideas that 
aren't superficial or to do with day-to-day goals and ambitions. It's a 
beautiful thing, and that's what I'm doing in my own way."

The buzz: "This type of music will make you rethink your life." 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-RFunvF0mDw.>

The truth: The man has made Chris de Burgh palatable – what else do we need to 
say?

Most likely to: Induce feelings of quasi-religious transcendence.

Least likely to: Shag the nanny 
<http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_qn4161/is_20031214/ai_n12882165/>.

What to buy: Returnal is available now 
<http://www.editionsmego.com/twiki/bin/view/Editionsmego/CataloguePage#emego104>
 on Mego.

File next to: Aphex Twin, James Ferraro, Stockhausen, William Basinksi.

Links: myspace.com/pointnever <http://www.myspace.com/pointnever>.

Thursday's new band: Matteah Baim.
 