
This statement covers all our significant findings regarding issues covered in 
theOperations <https://www.theguardian.com/sustainability/operations> section 
of the Living Our Values report to date. As we are using a rolling assurance 
process alongside the rolling publication of sections in the report, we may add 
additional findings that come to light as we investigate each section. All 
significant claims made and the data covering energy, carbon, waste recycling 
and paper sourcing in this section have been assured.

The Guardian has made further progress towards the goal of reporting 
comprehensive data that reflects the significant environmental impacts of the 
business. We previously highlighted the lack of data about the impacts of 
digital publication â€“ an area that many media organisations continue to ignore.

So it is particularly pleasing to see the Sympact project start to bear fruit 
with the publication of an estimated carbon footprint for the theguardian.com 
website. This is a difficult area to tackle and the Guardian deserves credit 
for generating some tangible numbers, albeit estimates at this stage, and for 
appointing a board-level champion with responsibility for digital 
sustainability.

Ultimately, the goal should be to understand and quantify digital impacts to 
at least the same level as the Guardian currently achieves for its paper 
publications and then to set meaningful improvement targets. There is still a 
long way to go to get to this point and the Guardian should maintain its drive 
for digital sustainability, reflecting the direction that the business is 
taking.

The availability of the Sympact data has allowed the Guardian to widen further 
the scope of its carbon footprint reporting and this is to be applauded. GNM 
should now consider presenting its carbon footprint data using the "Scopes" 
defined by the international GHG Protocol Initiative.

This template has been widely adopted by other reporting organisations and is 
increasingly being used to frame legislation (for example the draft regulations 
that will require reporting of GHG emissions by UK quoted companies). This will 
help clarify the boundaries of the footprint and facilitate comparison, both 
with previous years' data reported by the Guardian and with data reported by 
other organisations.

Last year, we commented on the lack of print site waste management data and so 
it is good to see some reported this year. At present it is not possible to 
give a comprehensive breakdown by waste category for each site, which would 
help to improve clarity of reporting for next year.

Collecting data is not an end in itself, but a means of measuring performance. 
Once again the Guardian is able to demonstrate performance improvements in 
energy use, water consumption and waste recycling in the areas where there is 
direct management control. This is a reflection of the continuing efforts of 
staff at the editorial offices and print sites to implement improvement 
initiatives day-to-day.

Managing impacts in the supply chain, where there is less direct control, is 
more difficult and the increase in emissions associated with business travel is 
an example of this. The efforts of the procurement team to integrate 
sustainability into purchasing contracts should help to address this issue, 
building on the Guardian's excellent track record of measuring and improving 
the sustainability of its paper supplies.
 