
Across Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, with growing 
numbers of baby boomers clinging to their office chairs, it has become harder 
for unskilled and semi-skilled young people to find work. Even graduates 
struggle to find work commensurate with their expertise.

“Europe needs an immediate answer on growth, youth and security issues,” said 
Sandro Gozi, Italian secretary of state for European affairs at a meeting of 
European leaders in Italy last month.

Most European leaders have wrung their hands and expressed their sympathy for 
the young as first the financial crash and then a succession of crises sent 
unemployment rates for 15- to 24-year-olds soaring.

Earlier this year, François Hollande described France’s unemployment rate as 
an “economic and social emergency”.Announcing a €2bn (£1.7bn) jobs package 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-france-economy-hollande-idUKKCN0UW11Q>, the 
French president said he was particularly upset at a youth unemployment rate 
that had topped 24%.

His answer was deeply traditional – before the end of the year he intended to 
put 500,000 unemployed into vocational training programmes, in addition to the 
150,000 announced last October.

To tackle youth unemployment more specifically, 150,000 would be enrolled in 
civic service volunteer programmes, almost three times as many as the 60,000 
youngsters enrolled in 2015.

State-run training programmes are nothing new in France and are often used to 
fill a jobs void. The suspicion must be that whenthe July youth unemployment 
figures 
<http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Unemployment_statistics>
 for the eurozone showed a drop of 136,000, and France’s unemployment ratefell 
below 10% for the first time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/18/french-unemployment-rate-falls-first-time-2012-francois-hollande>
 in his presidency, the falls could be largely attributed to Hollande’s civic 
service scheme, rather than a resurgent private sector.
 Italian prime minister Matteo Renzi overturned rules that restricted firms 
from hiring and firing, making the jobs market even more flexible and insecure. 
Photograph: Imago / Barcroft Images 
Germany’s, and France’s, answer has been to devise work schemes and skills 
centres that aim to make the young ready for work at least by the time they are 
30. And the use of internships, short-term and flexible contracts is equally 
rife. Like companies in the UK, German firms look around for ways to cut costs 
to afford the hugely expensive benefits negotiated by older, often unionised, 
workers. Invariably, they turn to the young for savings.

The scale of this attack on the terms and conditions of young workers in 
France and Germany pales compared to the brutal exploitation of under-25s in 
Spain, Italy, Portugal and Greece. These countries have always assumed young 
people will live at home while they are educated and trained for the workplace. 
Eight years after the financial crisis, this situation can only be described as 
extreme.

In Italy, around 80% of under-30s live in their parental home and the average 
age for achieving “economic independence” is estimated at 35. Thousands still 
leave for Germany and Britain and those who stay must work with few benefits 
and little job security.

Italian prime minister Matteo Renzi spent his first months in office 
overturning rules that restricted firms from hiring and firing, making the jobs 
market even more flexible and insecure. This policy,tax cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/12/italian-pm-matteo-renzi-electoral-reform-law-italy>
 and the end of a long recession last year has brought Italy’s youth 
unemployment rate down from 43% in 2014 to 39.2% in July 2016.

It is also worth noting that, as with the other Mediterranean countries, the 
official figures fail to reveal a huge hidden economy that offers work 
cash-in-hand to young people. These tax-free payments keep their heads 
financially above water from week to week, but don’t allow them to purchase a 
home, start a family or save for a pension.

Renzi wants Brussels to sanction a huge investment drive across Europe, in the 
wake of Britain’s Brexit vote, to encourage private companies to train young 
workers. It’s easy to see why, when the Italian economy is weighed down by 
troubled banks and the finance ministry is out of funds. But getting agreement 
from the rest of Europe, and Germany in particular, will be difficult. In the 
meantime, the continent’s youth will experience differing fortunes.
 