
Spoiler alert: this article will discuss the entire fourth season of Orange is 
the New Black <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/orange-is-the-new-black>
. Do not read on if you haven’t watched it.


Whether it’s wise-cracking junkie Nicky, jubilant Taystee, conniving Red or 
perpetual Emmy winner Suzanne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/05/uzo-aduba-orange-new-black-crush>
, Orange is the New Black’s greatest strength has always been its excellent 
characters. Fans enjoy spending time with them so much that it doesn’t really 
matter how good or bad a season is – just sitting around in these women’s bunks 
is entertainment enough.

The final two episodes of the fourth season were nearly impossible to get 
through without weeping after the accidental death ofPoussey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/jun/23/orange-is-the-new-black-samira-wiley-interview>
, who was always trying to broker peace and lighten the lives of those around 
her – and who died protecting Suzanne. When her best friend Taystee dropped to 
the ground beside her corpse, and when her family mourned her in the yard, it 
incitedTerms of Endearment <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0086425/> levels of 
blubbing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Forange-is-the-new-black-season-four-review-criminally-close-to-greatness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdec57a931fa3115d263df0ab528cb3fc0449df77%2F0_0_3600_2400%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Orange%20is%20the%20New%20Black%20season%20four%20review%20%E2%80%93%20criminally%20close%20to%20greatness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Forange-is-the-new-black-season-four-review-criminally-close-to-greatness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Orange%20is%20the%20New%20Black%20season%20four%20review%20%E2%80%93%20criminally%20close%20to%20greatness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Forange-is-the-new-black-season-four-review-criminally-close-to-greatness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdec57a931fa3115d263df0ab528cb3fc0449df77%2F0_0_3600_2400%2F3600.jpg>
 Poussey, who was always trying to lighten the lives of those around her. 
Photograph: Netflix 
There were other horrific moments, like CO Bayley shuffling through the halls 
after realising he murdered Poussey, knowing that his life was essentially over 
as well. Then there was the look on Piper’s face when the race-baiting she 
incited to keep her illegal panty business afloat led her to be branded with a 
swastika. And Lolly being hauled off to the psych ward for a crime she (kind 
of) didn’t commit? Awful.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Forange-is-the-new-black-season-four-review-criminally-close-to-greatness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F238fd271fc9ac61d6652c7a90862a07de9d37796%2F0_0_3606_2164%2F3606.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Orange%20is%20the%20New%20Black%20season%20four%20review%20%E2%80%93%20criminally%20close%20to%20greatness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Forange-is-the-new-black-season-four-review-criminally-close-to-greatness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Orange%20is%20the%20New%20Black%20season%20four%20review%20%E2%80%93%20criminally%20close%20to%20greatness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Forange-is-the-new-black-season-four-review-criminally-close-to-greatness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F238fd271fc9ac61d6652c7a90862a07de9d37796%2F0_0_3606_2164%2F3606.jpg>
 CO Bayley, who accidentally killed Poussey. Photograph: Netflix 
Yet for every chest-seizing moment, there was one that felt messy or 
arbitrary. Consider CO Healy: when he calls his estranged mail-order bride to 
say goodbye then walks into the water to commit suicide, it was devastating. 
But the buildup was perhaps insufficient: he had always seemed a little 
unbalanced, but Healy’s snap was a sudden one.

Orange Is the New Black: 'This show will change the fabric of our culture'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/17/orange-is-the-new-black-this-show-will-change-the-fabric-of-our-culture>
Similarly, the cliffhanger ending in which Daya points a gun at one of the 
guards was thrilling – but just how did she reach that point? We barely saw her 
all season and then, after losing her mum and spending two scenes in the beauty 
parlour with Maria and her Dominican gang, she’s ready to take an officer’s 
life?

There were plenty of other narrative flaws besides. Granted, the guard Alex 
killed at the start of the season was a recent hire, but did no one notice that 
he never clocked out? There was documentation that he worked at the prison, 
which Caputo inspected after his corpse was found. He might have been new, but 
hadn’t his car been sitting in the parking lot for as long as his body was 
fertilising the garden?

The worst, though, was Doggett’s about-turn on her rapist, Coates. I 
understand her arc of forgiveness, and the scene with Boo in which she explains 
her decision to let go of her anger was one of the best of the season. However, 
it didn’t seem like she forgave him so much as decided she had the hots for him 
again. I could understand how, in prison, she might have developed some sort of 
Stockholm syndrome, falling back in love with the one man who pays her 
attention, but that doesn’t tally with her Biblical justification for 
forgiveness.

At its best, Orange is the New Black is a finely constructed and deeply 
rendered show about how we’re all ground under the boot of the greater forces 
of society. Just look at the slow-simmering rage between the inmates and guards 
that led to a justified riot in the finale. That was handled perfectly.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Forange-is-the-new-black-season-four-review-criminally-close-to-greatness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd9c1cb3aefd79b18f189fc3caea271dffb8d05f%2F0_194_3606_2164%2F3606.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Orange%20is%20the%20New%20Black%20season%20four%20review%20%E2%80%93%20criminally%20close%20to%20greatness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Forange-is-the-new-black-season-four-review-criminally-close-to-greatness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Orange%20is%20the%20New%20Black%20season%20four%20review%20%E2%80%93%20criminally%20close%20to%20greatness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Forange-is-the-new-black-season-four-review-criminally-close-to-greatness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd9c1cb3aefd79b18f189fc3caea271dffb8d05f%2F0_194_3606_2164%2F3606.jpg>
 Indulgent and unrealistic … celebrity inmate Judy King. Photograph: Netflix 
But, at its worst, it is a garbled mess in which Piper can go from running a 
lucrative illegal operation to suddenly stopping with little explanation (but 
plenty of justification). It can be indulgent and unrealistic, à la the Judy 
King storyline. It was a waste of time on a woman who was clearly an 
amalgamation of Martha Stewart and Paula Deen, without offering any insight 
other than a few chuckles about a drug-fuelled threesome.

Orange is the New Black renewed for three additional seasons
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/05/orange-is-the-new-black-renewed-new-season-netflix>
The decisions over who got airtime seemed off-kilter this season, too: we saw 
barely any of Boo, Norma, Daya or Chang (who disappeared entirely after the 
first episode). Both Maria and Blanca stepping to the fore was great, but sadly 
each new body either replaces an old one or pushes it further down a hole. Of 
course, the cast needs to be huge to mimic the crush of bodies in a 
correctional facility, but at times it feels too sprawling.

With an almost literal cast of thousands, four of the 13 episodes didn’t 
feature flashbacks about any of the characters. After using this technique for 
virtually every episode of the series, it’s as if the writers got lazy and 
decided to forego the format that they devised and that viewers are expecting.

Yes, it all comes back to the characters, because that has always been the 
show’s strong suit. But with three more seasons in the pipeline thanks to a big 
renewal fromNetflix <https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix>, the show 
struggles with keeping everyone locked in the chain gang and crushing the same 
boulders. Of course it is enjoyable, often transcendent, television – and this 
season has been more political than ever before and wonderfully critical of the 
for-profit prison system in the US – but the unevenness is what keeps this 
great show from being criminally excellent.
 