
In 2004, Piper Kerman, a woman from a wealthy Boston family, served 13 months 
of a 15-month prison sentence for drug-trafficking and money-laundering 
offences. In 2010, she turned that experience into a bestselling memoir, Orange 
Is The New Black: My Year In A Women's Prison, which told stories of life on 
the inside and attempted to put a human face to the 2.4 million people 
currently incarcerated in the United States.

"I thought that if I was successful at what I wanted to achieve," she 
explains, over a coffee near her home in Brooklyn, "then people would come away 
from the book thinking differently about who was in prison and why they were 
there, and what really happens in there."

She could not have imagined just how successful she would be. In June 2013, 
the streaming serviceNetflix <https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> 
unveiled the seriesOrange Is The New Black 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/orange-is-the-new-black>, an oddball, 
13-episode comedy-drama loosely based on Kerman's story. It already had two 
high-profile shows in its stable:House Of Cards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/house-of-cards>, the campy political 
thriller starring award magnets Kevin Spacey and Robin Wright, and the rebooted 
sitcomArrested Development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/arrested-development>. But at the end 
of the year, Netflix, usually tightlipped about its viewing figures, revealed 
that Orange Is The New Black was its most popular original show. The underdog 
had become a sensation.

Kerman, who acts as a consultant on Orange (everyone on the show uses the 
shorthand name), and is a prominent advocate for penal reform, says she knew 
early on that she wanted her story to be told on TV. "Even the best,best 
bestselling book only reaches a fraction of the people that filmed 
entertainment reaches," she says. Plus, she goes on, television is longer and 
goes deeper. "Film is reductive to a single protagonist, but a series allows 
you a degree of latitude. What was interesting about my story was not my story 
solely, but the fact that it interlays with all these others."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fe99SkdcB2UU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fe99SkdcB2UU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fe99SkdcB2UU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>

Reading this on mobile? Click here to view <>

The drama initially centres on a fictional version of Kerman, Piper Chapman. 
She's played with impressive range by Taylor Schilling, who runs the gamut from 
wide-eyed terror to steely self-preservation. In the Litchfield Penitentiary, 
where Chapman serves her sentence, she does battle with petty bureaucracy, 
abusive guards, fundamentalist bigots, the etiquette of prison's micro-society, 
defective tumble-dryers and the hunt for a mythical chicken that may or may not 
represent hope and freedom for her fellow inmates.

Though the chicken is TV fantasy, Kerman says a surprising amount of the show 
is rooted in the truth. "I met the warden of a very large women's prison in the 
midwest, and she said, 'Oh, we love the show.' And I said, 'Really?' And she 
said, 'Oh yeah: we have a [born-again Christian] Pennsatucky, we have a 
[Chapman's would-be prison wife] Crazy Eyes. My response to this warden was, 
'Of course you have a Pornstache, then,'" referring to the magnificently 
moustached corrupt guard (played byThe Wire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wire>'s Pablo Schreiber) who brings drugs 
into the prison and has sex with the inmates.

"When you talk about something like the criminal justice system in America, 
there are inherently political strands," Kerman continues. "Race drives 
incarceration, and people are disproportionately punished based on their social 
situation, so it would be impossible to have a show about prison and not touch 
on political questions. But it goes back to the intimacy of a series; you 
invest yourself in those characters and the fact that you really care about 
them and what happens to them and why, that raises questions."

The show is now entering its second season, and while it covers plenty of new 
ground – a fresh arrival and wannabe top dog, Vee, sets about dividing up the 
prison along racial lines, and we get the backstories (the show loves a 
flashback) of online fraudster Morello and Poussey, a sharp-tongued 
wise-cracker previously used more as a comic foil – it's the central romance 
between Chapman and her former criminal cohort Alex Vause that has many fans 
hooked. The pair's destructive, co-dependent love story drives much of the 
first season, and is the catalyst for a huge shocker at the start of the second.

Laura Prepon, who plays Vause, explains its appeal over the phone. "It's a 
rocky relationship, it's very tumultuous, but I think the reason fans love it 
so much is because it's a true love they have for each other, but they just 
keep fucking it up. [Alex] is a straight-shooter, she doesn't mince her words, 
but she's also a truthful, vulnerable person. Piper really is the love of her 
life, and you see her hurt and vulnerable when she's dealing with love."

Plus, of course, Vause has got attitude. "She's a total badass," agrees 
Prepon, who suddenly begins to shout. "Oh my God, there's all these girls 
running by the car right now," she shouts. "They're really running! This is 
crazy. There are girls surrounding the car!"

Prepon has her theories about why Orange has caused such a fuss. "You never 
see a show with this many strong independent women on TV, and audiences want 
that. They're hungry for that, and it's pretty incredible." In many ways, its 
success can be seen as a defiant middle finger to traditional television 
models. Showrunner Jenji Kohan, who also created Weeds, took Orange to various 
cable executives; they all passed, leavingNetflix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> to take the chance. "Nothing is 
taboo for Jenji," says Prepon. "We're just trying to tell these stories in an 
authentic, honest way, about these women who are stripped of their creature 
comforts and are thrown into this environment where it's not about the makeup 
and the wardrobe and the hair. It's about what these women are dealing with."
 On set 
In August 2013, two months after Orange first appeared, BuzzFeed 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/> reported that Prepon was leaving the show. It caused 
a stink: some sites even speculated that Prepon's Scientology beliefs meant she 
was no longer comfortable playing a lesbian, a point she has always denied. 
Eventually, it was announced that she would be back for one episode, and then 
for four. "Because of a scheduling conflict, I wasn't able to be in the whole 
season, but I did as many as I could," she says now. Netflix, being relatively 
new to the series game, doesn't have six-year contracts in the way that 
traditional television does, though that "has changed a little bit" according 
to Prepon. "We're like pioneers of this new frontier, in terms of a place like 
Netflix making its own shows. It's a learning curve for all of us … But we 
already handled that, so I can be in every episode of season three." She will 
be filming it by the time season two appears online.

According to Uzo Aduba, who plays Crazy Eyes, this second season is darker 
than its predecessor, though given that the first ended with a formerly 
meth-addled fundamentalist being beaten to a pulp while Christmas carols were 
sung in the background, that's a lofty promise. "In season two, we definitely 
go deeper," says Aduba. "Not just for Suzanne [her character's real name] but 
deeper into the show. It's like you start season one at the entrance gate of 
Litchfield and then go further into the walls. You're really brought in through 
the lens of Piper. We see everyone through the sort of funhouse mirror image 
that she sees them in, because they're so foreign. But as the show begins to 
develop, and she settles more into the world in which she lives, we start to 
really see the people as who they are."

Jenji Kohan has spoken in the past about using the character of Chapman, a 
white, wealthy blonde woman, as her "Trojan horse", a way of telling stories 
that might not ordinarily be heard. Kerman thinks this says more about the 
entertainment business than it does about what viewers actually want, however. 
"Jenji said she couldn't go to a major media company and say, 'I want to make a 
show about a wide mosaic of women of all ages and races, and they're going to 
be poor…' Viewers are more receptive to a huge amount of different stories than 
perhaps media executives give them credit for."

As we talk, Kerman suddenly spots a familiar face: "Oh, my husband just walked 
in!" The real Larry, played by Jason Biggs in the show and much derided by fans 
online, comes over and gives the real Piper a kiss. I ask Larry what he thinks 
of TV Larry. "He's not nearly as hot," he jokes. "I appreciate my friend's 
teenage daughter saying, 'Dude, you're much cooler than that guy on TV.' It's 
just a kick, you know?"

For Kerman, whose fictional self takes up a lot more screentime, there is a 
lot more to consider. "I think she's a really well-done character," she says, 
laughing. "Sometimes I watch between my fingers: 'Oh no, don't do that!' I made 
plenty of mistakes when I was incarcerated. They don't mirror her choices, but 
her choices are very believable and as a human being, to be in this situation, 
which is scary and unfamiliar, you cling rather desperately to the things that 
make you feel better, even though they might not be the best thing for you." 
And with that, she nails the appeal of the show: "Any of us can relate to that, 
right?"

The whole of season two of Orange Is The New Black is on Netflix now
 