
To encapsulate what has made Orange Is the New Black one of the most-forward 
thinking television shows around, you only need to look as far as the opening 
credits. As the short sequence flashes through women’s faces – young, old, of 
varying race, ethnicity and eye colour, with freckles, frown-lines and scars – 
it uncompromisingly embraces the female form in all its manifestations.

This weekend marks the return of the hit Netflix series set in a women’s 
prison, which, over three seasons, has not only become the most popular show on 
the streaming site but also permanently changed the portrayal of female 
characters on TV.

Refusing to conform to stereotypes, the show’s writer Jenji Kohan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/27/orange-is-the-new-blacks-jenji-kohan-women-tend-to-be-forgotten-when-they-get-locked-up>
 embraced the racial and ethnic “tribes” that exist in real-life US prisons and 
penned a show whose diverse cast exposed how much the rest of TV drama is 
dominated by two-dimensional, mainly heterosexual, white female characters.

The highly anticipated fourth season, which focuses on prison overcrowding and 
the impact of privatisation, is no different.

Orange is the New Black: season four will take over your life, without parole
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/15/orange-is-the-new-black-season-four-review>
“These women are unapologetic for their flaws, for being in your face, for 
making mistakes and speaking their mind,” said Kate Mulgrew, who plays Red, a 
fierce Russian woman locked up for mafia activity.

“TV had been afraid to show this side of women up till now. Hollywood and TV 
networks are a big misogynist machine and it wants you to aspire to the perfect 
female form, and the perfect man seducing her, with the men pulling the 
strings. But that’s not true life and we know that. The men are not pulling the 
strings here and that is in great evidence. It is liberating and scary and 
invigorating to be a part of.”

Orange Is the New Black arrived on Netflix in 2013 and it did not take long 
for it to become a global sensation. Based on the real-life experiences of 
Piper Kerman, a well-to-do woman who served a 15-month sentence for drug 
trafficking, the show has grappled openly with female sexuality across all ages 
(something Mulgrew says television has “avoided” until now) as well as racism, 
homophobia and religious extremism. It was also one of the first to feature a 
transgender actor, Laverne Cox, playing a transgender character, and tackled 
the implications that would have in prison.

Yet neither Mulgrew nor her co-star Selenis Leyva, who plays the 
over-protective Gloria Mendoza, would call Orange Is the New Black a feminist 
show.


“No, that’s far too simplistic,” said Mulgrew. “Of course it’s strongly 
feminist but also strongly anti-feminist when you look at some of the 
individual characters and the prejudices they hold.”


Leyva added: “I would say it is strongly human, about exposing what the 
humanity of women really looks like … and sometimes that can be ugly.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Forange-is-the-new-black-this-show-will-change-the-fabric-of-our-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05011bff50f4f42078fd3ed79fe335d85a191974%2F0_125_3144_1887%2F3144.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Orange%20Is%20the%20New%20Black%3A%20'This%20show%20will%20change%20the%20fabric%20of%20our%20culture'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Forange-is-the-new-black-this-show-will-change-the-fabric-of-our-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Orange%20Is%20the%20New%20Black%3A%20%27This%20show%20will%20change%20the%20fabric%20of%20our%20culture%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Forange-is-the-new-black-this-show-will-change-the-fabric-of-our-culture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05011bff50f4f42078fd3ed79fe335d85a191974%2F0_125_3144_1887%2F3144.jpg>
 Stars and the writer of Orange Is the New Black at the New York premiere of 
season four. Photograph: StarPix/Rex/Shutterstock 
For Mulgrew, Kohan’s treatment of a rape scene in the previous season, which 
saw the character Tiffany “Pennsatucky” Doggett sexually abused by an officer, 
illustrates the show’s wider importance. The officer is shown as a product of 
his environment, who afterwards asks a friend what he did wrong.

“You think she examined rape in a conventional way? No,” said Mulgrew. “Every 
third woman in America has been raped and this was about showing why this is 
allowed to happen. That officer didn’t think that he was committing rape – he 
had complete ignorance of his own act. That raises bigger questions about this 
question of consent; we have to look at this man and realise his act is a 
result of his parenting, his education, his background, our society. Young boys 
still need to be taught, it’s that simple.”

She added: “It’s a step forward on television because it represents truth. 
Jenji’s not interested in making you feel liberated as a left-leaning political 
person, as a gay person or a Latina. She’s forcing us all to go deeper because 
only then will things change.”

The series’ unflinching examination of the difficulties and prejudices faced 
by a transgender woman at the hands of other prisoners has also proved at times 
a challenge for the cast.


Leyva, whose own sister is transgender, admitted she felt very uncomfortable 
when she read the abuse that Cox’s character Sophia had to face last season.


She said: “What Laverne’s character was put through got really ugly and to be 
a part of that for me was sheer horror. I wanted to protect my co-star because 
I knew that the words, although to some are fictional, are in fact very real 
and are spoken to people as an attack on transgender women and men.


Orange is the New Black's Jenji Kohan: 'Women tend to be forgotten when they 
get locked up'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/27/orange-is-the-new-blacks-jenji-kohan-women-tend-to-be-forgotten-when-they-get-locked-up>
“But I also knew that we had to get really in your face, because that’s how 
most people talk in the privacy of their own tribes – and how genius of Jenji, 
because that’s what starts conversations. Only by airing people’s prejudices 
can we change them.”


 Leyva is open about how tough it was to accept her transgender sister as a 
woman, both for her and her devoutly religious mother.


“I had a hard time with it,” she said. “I can’t just say I was perfectly fine 
with it from day one – that’s not the truth. Not because I wasn’t supportive or 
open but because I then had to mourn the loss of someone I loved and that I 
grew up with. It took me a while to use the right pronouns naturally, it took 
me a while to not be sad or angry. We all went through a very tough time in our 
family.”

Leyva said that while some of her family do not accept her sister, she wanted 
to commend her mother “who comes from the Caribbean with strong Catholic roots. 
And now she will march at Pride because she loves her daughter.”

She is proud, she added, to have been part of a show that championed this 
issue even before figures such as Caitlyn Jenner pushed the issue into the 
spotlight. “Suddenly you are watching this and you don’t feel alone,” she said.


Mulgrew added: “But also it agitates and that’s what makes real change. This 
show will change the fabric of our culture.”

• Orange Is the New Black season four is available on Netflix now. 

 