
George Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> has said 
he will continue to take “difficult decisions” after he embarked on a 
spectacular U-turn on his planned tax credits cuts and to spare frontline 
policing from severe austerity.

The chancellor said he would continue to cut day-to-day government spending 
and the welfare budget as he seeks to adopt an “inherently cautious approach” 
to deliver an overall budget surplus of £10.1bn by 2019-20.

Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, the chancellor said he had listened 
to critics after he abandoned his plans to cut £4.4bn from tax credits.

Osborne declined to apologise or to admit that he had made a mistake after he 
outlined the cuts in his July budget as part of his plan to deliver £12bn in 
welfare savings. Osborne will still deliver that overall level of cuts but will 
use £27bn of fiscal wriggle room gifted by the Office for Budget 
Reponsibility’s more benign forecast for tax receipts.

Asked by the Today presenter Nick Robinson whether he was admitting he had 
made a mistake and was apologising or whether he had simply been forced to 
change tack by critics, the chancellor said his “central judgment” to move to a 
lower welfare and higher wage economy was the right one.

“We are moving in the right direction and we are making billions of pounds of 
savings in the welfare budget. But people raised concerns with me that the 
speed of getting there was too quick, that we weren’t doing enough to help 
families in the transition. And because the public finances had improved a 
little I could use some of that improvement to smooth the transition to that 
lower welfare economy. So we are heading in the same direction, we are just 
taking an easier path to it.”

George Osborne scraps tax credit cuts in welfare U-turn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/25/george-osborne-u-turn-scrap-tax-credit-cuts-autumn-statement>
Osborne made clear that he was not abandoning his overall approach, which is 
to eliminate the structural budget deficit two years before the 2020 election 
and to deliver an overall budget surplus of £10.1bn a year before the election.

He said: “It is not an end to the difficult decisions, that spending review. 
There are going to be difficult choices for different government departments. 
Billions of pounds of savings, billions of pounds of savings in the welfare 
budget as well. This spending review sets out what Britain needs to do to stop 
borrowing, run a surplus, pay down our debt. It takes those difficult decisions 
in day-to-day spending so we can invest in the long term.” The chancellor added 
that there was “light at the end of the tunnel”.

 Cuts to universal credit – the benefit set to replace tax credits for most 
claimants in the last years of the parliament – are to go ahead. About 140,000 
people currently receive universal credit.

The cut to work allowances in universal credit was announced in the summer 
budget, and according to specialist thinktanks it will leave about 3m 
households about £1,000 a year worse off on average by 2020 than if tax credits 
had remained at their current levels.

The Resolution Foundation welcomed the change to tax credits but said it was 
pain delayed rather than abandoned. A single parent with one child, working 
part-time on the national living wage and making a new universal credit claim, 
would lose £2,800 by 2020, the thinktank said.

According to analysis by Liverpool Economics for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/25/so-osborne-scrapped-tax-credit-cuts-but-what-of-universal-credit>
, the losses will come sooner for those already on universal credit. A working 
single parent with two children will be £2,600 worse off by April 2016.

Osborne’s U-turn on tax credits means he faces the political embarrassment of 
needing to go to the Commons to seek permission to breach his self-imposed 
welfare cap for three years from 2016.


Overall, he described the spending review as the work of “the mainstream 
representatives of the working people of Britain”.

John McDonnell, the shadow chancellor, claimed Osborne’s change of heart on 
tax credits and police budgets as a “victory for Labour”, but alsodismayed some 
Labour MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/25/john-mcdonnell-mao-zedong-little-red-book-george-osborne>
 by tossing a copy of Chairman Mao’s Little Red Book at the chancellor in an 
attempt to illustrate that the Treasury was flogging off state assets to the 
Chinese.


The OBR made substantial upward revisions to its projections for VAT and 
corporation tax, and reduced its forecast for interest payments on the UK’s 
national debt.

Osborne announced three major tax changes that will raise a total of £28.5bn 
over the next five years. The chancellor said he would raise £3bn a year from a 
new apprenticeship levy on bigger businesses; £2bn a year from councils, which 
will be given greater power and financial responsibility but smaller government 
grants; and £1bn fromhigher stamp duty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/25/george-osborne-unveils-his-bold-plan-to-tackle-housing-crisis>
 – an extra three percentage points – on the purchase of buy-to-let properties 
and second homes.

Together with the pick-up in tax receipts, this allowed the chancellor to 
safeguard the £10bn budget surplus he has pencilled in for the final year of 
the parliament.

public sector net borowing 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/11/budget_eyeline_web_psbr/giv-32650zFO6DgZ7yTb1/>
Against a backdrop of weaker global growth, the chancellor said a surplus was 
necessary to ensure that Britain was ready for any storms that might lie ahead. 
“We are mending the roof while the sun is shining,” he said.

Osborne said a doubling of the housing budget would ensure the biggest 
housebuilding programme by any government since the 1970s. He also announced an 
extension to London of the Treasury’s help-to-buy scheme – originally supposed 
to be a time-limited three-year programme when introduced in 2013.


Homebuyers in the capital able to find a 5% deposit will be able to get an 
interest-free loan worth up to 40% of the value of a newly built home. The idea 
had been strongly pushed by Zac Goldsmith, the Conservative candidate in next 
May’s London mayoral election, which is being seen as the first big test of 
Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour party leadership.

Ray Boulger, of the mortgage advisers John Charcol, said the delay until next 
April in bringing in the changes to stamp duty risked setting off a property 
boom. “Giving four months notice of a substantial (150% for properties between 
£125,001 and £250,000) increase in stamp duty land tax brings back memories of 
the short-term boom before bust in 1988 caused by the chancellor giving similar 
notice of the abolition of double Miras (mortgage interest relief at source).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthree-minute-video-analysis-george-osbornes-autumn-statement-is-a-big-gamble&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F25%2F1448465552814%2FKP_601504_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Three-minute%20video%20analysis%3A%20George%20Osborne's%20autumn%20statement%20is%20a%20big%20gamble&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthree-minute-video-analysis-george-osbornes-autumn-statement-is-a-big-gamble>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Three-minute%20video%20analysis%3A%20George%20Osborne%27s%20autumn%20statement%20is%20a%20big%20gamble&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthree-minute-video-analysis-george-osbornes-autumn-statement-is-a-big-gamble&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F25%2F1448465552814%2FKP_601504_crop_640x480.jpg>
Three-minute video analysis: George Osborne’s autumn statement is a big gamble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2015/nov/25/three-minute-video-analysis-george-osbornes-autumn-statement-is-a-big-gamble>
Each of the successive five draft forecasts sent confidentially to the 
chancellor by the OBR before the spending review wasmore optimistic than the 
previous one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/25/obr-admits-uncertainty-over-27bn-windfall-behind-tax-credit-u-turn>
, giving the chancellor more and more leeway to meet his goal of putting the 
overall budget into surplus by 2019-20, execute a U-turn on tax credits and 
spare many government departments some of the pain they were expecting. In 
March, government departments faced a cumulative spending cut of £30bn by 
2019-20. These estimates fell to £18bn in July and £10.4bn in November.


Nevertheless, the spending review contained an array of cuts that will change 
the shape of the state, adding up to cumulative cuts of more than 45% for many 
key departments since 2009-10.

Specific changes include:

 * An end to grants for student nurses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/21/george-osborne-considers-axeing-student-nurse-bursaries>
, who must now pay for their own training with the help of loans. The cap on 
recruitment of student nurses will be lifted.

 * Higher student loan repayments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/nov/25/student-loans-george-osborne-criticised-freezing-repayment-threshold>
 for people who have graduated since 2012. They will have to pay about £300 a 
year more. 
 * A £15m boost for women’s charities to be paid from the so-called tampon tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/25/tampon-tax-15m-womens-charities-george-osborne-spending-review>
 – the VAT levied on sanitary products. 
 * A cap on housing benefit rates in the social housing sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2015/nov/18/who-lives-41-million-social-housing-homes-england-wales>
, limiting them to the same rate as private-sector housing benefit rates. 
 * A 19% cut in state funding for opposition parties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/25/osborne-accused-of-despicable-attempt-to-cut-opposition-party-funding>
. 
 * An overhaul of schools funding to even out regional variations and cuts to 
the further education budget that will mean funding per student for 16- to 
19-year-olds in sixth forms and colleges is cut by 9.4% by 2020.  