
Around the time the Queen was born, when Britain was facing its worst 
depression in living memory and the Wall Street crash was about to make it 
much, much worse, it dawned on the people in Whitehall that many local councils 
were trying to weave services out of thin air.

In areas where jobs were scarce as hen’s teeth and every other working man was 
unemployed, some places simply couldn’t afford to provide the most basic 
services. In response, Whitehall devised a system of sharing local taxes 
between rich boroughs and poor boroughs.

It was an ingenious idea that reflected and supported a sense of national 
solidarity that was deepened by the southward tramp of the hunger marches and 
compounded by the wartime experience of conscription, when the officer class 
encountered, often for the first time, the face of poverty.

Yesterday, George Osborne sounded its death knell.

Osborne wants a leaner, meaner state, and he wants leaner, meaner local 
government too. The message in the autumn statement was about devolution and 
autonomy. But in the language of the Treasury Red Book, that means cuts: cuts 
twice as deep as those that have already left town halls excising soft tissue, 
closing swimming pools and libraries and selling off assets left by the city 
fathers, such as the endowment ofrare ceramics that Croydon flogged to the 
Chinese <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-25120096> a couple of 
years ago to raise £8m.

On city treasurers’ own analysis, there will be a black hole in local finances 
so big 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/25/local-government-councils-funding-gap-critical-budget-cuts-social-care-spending-review>
 that even closing every single children’s centre, library, museum and park 
would not fill it.

Cuts are not invariably catastrophic. Every organisation has a tendency to 
grow fat and set in its ways; change is usually painful, and sometimes it needs 
a forceful external event to make it happen. It’s a little bit like catching 
sight of yourself in a window and realising that, yes, 7lbs extra does actually 
show. Only this is about something that actually matters to thousands of people.

The Osborne argument would go something like this: look at how well councils 
have handled the cuts so far, confirming that a) they were flabby and b) they 
just needed a bit of a kicking to become more innovative and efficient. Then, 
he would add, councils will be able to keep the money they raise from their 
business rates, and they will have the right to raise an extra 2% on their 
council tax to help with the soaring bill for social care. They will be able to 
stand on their own feet, autonomous.

This will be fine in Westminster, and probably in Knutsford, the town at the 
heart of George Osborne’s constituency; it will probably not be fine in 
Liverpool or Gateshead or Barrow or Stoke, or almost anywhere where Labour 
clings to power. There, councils’ income from business rates – which they will 
want to keep low or at least to discount in order to encourage more business – 
will be inadequate, and their council tax base will not generate enough to 
cover a shortfall in social care funding that is reckoned at £6bn.

There are several aspects of government policy that are truly puzzling, such 
as giving up on going green. But its approach to social care is mad, or bad, or 
both. It ignores thefindings 
<http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20130804121109/http://caringforourfuture.dh.gov.uk/2013/02/11/what-is-dilnot/>
 of the report it commissioned; it piles on new obligations; it mandates the 
national living wage and then it pulls out the already threadbare carpet of 
funding that supports them.

David Cameron hasn’t the faintest idea how deep his cuts go. This letter 
proves it | George Monbiot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/11/david-cameron-letter-cuts-oxfordshire>
The most generous interpretation is that Osborne believes there will be a 
resurgence of Edwardian philanthropy to go with Edwardian levels of income 
inequality. Maybe that was why hefound £5m for the Burrell collection in Glasgow
 
<http://www.heraldscotland.com/news/14100677.UK_Spending_Review_finds___5m_for___66m_revamp_of_Glasgow_s_Burrell_Collection/?ref=rss>
, that enormous assembly of cultural artefacts donated by the eponymous 
shipping magnate in the first part of the 20th century. Perhaps he pictures 
footballers endowing retirement homes and Big Brother winners underwriting 
children’s centres.

Or maybe he just wants everyone to pay more out of their own pockets. Or 
maybe, just maybe, he really doesn’t understand what his scheme means in real 
life. The way David Cameron doesn’t, ashe revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/11/david-cameron-letter-cuts-oxfordshire>
 in hislong and bemused complaint to his own Oxfordshire county council leader, 
Ian Hudspeth 
<https://www.scribd.com/fullscreen/289244432?access_key=key-2ZHPBfWYIpD2Sv2BQndU&allow_share=true&escape=false&show_recommendations=false&view_mode=slideshow>
.

People used to wonder whether Osborne was talking about a northern powerhouse 
or a northern poorhouse. Now we know.
 