
After George Osborne’s autumn statement failed to deliver the damage to 
charities and voluntary organisations that had been rumoured, there were 
feelings of relief, frustration and, dare I say, a little optimism.

First the relief. The Department for Culture, Media and Sport was allegedly 
planning to take £320m from charity funder the Big Lottery Fund 
<http://www.thirdsector.co.uk/treasury-accused-planning-slash-320m-big-lottery-fund-spending-review/policy-and-politics/article/1372765>
 to replace lost statutory grants for arts and sport. A specific commitment 
that the Big Lottery Fund will not be raided is good news for the sector and 
should be warmly welcomed. More broadly, many charities who support the working 
poor will be relieved at the reversal of the decision to cut tax credits, but 
will be mindful thatthe roll-out of universal credit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/25/so-osborne-scrapped-tax-credit-cuts-but-what-of-universal-credit>
 may be storing up problems for the longer term.

Tampon tax: men should share the burden of ending domestic abuse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/nov/25/tampon-tax-domestic-abuse-spending-review>
Second, the frustration. Uncertainty prevails regarding the Treasury’s 
intentions towards business-rate relief for charities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/oct/07/what-do-the-changes-to-business-rates-mean-for-charities>
. The risk is that the 80% mandatory tax discount for charities will be 
localised and de-ringfenced, leaving £1.4bn of charitable discounts at the 
discretion of hundreds of hard-pressed local authorities. The discount on 
business rates, the local taxes that organisations pay for the property they 
rent or own, is claimed by almost 100,000 charities. For many the money saved 
is the difference between viability and ruination. I hope the chancellor will 
continue to listen to charities on this issue and protect the relief.

Another irritation for some will be the investment of £80m in social impact 
bonds 
<http://www.civilsociety.co.uk/governance/news/content/20849/ocs_to_reduce_headcount_as_sib_funding_receives_lukewarm_welcome>
, a further injection of funds into a social investment space that is growing 
more slowly than pretty much anybody predicted. This was one of the biggest 
spending announcements to affect the voluntary sector, and it is persistence of 
the first order. The social investment market is clearly an important tool to 
help voluntary organisations play a bigger role in society, but until the 
government knuckles down on the more difficult issue of addressing problems in 
commissioning and procurement, voluntary organisations won’t win contracts to 
justify taking on social investment. A review of public service markets is long 
overdue.

Third, the optimism. Once again, the chancellor made the tactical decision to 
award grants to a small number of charities from the proceeds of Libor fines; 
he similarly intervened to address the funding crisis facing women’s 
organisations by assigning the levy from the tampon tax to charities working in 
areas such as domestic violence. While such decisions leave the sector 
hankering for a more strategic, long-term approach, they may provide a 
short-term fix, to the relief of some beneficiaries.

Spending more on prevention will improve public services
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/nov/25/spend-on-prevention-better-public-services>
A similar cause for hope was the decision to massively expand the National 
Citizen Service <http://www.ncsyes.co.uk/>, the volunteering programme for 16- 
to 17-year-olds that aims to encourage a new generation to be socially active. 
The expansion from 80,000 to 300,000 places is welcomed by many, though there 
are concerns that this is a relatively expensive programme. Greater involvement 
of grassroots organisations would not go amiss if the extra spending on the 
programme is to achieve value for money.

Was this a good spending review for the voluntary sector? Only time will tell, 
however it did seem to confirm that this is a government that is agnostic about 
charities. Its main commitments were to volunteering and social investment, 
activities that span further than charities and voluntary organisations. It’s a 
spending review that points to a world where social action takes place in the 
public, private and voluntary sectors and where all sectors have a social 
purpose, resourced by tools such as social investment bonds. And it points to a 
world where charities are just one of a number of vehicles for delivering 
social good. This government is interested in social investment and in 
volunteering – not the voluntary sector.

For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector, join our 
community <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/>.
 