
George Osborne’s past deep cuts in the rate of corporation tax are forgotten. 
Big business was almost united in hating the chancellor’s new tax-raising 
measure – the apprenticeship levy. The rate was set higher than expected, at 
0.5% of an employer’s payroll, and will apply to companies with an annual wage 
bill of more than £3m. It will raise almost £3bn a year from 2017, or £12bn 
over this parliament, which is serious money.

Large companies are hardwired to grumble about any new payroll tax and, under 
normal circumstances, outside sympathy would be limited. The UK, as even big 
business recognises, needs to improve its productivity and competitiveness, and 
a Tory chancellor can’t be blamed for wanting to force investment in training 
that isn’t currently happening. Some 3 million apprentices by 2020, compared 
with 2.4 million in the previous parliament, sounds a reasonable aim.

Yet one detail sets alarms ringing. The Institute of Directors (IoD) claimed 
it had been told the government was working on the assumption that up to a 
quarter of the money collected would be spent on administration. The 
explanation, apparently, is that a new IT system needs to be built.

If that figure for bureaucracy is even approximately correct, the IoD is right 
to question how businesses are supposed to get more out of a levy than they put 
in, which is Osborne’s boast. Too much cash would be leaking out of the scheme.

The Department for Business says it does not recognise the IoD’s figure. Good, 
but what’s the real number? If big business is to be persuaded to embrace the 
levy, there will have to be a clear answer.

Time to get real about housebuilding
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fosborne-apprenticeship-tax-autumn-statement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9a8b8cfef145f6b53c963024e13d3e636d3b512%2F0_407_6496_3900%2F6496.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Osborne's%20apprenticeship%20tax%20sets%20alarm%20bells%20ringing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fosborne-apprenticeship-tax-autumn-statement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Osborne%27s%20apprenticeship%20tax%20sets%20alarm%20bells%20ringing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fosborne-apprenticeship-tax-autumn-statement%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9a8b8cfef145f6b53c963024e13d3e636d3b512%2F0_407_6496_3900%2F6496.jpg>
 Newly constructed family homes for sale. The government has launched ‘the 
biggest housebuilding programme since the 1970s’. Photograph: David Lyons/Alamy 
The chancellor’s housebuilding ambitions grow bolder. The latest pledge is 
400,000 affordable new homes by the end of the decade under “the biggest 
housebuilding programme since the 1970s”. Believe it when you see it. Even 
housebuilders – the supposed indirect beneficiaries of the doubling of the 
housing budget – are sceptical about the 400,000 target, which implies a 
step-up of about 40% from current rates of construction.


There are at least two related problems. First, the shortage of skilled 
labour. One specialist recruiter, Randstad CPE, reckons the UK needs to train 
an extra 30,000 quantity surveyors and 61,000 project managers to achieve the 
target.

Positively minded chief executives take the view that extra investment and 
training will follow when all branches of government are sufficiently clear in 
their intentions. But that’s where the second problem kicks in: do local 
authorities share Osborne’s enthusiasm for meeting half the 400,000 target with 
so-called starter homes that are available to buy rather than to rent?

Local authorities may prefer to stick with what they know – rentable units – 
to meet their statutory obligations to supply affordable housing. “They don’t 
necessarily think starter homes are a bad thing, but not all are convinced they 
are a good thing,” said one housebuilding boss.

Indeed, the housebuilders have questions of their own. Starter homes will be 
sold at 20% below market value to first-time buyers, raising the question of 
how market values are calculated, at what point in the construction cycle. All 
these problems can be solved, but probably not overnight. One suspects 200,000 
extra new homes by the end of the decade would be more realistic.

Help to buy – and buy and buy
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fosborne-apprenticeship-tax-autumn-statement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffed7e50732cf35fc8639663445389c9994b694f2%2F0_0_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Osborne's%20apprenticeship%20tax%20sets%20alarm%20bells%20ringing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fosborne-apprenticeship-tax-autumn-statement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Osborne%27s%20apprenticeship%20tax%20sets%20alarm%20bells%20ringing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fosborne-apprenticeship-tax-autumn-statement%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffed7e50732cf35fc8639663445389c9994b694f2%2F0_0_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Critics continue to question key aspects of the help to buy scheme. 
Photograph: Stefan Wermuth/Reuters 
“We’ve been very explicit that this scheme is limited to three years,” said 
Danny Alexander, the then Treasury minister, when help to buy, the other half 
of Osborne’s plan to invigorate the housing market, was introduced in 2013. 
Yeah, right.

The scheme was launched as a temporary remedy to address a supposed shortfall 
in the mortgage market. It has since become a government addiction, just as 
critics feared it would. Help to buy has been extended to the end of this 
parliament and is spawning children. Londoners with a 5% deposit can get an 
interest-free loan to cover 40% of the value of a newly built home. A related 
share ownership has had many of its restrictions lifted. This is supercharged 
government intervention in the demand side of the housing market.

“We mustn’t let this scheme turn into a permanent scheme,” warned Mervyn King, 
then governor of the Bank of England, back in 2013. It looks like we just have.
 