
Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> would suffer 
a profound economic shock due to Brexit, with 14,000 extra people on regional 
dole queues and house values falling by almost £20,000, George Osborne will say 
when he visits.


On a two-day trip to Belfast and the border city of Newry, the chancellor will 
also warn that the border with the Irish Republic “would harden” if the UK 
voted to leave theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>.

Brexit explained: Who can vote and how? 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/06/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=who_and_how>
Osborne will say Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> 
is “particularly vulnerable” to the “profound economic shock” that would shake 
the province in the event of a leave vote on 23 June.


With polls showing consistently that Northern Ireland is the most pro-EU 
region of the UK, Osborne will appeal to voters to get registered and go to the 
ballot boxes on polling day.


He will estimate that average house prices in the province would fall over two 
years by £18,000 in the two years after the UK left the EU.


Speaking in Belfast, the chancellor will say: “At the moment Northern Ireland 
is among the best regions of the UK when it comes to creating jobs. It’s a 
great success story that I am confident we can build on if the UK remains in a 
reformed EU.


“But if the UK votes to leave, every credible independent voice agrees that 
there would be a profound economic shock that would hurt people’s jobs, 
livelihoods and living standards.”


On the impact of Brexit on the border with the Irish Republic – the only land 
frontier the UK has with an EU state – Osborne will say: “It is also inevitable 
that there would be changes to border arrangements. Leave campaigners who 
suggest this is not the case are simply not being straight with people. On any 
level, that is simply not a price worth paying.”


The chancellor’s warning of a refortified border on the island after a leave 
vote echoes the concerns of former Irish prime ministerBertie Ahern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bertie-ahern>.


Beyond borders: the Irish villages dreading a Brexit vote
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/23/beyond-borders-the-irish-villages-dreading-a-brexit-vote>
In an interview with the Guardian, the ex-taoiseach and key negotiator in 
securing the 1998 Good Friday agreement saida hardened border would be a 
catastrophe for the entire island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/04/bertie-ahern-uk-reimpose-irish-border-after-brexit-eu-northern-ireland>
.


Ahern dismissed the assurances of Tories campaigning for a leave vote, 
including the Northern Ireland secretary, Theresa Villiers, that there would be 
no new border controls or fortifications in Ireland if the UK voted to leave 
the EU.


“Villiers keeps telling us all the time that we have a common travel agreement 
from 1921 that ensures freedom of movement between Irish and British people 
across these islands. Yet her point is wholly irrelevant in a completely 
different world from back then,” he said.

“We are not talking about freedom of movement between the Irish and the 
British. If the UK leave the EU we are talking about both EU citizens and 
non-EU nations still seeking a way into Britain. And the only land border 
between a post-Brexit Britain and the EU is on this island.”

Bertie Ahern: UK would have to reimpose Irish border after Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/04/bertie-ahern-uk-reimpose-irish-border-after-brexit-eu-northern-ireland>
Ahern said the logic of the leave campaign in seeking to control immigration 
into the UK entailed strengthening the Irish border.


“If you follow the logic of the likes of Boris [Johnson] on the issue of 
immigration, I cannot see any other way they can fulfil their promise to 
control the numbers coming into the UK unless they set up border controls 
between the north and south on this island. That would be a catastrophe in 
terms of business and the movement of people every single day north and south 
on the island,” he said.


The single biggest party in the Northern Ireland assembly, the Democratic 
Unionists, are the main force arguing for a leave vote.


Sinn Féin <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein>, the Social 
Democratic and Labour party, the centrist Alliance party and the Ulster 
Unionist party are in favour of remaining within the EU.

Meanwhile, one of Northern Ireland’s largest public sector unions, NIPSA, 
voted at the weekend in favour of Brexit.


At their annual conference in Enniskillen, delegates voted by a narrow margin 
of 68 to 58 with five abstentions to back Britain leaving the EU.

 