
No surprises, all was exactly as foreleaked and forewarned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/dec/05/autumn-statement-key-points-george-osborne-live>
, according to the essential Osborne/Cameron template. This neutral budget gave 
a little and shaved a little as it ploughed ahead without deviation or 
hesitation. Though the chancellor has missed his 2010 targets by miles, at last 
the recovery is under way. The economy is better – but whose recovery is this 
and where does it lead?

Their grand plan motors on in bad times and in better, driven by the 
ideological imperative that powers the modern Conservative party. That plan 
says the public sector will shrink in perpetuity, as David Cameron told 
Guildhall last month. George Osborne has boasted ofa million public sector jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/dec/05/autumn-statement-2013-jobs-outlook-improving>
 already gone, with more to follow. His scheme outlined for 2018 will see 
public spending pushed back by 16 years, to 2002 levels. Beyond that if the 
Tories win again expect a perpetual freeze so that as GDP grows the size of the 
state falls to something closer to the 30% that visionary rightwingers, such as 
Oliver Letwin, always advocated.

The chancellor offered neither critique nor remedy for this misshapen society. 
As the Office for National Statistics (ONS) published this week, middle incomes 
are falling while pensioner incomes rise. Young people pay the penalty in jobs 
and housing, and children have taken the hardest hit. FTSE 100 directors had 
their14% pay rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/mar/04/non-executive-ftse-pay-rises> 
while most wages again fell below prices. The shift in national income from 
wages to profits continues and our destiny is to continue to become ever more 
unequal, with middle to low incomes bound to slide further from the rest. Small 
print in theTreasury's own analysis 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/263548/impact_on_households_autumn_statement_2013.pdf>
 showed how the lower half of the population is making a far greater 
contribution to reducing the national deficit than the richer half. Osborne 
said recovery was "thanks to the sacrifice of the British people", but just 
remember who made most sacrifice, as testified by the multiplying food banks 
and queues "sanctioned" out of their benefits.

After £19bn in cuts, benefits will still drop, accelerated by 1% more cut each 
year, falling behind the general standard of living for ever. As a political 
"trap" for Labour, the cap on benefits is to be fixed in law.Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> alleviated the growing income 
divide with tax credits, which are now dwindling, though two-thirds of 
recipients are "hardworking" low earners about whose pay the chancellor had 
nothing to say, not a word on the £1,000 the minimum wage has lost in value.

The Royal National Institute of Blind People – hardly a red hotbed – was among 
the first to attack "an arbitrary cap on the social security support for blind, 
partially sighted and other disabled people" when "changing demographics mean 
more disabled children survive into adulthood and growing numbers of older 
people experience impairments". Rationing support for the weak, sick and 
unlucky with a capped sum to be shared between growing numbers will surely seem 
grotesquely unjust to most. Institute for Fiscal Studies graphs suggest far 
worse is yet to come in the two years after the election: will both parties be 
honest about what those cuts mean, unless taxes rise instead?

That's the future, unless and until people decide they want to stop all this. 
It's politics, not economics, stupid, that decides how we should live in the 
long run. Step back and look at the bigger picture. In 1930 Keynes wrote 
Economic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren in the depths of depression, 
decrying those who said progress was at an end, complaining: "We are suffering 
just now from a bad attack of economic pessimism." He predicted that in 100 
years, national income would have risen eight times over. Indeed it has 
multiplied by over five times and is likely to keep rising.

As the nation gets richer, why are we seized by a spasm of panic that says we 
can no longer afford a good NHS, social care, education, skills or modern 
infrastructure? This prosperous country can afford, within reason, whatever we 
decide to pay for, if we are honest about the cost and the need for taxes to 
cover it. Councils have lost a third of their income, with further council tax 
freezes ahead. Their "graph of doom" shows soon they will be able to pay for 
nothing beyond minimal protection for children and the frail old. The NHS will 
almost certainly make crisis headlines before the election: Osborne gave no 
further bung to silence the ambulance wails from A&Es. Slipping far down the
Programme for International Student Assessment (Pisa) rankings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2013/dec/03/pisa-methodology-education-oecd-student-performance>
 this week was a blow to national pride. "More for less" has its natural limits 
for all to see.

Do we want good public services, beyond a bare safety net? If not, then those 
who can will have to buy these most precious commodities by contributing 
privately with top-ups to a basic NHS and private tuition to get children 
through exams that low-grade schools no longer achieve. The forgotten half not 
destined for university would fall yet further behind. Yes, money makes the 
difference: it took money and ferocious attention for Labour to send London 
schools from the worst to among the best in Britain. For all except the 
opted-out rich, better value for better services comes through paying together 
through taxes, if we want a quality to keep matching our long-term growth in 
living standards. That means more, not less, state. Can that basic truth, 
learned the hard way from US experience, really need to be written? Yes, in the 
face of the prevailing wind within the Conservative party and its public 
sector-bashing press, it still needs saying.

As yet Labour's message lacks clarity to spell out that stark choice. Ed 
Balls's reply 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2013/dec/05/george-osbornes-autumn-statement-live#block-52a0a662e4b09024ef9019ae>
 is a warning against falling into the bog of how far, how fast the recovery 
grows with "ya boo" ripostes that the government is borrowing more in three 
years than Labour borrowed in 13, and so on. Time to lift the sights higher, as 
it is always optimism for the future that wins elections. That means houses, 
wages, real jobs for the young and public services to be proud of, restored 
respect for public servants and a public ethos repaired from this bombardment 
of abuse.

The political terrain is marked out. Pollsters ponder whether voters will 
swallow another dose of what they still see as the nasty party, trusting its 
economic competence. Or will they reject the authors of a recovery who show no 
understanding that success must be spread beyond the upper half of society? 
Labour has had the Tories on the run on prices and living costs, but for the 
long view it needs to raise hopes and lift sights.
 