
In accepting her Oscar, Meryl Streep claimed to hear people all over America 
say: her? Again? Whatever! That might be a good way of describing the form of 
an Oscar ceremony: the again-whatever syndrome, the final iteration of a 
consensus that has been exhaustively rehearsed in all the other ceremonies that 
precede the Academy Awards.

The big win for The Artist <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142801/artist>
 raises the question: is it a novelty one-off, like the once-garlanded and 
talked-aboutLife is Beautiful 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/77063/life.is.beautiful> or The Crying 
Game <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/44591/crying-game>? Or will it 
herald a renewed interest in the silent genre? Could it, conceivably, generate 
a desire among other directors to make silent movies: that is to say, silent 
films on a subject other than the death of the silent movie? Well, maybe that 
would be a slightly retrograde fantasy, though it would be good to see The 
Artist's triumph lead to a renewed interest in cinema history.

One of the oddest aspects of the way this film has crossed over to the 
non-specialist commentariat is the chortling observation that The Artist is 
doing so well that it's even getting nominations for best screenplay. But there 
is nothing odd about it. Screenwriting is not about crafting lines of dialogue: 
it is about wielding the building blocks of narrative and thinking in pictures. 
(Although as it happens, director Michel Hazanavicius's non-visible sight gag 
in the inter-title that follows the suicidal hero placing a revolver to his 
forehead is a wonderful piece of screenwriting.) Actually, The Artist lost out 
to Woody Allen'sMidnight In Paris 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/141834/midnight-in-paris> for best 
original screenplay. Of this, more in a moment.

The Artist is a lovely film and the fact that it is still not a blockbuster 
commercial success, despite all its prizes, indicates that it could have some 
way yet to run in the cinema. The romantic chemistry is so potent between Jean 
Dujardin and Bérénice Bejo that I am tempted this morning to sit down to 
another viewing of their 2006 spy-spoof comedyOSS 117: Cairo, Nest Of Spies 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2008/nov/07/french-bond-film-review>, in which 
Dujardin plays a dopey agent opposite Bejo's activist Larmina El Akmar 
Betouche. He has a gloriously incorrect argument with her about Islam, which 
baffles him, triggered by his refusal to believe that there can be so many 
Muslims in the world. ("Des millions?")

Martin Scorsese's Hugo <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142805/hugo> 
picked up a clutch of technical awards, which seems to me fair enough: this was 
anintensely crafted film as Andrew Pulver observed 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2011/nov/23/hugo-martin-scorsese-film-review> 
in an early review, it is polished like a gemstone – but I felt that, 
appropriately for a movie about automata, there was something clockwork about 
it; Hugo did not come to life entirely, and the theme of early cinema was not a 
satisfyingly organic part of the film, the way it is in The Artist.

Well, the success of The Artist and Hugo may get us wondering about a revival 
of pioneering movie magic but MerylStreep's triumph as Maggie 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/140396/iron-lady> is unlikely to get us 
pining for a revival of Thatcherism. Why should it, in this era of David 
Cameron, Andrew Lansley and Emma Harrison? Thatcherism has already been 
revived: it never went away. It was certainly an inspired piece of 
impersonation: technically flamboyant, enjoyable and showy in a way that 
actresses are not often permitted to be in Hollywood movies. (Even Helen 
Mirren's Queen Elizabeth had to be fairly reticent, negotiating her screen 
presence opposite powerful males such as Tony Blair and Prince Philip.) And it 
was great to hear Streep produce one of the intensely exotic accents for which 
she is celebrated.

Viola Davis's performance in the sucrose civil-rights drama The Help 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142864/help> had been tipped, but her 
performance was not as interesting – or entertaining – as the supporting turn 
from Octavia Spencer in a more obviously comic role, who won best supporting 
actress.

Christopher Plummer, as in the Baftas, won the best supporting actor award for 
his portrayal of a man coming out as gay in the winter of his years. 
Interestingly, I don't think Plummer's Oscar was a kind of sentimentally 
disguised "career tribute": I suspect the Academy has been fairly indifferent 
to all the work Plummer has been doing lately and perhaps would be pushed to 
name many of his screen credits aside from The Sound of Music, in which he was 
a rather chilly figure, quite different from the warm, sympathetic role he had 
inBeginners <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142132/beginners>.

Back then to the screenplay award that went to Woody Allen, and incidentally 
revived another Hollywood tradition: Allen's legendary dislike of theOscars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscars> and his refusal to turn up to the 
ceremony in person. It was, perhaps, as the old-fashioned gagsmith and 
storyteller that Allen was honoured. The fact that Midnight in Paris is his 
biggest box-office success to date may or may not have weighed in the balance 
with Academy voters – but it has turned out to be a feelgood audience movie, in 
a way no one predicted. And incidentally, Allen's encouragement to his actors 
to improvise means that perhaps the cast should be sharing a tiny bit of the 
Oscar with him, at least in spirit.

These Oscars, more than in other years, were the Omission Oscars. Steve 
McQueen'sShame <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142860/shame>, Lynne 
Ramsay'sWe Need To Talk About Kevin 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/141828/we-need-to-talk-about-kevin>, 
Kenneth Lonergan's Margaret, Asif Kapadia's Senna – all horribly ignored. 
McQueen says thatShame was passed over because Hollywood and the Academy are 
prudish 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/feb/21/steve-mcqueen-michael-fassbender-oscars>
 and neurotic about sex. That could very well be true, although Ang Lee's 
Brokeback Mountain did reasonably well in the Oscars, and that was remarkably 
candid about sex. The snub for Kevin is, in my view, more easily explained: the 
US can be pretty frosty about British or European liberals being ironic about 
Columbine-style massacres. As for Margaret, it was a long and difficult film in 
many ways, and part of its brilliance lay in its mystery, its refusal to make 
clear to the audience what it was centrally about. But with a 
Harvey-Weinstein-mogul behind it, Anna Paquin could have given Streep a run for 
her money as best actress.

Perhaps in the end, the most historically significant aspect of the 2012 
Oscars was the name of the venue: it took place at the Hollywood and Highland 
Centre in Hollywood Boulevard – until this year known as the Kodak theatre. The 
Kodak name was smartly and unceremoniously dumped in 2012 when the building's 
sponsorEastman Kodak went bankrupt 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2012/jan/19/kodak-files-for-bankruptcy>, 
and that of course was becausefilm was becoming obsolete and digital is king 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2012/jan/19/kodak-bankruptcy-protection>. 
(So much for history and ancestor worship.) More and more people shoot on 
digital: it is cheaper and easier and looking better all the time; the number of
directors who have the willingness and clout to shoot on film is decreasing 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2011/feb/22/tacita-dean-16mm-film>. It 
only makes the preservation issue more pressing.

Oscar winners


Best picture The Artist

Actor Jean Dujardin, The Artist

Actress Meryl Streep, The Iron Lady

Supporting actor Christopher Plummer, Beginners

Supporting actress Octavia Spencer, The Help

Directing Michel Hazanavicius, The Artist

Foreign language film A Separation, Iran

Adapted screenplay Alexander Payne, Nat Faxon and Jim Rash, The Descendants

Original screenplay Woody Allen, Midnight in Paris

Animated feature film Rango

Art direction Hugo <https://www.theguardian.com/film/hugo>

Cinematography Hugo

Sound mixing Hugo

Sound editing Hugo

Original score The Artist

Original song Man or Muppet, The Muppets

Costume design The Artist

Documentary feature Undefeated

Documentary short Saving Face

Film editing The Girl With the Dragon Tattoo

Makeup The Iron Lady

Animated short film The Fantastic Flying Books of Mr Morris Lessmore

Live action short film The Shore

Visual effects Hugo
 