
If 2015 was the year of rather safe “triboot” or “legacyquel” film-making, 
with nostalgia-packed mega-movies such asStar Wars: The Force Awakens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-wars-episode-vii> and Jurassic World 
filling multiplexes, 2016 looks like something of a riskier era for fanboy 
film-making. By the time Christmas rolls around we’ll know, for instance, if 
the video-game movie has finally come into its own, or if all the hype 
surrounding ambitious fantasy epics such asWarcraft  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/06/world-of-warcraft-movie-trailer-video-game>
and Assassin’s Creed can’t fail to disguise the huge gulf between armchair 
adventuring and the big screen.


We’ll also have a good idea whether the flood of new superhero movies, from 
Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice, to Captain America: Civil War and at least 
three X-Men-related offerings, sates or dampens the apparently infinite demand 
for colourful comic-book fare. And we’ll know whether Hollywood’s desire to 
send its most popular sagas down ever-more-ambitious rabbit holes, via 
audacious spin-offs such as Star Wars: Rogue One andFantastic Beasts and Where 
to Find Them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/fantastic-beasts-and-where-to-find-them>, 
ultimately ends up being seen as an insulting money-making exercise, or simply 
a good old-fashioned example of giving the people what they want.

Animated fantasies
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkqeHCNojuQ4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkqeHCNojuQ4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkqeHCNojuQ4&media=>
If you’re looking for original big-budget film-making in 2016, the all-CGI 
arena is a good place to start, as there could easily be another Inside Out, 
Wreck It Ralph or Rango lurking in the schedules. Disney Animation’s Zootopia, 
with its bunny police officer struggling to be taken seriously in a world of 
stronger, mostly male talking animals, could be the feminist Toy Story, while 
Universal’s The Secret Life of Pets should give Despicable Me’s Chris Renaud 
the chance to prove he can keep audiences laughing when the Minions are out of 
town. Staying on an anthropomorphic tip but moving into sequel territory, 
Pixar’sFinding Dory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/10/first-trailer-pixar-finding-dory-nemo-ellen-degeneres-diane-keaton-idris-elba>
 looks a little lacklustre compared to its warm-hearted predecessor, and Kung 
Fu Panda 3 might struggle to maintain the quality levels of its predecessors, 
even with a new supernatural villain voiced by the wonderfully spiky JK 
Simmons. Dreamworks Animation also has the rather lightweight-looking Trolls, 
based on the punky children’s toys, due in November, while Disney Animation’s 
second offering of 2016 is the South Pacific-set musical fantasy Moana, from 
the team behind 2013’s middling The Princess and the Frog.

Superhero smackdowns
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIwfUnkBfdZ4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIwfUnkBfdZ4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIwfUnkBfdZ4&media=>
It really is getting very busy on the superhero front in 2016. Batman v 
Superman: Dawn of Justice <https://www.theguardian.com/film/man-of-steel-2> and 
Captain America: Civil War look the most populist efforts, but there’s also a 
surprising amount of buzz around starry comic-book warsploitation riff Suicide 
Squad, from Fury’s David Ayer. If the trailers for Deadpool are anything to go 
by, first-time director Tim Miller’s film could take the superhero flick into 
refreshingly edgy new territory, while X-Men: Apocalypse should build on the 
success of the mutant saga’s gripping 2014, Days of Future Past – which in many 
ways ushered in the “legacyquel era”. All bets are off for Gambit, another 20th 
Century Fox-produced X-Men spin-off. Director Doug Liman did an excellent job 
with Edge of Tomorrow, but for every Fox superhero triumph there’s usually a 
Fantastic Four lurking around the corner.

Going out on a limb, I’m calling Marvel’s Doctor Strange, with Benedict 
Cumberbatch as the sorceror supreme, as the most tantalising comic-book 
prospect of 2016. It may have the rather underwhelming Scott Derrickson (The 
Day the Earth Stood Still, Sinister) in the director’s chair, but the 
Disney-owned studio has always been a writer and producer-driven setup. Marvel 
needs Doctor Strange to take over from Robert Downey Jr’s Iron Man as boss man 
chief of The Avengers, and has recruited Tilda Swinton, Chiwetel Ejiofor, Mads 
Mikkelsen and Rachel McAdams to make sure its new effort has the required 
gravitas. And itsounds like the film’s psychedelic look should be suitably 
barmy and far-out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/07/benedict-cumberbatch-doctor-strange-marvel-fantasia-says-cinematographer>
.

Space opera sequels and romance in the stars
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXRVD32rnzOw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXRVD32rnzOw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXRVD32rnzOw&media=>
According to new research, Star Wars: Rogue One is the most highly anticipated 
film of 2016 amongst US cinemagoers thanks to the barnstorming success of The 
Force Awakens. Set prior to the first Star Wars movie and pitched around the 
famed crew of rebels who conspired to steal the plans to the first Death Star, 
Gareth Edwards’ movie looks at first glance like aStar Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> movie operating at half-throttle. 
Will audiences buy into space opera without lightsabers, Force ghosts and the 
eternal Jedi/Sith battle? The film’s success might just balance on whether 
rumours that Forest Whitaker is playing Darth Vader turn out to be true.

As far as that other long-running space saga goes, there seems to be little or 
no buzz aroundStar Trek Beyond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/14/star-trek-beyond-10-things-we-learned-from-the-trailer>
 now that Justin Lin has taken over from JJ Abrams and Fast and Furified Kirk 
and Spock’s latest adventure (at least, according to a much-criticised recent 
trailer.) But two movies, Passengers and The Space Between Us, promise to offer 
up a more grownup take on the extra-terrrestrial experience. The former is set 
on a ship carrying travellers to a distant destination, and sees Chris Pratt’s 
lonely early-waker interrupt Jennifer Lawrence’s suspended animation in the 
hope of getting a bit of company, sparking unexpected romance. And the latter 
centres on the interplanetary love affair between two young people (Asa 
Butterfield and Britt Robertson) who are drawn together despite living in 
(literally) different worlds.

Live action remakes
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVG5MtenlP-A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVG5MtenlP-A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVG5MtenlP-A&media=>
Is there anybody out there who isn’t holding their breath for the chance to 
hear Mark Rylance’s take on Roald Dahl’sThe BFG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/dec/09/the-bfg-trailer-steven-spielberg-film-mark-rylance-video>
, with Steven Spielberg in the director’s chair? Let’s hope the ET film-maker 
brings more brio to the table this time than he did on 2011’s slightly 
lacklustre Tintin. Spielberg often seems to lose his mojo when working beyond 
American borders, but a timely return to form with the excellent Bridge of 
Spies bodes well.

Jon Favreau’s The Jungle Book has a sumptuous cast – and rights to all those 
hearty knockabout songs from the 1967 animation – in its favour. But Tim 
Burton’s Alice in Wonderland proved five years ago that Carrollian whimsy is 
entirely wrong for the 21st-century Hollywood action movie template, and 
Muppets director James Bobin might struggle with sequel Alice Through the 
Looking Glass – especially since Burton used all the best characters from both 
Lewis Carroll’s late 19th-century children’s fables last time out.

Swords and sorcery epics
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWj1devH5JP4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWj1devH5JP4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWj1devH5JP4&media=>
JK Rowling’s Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them, with Oscar-winner Eddie 
Redmayne as the titular magizoologist, could well be as critic-proof as some of 
the weaker entries in the blockbuster Harry Potter saga from which it spawned. 
Redmayne has the impish charisma to prove an inspired choice, but we have yet 
to see whether Rowling’s magical universe can survive the trip 70 years back in 
time, and across the Atlantic, without losing some of its charm.

Do you have to be a gamer to 'get' the first trailer for Duncan Jones' 
Warcraft?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/06/world-of-warcraft-movie-trailer-video-game>
The recent trailer for Duncan “Moon” Jones’ Warcraft, which appears to cleave 
too closely to its source material,left me distinctly depressed about the 
long-gestating video-game adaptation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/06/world-of-warcraft-movie-trailer-video-game>
. But I’m still holding out hope for Justin Kurzel’s Assassin’s Creed, which 
will reunite the key cast of the Australian film-maker’s superb Macbeth, 
Michael Fassbender and Marion Cotillard. Let’s hope Ubisoft shows a little more 
vision than World of Warcraft makers Blizzard seem to have done, and gives the 
film-making team – Fassbender is also a hands-on producer – free reign to move 
beyond the rigid boundaries of the original games.


Elsewhere on a fantasy tip, Gods of Egypt has already made its heavily 
whitewashed bed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/13/gods-of-egypt-posters-anger-whitewashed-cast-twitter-exodus>
, and The Huntsman: Winter’s War is a spin-off from a stylish but insipid movie 
(Snow White and the Huntsman)that only achieved box-office success thanks to 
Twilight fans’ enduring support for star Kristen Stewart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/20/is-snow-white-prequel-the-huntsman-the-most-pointless-follow-up-of-all-time>
. For much more promising fun on a period tip, Netflix’s Crouching Tiger, 
Hidden Dragon: Sword of Destiny hits the streaming service in February with 
Hong Kong martial arts legend Yuen Woo-ping in charge of the cameras.
 