
The headlines were inevitable, once Mark Carney uttered the word automation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/05/mark-carney-isolation-globalisation-bank-of-england>
. Robots, the Sun told us, are set to“steal 15m jobs from Brits” 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/2336607/mark-carney-warns-robots-could-steal-15m-jobs-from-brits-as-roles-could-be-taken-over-by-machines-with-some-professions-just-disappearing/>
. Sadly, our main problem is not robots; still less the artificial intelligence 
technologies that will power them.

Our real problem is symbolised by the car wash. A car wash used to mean a 
machine. Now it means five guys with rags. There are now 20,000 hand car washes 
in Britain, only a thousand of them regulated. By contrast, in the space of 10 
years, the number of rollover car-wash machines has halved – from 9,000 to 
4,200. The free-market economic model, combined with a globalised labour 
market, has produced a kind of reverse industrialisation.

Five guys with rags can undercut a machine that cost tens of thousands of 
pounds to build, because the entire economic system is geared to distributing 
the proceeds of globalisation upwards and its costs downwards.Mark Carney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/mark-carney> had some very prophetic 
things to say about this problem, as well, but funnily enough the tabloids 
ignored it.

Carney last week became one of the first powerful policymakers to recognise 
that the crisis of globalisation, the stagnation of free-market economies and 
the delayed impact of new technologies are linked.

In the eight years since financial crisis, the response of policymakers has 
been to prescribe simply more of the things that caused it: more free markets 
and more globalisation. That is the logic that droveTTIP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ttip>, that drove last week’s breakup of 
BT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/29/bt-openreach-competition-ofcom-european-commission>
. It is the logic that drives Theresa May’s government to go onhanding large 
chunks of the NHS to Richard Branson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/11/virgin-care-700m-contract-200-nhs-social-care-services-bath-somerset>
.

Carney is the first person with significant power in the western world to say 
that the medicine cannot work. It delivers slow growth, stagnating wages, 
falling productivity and rising inequality. Central banks, by printing money, 
can keep the patient alive, but it is for politicians and economists to design 
a new system.

Carney’s solutions, though couched in language eviscerated in order to avoid 
offence, boil down as follows. First, economists have to accept that the 
current form of capitalism is failing the 99%. Gains from both technological 
progress and globalisation flow more to the rich than the poor. Second, he 
says, we have to stimulate growth by relying less on creating money, and more 
by creating growth: governments have to start using taxpayers’ money to invest, 
and redesign the economy so that our dire productivity is reversed. Third we 
have to redistribute wealth downwards instead of upwards.

If Theresa May’s government was actually listening to Carney (instead of 
trying to undermine him as in reality 
<http://www.spectator.co.uk/2016/11/how-bad-is-mark-carneys-relationship-with-theresa-may/>
), they should scrap Philip Hammond’s austerity targets, raise tax revenues, 
shut down tax havens and take decisive measures to end the creation of 
low-wage, low-productive jobs. To do that you would have to re-regulate the 
economy and hard.

It would, in short, have to be somebody’s responsibility that 20,000 low-wage 
cash business appear out of nowhere; somebody has to care about it other than 
the police, whose raids on such businesses frequently scoop up just enough 
trafficked migrants to hit the headlines, but never enough to actually put the 
traffickers out of business, nor to raise wages.

At the same time, you would have to redistribute wealth aggressively. Not all 
of that needs to be done through taxation. If, instead of privatising public 
services, you ran them as non-profit corporations, providing rail, broadband 
and energy at prices below the cost of production, the redistributive effect 
would be significant. People on rock-bottom wages would suddenly have a lot 
more to live on.

On top of that you need to actively raise wages. That needs more than a worker 
on the board: it needs a recognised union rep in every workplace. If Amazon, 
Pret a Manger, the courier industry and the construction firms were obliged by 
law to negotiate with unions, and to cease repressing them, there would be 
upward pressure on wages across the whole economy. Another way of creating that 
pressure would be for local and national government to hike public sector pay.

Call it what you will, it would no longer be globalisation as we know it, and 
it would reverse 30 years of free market labour reforms. Because he cannot or 
will not spell this out, Carney’s intervention only does half the job.

But if we did all of the above, then what? Companies would react to rising 
wages by promoting rapid automation. Hand car washes would probably shrink to a 
couple of thousand luxury valeting operations, and the investment of petrol 
stations in machines would pay off. Productivity would increase. Maybe 
forecourts would be incentivised to invest in more machines. Maybe more of them 
could be built in the UK.

But then the strategic problem highlighted by Carney would kick in. What kind 
of work can we offer people displaced by automation?

Politicians of all stripes like to promise a future of high-value, 
high-skilled, high-paid work. But if the Bank of England’s economists are 
right, there won’t be enough of that work in the world to go around. Technology 
is automating tasks faster than it is creating new ones. So in a situation 
where global growth is stagnant, providing your own population with decent jobs 
means attracting them from somewhere else.

That, in turn, will mean enacting a controlled, limited and reluctant step 
back from freemarket globalisation. The alternative is the uncontrolled and 
chaotic one being promoted by Trump, Putin, Shinzo Abe and Xi Jinping. As in 
the 1930s, the last time a global system fragmented, this will take radical 
leaps of thinking among the elite – and Carney’s intervention, though 
constrained by his remit, is hopefully the first of many.

A new kind of capitalism, whose aim is to put the cheap labour exploiter out 
of business and promote high wages, will provoke howls of indignation from the 
economics profession and the asset-rich classes of the West. They revelled in 
the race to the bottom, as long as they got the upside of it. To unleash 
technology and revive productivity will take a big and careful rethink, above 
all about what redistribution policies work best in a highly complex and 
individualised consumer economy. But the outcome has to be better than the 
economics of the hand car wash.
 