
Humans are obsessed with chimps. We’ve nursed this obsession for a long time, 
and it has a very particular focus: how similar are chimps to humans? It seems 
humans want nothing more than for chimps to return our intense, curious gaze 
with some unambiguous recognition. What this desire means, and where it leads 
us, is inextricably tangled up with broader questions about how we conceive of 
humans in relation to the natural world.

These days, the fascination tends to manifest itself largely through 
scientific observation of chimps in their natural habitat. The Max Planck 
Institute’sTaï Chimpanzee Project 
<http://www.eva.mpg.de/primat/research-groups/chimpanzees/field-sites/tai-chimpanzee-project.html>
 recently released a study concluding that chimps communicate about at least 
two separate, identifiable subjects: their favourite sort of fruit, and where 
to find trees bearing that fruit.

Project leader Ammie Kalan has this to say 
<http://www.abc.net.au/science/articles/2015/01/20/4165321.htm> about her 
findings:

How much it resembles human language is still a matter of debate, but at the 
very least, research shows that chimpanzees use vocalisations in a 
sophisticated manner, taking into account their social and environmental 
surroundings.

This is a far more defensible sort of investigation than our earlier attempts 
to examine chimps and language. Back in the 1970s we hadNim Chimpsky 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nim_Chimpsky> and Project Washoe 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Washoe_(chimpanzee)>, two experiments whose 
methodology boiled down to “raise a chimp in a bizarre, unsuitable human 
environment” purely in order to debunk Noam Chomsky’s theory that only humans 
have language. But coverage of the studies, and questions asked of its 
researchers, show the same thread of anthropomorphism running through to the 
present day.

There are many speculative accounts of why it is that humans have spent so 
long dreaming of merging the human and chimp communities. I don’t doubt the 
noble ecological intentions of theWild Chimpanzee Foundation 
<http://www.wildchimps.org/>, an organisation dedicated to preserving the 
habitat of the chimps in the Max Planck Study, or theGreat Ape Project 
<http://www.projetogap.org.br/en/>, a group campaigning to grant human rights 
to apes. Of course we should try to conserve chimps’ habitat, and of course the 
ethical considerations of using apes in scientific experimentation is a serious 
area of inquiry.

But these efforts are both conducted from within the framework of this 
seemingly deep-rooted urge to humanise, and thus contain their own seeds of 
contradiction. Chimps aren’t human, and we shouldn’t need a steady supply of 
pop science soundbites about their language ability to justify protecting their 
ecosystem. They are not the same as us, and no amount of anthropomorphism will 
make them so. Chimps can never be citizens of the human community, and if this 
is the only way for us to pursue better outcomes on their behalf, the 
initiatives seem doomed to failure.

Faced with this dead end, we have three options. First, we can continue to 
bang our heads against the barrier, attempting to muster enough scientific 
information and emotionally persuasive rhetoric to have chimps placed at the 
centre of the universe with human beings. I do not believe this will work, and 
the questions it raises demand answers that naive anthropomorphism can’t 
provide anyway. The logistical, ethical and even ontological considerations of 
full chimp personhood are large, and have implications for how we relate to all 
animals. How big does the tent get? Who’s next? What could citizenship mean for 
creatures that cannot consider us on the terms we use to consider them?

A second option is to engage with the nascent field of animal studies, which 
grapples with these contradictions using a posthumanist methodology that moves 
away from the language of rights and personhood. In the video below Cary Wolfe, 
one of the discipline’s most prominent figures, explains the problems with 
considering animals from inside a humanist field:

The reason you need a posthumanist rather than humanist framework is to say 
look, the reason we should care about animals, treat them well, expand the 
moral community, is not because all of these different creatures are like us. 
What’s beautiful and worthy of respect is that they’re not like us. Their 
different ways of being in the world deserve protection.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5NN427KBZlI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5NN427KBZlI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5NN427KBZlI&media=>
 ‘Cary Wolfe explains the problems with considering animals from inside a 
humanist field.’ 
This raises its own set of questions, which is why animal studies exists as a 
discipline. What would a posthumanist world look like? It is a major challenge 
to the prevailing anthropocentric view of humans as separate from or outside of 
the natural world. The debate is no longer about responsible ways of using 
animals and the environment as resources, but rather about restructuring our 
entire outlook to recognise other forms of inherent value. It is a radical 
turn, and perhaps suffers from an irreconcilable contradiction of its own: 
humans must still be the ones who decide what animals need, an implicit form of 
anthropocentrism that has no immediate solution.


Finally, we might turn away from both humanism and posthumanism. Humanism 
seems obviously incapable of providing adequate guidance on non-human animals. 
Posthumanism, despite its exciting potential, looks too much like an 
obfuscation or abnegation of the fact that humans are going to run the show, or 
at least try to, as long as we’re around. We depend on the death of other forms 
of life for survival, both plant and animal.

The question of how we might go about managing these deaths in an ethical way 
must proceed from an honest acceptance that life itself, in its infinite 
varieties, is destructive. No matter how broadly that chimp smiles, it does not 
consider us its friends.
 