
The difference between Andrei Tarkovsky's 1972 film Solaris and more recent 
science fiction is summed up by the contents of the library on the space 
station suspended over an endlessly changing and apparently sentient alien 
ocean. The humans - struggling to stay sane as the ocean of Solaris tampers 
with their memories and consciousness - have Bruegel's Hunters in the Snow 
hanging in their wood-panelled library, a paradoxically warm and comforting 
image of hunters coming back empty-handed, cresting a wooded hill at the top of 
the village, their pack of hounds exhausted, while peasants play on the 
iced-over ponds in a white hollow below them.

The space station's library also has a bust of the homely looking Athenian 
sage Socrates and an old copy of Don Quixote from which, in a critical scene, 
the hero Kris Kelvin quotes the earthy wisdom of Sancho Panza. Contrast this 
with William Gibson's 1984 novel Neuromancer, in which the prophet of 
cyberspace describes a wealthy family's orbital villa that contains Marcel 
Duchamp's The Large Glass (The Bride Stripped Bare by Her Bachelors, Even), the 
perfect work of art for a virtual, post-human future. Tarkovsky, on the other 
hand, puts the most earthly image in art into deep space, and celebrates 
nostalgia, not futurism; Earth, not space; and humanity, in all its Bruegelian 
strangeness. His greatest film is about discovering ourselves in the mirror of 
an alien's mind.

Solaris, based on Stanislaw Lem's 1961 novel, is arguably the best 
science-fiction film ever made. We're talking about real science fiction, the 
philosophical, meditative mid-20th-century genre that was more or less 
destroyed by the success of George Lucas's Star Wars in 1977. Everything fell 
apart for science fiction after Star Wars. In Britain, even Dr Who lost its 
confidence and started aping the new "space opera", as Lucas's film was called 
at the time.

I only mention Doctor Who because, in a strange way, Solaris reminds me of it. 
The best Doctor Whos, surely, were the ones set on Earth, with the Doctor 
working as scientific adviser to Unit. Somehow the Master was all the scarier 
when he materialised in an English country house, and giant maggots were at 
their creepiest in a Welsh coal mine. This frisson of the uncanny, or unhomely, 
the intervention of inexplicable irregularities in the cosy and real world, is 
exploited by Tarkovsky as cleverly as it was by Dr Who. The big change he makes 
to Lem's novel is to add a long prologue set on Earth. Tarkovsky starts with 
his protagonist, Kris Kelvin, standing daydreaming at dawn in a mist-saturated, 
marshy landscape. Actually, it begins before that: with a shot of grasses and 
plants underwater, before gradually revealing Kris communing with the Russian 
wetlands.

It is the landscape of Earth that haunts you most throughout the film. The 
views out of the space station are of swirling clouds and a boiling sea, but 
there is that painting of the hunters in the library - exactly the painting you 
would want with you on a space station light years from Earth.

And Hunters in the Snow is not the only work of art aboard the space station. 
There is also an icon by the medieval painter Andrei Rublev. This is one of 
many connections Tarkovsky creates between his science fiction vision and his 
historical one, between Solaris and the film he made for the same studio, 
Mosfilm, in 1966 about the great icon painter. Both films make you see Earth as 
if for the first time.

In the house at the beginning of Solaris there are 18th-century prints of 
balloons. Andrei Rublev begins with a man trying to fly in a balloon made from 
animal skins. This is Russia 600 years ago, in a world of Tatar invaders, monks 
and holy fools. People rush around, preparing the flying machine; and then it 
rises up, floating above Earth, with a view of the ground rolling beneath. But 
the balloon plummets, like a fallen rebel angel, and the last we see of it is a 
steaming, collapsed lung in the filthy margins of a river.

Mud, water, scrub and monasteries. The landscape of Andrei Rublev is, from the 
beginning, a singular view of Earth. The shot from the flying pig's bladder is 
curious. It scrolls the ground past you - a landscape is experienced as if the 
land had been tilted up so fields and marshes and bits of hills are seen as a 
vertical arrangement, a frieze. The flyer falls, and from that moment the film 
is earthbound. No other film is so rooted to the ground. There are scarcely any 
glimpses of sky; the camera keeps its nose down and Tarkovsky constantly finds 
views in which Earth seems to rise up, filling the screen. This snuffling of 
the landscape comes from paintings, from Uccello's Battle of San Romano - or 
from Bruegel's Hunters in the Snow.

It is the sensual and - this is what strikes everyone first about Tarkovsky - 
extremely slow revelation of this earthly setting at the beginning of Solaris 
that makes it such a great film. Usually all this stuff would be got out of the 
way quickly to speed the story along. But Tarkovsky delights - with a lot of 
wit - in creating his future Earth. As Kris stands in the morning meadow, he 
sees a car arrive on a concrete monorail in the distance.

The landscape Tarkovsky films is real and valued for itself, not just as 
background, so that when he reminds you that this is a future Earth - where the 
people speak Russian but have American names - you accept it. You even accept 
it as a vision of the future when he films people in a 1970s Russian car 
driving through underpasses and on flyovers into a 1970s Russian city. In a 
later film, Stalker (1979) - the last he made in his native country - Tarkovsky 
penetrates even deeper into the Soviet architectural unconscious. Stalker was 
filmed in a disused and rotting power station, which becomes "the zone", a 
forbidden landscape where the Stalker leads a Writer and a Scientist on a quest 
for a hidden truth. The decaying concrete tunnels and fetid pools, the peeling 
walls and dilapidated bunkers of a dying socialist society provide an instant 
iconography of some dreadful future. The most startling image is the last: the 
Stalker and his family walk on a rancid, muddy beach in front of a nuclear 
power station that - inevitably - looks like an intimation of the Chernobyl 
disaster six years later.

The alien future is here already. But people are still people, they still need 
each other. In Solaris, Kris's relationship with his father, his love for his 
home, are both strong. And then he arrives at the space station. The journey is 
not shown. From Earth we go to not-Earth - a padded, white interior, circular 
corridors, the sublime ocean of Solaris. And we go inwards, to madness. Of the 
three men Kelvin was sent to consult prior to closing down the space station, 
one has killed himself; the others are seeing things. Within hours, the 
rational and sceptical Kelvin meets his lover or wife, Hari, who killed herself 
long ago, convinced that this coldly professional career scientist didn't love 
her.

His first reaction suggests he may indeed be poor at relationships, as he puts 
Hari in a rocket and blasts her into space. However, she rematerialises in his 
bedroom that night, they make love and he becomes inseparable from his clearly 
fictional partner. It is Hari who looks at Bruegel's painting, and the camera 
goes on its own journey over the picture, singling out details - a bird perched 
on a snow-fringed black branch, the hunched men trudging home, the skaters.

No other director does this - simply departs from his film's narrative to 
visit an art gallery as if this were not fiction but documentary. Tarkovsky 
obviously felt the same way about paintings as did Dostoevsky, who constantly 
alludes to them in his novels - Raphael's Sistine Madonna is a talking point in 
Crime and Punishment, Holbein's Dead Christ in The Idiot.

It is almost too easy, but true, to call Tarkovsky the Dostoevsky of 
film-makers. Like Dostoevsky, he has a profound belief in the mystery of human 
consciousness. The most simple revelation of this vision is Solaris. It turns 
out that "solaristics" - the fictional branch of knowledge the characters in 
the film are dedicated to - is a deluded science. It is we who are the objects 
of enquiry and fascination to an alien mind. Humanity is the true wonder, the 
true miracle. Finally the Solaris ocean generates islands from Kelvin's 
memories, including the house where he grew up, just as, his father explained 
early in the film, he built that house as a reproduction of his own childhood 
home. "I don't like anything new," his father says. You know this is Tarkovsky 
speaking - a man who takes us on a space odyssey that ends in a Russian dacha.

Â· Solaris is rereleased on February 18 at the National Film Theatre, London 
SE1. Box office: 020-7928 3232. The NFT's Tarkovsky retrospective begins on 
March 1, with an extended run of Stalker from March 11.
 