
The bookmaker Paddy Power is targeting minority ethnic communities with 
controversial fixed-odds betting terminals (FOBTs), according to a new analysis.

The study, which uses Gambling <https://www.theguardian.com/society/gambling> 
Commission data, reveals that 61% of Paddy Power’s 349 betting shops are 
located in areas with above average levels of non-UK born population.

The mapping exercise shows Paddy Power’s shops are concentrated in places such 
as Newham and Brent in London, Luton and Leicester and parts of Birmingham.

When the chips are down: what it’s like to gamble everything away | Sarah Marsh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/18/gamble-away-everything-fixed-odds-betting-terminals>
By comparison, only a third of William Hill’s shops and just a quarter of 
BetFred’s 1,375 shops are located in these areas.

Each betting shop is allowed to have up to four FOBTs – described by critics 
as the “crack cocaine of gambling” – which allow stakes of up to £100 to be 
laid on casino games with a maximum delay of just 20 seconds between wagers.

Charities have repeatedly warned about high levels of problem gambling in 
minority ethnic communities, citing evidence from the government’s own gambling 
prevalence surveys.

A study for the Responsible Gambling Trust in 2014 said there were concerns 
that “the odds of being an at-risk gambler were higher among non-white ethnic 
groups, being around 2.6-3 times higher among those from black/black British 
and Asian/Asian British ethnic groups”.
paddy graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/03/paddy_power-zip/giv-27167RW6wLEv5LfWN/>
With a more lucrative customer base, campaigners say it is no surprise that 
Paddy Power is now the most successful of bookmakers – in terms of achieving 
the highest profit per terminal on FOBTs.

The Irish bookmaker, which has recently bought up internet betting company 
BetFair to create the biggest publicly-listed online gaming company, collects 
about £1,300 of profit per machine compared with rivals which only manage about 
£1,000.

The figures come a week after the company was forced to pay £280,000 to a 
“socially responsible” cause after the Gambling Commission found it had
encouraged a problem gambler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/29/paddy-power-encouraged-gambler-lost-home-jobs-family-gambling-commission-report>
 to keep betting until he lost five jobs, his home and access to his children. 
It was criticised for “failing to keep crime out of gambling and protect 
vulnerable people”.

Labour’s mayoral candidate, Sadiq Khan, has made the issue part of his 
campaign. He told the Guardian he was “extremely disturbed” by the results.

“Almost every area of London with high non-UK-born populations has been 
targeted by them – not just one or two shops, but dozens in the same areas and 
in some cases on the same high streets,” he said.

Paddy Power case highlights scourge of fixed-odds betting terminals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/mar/01/paddy-power-case-highlights-scourge-fixed-odds-betting-terminals>
“This isn’t chasing footflow – it’s targeting the most vulnerable people, 
people who have come here seeking refuge and a way of improving their lives.

“It is disgraceful behaviour and reinforces why we must deal with the 
proliferation of betting shops in disadvantaged areas, and the addictive 
roulette machines which can cause so much misery.”

The Campaign for Fairer Gambling <http://fairergambling.org/>, which compiled 
the data, said the analysis pointed to Paddy Power’s “preference for opening 
shops in areas of greater ethnic mix and there is a direct correlation between 
these areas and higher revenues from fixed-odds betting terminals”.

Adrian Parkinson, a campaigner who was formerly a top executive in the 
industry, said: “Paddy Power achieves a higher return on their machines than 
any other bookmaker.

“They may argue they are effective at picking the right sites. We believe they 
are deliberately targeting those communities with populations susceptible to 
the kind of addictive play enabled by FOBTs.”

Last year FOBTs, which are disproportionately found in poorer parts of 
Britain, generated £1.7bn of revenues for bookmakers. Politicians of every 
party have been alarmed by the rise of the machines.

Last April the government announced that bookmakers would have to put checks 
in place so that punters who wanted to bet more than £50 at a time would need 
to set up gambling accounts.

Paddy Power has argued that it has a fewer shops than competitors and was 
forced to concentrate in urban areas. When the Guardian approached the company 
with the research, a spokesman said the firm had no comment to make.

The Association of British Bookmakers, which represents Britain’s biggest 
gambling firms, said it did not wish to comment.
 