
Just days after the historic Paris agreement officially came into force 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/04/paris-climate-change-agreement-enters-into-force>
, climate denier Donald Trump’s victory has thrown the global deal into 
uncertainty and raised fears that the US will reverse the ambitious 
environmental course charted under Barack Obama.

International environmental groups meeting at the UN climate talks in Morocco 
said it would be a catastrophe if Trump acted on his pledge to withdraw the US 
from the deal, which took 20 years to negotiate, and to open up public land for 
coal, oil and gas extraction.

Trump has called climate change a “hoax”, placing him virtually alone among 
world leaders on the validity of the science. The real estate magnate has 
promised to embark upon a four-year process of withdrawing the US from the 
Paris deal and has targeted the “billions and billion and billions” given to UN 
climate programmes and clean energy development.

Domestically, Trump has promised to reboot America’s ailing coal industry, as 
well as expand gas and oil drilling, despite the fact that the growth of 
natural gas use has caused the downturn in coal.

He also plans to scrap Obama’s signature Clean Power plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/03/obamas-clean-power-plan-hailed-as-strongest-ever-climate-action-by-a-us-president>
, which is the main policy designed to lower US emissions.

Recent analysis by Lux Research 
<http://www.luxresearchinc.com/news-and-events/press-releases/read/trump-presidency-could-mean-34-billion-tons-more-us-carbon>
 estimated that a Trump presidency would raise US greenhouse gas output by 16% 
by the end of his second term, should he get one, compared to a Hillary Clinton 
administration. Such a shift could prove key in not only pushing the world 
towards dangerous climate change but also dissuading other nations from making 
the required cuts in emissions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fus-election-result-throws-paris-climate-deal-into-uncertainty%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faad9601dc969c00523805b13b4abc52564f561dd%2F0_0_650_396%2F650.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paris%20climate%20deal%20thrown%20into%20uncertainty%20by%20US%20election%20result&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fus-election-result-throws-paris-climate-deal-into-uncertainty%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paris%20climate%20deal%20thrown%20into%20uncertainty%20by%20US%20election%20result&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fus-election-result-throws-paris-climate-deal-into-uncertainty%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faad9601dc969c00523805b13b4abc52564f561dd%2F0_0_650_396%2F650.jpg>
 Lux Research modelling of what Clinton and Trump victories would mean for US 
carbon emissions Photograph: Lux Research 
Green groups have urged the president-elect, as the leader of the second 
greatest greenhouse gas emitter, to act in the interests of all the world.

“The new president must protect the people he serves from climate chaos. No 
personal belief or political affiliation can change the stark truth that every 
new oil well and pipeline pushes us all closer to catastrophe. The 
administration has moral and legal obligations to meet international 
commitments,” said May Boeve, head of climate campaign group350.org 
<http://350.org/>. 

Christian Aid warned that any attempts by Trump to ditch the Paris deal would 
be an act of “economic self-sabotage”.

“The global transition to a zero-carbon economy will not be held up by one 
man. The rest of the world will not risk a global climate catastrophe because 
of one man’s opposition,” said Mohamed Adow, Christian Aid’s international 
climate lead spokesman.

In the US, shellshocked environmentalists pledged to step up their opposition 
to Trump. “Greenpeace and millions of people around the world have all the 
power we need to combat climate change and create a just world for everyone,” 
said Annie Leonard, executive director of Greenpeace US. “Let’s use this moment 
to reenergize the fight for the climate and the fight for human rights around 
the world.”

Ségolène Royale, the French environment minister who helped negotiate the 
Paris accord, told journalists in Marrakech that the US could not withdraw from 
the treaty easily. “The Paris agreement prohibits any exit for a period of 
three years, plus a year-long notice period, so there will be four stable 
years,” she said.


“We must be extremely attentive and responsive to each time there is an 
attempt made to weaken this agreement,” she said on French radio.

“There is no possible turning back in the negotiation on what was agreed in 
Paris ... we can only advance,” said Salaheddine Mezouar, foreign minister of 
Morocco, which is hosting the latest round of climate talks.

Major countries meeting in Marrakech were slow to respond to Trump’s win but 
small island states threatened with annihilation if temperatures are not held 
to 2C urged him to take responsibility for the whole world.

 “I expect [Trump] will realise that climate change is a threat to his people 
and to whole countries which share seas with the US including my own ... I look 
forward to watching Mr Trump live up to his responsibility to protect his 
people, and others around the world,” said Hilda Heine, president of the 
Republic of the Marshall Islands.

“One of the many challenges Trump’s administration will now confront is 
climate change. Last month, for the first time,renewables like wind and solar 
surpassed fossil fuels in [new] electricity generation globally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/25/renewables-made-up-half-of-net-electricity-capacity-added-last-year>
 and that number is expected to climb. America has led this technological 
transformation and can continue to create jobs and opportunity in this area,” 
said Thoriq Ibrahim, energy minister for the Maldives and chair of the Alliance 
of Small Island States (Aosis).


Alden Meyer from the Union of Concerned Scientists was reported to have told a 
press conference at Marrakech 
<http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.desmog.uk%2F2016%2F11%2F09%2Fcop22-marrakech-climate-conference-pins-hopes-trump-s-inconsistency-save-global-climate-action%3Fplatform%3Dhootsuite&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNGbuhS-iECibW77kapFIKsEYxDvyQ>
 that: “If the US pulls out of this, and is seen as going as a rogue nation on 
climate change, that will have implications for everything else on President 
Trump’s agenda when he wants to deal with foreign leaders. And I think he will 
soon come to understand that.”

“The election of President Trump is clearly a major threat to our climate and 
future wellbeing of generations to come. But thankfully the clean energy 
revolution is now unstoppable. If Mr Trump chooses to disengage then he will 
hand the next industrial revolution lock, stock and barrel to the Chinese,” 
said Friends of the Earth’s chief executive officer, Craig Bennett.


 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fus-election-result-throws-paris-climate-deal-into-uncertainty%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9220554ee4da2bb5253aa597cbdf5b640c9610a8%2F264_0_4373_2624%2F4373.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paris%20climate%20deal%20thrown%20into%20uncertainty%20by%20US%20election%20result&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fus-election-result-throws-paris-climate-deal-into-uncertainty%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paris%20climate%20deal%20thrown%20into%20uncertainty%20by%20US%20election%20result&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fus-election-result-throws-paris-climate-deal-into-uncertainty%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9220554ee4da2bb5253aa597cbdf5b640c9610a8%2F264_0_4373_2624%2F4373.jpg>
 Coalminers wave signs as Donald Trump speaks at a Republican rally in 
Charleston, West Virginia. Photograph: Steve Helber/AP 
US human rights and environment groups urged other countries to hold Trump to 
account. “The Paris agreement was signed and ratified not by a president, but 
by the United States itself. As a matter of international law, and as a matter 
of human survival, the nations of the world can, must, and will hold the United 
States to its climate commitments,” said Maya Golden-Krasner, senior attorney 
at the Center for Biological Diversity.




Nathaniel Keohane, vice-president at the Environmental Defense Fund, said: 
“The world won’t wait for the US and neither will the climate. This year the 
impacts of climate change cost the US hundreds of billions of dollars and put 
40 million people in southern Africa alone at risk of hunger.

“The next president needs to work with Congress to go further faster to cut 
emissions and protect the rights of men and women on the front lines of the 
climate crisis.”

Businesses also expressed concerns that a Trump presidency would set back 
climate change action. “We expect Trump’s policies to put at risk the 
decarbonisation and clean energy uptake seen during President Obama’s time in 
office, with potential to slow both the US energy system transition and 
domestic measures to mitigate climate change,” said analysts at HSBC’s Global 
Research unit.


China earlier this month took the unusual step of criticising Trump’s plans to 
pull out of Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/01/china-criticises-donald-trumps-plan-to-exit-paris-climate-deal>
.

But Zou Ji, deputy director general at China’s National Center for Climate 
Change Strategy and International Cooperation, said: “China’s climate strategy 
and policy is in accordance with China’s national interest, and is not 
dependent on the US presidency.

“The fundamental incentive is China’s need to drive growth by escalating the 
economic transition, improving air quality, boosting growth rate by efficiency 
improvement, and strengthening energy security. After all, it is a matter of 
innovation of development path.”
 