
Founded in 1824, The Athenaeum <http://www.athenaeumclub.co.uk> is considered 
one of London's foremost gentlemen's clubs. Nobel prize-winners, poet laureates 
and heads of state have all passed through its doors. Churchill was a member 
here, as was Darwin. It's in this temple of intellectual titans that the 
Guardian is standing, watching Chris Pratt andPeter Serafinowicz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/peter-serafinowicz> look for a goose.

"Actually, I think it might have just been a plastic bag," Pratt declares, 
glumly.

"It might have been a goose," Serafinowicz says, hopefully, and the pair race 
to the window, like two E-number-addled six-year-olds, for a closer glimpse.

The wild goose chase in question is for Parks And Recreation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/nov/22/parks-and-recreation-bbc4>
, the US sitcom that is filming a one-off episode in the UK. Pratt's character, 
likable lummox Andy Dwyer, is discussing a business proposition with guest star 
Serafinowicz's aristocratic, and equally dim, Lord Covington. Between them is 
Adam Scott, AKA Parks And Rec's resident worrier Ben Wyatt, whose wary 
expression reads as if he's expecting an army of butlers to forcibly eject the 
trio at any moment.

He needn't be concerned. The giddy enthusiasm of this unruly mob would win 
over the most po-faced of patricians. The same could be said of Parks And 
Recreation itself. A mockumentary centred on a group of government workers in 
the parks department of the fictional midwestern city of Pawnee, the show 
exhibits a positivity and sincerity at odds with much of television comedy's 
snark-driven output. That it does so while also remaining one of TV's funniest 
sitcoms is more impressive still.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FcLMEGsGwULY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FcLMEGsGwULY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FcLMEGsGwULY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>

Reading this on mobile? Click here to view <>

Away from the goose antics, the show's star, producer and sometime writer Amy 
Poehler <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/amy-poehler> is plotting the next 
step in her 10-point checklist for global domination. "I'd love to be on the 
BBC more. I'd like to be on all of the BBCs. There's five of them, yes? Ten?" 
For now, though, she's just happy to be recognised. "Saturday Night Live [which 
she appeared on for nearly a decade] was never on in the UK," she says, 
mock-indignantly. "The couple of times that I've been here I would just stand 
in the street and wait for someone to recognise me… and they never did!"

Poehler has no such visibility problem now. Outside, a line of autograph 
hunters has formed, despite the location of the shoot being kept under wraps. 
Arguably one of the most influential figures currently working in comedy, she's 
just been announced as Golden Globes co-host for a third consecutive year. 
Meanwhile, her character on Parks And Rec, the parks department's indefatigable 
deputy director Leslie Knope, is routinely praised as a feminist role model 
online, with fan-made "Vote Knope" and "Knope We Can!" gifs scattered across 
social media.

But while Poehler is the show's obvious big name, Parks And Recreation is at 
its heart an ensemble comedy, stuffed with memorable characters. Everywhere you 
look there's someone who could be categorised as a breakout star, fromAziz 
Ansari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/oct/25/aziz-ansari-parks-and-recreation>
 – as Jay-Z-quoting have-a-go-entrepreneur Tom Haverford – to Nick Offerman, 
whose libertarian department chief Ron Swanson barely utters a sentence that 
doesn't become a meme ("I like fishing. It's like yoga, except I get to kill 
something").

Despite all that, the news that Parks And Rec has decamped to Blighty might 
surprise some who have followed its fortunes over here. For years, this was a 
show that was nowhere to be seen on British TV. Indeed, until recently, the 
only way to watch it without resorting to illegal downloads was, bizarrely, on 
the little screens in the carriages of First Great Western trains. Even now, in 
an age when Game Of Thrones and the like air mere nanoseconds after the US 
broadcast, we're still a full four seasons behind the States. Pratt didn't even 
know Parks And Rec was on over here until he saw it, "at one in the morning or 
something".

"When kids are coming back from the clubs," adds Poehler, putting a positive 
Knope-ian spin on the situation. "When everybody is coming down."

So, what on earth are they doing in London? "We thought it would be fun," 
explains Poehler, who, along with Pratt, Scott andAubrey Plaza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/aubrey-plaza> (who plays the parks 
department's apathetic intern April), is taking a break from filming to chat 
with the Guardian. "It's always been fun to take the Parks people, the small 
weirdos, into a bigger universe. And Chris is shooting [superhero movie 
Guardians Of The Galaxy] here for the next couple of months, so we wanted to be 
able to combine all those things."
 Ron Swanson and his ex-wife Tammy 
Traipsing over to another continent just to fit in with the schedule of one of 
your cast members might seem excessive, but Parks And Rec has never been a 
sitcom to show caution. A word-of-mouth success rather than a ratings smash, 
the show spent many of its early seasons threatened by cancellation. It's an 
environment that has encouraged the programme's creators, Mike Schur and Greg 
Daniels, to write every episode as if it's the show's last. There's little time 
for the lingering, will-they-won't-they relationships of other shows. "If you 
know you're a giant hit right out of the gate, you're going to be very 
tantric," says Pratt. "'We're going to save that [storyline] for season four.' 
While we're like, 'No, we're going to pump as hard and as fast as we can!'"

Moreover, you get the sense that this is an ensemble who are happy to fly 
halfway across the world if it means getting to arse about in each other's 
company. "We're all primarily comedic actors, so you all get a chance to make 
jokes and crack each other up," says Pratt. "It's creatively fulfilling." As if 
to prove that point, Poehler, Pratt, Plaza and Scott spend large chunks of our 
interview making each other laugh with impromptu riffs on everything from 
Plaza's interests – "Bloodied corpses," says Plaza; "She enjoys Satan," adds 
Poehler – to the actorly guidance Scott plans to give the cast when he directs 
a future episode of the show (the first chapter of his acting manual, he says, 
is called, "Shut up and listen to me").

Inevitably in this environment, the boundaries between the cast and the 
characters they play becomes blurred. It's only really Scott, affecting a dry, 
jokey arrogance, who doesn't openly exhibit traits of his character. Pratt, 
while far sharper than Andy, throws himself into conversation with the same 
boyish enthusiasm, while Plaza mirrors April's deadpan rhythms to an eerie 
degree: in one telling exchange she answers a question by saying, "I don't 
care", prompting a dressing-down from Poehler. "You do care! Stop it. She cares 
very much."

Poehler, meanwhile, is pure Knope: knowledgable, enthusiastic, and always 
ready to cajole her co-stars into conversation in their rare recalcitrant 
moments. When Parks And Recreation first aired, Leslie was depicted as a 
slightly tragic figure: a grown-up version of Tracy Flick from the film 
Election whose keenness grated on her co-workers and whose self-importance was 
disproportionate to the small-potatoes nature of her role. But then in season 
two, she suddenly stopped being the butt of the show's jokes. Her 
once-irritating zealousness had been reinterpreted as something to be lauded, 
and her friendship withRashida Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/nov/30/rashida-jones-celeste-jesse-forever>
's nurse Ann Perkins became one of the sweetest relationships on television. 
The rest of the show followed suit: Andy, slothful and dislikable in season 
one, became vaguely heroic in his wooing of April, who began to show hints of 
humanity behind the scowl, while Ron's inflexible libertarianism turned into 
noble self-sufficiency. Now, "it's a show about how you're better as a group 
than alone," explains Poehler. "And really, when given the chance to not care 
or care, which one would you rather do?"
 Amy Poehler as Leslie Knope 
Parks And Rec's third season, which has just started on BBC4, plumps up its 
cast further with permanent roles for Scott, as a buttoned-down accountant who 
quietly becomes charmed by Pawnee, and Rob Lowe, radiating wild enthusiasm as 
city manager Chris Traeger. For a show forever threatened by the spectre of 
cancellation, Lowe's presence gave its creators some much-needed clout. "He 
gave us some more eyeballs," says Poehler, who confesses to asking Lowe "a lot 
of questions about whether he minds that I used to kiss his poster when I was 
13".

Fittingly for a show that features Lowe, Parks And Rec was pitched, Poehler 
says, as "a comedy West Wing, only with really low stakes". And, at a time when 
America's two parties can't seem to agree on anything, the show – where the 
diametrically opposed Leslie and Ron are able to find common ground – preaches 
a form of bipartisanship absent from real-life politics. Poehler, though, 
downplays Parks And Rec's politics. "At the end of the day, I don't think it's 
a show about politics. It's just a character comedy that happens to take place 
in this [government] department. The larger political stuff provides a backdrop 
for personal drama."

Parks And Rec has just been recommissioned for a seventh season, and Poehler 
talks enthusiastically of "exciting stuff" to come, but at the back of her mind 
the prospect of the show's end looms. Rashida Jones and Rob Lowe have confirmed 
their exits from the show, and with other cast members involved in films – 
Pratt in Guardians Of The Galaxy, Plaza in The To Do List – you do wonder how 
long the gang can stay together. "I'm in a little bit of denial about that," 
Poehler admits, describing it as "a miracle" that the show has lasted as long 
as it has. Still, she says there's still some unfinished business. "I feel like 
Leslie and Andy still haven't had their moment."

"True, yeah," says Pratt, returning to his favourite theme. "Talk about 
tantric. Season 10, you better watch your step."

"Season 10 everybody will just be having sex with each other," offers Poehler.

Perfect for the 1am crowd, then.

The third season of Parks And Recreation continues in the UK on Wednesdays, 
10pm, BBC4
 