
Harvard Law professor Lawrence Lessig has raised a million dollars and declared
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/06/larry-lessig-presidental-candidate-2016>
 that he’s running for the Democratic nomination for president – and he claims 
to have invented a new strategy that would compel Congress to pass his agenda.

Lessig’s campaign is based on a simple promise 
<http://ivn.us/2015/08/20/lawrence-lessig-another-partisan-election-wont-change-america/>
 – that his entire goal as president would be passing the “Citizens Equality 
Act,” a series of (attractive) electoral and campaign finance reforms. He has 
vowed to do nothing but focus on the act and then resign once it’s passed. Even 
if North Korean troops attempt to march into Seoul, a hurricane hits Miami and 
a US Supreme Court vacancy emerges, Lessig will retain a laser focus on his pet 
procedural reforms. By declaring the election a “referendum,” he asserts, even 
the Republicans who will almost certainly control the House of Representatives 
in 2016 will have no choice but to pass his proposed legislation.

He’s wrong. Both strategically and substantively, Lessig’s run reflects a lot 
of thecommon fallacies 
<http://www.vox.com/2015/8/27/9214015/tech-nerds-politics> of people who think 
they’re too smart for politics.

The most obvious objection to be raised to Lessig’s campaign is that its 
underlying theory of politics is nutty 
<http://theweek.com/articles/571313/lawrence-lessig-how-not-run-singleissue-campaign>
. Declaring an election a “referendum” will not compel a single Republican to 
vote for legislation that is against both the ideological and political 
interests of the party. Vowing to turn the actual business of governing over to 
an unnamed vice president is irresponsible and dilettantish. And it’s silly to 
think that a series of wonky procedural reforms – no matter how worthy – 
unconnected to substantive issues could mobilize a mass constituency.

But let’s leave that aside and look at the actual policy he’s proposing. The 
Citizens Equality Act, which would make it easier to vote, end gerrymandering – 
voting district manipulation – and authorize Congress to regulate campaign 
spending and donations more aggressively than the Supreme Court currently 
permits, would be a net benefit for American politics. But we shouldn’t 
exaggerate the importance of all of these issues, either.

Citizens United, the 2010 Supreme Court decision that abolished campaign 
spending caps for corporate entities, imposes too many restrictions on the 
ability of Congress to regulate campaign financing, and the publicly funded 
campaigns Lessig advocates probably nudge politics in the right direction. But 
it’s also true that it wouldmore likely be 
<http://www.eschatonblog.com/2015/09/3-profit.html> a nudge than a shove. 
Political campaign spending could not be entirely eliminated without violating 
the First Amendment. “Getting the money out of politics” isn’t really possible 
or even desirable.

Similarly, gerrymandering distorts political outcomes and it would be better 
if it was eliminated. But even a non-gerrymandered Congress would tilt against 
the urban-based Democratic Party and in favor of the more exurban and 
rural-based Republicans. Gerrymandering is not a good thing, but it’s not the 
root cause of American political dysfunction. The Senate – which cannot be 
gerrymandered, because it’s a statewide office, rather than based on in-state 
districts – has generally been agreater barrier 
<http://www.mischiefsoffaction.com/2015/04/the-roots-of-political-science.html> 
to progressive change than the gerrymandered House of Representatives.

Even stranger than his so-called platform is Lessig’s focus on the evils of 
“partisanship.” This is the mantra of people whose politics is antipolicitcs: 
Both Sides Do It. The truth is more mundane.Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> generally support Lessig’s 
reform goals and Republicans, at both the federal and state level, vociferously 
oppose them. I agree that it would be desirable to have a bipartisan consensus 
on these procedural reforms, but Lessig’s plan for achieving it is wishful 
thinking all the way down. In practice, Lessig’s reforms will require solid 
Democratic majorities, not gimmicks.

To see the limitations of Lessig’s proposed reforms, we just need to go back 
to mid-20th century American politics. Many of the things Lessig seeks to solve 
were attenuated or absent. Partisanship was very weak.Turnout 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voter_turnout_in_the_United_States_presidential_elections>
 in presidential elections generally exceeded 60%. More stringent campaign 
finance reformswere in place <http://www.fec.gov/pages/brochures/fecfeca.shtml>
, and campaigns were a lot cheaper, reducing the role of money in politics. So 
this was when American politics was actually functional and representative, 
right?

Hardly. Between 1938 and 1963, Congress was dominated by a coalition of 
conservative Democrats and Republicans that consistently thwarted progressive 
reforms and civil rights legislation. Probably the most important legislation 
of the period was the Taft-Hartley Act, in which veto-proof bipartisan 
coalitions reached across the aisle to eviscerate American labor. The statute
remains 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/the_great_divergence/features/2010/the_united_states_of_inequality/the_great_divergence_and_the_death_of_organized_labor.html>
 a major source of American inequality today.

Conversely, party-line or near-party line votes achieved the major 
achievements of the Obama administration, including the Affordable Care Act and 
major stimulus and financial regulation laws. You might argue that all of these 
statutes are flawed, and I would agree, but thenso were most of the major 
achievements <http://prospect.org/article/fear-and-new-deal> of the New Deal 
and Great Society. And while those earlier periods of progressive reform had 
more nominal bipartisan cooperation, it’s not a coincidence that some 
Republicans felt compelled to do along only when faced with atypically huge 
Democratic supermajorities. Partisanship isn’t the enemy of major reform: it’s 
more of a necessary condition. And even if you mistakenly think it would be 
beneficial, the era of liberal northern Republicans and a conservative 
Democratic south isn’t coming back.

The brutal truth is that the choices that make American government largely 
dysfunctional were not made by the Supreme Court in 2010 or by state 
legislatures following the 2010 census. They were made by the framers of the 
Constitution in 1787. The large number of veto points established by the system 
were designed to make transformative change enormously difficult, and they have.

The electoral reforms proposed by Lessig are very necessary, and eliminating 
gerrymandering and passing campaign finance restrictions would be useful. But 
pretending they’re a magic bullet will make the road to progressive change 
harder rather than easier, and pretending that “partisanship” is the enemy, 
will make things even worse.
 