
Before he began photographing the LGBT community in his native Bangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh> towards the end of 2008, Gazi 
Nafis Ahmed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/apr/28/i-want-to-help-the-lgbt-community-in-bangladesh-make-their-voices-heard>
 spent a year in their midst without taking a single shot. “I was content just 
to hang around and socialise,” he says. “Though my work isrooted in traditional 
documentary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/apr/29/inside-bangladesh-garment-factories>
, I cannot photograph people I cannot be friends with. So it is important for 
me to first create a space for us to be comfortable. The work flows from that.”

'I want to help the LGBT community in Bangladesh make their voices heard'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/apr/28/i-want-to-help-the-lgbt-community-in-bangladesh-make-their-voices-heard>
The result is Inner Face <http://www.gazinafis.com/work_detail.php?id=157>, an 
insider view of a community that is relatively invisible in Bangladesh’s 
conservative, patriarchal society. In this series of black and white 
photographs, Ahmed eschews documentary detachment, favouring a more intimate – 
often playful – kind of collaboration. “I want my subjects to express 
themselves freely,” he says, “and that involves a huge level of trust on their 
part.”

Portraits of individuals and couples give way to close-ups of hands on skin or 
intertwined legs. Stylish gay men embrace while staring straight at the camera; 
another couple sit with their backs resolutely to the lens. In grainy, high 
contrast close-up more resonant of the Scandinavian school of heightened 
observation, Ahmed homes in on telling details: a nail-varnished male hand, a 
makeshift shelving unit full of lotions and music cassettes, a nude whose face 
is hidden beneath a raised dress – it is titled simply Castration. Another 
graphic image, called Shahinoor and Nipa, depicts rows of scars on a pair of 
wrists.

“The people come from the middle and lower-middle classes,” says Ahmed. “I 
give them space to tell their stories. These often hint at the gender-based 
violence that determines their lives. Shahinoor told me, ‘I’m a woman. I want 
to be with my female lover. I don’t want anyone to come between us. We don’t 
want anyone to cut themselves or commit suicide because of their sexuality.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fphotography-bangladesh-lgbt-community%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f02626a6240f8f33b8a96ab706b1feda9f031dd%2F0_0_1333_2000%2F1333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Passion%20and%20persecution%3A%20photographing%20Bangladesh's%20outcasts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fphotography-bangladesh-lgbt-community%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Passion%20and%20persecution%3A%20photographing%20Bangladesh%27s%20outcasts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fphotography-bangladesh-lgbt-community%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f02626a6240f8f33b8a96ab706b1feda9f031dd%2F0_0_1333_2000%2F1333.jpg>
 Lover #11 (Billal & Aman): ‘Our family thinks we are just friends, but we are 
deeply in love and nothing can tear us apart.” Photograph: Gazi Nafis Ahmed 
Ahmed describes himself as “not just a photographer, but an activist”. His 
previous projects includeAgonized Souls 
<https://www.lensculture.com/articles/gazi-nafis-ahmed-agonized-souls>, which 
tackled opium addiction in Bangladesh, andThe Social Network 
<https://www.lensculture.com/articles/gazi-nafis-ahmed-the-social-network>, in 
which he spent time among street kids in Dhaka. It is important, he says, for 
his work to suggest the wider social context in which his subjects live. To 
this end, Inner Face is imbued with “the sense of threat from the outside that 
is ever-present in this community – alongside their joy and support for each 
other”.

That sense of threat recently became more real. In April, Xulhaz Mannan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/25/editor-bangladesh-first-lgbt-magazine-killed-reports-say-roopbaan>
 – the founder of Bangladesh’s only LGBT magazine, Roopbaan, and a close friend 
of Ahmed’s – was hacked to death by an extremist gang who gained access to his 
apartment block by posing as couriers. A friend of Mannan’s was also killed and 
two other men seriously injured in the machete attack. Just two days before, a 
progressive academic,Prof Rezaul Karim Siddique 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/23/bangladeshi-professor-hacked-to-death-rajshahi-islamists>
, was hacked to death near his home. Earlier in the month,Nazimuddin Samad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/07/secular-activist-who-criticised-islamism-hacked-to-death-in-bangladesh>
, an atheist blogger, was also murdered. Bangladesh suddenly seems a much more 
dangerous place for an activist.

Mannan’s death occurred just over a week after the cancellation by the 
authorities of Bangladesh’s “rainbow rally” in Dhaka, an annual celebration he 
had organised since 2014. At the time,Ahmed told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/apr/28/i-want-to-help-the-lgbt-community-in-bangladesh-make-their-voices-heard>
: “Mannan was very kind-hearted, always supportive. If I ever asked him, he was 
always ready to support my work. He always had a smile on his face, always a 
yes for any favour.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fphotography-bangladesh-lgbt-community%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fbee88ca50fed469d9b38c80270e2193502fd3d%2F0_0_1333_2000%2F1333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Passion%20and%20persecution%3A%20photographing%20Bangladesh's%20outcasts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fphotography-bangladesh-lgbt-community%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Passion%20and%20persecution%3A%20photographing%20Bangladesh%27s%20outcasts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fphotography-bangladesh-lgbt-community%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fbee88ca50fed469d9b38c80270e2193502fd3d%2F0_0_1333_2000%2F1333.jpg>
 Mithu: ‘If I could understand myself back then like I do now, then I believe 
nobody would have been able to force me to get married.’ Photograph: Gazi Nafis 
Ahmed 
Is Ahmed concerned about his own safety? “In the past, I never took threats on 
my life seriously,” he says. “But now I have no choice. Before, I always 
thought, ‘If I stop doing my work, it will end and no one else will do it.’ 
Now, the series is complete, but I am still at risk. The people who threaten 
and kill free-thinkers are afraid of knowledge, change, freedom of expression. 
All the things that people like me believe in. We are a big challenge to them.”

Ahmed lived for a time in London, where he studied art and design, before 
moving to Denmark to take a degree in documentary photography. Between studies, 
he returned home to shoot on the streets of Dhaka. Now based in Madrid, where 
he recently completed an MA in photography, he is understandably reluctant to 
return to Bangladesh any time soon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fphotography-bangladesh-lgbt-community%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d3279df597402c2bdc71a64a99e9051c9073180%2F0_0_3780_2520%2F3780.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Passion%20and%20persecution%3A%20photographing%20Bangladesh's%20outcasts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fphotography-bangladesh-lgbt-community%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Passion%20and%20persecution%3A%20photographing%20Bangladesh%27s%20outcasts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fphotography-bangladesh-lgbt-community%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d3279df597402c2bdc71a64a99e9051c9073180%2F0_0_3780_2520%2F3780.jpg>
 Bobby: ‘I left home when I was 14 years old. I am now the Guru of 500 hijras 
making a living under my guidance in my neighbourhood.’ Photograph: Gazi Nafis 
Ahmed 
“I was there for 24 days in January and February for the art fair, but I had 
some strange phone calls. One person asked me to go to some place to be 
interviewed about my work, but it did not seem right. Since the death of 
Mannan, I feel uneasy. I don’t want to apply for asylum, because I don’t want 
to be removed from where I come from. But there have been threats made towards 
me and I don’t feel I can return at the moment because of the risk.”

Nevertheless, Ahmed continues to work amid the LGBT community. “The themes 
remain the same – diversity of gender and sexuality – but now I am shooting in 
European cities. My photography has really been adapted from the family 
snapshots I made when I was younger: pictures of birthdays, gatherings and 
social events. It is about the presence of loved ones at significant moments. 
It is about family, belonging and community.”
 