
I was up early this morning as the sun levered its way over the hill. Its long 
fingers, reaching through the trees above, lay shafts on the meadow grass on 
the slopes. Finally alighting upon the caravan, they took the chill off the 
morning. We are still in the upheaval of construction, with our little house 
and the milking barn that will become my studio exposed and pared back to the 
bare essentials. It has been an exciting, long-awaited summer. Five years in 
planning and many more in waiting to live this dream.

A cold night and a silvery dew soaked my feet just steps off the track as the 
dog and I went for a walk ahead of the day proper starting. I wanted to take in 
everything I have done here and some of the things I plan to do, for this is my 
last regular article for the Observer. I am leaving the paper to take a breath 
before starting the next chapter.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fpastures-new-dan-pearsons-journey-city-to-farm%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441190438607%2F73782e5a-510c-4fe4-803a-a50c189f6b16-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pastures%20new%3A%20Dan%20Pearson%E2%80%99s%20journey%20from%20city%20to%20farm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fpastures-new-dan-pearsons-journey-city-to-farm%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pastures%20new%3A%20Dan%20Pearson%E2%80%99s%20journey%20from%20city%20to%20farm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fpastures-new-dan-pearsons-journey-city-to-farm%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441190438607%2F73782e5a-510c-4fe4-803a-a50c189f6b16-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Early days: the farm in Somerset shortly after Dan moved in. Photograph: Suki 
Dhanda for the Observer 
The reward in tending this place is in it being a process of discoveries, but 
my delight has been deeper for being able to share it through this column. My 
English teacher, Joan Wiggins, helped me to see the value of holding and 
distilling a thought in words. A thought that might not last much longer than 
it takes to bury your nose in a rose or unearth the first freshly dug spuds. 
Gardening is special for that. Everything has meaning and association, a 
layering of accrued experience that builds towards a slow but sure 
understanding. Words help with this illumination and as I am working, I plan 
how to describe what makes this particular activity or plant special.

My old friend Jane, who lives on the hill opposite and who I met when we were 
students at Kew, said I would find my inclinations hard to resist and that I 
would soon be gardening our little part of the valley. Quickly, however, I 
found that, if anything, I wanted to make my mark less and to garden only with 
the energy reserves I could afford to throw at the place. I wanted to keep my 
head up and not be bent double, looking down. This is the place to keep your 
clarity and your ego – and every gardener has one – in check. From here my 
design projects back in the London studio can be seen with a fresh eye. The 
planting I have been commissioned to do forthe Garden Bridge 
<http://www.danpearsonstudio.com/#/news/tag/garden-bridge> over the Thames 
needs careful planning, but I can retain perspective from this vantage point. 
The conundrums are more easily solved for having the raw materials of 
inspiration close to hand.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fpastures-new-dan-pearsons-journey-city-to-farm%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441190537687%2Fbe7c4a17-3390-40a7-a440-cdd2de285ba7-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pastures%20new%3A%20Dan%20Pearson%E2%80%99s%20journey%20from%20city%20to%20farm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fpastures-new-dan-pearsons-journey-city-to-farm%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pastures%20new%3A%20Dan%20Pearson%E2%80%99s%20journey%20from%20city%20to%20farm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fpastures-new-dan-pearsons-journey-city-to-farm%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441190537687%2Fbe7c4a17-3390-40a7-a440-cdd2de285ba7-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Making the beds: Dan in the vegetable garden. Photograph: Sam Frost for the 
Observer 
Not long into the first summer here I found gardening and farming to be at 
surprisingly different ends of the spectrum. The farmers have humoured me 
taking the naturalist’s view, putting the pasture back to meadow and 
introducing yellow rattle, and getting my hedges cut on a year-on-year-off 
rotation for the wildlife. I have had to contend with the sheep and deer 
outwitting my tree guards. One farmer’s comment that “trees like a good nibble” 
rankled with my horticultural training until I learned to build in loss. A 
haven is not always easily won.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fpastures-new-dan-pearsons-journey-city-to-farm%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441190694987%2F225b601b-b4a8-458a-97aa-3f8ef2531e5f-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pastures%20new%3A%20Dan%20Pearson%E2%80%99s%20journey%20from%20city%20to%20farm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fpastures-new-dan-pearsons-journey-city-to-farm%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pastures%20new%3A%20Dan%20Pearson%E2%80%99s%20journey%20from%20city%20to%20farm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fpastures-new-dan-pearsons-journey-city-to-farm%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441190694987%2F225b601b-b4a8-458a-97aa-3f8ef2531e5f-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Nature’s bounty: collecting windfalls from the orchard in 2010. Photograph: 
Suki Dhanda for the Observer 
We ascended a summer-worn track in the meadows behind the house, passing 
through my young crab apples and up on to the ridge I cut into the hill to make 
a flat track and point of observation. From here you can survey the wood and 
the stream below, over to the ditch where we keep the bees and up the valley 
where I have planted the orchard and nuttery. Immediately below is the neatly 
ordered plateau of the vegetable garden. Growing to eat has been an important 
part of being here and I am learning daily about how to get more from the land.

In the furthest corner is the blossom wood we planted in the first winter. 
Young whips, just 3ft and no more when they went in, are already up to 15ft 
high that you can stand amongst. They have transformed this previously coarse, 
open field into something with a distinct, developing environment. The most 
noticeable change is that the trees are all aflutter with birds feasting 
furiously, with the rowan already stripped, and euonymus and rosehip blazing in 
early sun. The hedge we planted with friends that first new year is thickened 
and tall. Walk in its lee and you move through clouds of eglantine perfume from 
the roses in the mix. These are simple pleasures. Time and ambitions marked in 
growth.

Over the stile and into the plum orchard, the trees are already burdened with 
fruit. It was good to plant trees in the first year here and to have them 
quietly advancing while we ruminated elsewhere. The plums were planted at the 
top of the slope. Should we have an untimely frost, I hope their early flower 
might escape the pool of cooled air below. So far I have been right, and the 
apples further down, which flower later, once the frosts have abated, have done 
well, too. In the shelter towards the bottom of the slope, the nuts take the 
ground that wouldn’t be favoured by either.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fpastures-new-dan-pearsons-journey-city-to-farm%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441190843044%2Fffdc4f88-bd74-45a6-bcf2-b27a2f7b2fda-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pastures%20new%3A%20Dan%20Pearson%E2%80%99s%20journey%20from%20city%20to%20farm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fpastures-new-dan-pearsons-journey-city-to-farm%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pastures%20new%3A%20Dan%20Pearson%E2%80%99s%20journey%20from%20city%20to%20farm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fpastures-new-dan-pearsons-journey-city-to-farm%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441190843044%2Fffdc4f88-bd74-45a6-bcf2-b27a2f7b2fda-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Dan in front of the barn which will soon become part of his studio. 
Photograph: Sam Frost for the Observer 
I make a special point of visiting the group of Kentish cob we placed in 
memory of Heidi, our beloved colleague and friend who died too young in the 
same year the nuttery was planted. She is with us there – in best spirits I 
might add – and so are the nuts, which are already fruiting. I pull away the 
excess of bindweed. Tending where I might not be gardening keeps the trees on 
the right path. Checking their wellbeing keeps you in touch and mindful. This 
is all there is to a green finger.

Over the years I have been writing, I have been lucky to record my own process 
in a sketchbook of words and communicate the mistakes and indeed the successes, 
to you. When I started writing a column 20 years ago, my haven was a 4x5m 
rooftop in Vauxhall, but I also had the luxury of gardening the four acres of 
Home Farm for my friend Frances, in Northamptonshire. We were planting on the 
wild side there, interpreting my observations from travels overseas. Home Farm 
was part of a zeitgeist when we started in the mid-80s, and a naturalistic 
movement has swept the country since. The Chelsea Flower Show brims with a 
froth of mingled planting that is now commonplace, but as gardeners we know the 
true value of working with and not against nature where we can.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fpastures-new-dan-pearsons-journey-city-to-farm%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441190932073%2F4d0b36dd-7da2-4e5e-aa1b-35f6d56e058c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pastures%20new%3A%20Dan%20Pearson%E2%80%99s%20journey%20from%20city%20to%20farm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fpastures-new-dan-pearsons-journey-city-to-farm%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pastures%20new%3A%20Dan%20Pearson%E2%80%99s%20journey%20from%20city%20to%20farm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fpastures-new-dan-pearsons-journey-city-to-farm%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441190932073%2F4d0b36dd-7da2-4e5e-aa1b-35f6d56e058c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Colour vision: in the flower garden. Photograph: Sam Frost for the Observer 
Crossing the brook though the water mint, I visit my katsura grove in the 
stillness at the bottom of the slopes. The trees were brought back as seedlings 
from my long-term project in Hokkaido, Japan, where I am working on a 
400-hectare park designed to be sustainable for 1,000 years. These trees are a 
connection with that place and one of the reasons for the decision to start a 
new writing project. There is a book there; a story that needs the room to be 
told.

Returning in an arc through a catkin coppice and up on to the rounded field 
named the Tump, I arrive breathless, the ascent is steep. We look up the valley 
to the building site. The slopes below me, where the brambles were cut this 
last winter, are already regenerating along the damp ditch with marsh thistle 
and meadowsweet. I have plans for a bridge here and for the land immediately 
beyond it to become a garden. The new studio will be perched on the edge of the 
garden: part in landscape, part in a cultivated world. It will be a touchstone 
and a place of industry and reflection.

From here I can plan the new garden. It is a place that is marked in trial 
beds, but I am teetering now on the edge of a new and much- pondered garden. 
The prospect brims with expectations. Although it is currently formless and 
ungrounded by words, it is sure to be the start of the next page.

Dan is starting a new website. For details, go to 
danpearsonstudio.com/nextsteps <http://www.danpearsonstudio.com/>
 