
‘It doesn’t really matter what I do,” says the film director Paul Schrader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/paul-schrader>, “the first line of my 
obituary will be ‘the writer ofTaxi Driver’.”

I meet the onetime enfant terrible of Hollywood in a hotel in Leicester Square 
during the London film festival. He has a cold that makes his already gravelly 
voice sound like a cement mixer. Stocky with a lived-in face, he is now 70 
years old.

He’s got a point about how he’ll be remembered. Schrader has directed 20 
films, among themBlue Collar, American Gigolo, The Comfort of Strangers and 
Affliction, but his reputation as a film-maker remains overshadowed by his work 
as a screenwriter for Martin Scorsese – as the creator of legendary lines for 
Robert De Niro – inTaxi Driver <https://www.theguardian.com/film/taxi-driver> 
andRaging Bull <https://www.theguardian.com/film/raging-bull>.

Because of social media and the internet, everybody is a critic, everybody is 
a film reviewer

Those films were so powerful and vivid, so charged with tormented personal 
struggle, that they seemed to define a whole era of not just film-making but 
social alienation and cultural revolt. But perhaps more important, they 
represented a time when popular cinema was taken seriously as an art form.

“There’s probably more talented people making films today than there were back 
then,” says Schrader. “The biggest and only difference – and people don’t 
understand this – was the audiences were better. The audiences were going 
through social uncertainty and they wanted artists to help them out. And the 
moment that a society turns to artists for answers, great art emerges.”

Schrader’s latest film, Dog Eat Dog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/13/dog-eat-dog-paul-schrader-review>
, a sort of low-rent crime caper starring Nicolas Cage and Willem Dafoe, does 
not fall easily into the category of great art. A post-Tarantino rush of 
dysfunctional Americana, full of lurid violence and dubious humour, it stands 
awkward comparison with some of Schrader’s more memorable films.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWMKm9ydY12s&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWMKm9ydY12s>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWMKm9ydY12s&media=>
Watch the trailer for Dog Eat Dog. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WMKm9ydY12s>
Whereas, for example, Blue Collar, his directorial debut in 1978, was a gritty 
tale of three Detroit auto-workers falling out against the backdrop of a 
corrupt union,Dog Eat Dog features three criminals who come to a sticky end in 
a bleak Cleveland setting. If you wanted to, you could perhaps construct a 
theory that the two films, placed together, trace America’s postindustrial 
urban decline. But it would be a stretch.

Thankfully Schrader cuts through such pretence straight away. “I’ve been 
fortunate over my career to be involved in some important and prestigious films.
Dog Eat Dogis not one of them.” He explains that he made the film, which is a 
based on a pulp novel by Edward Bunker, as “a redemption project” to put right 
the unhappy experience of an earlier film he made with Cage.Dying of the Light 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/01/dying-of-the-light-review-paul-schrader>
, made in 2014, was taken away from Schrader and recut by the film’s financial 
backers. It was disowned by director and star and disappeared without trace, 
except for the bad feeling it left Schrader with.

He read the script of Dog Eat Dog, which opens with an almost comically 
grotesque domestic murder of a mother and her teenager daughter, and he 
thought, “Oh maybe Nick would like this. I just wanted to do something with 
Nick to show that we could make a film that people would see.”

Dying of the Light review – disowned Paul Schrader thriller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/01/dying-of-the-light-review-paul-schrader>
Cage liked the script but didn’t want the part of Mad Dog that Schrader was 
offering, explaining that he’d just done a crazy guy in his previous film – 
though it could be said that this had never stopped him before. Instead he took 
the part of Troy, the “straight” guy, a relative concept in a film in which 
pretty much everyone kills everyone else.

So then, Schrader explains: “I was able to go to Willem and say, I’ve got the 
best role for you.” This too was an act of redemption because the last time 
he’d cast Dafoe it was in a walk-on part, which the actor agreed to but told 
Schrader to come to him next time with a proper role. Dafoe liked the part.

“Then it was just a matter of massaging the egos financially,” says Schrader. 
However, that was more complex than it might sound: Schrader only had a small 
budget, which wouldn’t cover both actors. “The good thing about working with 
Nick is that he gets your film financed,” he growls. “The bad thing is that he 
eats your budget alive.” His solution was to ask Cage to give Dafoe $100,000 
out of his own payment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fpaul-schrader-ive-been-involved-in-important-films-dog-eat-dog-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f6a42e238e981825804ade1b0088fa529cea4ae%2F32_0_701_416%2F701.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paul%20Schrader%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ve%20made%20some%20important%20films.%20Dog%20Eat%20Dog%20is%20not%20one%20of%20them%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fpaul-schrader-ive-been-involved-in-important-films-dog-eat-dog-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paul%20Schrader%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ve%20made%20some%20important%20films.%20Dog%20Eat%20Dog%20is%20not%20one%20of%20them%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fpaul-schrader-ive-been-involved-in-important-films-dog-eat-dog-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f6a42e238e981825804ade1b0088fa529cea4ae%2F32_0_701_416%2F701.jpg>
 Paul Schrader and Nicolas Cage on set for Dog Eat Dog. ‘It was a redemption 
project,’ says Schrader. Photograph: Allstar/Signature Entertainment 
“Willem’s ego was hurt by the distance between them and the only thing that 
would fix that was if the money actually came from Cage himself. And I was able 
to say, Nick’s going to give you a hundred grand more out of his salary. Then 
he says: OK, that will do it.”

This kind of frankness is not typical in film-making, where behind-the-scenes 
negotiations tend to be guarded like nuclear codes, but Schrader has a 
reputation for candour. A couple of years ago he madeThe Canyons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/11/the-canyons-review-linday-lohan-dire-erotic-thriller>
, a film set in the louche backwaters of LA, where sex is a communal activity. 
It was written by Bret Easton Ellis, financed by crowdfunding, and it starred 
the porn actor James Deen and the troubled actor Lindsay Lohan.

It was a bizarre but fascinating confection. Lohan, he has said, was 
exhausting. As he commented at the time: “When you are working with someone who 
lives in a world of crisis and unpredictability, you’re never really relaxed.”

“The film made money and we made money,” he says now, “but I’d never do it 
again. It’s much more work than normal financing.”

I wouldn’t be a film-maker if it wasn’t for Pauline Kael

Intriguingly for someone who has repeatedly returned to themes of moral and 
sexual transgression, Schrader grew up in a highly religious environment as a 
child of strict Calvinists. He did not see his first film –The Absent-Minded 
Professor– until he was 17. He was so anxious about sinning that he walked out 
of the cinema, before returning to watch the movie. It left a big impression 
upon him.

Thereafter he started trying to make up for lost time by watching as many 
films as he could. During summer school at Columbia University in 1966, he met 
Pauline Kael, the pioneering film critic. He later recalled the encounter: “The 
first time I met her, referring to some movie, a comedy, she said: ‘The laughs 
are as sparse as pubic hair on an old lady’s cunt.’ I was shocked. I didn’t 
know women talked like that.”

Despite his alarm, he became one of her acolytes at a time when she wielded 
enormous influence in the film world. That’s another thing that’s changed – the 
high priest role of the critic. “One of the problems we have now because of 
social media and the internet is that everybody is a critic, everybody is a 
film reviewer,” says Schrader. “And the other half of it is that none of them 
can make any money.”

Back then, Kael’s opinion didn’t just close films, it also opened doors. Kael 
got him a job as a film critic atLA Free Press – he later lost it after giving 
Easy Ridera bad review – and recommended him for a place at UCLA film school. 
“I wouldn’t be a film-maker if it wasn’t for Pauline,” he says.

Having been both critic and film-maker, Schrader says now: “The critic at 
heart is like a medical examiner. He or she simply wants to get that cadaver on 
the table and figure out how it lived. A film-maker is like a pregnant woman. 
All the film-maker wants is to give birth to a living thing. So if you allow 
the medical examiner into the birthing room he will kill that baby.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fpaul-schrader-ive-been-involved-in-important-films-dog-eat-dog-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F260fe08b38d84e629d5f38d8a230c656edc263bf%2F0_87_2256_1403%2F2256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paul%20Schrader%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ve%20made%20some%20important%20films.%20Dog%20Eat%20Dog%20is%20not%20one%20of%20them%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fpaul-schrader-ive-been-involved-in-important-films-dog-eat-dog-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paul%20Schrader%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ve%20made%20some%20important%20films.%20Dog%20Eat%20Dog%20is%20not%20one%20of%20them%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fpaul-schrader-ive-been-involved-in-important-films-dog-eat-dog-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F260fe08b38d84e629d5f38d8a230c656edc263bf%2F0_87_2256_1403%2F2256.jpg>
 Robert De Niro in Taxi Driver (1976). Photograph: Ronald Grant Film Archive 
In those early days in LA he was the ultimate film nerd, making notes on 
everything he saw. “I look back on the late 60s,” he says, “and I missed a lot 
of sex and a lot of drugs and a lot of good times because all I cared about was 
going to the movies and catching up.”

But as I remind him, he later caught up with the sex and drugs with the same 
dedication he put into discovering cinema. First, though, he was intent on 
penetrating Hollywood.

He befriended a group of other aspiring film-makers, including Brian De Palma, 
Martin Scorsese, Francis Ford Coppola, Steven Spielberg and George Lucas. They 
were further ahead than him in their careers but what he lacked in experience 
he tried to make up for in networking.

I always felt I was looking at the world through a pane of glass and I 
couldn’t quite touch it, even though I was in it

In Peter Biskind’s 1998 book about the “New Hollywood” of the late 60s and 70s,
Easy Riders, Raging Bulls, Schrader is portrayed as someone who’d sell his 
grandmother to get into the right party. As his girlfriend at the time, a 
part-time publicist called Beverly Walker, complained to Biskind: “What kind of 
relationship can you have with someone when you fuck them, and then you turn 
over, and they’re asking you to give a script to Clint Eastwood?”

But Schrader and his other film-maker friends sensed that Hollywood was ready 
to be taken over – they just needed a few contacts on the inside. “There was a 
big change in Hollywood because of two films,” recalls Schrader. “One wasPaint 
Your Wagonand the other was Hello Dolly. They were both mega-budget films in 
the old way and they tanked and sent their companies to the edge of bankruptcy. 
There was a real panic about what the young people wanted. And there was a 
period when the financiers were actually asking the artists what the young 
people wanted to see.”

He says that era, which produced masterpieces such as Taxi Driver, The 
Godfather <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/oct/01/thriller.robertdeniro> 
andChinatown <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jan/03/chinatown-review>, 
came to an end when Barry Diller went to Paramount and made market research the 
midwife of formulaic blockbusters. But before that happened, Schrader lived 
through a spate of successes that was matched only by his drive towards 
self-destruction.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fpaul-schrader-ive-been-involved-in-important-films-dog-eat-dog-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f6f89bcb34dd446c88ec2ae4c2da81cff0d1270%2F0_18_2303_2877%2F2303.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paul%20Schrader%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ve%20made%20some%20important%20films.%20Dog%20Eat%20Dog%20is%20not%20one%20of%20them%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fpaul-schrader-ive-been-involved-in-important-films-dog-eat-dog-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paul%20Schrader%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ve%20made%20some%20important%20films.%20Dog%20Eat%20Dog%20is%20not%20one%20of%20them%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fpaul-schrader-ive-been-involved-in-important-films-dog-eat-dog-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f6f89bcb34dd446c88ec2ae4c2da81cff0d1270%2F0_18_2303_2877%2F2303.jpg>
 Robert De Niro in Raging Bull. Photograph: Alamy 
Still deeply affected by his fundamentalist upbringing, he struggled with the 
moral free-for-all that money and attention brought. These were his years of 
catching up on sex and drugs. But he felt no more at ease with excess than he 
did with constraint. As he once put it: “I always felt there was something 
between me and that world. It was like looking through a pane of glass and I 
couldn’t quite touch it, even though I was in it. And that dislocation first 
showed up inTaxi Driver, where there literally was a pane of glass between the 
character and the world. I’ve always circled around that same feeling.”

If his own moral alienation as an excluded young man in laissez-faire LA led 
him to create the confused and puritanical Travis Bickle ofTaxi Driver, life as 
a Hollywood director wasn’t any easier. His 1978 debutBlue Collar had three 
actors – Harvey Keitel, Richard Pryor and Yaphet Kotto – each of whom believed 
he was the star. Pryor was using a lot of cocaine and he and Keitel were 
constantly at each other’s throats.

There was an incident with a gun and my psychiatrist came over… I wasn’t going 
to last much longer, the way I was living

“About three weeks in,” Schrader told Biskind, “all of a sudden I started 
crying, and I just couldn’t stop. Richard looked at me and said: ‘You pussy – 
are you gonna be a man or not?’” Pretty soon Schrader was seeing two 
psychiatrists, was himself a major cocaine abuser, and kept a loaded gun on his 
desk. His brother, Leonard, with whom he wroteBlue Collar, was also in a crazed 
state, and the pair of them fell out in such a damaging way that they never 
really repaired the relationship before Leonard died 10 years ago.

Things came to a head for Schrader in Hollywood with Cat People (1982), the 
erotic horror film he directed starring Nastassja Kinski. Schrader was 
consuming a gram of cocaine a day. Everyone on the set was doing drugs aside 
from Kinski. Again as Schrader told Biskind: “One day, I had been doing some 
coke in my trailer, I didn’t want to come out. My AD [assistant director] came 
in to get me. He started doing drugs. The second AD came in to try and get us 
both out. Then the three of us were there doing coke… Somebody said, ‘How are 
we gonna get anybody to direct this movie?’”

Schrader also had an on-set affair with Kinski, which she broke off towards 
the end of the film, leaving Schrader embittered and obsessed. According to the 
writer-director John Milius, Schrader pursued Kinski to Paris, where he found 
her with a young stud. Milius told Biskind that Kinski explained: “Paul, I 
always fuck my directors. And with you it was difficult.”

It should be said that, while he stands by what he told Biskind himself, 
Schrader disputes many other stories in the book as gossip and hearsay. Of his 
decision to leave LA, Schrader tells me: “There was an incident and my 
psychiatrist came over in the middle of the night. There was a gun involved. 
The next day I called up my office and said, ‘I’m going to New York. Sell it 
all. Sell the house, sell the furniture, sell it all.’ Because I knew that I 
wasn’t going to last much longer in the way that I was living.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fpaul-schrader-ive-been-involved-in-important-films-dog-eat-dog-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd46da2f42dbd4e6210a9e8c86aea48f43d6b2d6e%2F0_28_2589_1553%2F2589.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paul%20Schrader%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ve%20made%20some%20important%20films.%20Dog%20Eat%20Dog%20is%20not%20one%20of%20them%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fpaul-schrader-ive-been-involved-in-important-films-dog-eat-dog-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paul%20Schrader%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ve%20made%20some%20important%20films.%20Dog%20Eat%20Dog%20is%20not%20one%20of%20them%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fpaul-schrader-ive-been-involved-in-important-films-dog-eat-dog-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd46da2f42dbd4e6210a9e8c86aea48f43d6b2d6e%2F0_28_2589_1553%2F2589.jpg>
 Nastassja Kinski in Cat People (1982). Photograph: Allstar/RKO 
But relocating didn’t entirely solve the problem. “So I got to New York and lo 
and behold I made new drug friends. I thought all my drug friends were in Los 
Angeles. But they had drug friends there too! And so that’s when I went to 
Japan. Japan at that time was a drug-free country. But it took a while. Took 
about eight or nine years [to get off drugs].” The year he moved to New York he 
married William Hurt’s ex-wife, the actress Mary Beth Hurt (they’re still 
together), and they had two children. He’s said that the children put an end to 
his suicidal fantasies.

The idea, popularised in Biskind’s book, that Schrader was a busted flush by 
the mid-1980s is not fair. His experiences as a cokehead he put to good use in 
1992’sLight Sleeper, which he wrote and directed. Starring Dafoe, it was a 
stylish and affecting voyage into New York’s drug underworld.

But perhaps his finest hour was the 1997 drama Affliction, which he again 
wrote and directed. It featured a tormented father and son relationship and 
starred Nick Nolte and James Coburn, the latter winning an Oscar for his role. 
Like most of Schrader’s best work, there was a personal element to the film, 
the flame of autobiography that illuminated the rest of the story.

Schrader’s relationship with his own father turned on strict discipline, often 
in the shape of corporal punishment; his brother in particular would receive 
regular whippings. Schrader’s parents are long dead but he wishes they were 
alive so that he could apologise to them. What for, I ask? “The anger it took 
to break away, and the hurt it gave them. But it was a life or death situation 
for me. Maybe it wasn’t. Maybe I was too cruel. I’ve started going back to 
church. I find it’s a comfort. I’m not a big believer but I like the… idea of a 
Sunday morning ritual.”

Paul Schrader and Willem Dafoe: 'We thought we should really do the nasty'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/27/paul-schrader-willem-dafoe-dog-eat-dog>
There has long been a spiritual element in Schrader’s films, albeit sometimes 
quite contorted. His first love in film was what he calls the intellectual 
European cinema of the 60s – Antonioni, Bergman, Godard, Truffaut et al. And, 
he says, you never forget your first love. The next film he plans to make – 
with Ethan Hawke – is overtly spiritual. “It’s a kind of reworking of [Ingmar 
Bergman’s]Winter Light, a little bit of [Robert Bresson’s Diary of a] Country 
Priest. And a little bit of Tarkovsky. Black and white.”

It doesn’t sound much like Dog Eat Dog, although that too features a 
redemptive ending, in which Cage plays Humphrey Bogart in a noirish heaven – 
you sort of have to see it. How did that scenario come about? He says Cage had 
been flirting in various takes with Bogart impressions that Schrader himself 
didn’t much care for. “But I’m not going to pick a fight over it. I can always 
cut it out.”

Needless to say, Cage went full Bogart. Given Schrader’s experience with Lohan 
and Pryor, we can take it that the director has learned a thing or two about 
how to deal with mercurial talent. The days of shedding tears over actors are 
now a distant memory.

With two or three projects in the pipeline, he still loves the whole mad 
business of film-making, telling me that directors don’t retire, the phone just 
stops ringing. But Schrader’s phone is still running up a healthy bill, and 
long may it remain so.

Dog Eat Dog is in cinemas and on demand now
 