
The actor Pearl Mackie has been revealed as the new companion for Doctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who>. The announcement was 
made in a specially shot clip broadcast during half-time at the FA Cup 
semi-final between Everton and Manchester United, shown on BBC1 on Saturday. In 
the sequence, Capaldi and Mackie are shown exchanging barbs while hiding from a 
Dalek.


Mackie will be the Doctor’s 41st companion, and the ninth since the show was 
rebooted in 2005 – give or take (fans are divided on the official status of 
several characters who travelled only briefly with the Doctor). Mackie, who 
will play a character called Bill, takes over from Jenna Coleman to star 
alongside the current Doctor,Peter Capaldi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/peter-capaldi>. She will make her 
debut at the beginning of the show’s next season in 2017.


Doctor Who: Peter Capaldi accuses BBC of neglecting hit show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/11/doctor-who-revelations-peter-capaldi-accuses-bbc-of-neglect>
On joining the cast in her first major television role, Mackie said: “I’m 
incredibly excited to be joining the Doctor Who family. It’s such an 
extraordinary British institution – I couldn’t be prouder to call the Tardis my 
home. I can’t wait to see what adventures are in store for him and Bill 
throughout time and space.


“Reading the script at the audition, I thought Bill was wicked. Fantastically 
written, cool, strong, sharp, a little bit vulnerable, with a bit of geekiness 
thrown in.” The actor described shooting the trailer as “absolutely mental”.


“There were pyrotechnics and smoke and I met my first Dalek. I’m not sure it 
will ever become ‘the norm’ seeing crazy monsters on set, but I cannot wait to 
meet some more. The weirder the better – bring it on!”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fapr%2F23%2Fpearl-mackie-announced-as-new-doctor-who-companion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe08c119ef73099bb602cedf25f5fdac10eb15bea%2F0_630_2784_1669%2F2784.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pearl%20Mackie%20announced%20as%20new%20Doctor%20Who%20companion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fapr%2F23%2Fpearl-mackie-announced-as-new-doctor-who-companion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pearl%20Mackie%20announced%20as%20new%20Doctor%20Who%20companion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fapr%2F23%2Fpearl-mackie-announced-as-new-doctor-who-companion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe08c119ef73099bb602cedf25f5fdac10eb15bea%2F0_630_2784_1669%2F2784.jpg>
 Pearl Mackie in a production of Obama-ology at the Finborough Theatre in 2014. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Capaldi said it was “a genuine delight” to welcome Mackie to Doctor Who. “A 
fine, fine actress with a wonderful zest and charm, she’s a refreshing addition 
to the Tardis and will bring a universe of exciting new possibilities to the 
Doctor’s adventures.”

Steven Moffat, outgoing lead writer and executive producer, said: “A new face 
in the Tardis, a new voyage about to begin: welcome aboard, the amazing Pearl 
Mackie! This is where the story really starts.”

Mackie trained as an actor at Bristol Old Vic Theatre School, graduating in 
2010. Since drama school, she has worked across theatre, film, radio and 
television. Her acting credits include Svengali, a British film released in 
2013, and she is currently appearing in the stage production of The Curious 
Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time at the Gielgud Theatre in London.

Among other actors who had been thought to be in the running for the role were 
Coronation Street’s Michelle Keegan, Rakhee Thakrar, who impressed many with 
her performance as Shabnam Masood in EastEnders, and Maisie Williams, who plays 
Arya Stark in Game of Thrones and guest-starred in the last season of the 
sci-fi show.

In January, Steven Moffat revealed that he was stepping down as the lead writer
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/jan/25/steven-moffat-doctor-who>
 and executive producer of Doctor Who. He will be replaced by Broadchurch 
creator Chris Chibnall, who will start work as executive producer in 2018. 
Series 10 is to be Moffat’s last.
 