
The chancellor, George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne>, is reported to be 
considering making radical changes to pensions that could be announced as soon 
as this month in his budget statement.

What changes could be made?

Reports suggest the chancellor wants to change tax relief available on pension 
contributions. Currently, when savers pay into a scheme, their contributions 
are boosted by tax relief at the rate they pay on their earnings – which can be 
as much as 45%.

This means a worker who pays tax at 20% can make a contribution of £100 for 
just £80, while a worker who pays tax at 40% can make the same contribution at 
a cost of £60. The rules apply to 45% taxpayers too, meaning they can boost 
their pensions by £100 at a cost of just £55.


The chancellor has been looking at these incentives and considering how to 
reduce the amount that is paid upfront to savers. He is said to have considered 
scrapping the relief altogether, introducing a flat rate somewhere between 20% 
and 40%, or setting everyone’s relief at 20%. Some reports have suggested there 
could a 20% “bonus” for savers.

Won’t reducing those incentives put people off pensions?

To offset the change, it’s been suggested that people would pay less tax when 
they come to use their funds. Currently, savers can access up to 25% of a 
workplace or private pension without paying any tax on the money, while all 
further withdrawals are subject to tax like normal earnings. This could be 
changed so that any money taken out of a scheme would be tax-free.

This would mean that pensions are treated similarly to Isas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/isas> – savers on those accounts make 
contributions from income that has already been taxed but can take out their 
cash without paying tax on withdrawals. Any money they have made from interest 
or growth in their investments is all theirs.

Pensions ISA could be in budget despite criticism, Treasury indicates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/04/pensions-isa-tax-free-could-be-in-budget-despite-criticism-treasury-indicates>
The change could mean that the only difference between pensions and Isas would 
be when you were allowed to access your cash.Pensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> are generally only accessible when 
you reach age 55.

Hasn’t the government already changed pensions?


Yes. This would be just the latest in a long line of changes and experts warn 
that constant tinkering can put people off saving.

Two years ago the chancellor surprised everyone by announcing that people 
could get easier access to money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/mar/19/chancellor-scrap-compulsory-annuities-pension-overhaul>
 they have saved in workplace and private pension schemes. Many savers who 
would previously have had their options limited to buying an annuity can now 
withdraw their money as and when they want, subject to their scheme’s rules. 
After the first 25%, these withdrawals are subject to tax.

From April 2016, there will be changes to how much people earning more than 
£150,000 can claim in tax relief 
<http://adviser.royallondon.com/pensions/technical-central/information-guidance/contributions-and-tax-relief/tapering-annual-allowance-and-transitional-arrangements/tapering-of-annual-allowance-for-high-incomes/>
.

State pensions are also changing: from April there will be a single flat-rate 
pension to replace the current state pension and second state pension.

What would be the advantage of a pensions Isa?


For the chancellor, savings – although how much is unclear. Pensions 
administration adviserPunter Southall estimates that the relief costs the 
Treasury around £20bn 
<http://www.puntersouthall.com/pension-blog/Pages/Post.aspx> a year. It says 
moving to a flat rate of tax relief could save around £4bn. However, this would 
be offset by the loss of tax on payments at the other end.

For savers the system may be easier to understand and involve less paperwork. 
It will also mean that higher-rate taxpayers do not have a bigger incentive to 
save than those who earn less. Currently more than two thirds of pensions tax 
relief currently goes to 40% and 45% rate taxpayers.

Who would lose out?


Higher-rate taxpayers stand to lose from reforms that take away their larger 
relief on contributions. Many will no longer be in that tax bracket when they 
retire so will get less out of any move to scrap tax on withdrawals.Figures 
produced for the Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/personalfinance/pensions/12182776/Millions-of-middle-class-savers-could-lose-out-under-radical-pensions-shake-up.html>
 suggest high earners could lose up to 15% of their retirement income if tax 
relief is replaced with a 20% bonus.

If incentives to save are removed completely in favour of tax-relief on 
withdrawals, this would be bad for younger people. Tom McPhail, pensions expert 
at IFAs Hargreaves Lansdown, says that a “wholesale shift” to a pensions Isa 
“would shift the fiscal burden of pensions on to younger generations, thereby 
exacerbating the existing trend towards intergenerational inequality”.
 