
This statement covers all our significant findings regarding issues covered in 
this section of the Living our Values report to date. As we are using a rolling 
assurance process alongside the rolling publication of sections in the report, 
we may add additional findings that come to light as we investigate each 
section. All data and significant claims made in this section have been assured.

Change has continued to be a theme for the Guardian in 2011-12 and, as 
expected, the move to the digital-first strategy is affecting the nature of 
individuals' roles. The text from the National Union of Journalists and Unite 
provide an important employee perspective on the impact of the changes and a 
challenge to keep employee views in mind.

It is, therefore, a positive development that an employee survey was 
undertaken during summer 2012 â€“ the first since 2009. Understanding employee 
opinions and concerns is even more important during periods of major change, so 
it's heartening that the Guardian is now committed to ongoing six-monthly 
surveys. We look forward to the Guardian publishing the results once they are 
available.

Although employee numbers have remained stable during the reporting year, the 
Guardian is open about the need to reduce headcount further this year. The fact 
that the company is providing an opportunity initially for voluntary redundancy 
is helpful and is supported by the unions. Depending on the number of 
volunteers, the Guardian will then need to manage the challenge of achieving 
the right size and structure in an open and fair way.

The first year of the digital-first strategy has resulted in growth in digital 
revenues, which is a step in the right direction. The training and development 
plan developed following the digital skills audit will help the Guardian ensure 
that employees have the appropriate skills to deliver the next stage of the 
strategy. Monitoring delivery of the training plan will be an important way for 
the Guardian to establish that employees are able to effectively support the 
strategy. It is reassuring that the training plan includes general business 
training as well as specific digital training.

Not surprisingly in a year of significant change, individual appraisals have 
not achieved the same completion levels as in previous years. The Guardian is 
taking steps to make these more relevant to individuals and better linked to 
business performance and undertaking training to help improve completion rates.

Achieving this, as well as ensuring individual objectives are linked to 
business objectives, will be another important stage in delivering the 
digital-first strategy, in particular in the editorial area. Given the 
importance of managing individuals' performance and ensuring this aligns with 
business objectives, it is surprising that there are no targets around 
appraisals in the 2012-13 action plan.

It's very encouraging to see the ambassador programme continuing to promote 
diversity and encouraging more diverse comments. We look forward to seeing 
innovative ways of measuring the impact of these initiatives.
 