
Manchester City’s team selection this season has essentially become a game of 
‘What will Pep Guardiola think of next?’ and few could have predicted his major 
decision here –leaving out Sergio Agüero 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/19/barcelona-manchester-city-champions-league-pep-guardiola>
, with Kevin De Bruyne fielded in a centre‑forward role.

Lionel Messi hat-trick sends Barcelona waltzing past Manchester City
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/19/barcelona-manchester-city-champions-league-match-report-messi>
The real tactical interest, however, was what Guardiola did at the opposite 
end. He had fielded a three-man defence for the first time inthe 1-1 draw with 
Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/15/manchester-city-everton-premier-league-match-report>
 on Saturday and deployed that system the last time he visited the Camp Nou as 
an opposition manager, with Bayern Munich two seasons ago. There was a strong 
possibility he would use a back three here but on paper the teamsheet suggested 
a back four.

Guardiola always had a trick up his sleeve, though, and here City managed to 
transform into a three‑man defence with and without the ball, in two ways. In 
possession Pablo Zabaleta would drift inside to become an extra central 
midfielder, turning City from a 4-1-4-1 to a 3-2-4-1. It was a tactic witnessed 
earlier in the season but appeared to have been ditched – trust Guardiola to 
revive the systemaway at this season’s Champions League favourites 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/19/barcelona-manchester-city-champions-league-match-report-mes>
.

That approach did not affect the game significantly but City’s pressing was 
extremely impressive – and again that resulted in them shifting temporarily to 
a three‑man defence. Ilkay Gündogan moved forward to join De Bruyne pressing 
the opposition centre‑backs, Nolito and Raheem Sterling shut down Barça’s 
full-backs while David Silva and Fernandinho marked Sergio Busquets and Andrés 
Iniesta respectively. This left the third central midfielder, Ivan Rakitic 
unmarked so, when the ball was in Barça’s left-back zone, Nolito moved inside 
to shut him down.

However, when Nolito needed to press the makeshift right-back Javier 
Mascherano, John Stones would step forward, becoming an additional midfielder, 
to shut down Rakitic. This left three City defenders to cope with the fabled 
front three of Lionel Messi, Luis Suárez and Neymar. Nevertheless the pressing 
was effective at stopping the service into them – at half-time Barça’s three 
forwards had completed only 20 passes between them. Guardiola had succeeded in 
starving Barcelona’s best players of the ball.

Amid this tactical fascination it was a game peculiarly lacking in technical 
quality. The major incidents originated from individual errors rather than 
individual brilliance, while three players departing through injury created a 
stop-start feel to the contest.

Pep Guardiola pays the price for keeping Sergio Agüero from the reunion | Sid 
Lowe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/19/barcelona-manchester-city-champions-league-pep-guardiola>
While there were still 22 players on the pitch, Guardiola will be frustrated 
his players were not more clinical: Gündogan and Nolito had good chances and 
early in the second half De Bruyne played a great cut-back along the six-yard 
box to find no one waiting. Perhaps Agüero’s absence was, after all, the 
decisive factor.

Of course, City’s gameplan unravelled dramatically after Claudio Bravo’s 
dismissal early in the second half, when intense pressing in advanced positions 
became impossible. The injuries and a red card for either side meant the 
managers were forced to reshape regularly: this was far from the footballing 
exhibition we had been promised. ButManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> should have scored here, 
and they’ll rarely face a top-level European side with so many glaring 
weaknesses at the back. Barcelona started with Mascherano out of position at 
right-back, lost both Jordi Alba and Gerard Piqué to injury inside the opening 
45 minutes, and the latter’s replacement, Jérémy Mathieu, collected two yellow 
cards – the second an incredibly unnecessary lunge on the galloping Sterling.

Looking for positives from a 4-0 thrashing is a tough task, and Guardiola must 
ponder why so many players were guilty of such unnecessary mistakes. But he can 
console himself with the idea those errors probably will not be repeated in two 
weeks’ time, and his overall game plan – the heavy pressing, the transient 
defensive shape and the attempt to shut off the supply line into Barcelona’s 
forwards – will probably be the order of the day at the Etihad Stadium.
 