
Shares in housebuilders have risen after Persimmon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/persimmon>, the biggest company in the 
sector, said the UK vote to leave the EU has not put off potential homebuyers.

Announcing first-half results, Persimmon said trading since the 23 June 
referendum had been strong and that after a short period of wariness customer 
interest had increased from a year earlier.

Along with other housebuilders, Persimmon’s shares fell after the referendum 
result amid fears thatfalling consumer confidence and an economic slowdown 
would dent the housing market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/24/house-price-fall-could-follow-brexit-say-experts>
. Countrywide, Britain’s biggest estate agent,predicted this week that average 
prices would fall 1% next year before rising again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/22/house-prices-to-fall-1-in-2017-predicts-countrywide>
.

Nicholas Wrigley, Persimmon’s chairman, said: “While the result of the EU 
referendum has created increased uncertainty, the news was quickly digested by 
our customers. Customer interest since then has been robust with a 
strengthening of visitor numbers to our sites compared to the same period last 
year.”


Customer cancellations for viewings rose slightly in the week following the 
referendum but they are now running slightly lower than a year ago, Wrigley 
added.

After dropping 37% on 24 June to £13.10, Persimmon shares have regained most 
of the loss and were the biggest risers in the FTSE 100 following its upbeat 
statement, rising almost 5% to £18.77 in early trading. Rival housebuilders 
Taylor Wimpey, Barratt and Berkeley were also among the index’s top 10 gainers.

Persimmon’s pre-tax profit rose 29% to £352m in the six months to the end of 
June as revenue rose 12% to 1.3bn.Housebuilders have boomed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/06/nice-pile-executives-cashing-britains-housebuilding-berkeley-persimmon-barratt>
 over the past few years supported by rising prices, economic growth and the 
government’s help-to-buy scheme.

Finance director Mike Killoran said that after the traditionally quiet summer 
months Persimmon expected business to pick up in the autumn and that potential 
customers had their finances in place to buy.

Killoran added: “Given the interest we are seeing on the sites from visitor 
traffic and people genuinely wanting to buy we can see no reason why we 
wouldn’t see that [autumn] seasonality continue. All the feedback we are 
getting from sites is that given the market we are in and the product we are 
offering … there is a great desire to buy.”

 