
Next month will see a revolution in how your bank and building society 
accounts are taxed. Until now, your account provider has automatically whipped 
20% from the interest earned on savings accounts and passed the money to the 
taxman. But from 6 April this decades-old system will be swept away, and all 
the interest earned on your savings will be paid out in full, without any tax 
deducted.

What’s more, the government is introducing a personal savings allowance of up 
to £1,000 a year in interest, which means the vast majority of people won’t 
have to pay tax on their savings income. In the past, the cash Isa sheltered 
your savings from tax – but now people are asking if there is any point in 
having an Isa any more.

The new tax system works like this: if you are a basic rate taxpayer – ie you 
earn less than £43,000 a year – then you will be allowed to earn up to £1,000 
in interest without having to pay tax or declare it on a tax form. If you earn 
more than £1,000 in interest then your bank or building society will contact 
HMRC, which will tax the money by making a downward adjustment to your annual 
tax code.

But it’s difficult to earn more than £1,000 in interest with rates at 
rock-bottom lows. If, for example, you put your savings into the current best 
easy access account, theFreedom Savings Account from RCI Bank 
<https://www.rcibank.co.uk/savings/freedom>, the interest rate is only 1.55%, 
which means you would need to have £64,516 in savings to bust the £1,000 annual 
interest limit. The cash Isas from the big banks pay even less: Barclays, for 
example, pays just 0.8% on its variable rate Isa. A Barclays customer would 
need to have more than £125,000 in their savings account to produce an interest 
income of more than £1,000.

If you earn more than £43,000 a year it’s a different story. Higher rate 
taxpayers are only allowed to earn £500 in interest over the year without 
having to pay tax. In the case of the RCI account, you will be taxed if you 
have more than £32,258 in savings. For people who are 45% taxpayers – earning 
more than £150,000 a year – there will be no personal savings allowance, and 
they will have to pay tax at 45% on any savings interest.

Susan Hannums, director at Savingschampion.co.uk 
<https://savingschampion.co.uk/>, says savers should simply go for the best 
rates possible rather than focusing on whether or not the account is a tax-free 
Isa. “Savers will have greater flexibility as they will be able to choose from 
the very best savings accounts available to them, which could be a cash Isa, a 
normal savings account, or even a high interest current account.”

Several current accounts pay much higher rates of interest than savings 
accounts. For example, TSB’s current account pays 5% on balances up to £2,000, 
provided you pay in £500 a month and register for internet banking. You also 
get 5% cashback on the first £100 spent each month on your contactless debit 
card until the end of this year, as well as access to a regular savings account 
paying up to 5%.

If you have more to save, Santander’s 123 account pays 3% on balances up to 
£20,000. There’s a £5 monthly fee, but the account pays cashback on utility 
bills which should cancel this out.

Bear in mind, however, before turning your back on cash Isas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/isas> for good, that when interest rates 
eventually start to rise, the amount you can save before you use up your 
savings allowance will fall. For example, if a basic rate taxpayer saves into 
an account paying 4.15%, they would only need to deposit £24,096 before they 
use up their personal allowance, or £12,948 if they are a higher rate taxpayer.

Charlotte Nelson of moneyfacts.co.uk <http://moneyfacts.co.uk/> says: “Isas 
should not be overlooked, particularly if you are able to save up to the Isa 
limit each year, as the cash saved within the Isa will be tax-free 
indefinitely. While most savers may not save enough to earn £1,000 in interest 
now, it is quite possible they could in future.”

Martin Lewis of MoneySavingExpert reckons savers should not abandon Isas. “For 
most people it will still be best to put your money in a top cash Isa first, 
and then use the personal allowance after that. Money in a cash Isa is 
protected from tax year after year, so you can gradually protect more and more. 
So even if this isn’t relevant now, if you later have larger savings or become 
a higher rate taxpayer then it is worth doing, just in case.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fshould-i-still-get-cash-isa-personal-savings-allowance-interest-tax-free%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01ab8abd8c697e93923a34a04342a74ba1bccdca%2F0_211_3498_2097%2F3498.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Personal%20savings%20allowance%20changes%3A%20should%20I%20still%20get%20a%20cash%20Isa%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fshould-i-still-get-cash-isa-personal-savings-allowance-interest-tax-free%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Personal%20savings%20allowance%20changes%3A%20should%20I%20still%20get%20a%20cash%20Isa%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fshould-i-still-get-cash-isa-personal-savings-allowance-interest-tax-free%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01ab8abd8c697e93923a34a04342a74ba1bccdca%2F0_211_3498_2097%2F3498.jpg>
 All interest on bank accounts will be paid gross from April. Photograph: 
Darrin Zammit Lupi/Reuters 
The allowance explained

What is the new allowance? All interest on bank accounts, writes Patrick 
Collinson, will be paid gross from April 2016:

• Basic rate (20%) taxpayers can earn £1,000 interest with no tax

• Higher rate (40%) taxpayers can earn £500 interest with no tax

• Top rate (45%) taxpayers will have no allowance.

What if I earn more than the allowance? Tax will be charged at the 
individual’s marginal rate – 20%, 40% or 45% – on any interest earned above the 
personal savings allowance (PSA). But HMRC says you won’t need to do anything: 
it will collect the tax by changing your tax code. For example, the standard 
tax code for 2016-17 will be 1100L (meaning you have £11,000 of earnings that 
are tax free). This will be adjusted by HMRC to a lower number, which means you 
will pay more tax.Banks and building societies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/banks> will give HMRC the information they 
need to do this. If you fill in a self-assessment tax return you should carry 
on doing this as normal.

Tax-free savings deal extends a helping hand to first-time buyers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/nov/30/tax-free-savings-first-time-buyers-help-to-buy-isa-6000>
We’re a couple, one on higher rate tax, with a joint account. What happens? 
The interest earned will be split equally between the account holders and will 
count towards their own allowances.

What sort of accounts will come under the allowance? Bank and building society 
accounts; accounts with providers like credit unions or NationalSavings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/savings> and Investments; interest 
distributions (but not dividend distributions) from authorised unit trusts, 
open-ended investment companies and investment trusts; income from government 
or company bonds; interest on peer-to-peer accounts; and most types of 
purchased life annuity payments.

What if I already pay into a cash Isa? It will make no difference to your 
personal savings allowance. You will still earn interest on your cash Isa 
tax-free, but it won’t count towards your PSA limit.

Should I cash in my existing cash Isa? Although cash Isas will look much less 
attractive once the PSA is introduced, experts advise against cashing in 
existing accounts.

Martin Bamford of independent financial adviser Informed Choice 
<http://www.icfp.co.uk/> says: “I certainly wouldn’t advise any savers to cash 
in their Isas. The real value from Isas comes over time, when you maximise your 
allowance each year and accumulate significant sums in these tax-free wrappers. 
In my opinion, HM Treasury is far more likely to change or reverse the personal 
savings allowance than remove the tax benefits of Isas.”

Currently, savers could have more than £86,000 in capital in cash Isas alone 
if they had deposited the full amount each tax year since Isas first launched 
in 1999. Once you cash in any Isas you immediately lose the tax-free benefit. 
Charlotte Nelson of Moneyfacts.co.uk says: “Savers with old Isas would be 
better off transferring these to a higher interest Isa account to ensure that 
competitive returns are maintained.”

Does the PSA affect my personal tax allowance? No. Your personal allowance is 
the amount you can earn which is free of income tax. This is £10,600 this year 
and £11,000 for 2016-17. This is completely separate from the PSA.
 