
A casual observer might struggle to equate the man who appeared before the 
transport select committee looking like a French philosopher with the hatchet 
man whom unions accuse of driving theSouthern rail strike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/14/southern-rail-strike-talks-adjourned>
.

But Peter Wilkinson 
<http://www.croydonadvertiser.co.uk/dft-official-apologises-telling-train-drivers/story-28785666-detail/story.html>
, whose shaven head, polo-neck and thick designer glasses transcend the usual 
faceless civil servant attire, has become the bogeyman at the Department for 
Transport for unions since he made an ill-advised speech in Croydon in February.

All aboard the Southern chaos train: the commuters caught in a war on rails
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/08/all-aboard-southern-trains-disaster-commuters-caught-in-war-on-rails>
Speaking to local rail users 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/08/all-aboard-southern-trains-disaster-commuters-caught-in-war-on-rails>
 about train drivers, he said: “We have got to break them,” adding that those 
who resisted government plans should “get the hell out of my industry”.


Wilkinson has since apologised to the committee both for his comments then and 
for subsequently misleading MPs aboutSouthern’s franchise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/12/take-southern-rail-franchise-off-operator-urges-sadiq-khan>
.

He joined the DfT in the wake of the West Coast fiasco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/feb/26/mps-west-coast-mainline-department-transport>
 as franchising director with a brief to get the business of awarding rail 
contracts back on track.

His appointment was greeted warmly by many in rail, when he was seen as a 
highly experienced rail professional giving some much-needed ballast to the 
department, having worked on both sides of franchising.

A graduate of what was then Sheffield City Polytechnic (now Sheffield Hallam 
University) in industrial science, he became a general manager at London 
Underground before joining British Rail in the last years before privatisation.

As an international rail consultant he built up a number of businesses, 
selling up equity to take over his departmental role. Now managing director, 
passenger services, he earns £265,000 a year.

Wilkinson lives in London – near Borough market, of which he has been a 
trustee – during the week and flies to be with his wife and children in Vienna 
at weekends.

Wilkinson, who describes himself as an urbanite who loves the mountains, used 
to race motorbikes, with a passion for the kind of speed and freedom fewSouthern
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> commuters now enjoy.

For all his controversial statements about drivers, Wilkinson also told Rail 
Professional magazine two years ago: “Frontline staff are the heroes of this 
industry, they’re the people who make it work, not people like me in head 
offices and places; this is a nonsense, we’re just petty bureaucrats.”

• This article was amended on 16 December 2016. An earlier version said 
incorrectly that Peter Wilkinson was a graduate of Sheffield University and 
that he had a master’s in business.
 