
What is a journalist? It’s a fundamental question to be sure, and the answer 
is increasingly the subject of fierce debate as social media blurs the lines 
between traditional and citizen journalists. But surely the most 
uncontroversial definition must be that a journalist is someone who is 
accredited with a recognised news organisation, and who has produced a body of 
credible, accurate and balanced work – whether printed or broadcast – generally 
recognised as “journalism”.

Amal Clooney calls on Egypt to pardon Peter Greste and al-Jazeera colleagues
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/aug/31/amal-clooney-calls-on-egypt-to-pardon-peter-greste-and-al-jazeera-colleagues>
Yet a court in Egypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> has found that 
my two colleagues and I are not legitimate journalists. Late last month the 
court decided that because we were not accredited with the Egyptian 
Journalists’ Syndicate – the body that manages local media workers – we could 
not be described as journalists. Never mind that the syndicate’s lawyer told 
the court that the law did not require foreign correspondents to register, and 
that it would happily register us retrospectively anyway, to confirm that in 
its view we really were “journalists”.

The court went on to find that we violated a host of regulations around the 
licensing of equipment, and that we broadcast false news to undermine national 
security. It then sentenced my colleague Mohammed Fahmy and me to three years 
in prison, and added an extra six months to sentence of the third member of our 
team, Baher Mohammed, because he had a single bullet that he had picked up off 
the battlefield in Libya as a souvenir.

In response to the criticism of the verdict, the interior ministry said that 
we had been convicted of specific violations of the law and that it had nothing 
to do with press freedom. And to underline its point, the ministry explained 
that thousands of other foreign and local journalists were working in Egypt 
freely.

Of course that last fact is at least partly true. Thousands of journalists are 
working in Egypt without being thrown in prison. But let’s stop for a moment 
and ask what our case means for them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fpeter-greste-egypts-press-lost-its-freedom-with-me-and-my-al-jazeera-colleagues%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6467bf3ddd21ff41b4e1d3aeae63ed9a931771a6%2F0_88_3873_2324%2F3873.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Peter%20Greste%3A%20Egypt's%20press%20lost%20its%20freedom%20when%20my%20al-Jazeera%20colleagues%20and%20I%20lost%20ours&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fpeter-greste-egypts-press-lost-its-freedom-with-me-and-my-al-jazeera-colleagues%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Peter%20Greste%3A%20Egypt%27s%20press%20lost%20its%20freedom%20when%20my%20al-Jazeera%20colleagues%20and%20I%20lost%20ours&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fpeter-greste-egypts-press-lost-its-freedom-with-me-and-my-al-jazeera-colleagues%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6467bf3ddd21ff41b4e1d3aeae63ed9a931771a6%2F0_88_3873_2324%2F3873.jpg>
 Peter Greste: ‘Nobody, least of all the prosecutor, has been able to show us 
that anything we produced was either false or falsified.’ Photograph: Paul 
Miller/EPA 
As every independent observer to the trial has noted, the prosecutor failed to 
present a single piece of evidence to substantiate the allegations against us. 
Remember, the news that we broadcast, the false news in the court’s judgment, 
is by definition a matter of public record. It’s out there on the internet 
freely available for anyone who wants to check it for themselves. As any 
reporter who has been loose with the facts well knows, social media has made it 
almost impossible to get away with publishing “false” news for very long, let 
alone the 20 months that have passed since we were arrested in December 2013. 
And yet nobody, least of all the prosecutor, has been able to show us that 
anything we produced was either false or falsified in any sense of those words.

So in the absence of evidence, most observers have concluded that our 
convictions were politically motivated; that our arrest, trial and imprisonment 
were intended to send a message. We don’t know explicitly what that message 
was, but it is pretty clear how any journalist watching the trial will 
interpret it.

The US State Department said it was “deeply disappointed” by the verdict, 
which “undermines the very freedom of expression necessary for stability and 
development”.

'Devastated' Peter Greste calls on Egypt's president to pardon trio
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/aug/30/devastated-peter-greste-calls-on-egypts-president-to-pardon-trio>
A spokesman for the UN high commissioner for human rights said: “We are very 
disturbed by these three sentences and the extra pressure it creates on 
journalists in Egypt who are just trying to do their jobs.”

And according to the European Union, the verdict represented “a setback for 
freedom of expression in Egypt”.

Of course Egypt has a problem of security. It is fighting extremists in the 
Sinai peninsula who’ve declared allegiance to Islamic State (Isis). There are 
routine bombings and attacks on the security services. On the day of one of our 
last hearings, the prosecutor general – equivalent to Australia’s attorney 
general – was assassinated in a roadside bomb blast. But the ultimate question 
has to be whether silencing the press helps or hinders the fight to control 
that kind of violent extremism.

Let me be clear. I am not advocating for the right to publish anything that 
incites violence. I am not saying we need to give free rein to anybody who 
wants to run appalling Isis snuff videos. I’m not suggesting that we ought to 
be allowed to give an open microphone to anybody who advocates hatred and 
bigotry.

But we have also learned the hard way that stable, properly functioning 
democracies need a free, untrammelled press capable of interrogating extremist 
views in any form, with as much force and vigour as it does the governments who 
act in our names.

Peter Greste calls for universal charter of media freedoms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/26/peter-greste-calls-for-universal-charter-of-media-freedoms>
Even the Egyptian constitution acknowledges that vital function. Article 70 
guarantees “freedom of press and printing, along with paper, visual, audio and 
digital distribution”. Article 71 prohibits censorship and explicitly states 
“no custodial sanction shall be imposed for crimes committed by way of 
publication or the public nature thereof”.

And yet Baher and Fahmy are back in prison, and I and six other al-Jazeera 
journalists convicted in absentia during our first trial run the risk of being 
sent back to Cairo to serve out our sentences whenever we cross an 
international border.

Every other reporter working in Egypt has that uncomfortable fact sitting in 
the backs of their minds each time they put pen to paper. It doesn’t take great 
insight to understand the impact that has on the freedom of expression.

Egypt’s president, Abdel Fatah el-Sisi, has said several times that if we were 
ever convicted, he would consider pardons. The court has made a grave error of 
judgment that can only have a chilling effect on press freedom, and set back 
Egypt’s democracy. We urge him to use his power to undo the injustice, free the 
men who’ve been innocently imprisoned and clear the names of everyone caught up 
in this case.
 