
Peter Greste <https://www.theguardian.com/media/peter-greste> has warned the 
fight for journalists convicted of terrorism offences in Egypt is not over as 
he celebrates the freeing of his al-Jazeera colleagues Mohamed Fahmy and Baher 
Mohamed.

Egypt pardons and releases jailed al-Jazeera journalists
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/23/egypt-pardons-jailed-al-jazeera-journalists>
Fahmy and Mohamed were pardoned in a surprise decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/23/egypt-pardons-jailed-al-jazeera-journalists>
 by the Egyptian president, Abdel Fatah al-Sisi, on the eve of the Muslim 
holiday of Eid al-Adha as Sisi prepared to fly to New York for the UN general 
assembly.

Greste, who was accused of broadcasting false reports and colluding with the 
Muslim Brotherhood with six other journalists tried in absentia, wasfreed in 
February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/feb/04/peter-greste-captives-egypt-al-jazeera-australia>
 and returned to Australia after serving more than 400 days in Egyptian 
detention. His name was not on the pardon list.

Greste and the six other journalists are still convicted in Egypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt>.

“I’m semi-jubilant,” Greste told Guardian Australia on Thursday. “I want to 
believe we’re all off the hook, and I have a feeling we probably are but can’t 
afford to high five just yet.

“It’s great news for colleagues. I’m over the moon. I was literally jumping on 
the sofa at the news last night, but as long as one person in that case has a 
conviction we can’t say it’s over; we can’t crack out the cigars yet.”

Greste is also travelling to New York for the UN general assembly and will 
lobby politicians, diplomats and world leaders to help have his conviction and 
the conviction of the six other journalists quashed.

“We can’t have convictions hanging over our heads,” he said. “There’s the 
practical problem of having a criminal record, such as convicted terrorist, 
which imposes on normal life, such as trying to get bank loans and travel.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Fi-still-cant-believe-it-says-pardoned-al-jazeera-journalist-mohamed-fahmy-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F23%2F1443030904167%2FKP_481558_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20still%20can't%20believe%20it'%2C%20says%20pardoned%20Al-Jazeera%20journalist%20Mohamed%20Fahmy%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Fi-still-cant-believe-it-says-pardoned-al-jazeera-journalist-mohamed-fahmy-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20still%20can%27t%20believe%20it%27%2C%20says%20pardoned%20Al-Jazeera%20journalist%20Mohamed%20Fahmy%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Fi-still-cant-believe-it-says-pardoned-al-jazeera-journalist-mohamed-fahmy-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F23%2F1443030904167%2FKP_481558_crop_640x480.jpg>
“But there’s also the principle involved here. President Sisi has recognised 
an injustice was done. He’s taken an important step, an absolutely vital step 
in acknowledging that, but he needs to pardon everyone involved.”

It was possible all six had been pardoned and were not yet aware, he said. 
They could know as early as next week if that was the case.

It was “all over” for Fahmy and Mohamed and they have no criminal record “as 
far as we know” and are “perfectly safe” from the authorities in Egypt.

He spoke to both last night.

“The news is sinking in,” he said. “Both of them are starting to dream.

“[Their release] came as a complete shock. In that situation nobody is 
prepared to let themselves hope or believe they are free. You don’t make plans 
because it becomes emotional and quite risky … They want to travel and do all 
the things they haven’t been able to do, but haven’t made any plans yet.”

Greste, Fahmy, Mohamed and the six other journalists who were out of the 
country when charges were first laid were found guilty of terrorism offences and
sentenced to three years in jail last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/29/egyptian-court-sentences-3-al-jazeera-english-journalists-to-3-years-in-prison>
.
 