
Peter Vaughan, who has died aged 93, was one of the most distinctive and 
menacing of character actors on stage and screen in a career spanning seven 
decades and ranging from West End comedy to Dickens and Our Friends in the 
North on television, to movies with Frank Sinatra and Tallulah Bankhead, and 
encompassing a string of unpleasant authority figures. With his bulky figure, 
small eyes and prognathous jaw, he usually played the type of character you 
would not want to bump into on a dark night in a darker alley, even though, in 
real life, Vaughan was known for his conviviality, kindness to animals and 
devotion to his family.

For television audiences in the 1970s, he was a faux terrifying and hilarious 
Mr Big inRonnie Barker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2005/oct/04/broadcasting.guardianobituaries>
’s prison comedy series Porridge: he ran the gaff as the glinting-eyed tobacco 
baron Harry Grout, who shared a cell with his budgerigar Seymour. And in the 
80s, he was equally memorable as another, less amusing, Mr Big, Billy Fox, in 
Trevor Preston’s series Fox, for Thames TV, lording over the manor with his 
wife, played byElizabeth Spriggs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2008/jul/07/obituaries.television>, and 
five sons, including Bernard Hill andRay Winstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ray-winstone>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fpeter-vaughan-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0d4d86b25304edb55369b01c5d17b6741596fff%2F0_0_3307_1985%2F3307.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Peter%20Vaughan%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fpeter-vaughan-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Peter%20Vaughan%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fpeter-vaughan-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0d4d86b25304edb55369b01c5d17b6741596fff%2F0_0_3307_1985%2F3307.jpg>
 Peter Vaughan as Maester Aemon in the HBO TV series Game of Thrones, 2011. 
Photograph: Alamy 
More recently, and in his last job, he attracted a cult following as Maester 
Aemon Targaryen in HBO’sGame of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/game-of-thrones-episode-by-episode>
. He played the centenarian blind sage, maester to the men of the Night’s Watch 
guarding the ice wall at Castle Black, for five seasons.

In his last film, John Crowley’s Is Anybody There? (2008) he appeared – 
alongsideMichael Caine <https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-caine>, Sylvia 
Syms <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2004/apr/18/features.review>, Rosemary 
Harris, Leslie Phillips and Spriggs – as a first world war veteran in an old 
people’s home in the 80s.

It had been a long journey for the only child of a bank manager, Max Ohm, an 
Austrian immigrant, and his wife, Eva (nee Wright), a nurse. Peter was born in 
a flat above the bank in Wem, Shropshire, moving with his parents to 
Wellington, then Uttoxeter, where he attended the grammar school.

Showing a talent for drama, he was recruited at the age of 16 to the repertory 
company in the Grand, Wolverhampton, to play Simon the pie-boy in Sweeney Todd 
in 1939. He stayed, became an actor, and changed his surname from Ohm to 
Vaughan, though he never did so by deed poll. This early start in the 
profession, without formal training, was interrupted by the second world war. 
He served in the Royal Signals, eventually as an officer, in Normandy, Belgium 
and the far east, before returning to the Wolverhampton rep, followed by 
seasons in Macclesfield, Leicester and the Birmingham Rep, where he played Algy 
toJohn Neville <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/nov/21/john-neville>’s 
Jack, Lally Bowers’s Lady Bracknell and Donald Pleasence’s Canon Chasuble; he 
and Pleasence became lifelong friends.

When Vaughan married the actor Billie Whitelaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/dec/22/billie-whitelaw>, nine years his 
junior, in 1952 – they met while playing in the same company in a London fringe 
theatre that year – Pleasence moved in with the couple as a lodger before 
embarking on several marriages of his own.

Throughout the 50s Vaughan was busy in theatre while his television career 
took root. He appeared with the actor/manager Donald Wolfit in The Strong Are 
Lonely, an Austrian play about Jesuits in Paraguay, at the Haymarket in 1955, 
and a French comedy, Paddle Your Own Canoe, at the Criterion in 1958; the 
critic Harold Hobson eulogised Vaughan’s performance and said that the play 
never recovered after his exit.

But his real breakthrough came when the actor Dudley Sutton, whom he knew, 
introduced him to the playwrightJoe Orton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/charlottehigginsblog/2012/feb/14/john-lahr-joe-orton-interview>
 in a theatrical drinking bar. Orton was scouting for a heavyweight 
heterosexual actor to play Ed, an ordinary-looking man who was interested in 
having sex with boys, in his forthcoming play, Entertaining Mr Sloane (1964). 
Vaughan fitted the bill perfectly, teaming in Patrick Dromgoole’s production at 
the Arts theatre withMadge Ryan 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-madge-ryan-1401217.html> as 
Kath, his sister, and Sutton as sullen, sultry Mr Sloane, shared object of 
their carnal attentions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fpeter-vaughan-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F282875df24b1668ee9e3ee2890f45bb3ae07b430%2F0_193_2630_1579%2F2630.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Peter%20Vaughan%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fpeter-vaughan-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Peter%20Vaughan%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fpeter-vaughan-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F282875df24b1668ee9e3ee2890f45bb3ae07b430%2F0_193_2630_1579%2F2630.jpg>
 Peter Vaughan, left, and Anthony Hopkins in The Remains of the Day, 1993. 
Photograph: Allstar/Columbia 
Either side of that performance (Harry Andrews played Ed in the subsequent 
1970 film), Vaughan performed Bottom at the Glasgow Citizens and his Gladstone 
oppositeDorothy Tutin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/aug/07/guardianobituaries.lyngardner> in 
Portrait of a Queen (1965) at the Vaudeville. His marriage to Whitelaw, never 
easy (according, at least, to Whitelaw in her autobiography) ended in divorce 
in 1966 and he married, in the same year, the actor Lillias Walker, whom he had 
known for some time.

Having made a film debut in Ralph Thomas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/mar/20/guardianobituaries.filmnews>’s 
The 39 Steps (1959), a remake of the Hitchcock classic, he played the first of 
many big screen police chiefs in John Paddy Carstairs’s The Devil’s Agent 
(1962), followed by the Boulting Brothers’ Rotten to the Core (1965), withAnton 
Rodgers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/dec/04/guardianobituaries.television> and
Eric Sykes <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/jul/04/eric-sykes>; a 
British agent in The Naked Runner (1967), with Sinatra; and inJack Gold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/aug/11/jack-gold>’s The Bofors 
Gun (1967), withNicol Williamson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/jan/26/nicol-williamson>, Ian Holm and 
David Warner.

Notable appearances in Sam Peckinpah’s Straw Dogs (1971) and Karel Reisz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/nov/28/guardianobituaries.filmnews>’s 
The French Lieutenant’s Woman (1981) were followed by two great fantasy films 
by Terry Gilliam – Time Bandits (1981) and Brazil (1985) – in which his gift 
for manic extravagance was given full rein, playing an ogre in the first and a 
minister of information retrieval in the second.

His theatre work was maintained in a wonderful, diabolically possessed 
performance as the nearly-cuckolded Fitzdotterel in Ben Jonson’s The Devil Is 
an Ass at the Birmingham Rep and the NationalTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> in 1976. A friendship formed with 
Robert Lindsay while playing his girlfriend’s father in Citizen Smith (1977-79) 
on television led to a brace of imposing performances – Lopakhin in The Cherry 
Orchard and Luka in Gorky’s The Lower Depths – in a company headed by Lindsay 
at the Royal Exchange in Manchester.

Vaughan was a tetchy Aussie widower in Michael Blakemore’s tender production 
of David Williamson’s Travelling North at the Lyric Hammersmith in 1980 and a 
self-styled, crypto-fascist security guard in Alan Ayckbourn’s glorious Seasons 
Greetings at the Greenwich theatre, and the Apollo, in 1982.

Thereafter, his theatre work was confined to touring in Priestley’s An 
Inspector Calls and Brighouse’s Hobson’s Choice until his final West End 
flourish inHarold Pinter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2008/dec/27/harold-pinter-obituary-playwright-politics>
’s superb 1996 revival of Reginald Rose’s Twelve Angry Men, in which he played 
a racist bigot, Juror No 10. In the same year, he was the trade unionist Felix 
Hutchinson, father to Christopher Eccleston’s Nicky and succumbing to 
Alzheimer’s, in Our Friends in the North, the BBC drama serial set over three 
decades by the writer Peter Flannery.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fpeter-vaughan-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd2b145cfe30cd89093813e7e020e9d6e7c973dc%2F0_119_2250_1350%2F2250.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Peter%20Vaughan%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fpeter-vaughan-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Peter%20Vaughan%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fpeter-vaughan-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd2b145cfe30cd89093813e7e020e9d6e7c973dc%2F0_119_2250_1350%2F2250.jpg>
 Peter Vaughan, centre, with Geoffrey Rush and Miriam Margolyes in The Life and 
Death of Peter Sellers, 2004. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
Many people would consider Felix his finest performance. It certainly ranks 
alongside his ex- ceptional turn – uncharacteristically quiet and intensely 
moving – as the old servant, father to Anthony Hopkins’s head butler, in James 
Ivory’s The Remains of the Day (1993); an accident with a tea tray he sends 
flying across the garden patio results in a demotion, by his own son, to 
mops-and-brushes duty.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fpeter-vaughan-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49275a8d542b98b54f95413adc6f4c25298e3913%2F208_191_4827_2896%2F4827.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Peter%20Vaughan%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fpeter-vaughan-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Peter%20Vaughan%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fpeter-vaughan-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49275a8d542b98b54f95413adc6f4c25298e3913%2F208_191_4827_2896%2F4827.jpg>
 Peter Vaughan, far left, with Dustin Hoffman, second from right, in Sam 
Peckinpah’s Straw Dogs, 1971. Photograph: Getty Images 
But he graced every film he was in, really, including Nicholas Hytner’s The 
Crucible (1996) with Daniel Day-Lewis andPaul Scofield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/mar/20/2>, in which he played Giles 
Corey; Christopher Hampton’s The Secret Agent (1996) withBob Hoskins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/30/bob-hoskins> and Patricia 
Arquette; Bille August’s Les Misérables (1997) with Liam Neeson, the ninth 
screen version of that Victor Hugo novel before the screen musical came along; 
and Stephen Hopkins’s The Life and Death of Peter Sellers (2003), with Geoffrey 
Rush brilliant as Sellers, Charlize Theron as Britt Ekland and Stanley Tucci as 
Stanley Kubrick.

Later in life, Vaughan and his wife lived on the Costa del Sol in Spain, but 
returned to live in West Sussex. In March he published a short book of 
anecdotal memoirs, Once a Villain.

Vaughan is survived by Lillias and their son, David, and by two stepdaughters, 
Alexandra and Victoria, and four grandchildren.

• Peter Vaughan (Peter Ewart Ohm), actor, born 4 April 1923; died 6 December 
2016
 