


The price of petrol will drop close to £1 a litre in the coming months if oil 
prices remain low, a powerful committee of MPs was told on Tuesday.

Senior Goldman Sachs <https://www.theguardian.com/business/goldmansachs> 
economist Kevin Daly predicted forecourt prices would fall by 15p a litre from 
current average of just over 120p, boosting consumer confidence despite weak 
wage rises and uncertainty over global growth.

He told the Commons Treasury select committee that Britons would “really 
notice things such as the sharp decline in oil prices”.

Daly said: “My own view is that people respond more to the pounds and pence in 
their pockets than warnings by politicians of dangers lurking abroad.”

The value of the benchmark Brent crude has tumbled 40% since June and edged 
down to $66.50 (£42) a barrel on Tuesday compared with $115 in the summer.
Morgan Stanley forecast on Monday it would average $70 a barrel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/03/oil-collapse-leads-world-economy-trouble>
 next year.

The select committee heard sharp criticism of the chancellor, George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne>, from a leading thinktank 
for sanctioning huge tax giveaways that forced the government to impose deeper 
than expected cuts on vital welfare budgets and Whitehall spending.

The Institute for Fiscal Studies said the coalition government made 
“remarkable choices” to cut income and corporation tax that shifted the burden 
of balancing the budget to already hard-hit areas of government spending.

IFS director Paul Johnson said the move had also limited the Treasury’s scope 
for bringing Britain’s mounting debts under control.

“It’s been very striking over this parliament how £12bn or so is being spent 
on increasing the personal [income tax] allowance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/dec/03/autumn-statement-income-tax-george-osborne>
 [and] something like £7bn-£8bn on reducing corporation tax,” Johnson told MPs 
examining Osborne’s autumn statement delivered last week.

“Those are remarkable choices, as it were, in the context of the deficit 
reduction that you have got, and therefore the spending cuts that you have got. 
Clearly cutting taxes makes the arithmetic elsewhere more difficult.”

The comments by Britain’s leading independent tax and spending analyst came 
amid criticism of the proposals outlined by the chancellor last week to reduce 
the relative size of the stateto a level not seen since 1938 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/dec/03/autumn-statement-2014-george-osborne-spending-cuts>
.

Osborne told parliament another five years of cuts were needed to departmental 
spending and local government alongside cuts to the welfare bill to achieve a 
budget surplus by 2019/20.

MPs later learned that ringfenced protection of healthcare and schools meant 
some departments could have their budgets slashed by more than 40% by the end 
of the next parliament. Local government suffered a 6% budget cut this year but 
will see this double to 12% in the next financial year under current plans.

Johnson said last week that the deep spending cuts planned by Osborne amounted 
to a “colossal” reduction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2014/dec/04/autumn-statement-2014-reaction-politics-live-blog>
 in the size of the state and could change Britain’s public sector “beyond all 
recognition”.

Britain’s budget deficit has failed to come down as quickly as forecast by the 
Office for Budget Responsibility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/sep/23/osborne-deficit-reduction-target-uk-borrowing-rise>
 despite two years during which the UK has ranked alongside the US as the 
fastest growing of the major developed economies.

Analysis by the National Institute for Economic & Social Research found that 
the economy grew by 0.7% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/oct/07/british-economy-growth-gdp-niesr>
 in the three months to November, which means it is on track to grow by more 
than 3% this year.

The deficit currently stands at little more than 5% of economic output, down 
from about 10% when Osborne took office in 2010, but is predicted to fall only 
slightly this year after a collapse in tax receipts.

Corporation tax receipts have failed to pick up as expected after a cut from 
28% to 21% in the past four years. The tax on business profits is forecast to 
bring in £7bn less this year than was expected four years ago. Next year, the 
tax is scheduled to fall to 20%, though Labour has promised to reverse the 
move, using the saving to cut national insurance.

Income tax has suffered a fall during a boom in jobs that has seen Britain’s 
employment rate reach record levels. Economists have blamed the failure to 
generate higher tax receipts on a shift to low-paid self-employment and 
part-time working since the recession.

Osborne last week announced he would miss his most recent short-term 
deficit-reduction targets, but was committed to restoring a surplus in 2018/19 
through spending cuts, without raising taxes, if his Conservative party wins 
the election.

Johnson’s comments lend weight to complaints from political rivals that 
Osborne’s approach is too heavily focused on spending cuts – particularly in 
light of a pledge made by Prime minister David Cameron tohand out a further 
£7bn of tax cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/oct/01/david-cameron-ukip-labour-miliband-election>
 after the general election.
 