
“We are part of the NHS team,” boasts Pfizer in a fuzzy claim on its UK 
website. But it’s not. On the evidence presented by the Competition and Markets 
Authority, which whacked the US company witha record £84m fine for breaking 
competition law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/07/pfizer-fined-nhs-anti-epilepsy-drug-cma>
, Pfizer is a company that thinks it OK to raise the price of an ancient drug 
by 2,600% by exploiting a loophole. The annual bill for the NHS jumped from £2m 
to £50m.

The price-hiking wheeze was artful. Pfizer sold the distribution rights to an 
anti-epilespsy drug called Epanutin to Hertfordshire-based Flynn Phama in 
September 2012. As a branded medicine, Epanutin was covered by price 
regulation. But Flynn immediately de-branded, or genericised, the medicine.
Pfizer <https://www.theguardian.com/business/pfizer> continued to manufacture 
and supply the drug but, critically, in generic form both parties could charge 
what they wished. The result was a jump in the price of a 100mg pack from £2.83 
to £67.50, later reduced to £54.

In a normal market, other generic manufacturers would rush to produce their 
own copycat versions and competition would erode prices the CMA called 
“excessive and unfair”. But, as the regulator explains, this market was 
different. Medical advice says epilepsy patients already taking the medicine – 
phenytoin sodium – can’t be switched to another manufacturer’s generic version. 
“As a result, the NHS had no alternative to paying the increased prices for the 
drug,” says the CMA.

Pfizer’s attempts to justify its action are horribly weak. First, it says 
Epanutin was loss-making at the old price. But the solution was surely to 
approach the NHS for a fairer price; nobody expects pharmaceutical companies to 
supply at a loss. According to the CMA, Pfizer recouped all its losses within 
two months of the hike.

The company’s second argument is that, even at the higher price, the capsules 
were still cheaper than an unspecified “equivalent medicine” supplied to the 
NHS by another company under the regulated regime. But that argument ignores 
the CMA’s point that there wasn’t an equivalent medicine for the 48,000 
patients taking Pfizer’s drug.

The company intends to appeal against the CMA’s findings, describing them as 
“wrong in fact and law”. We’ll see where that leads, but Pfizer’s legalistic 
tone is ugly and will infuriate patients, NHS managers and government. There is 
an unspoken bargain between wealthy countries and pharma companies: we are 
happy to pay good money for genuinely novel and innovative medicines, but we 
don’t expect to be ripped off on drugs that have been around for decades. In 
this case, phenytoin sodium dates to 1908.

The US has seen several high-profile attempts at price-gouging on obscure old 
medicines. Perpetrators like Martin Shkreli of Turing Pharmaceuticals have been 
denounced as cynical greed merchants by politicians on all sides. There are 
differences in the UK saga addressed by the CMA – but as many similarities. 
Pfizer is keeping unpleasant company and cannot be surprised if there is a 
backlash. It’s simple: you cannot describe yourself as a “partner” of the NHS 
and then behave this way.

Port Talbot’s steely resolve

It was as long ago as March that Sajid Javi, then business secretary, had to 
rush back from a trip to Australia to mutter ineffectually about doing whatever 
he could to save the Port Talbot steelworks. The months have rolled by and now 
a likely solution has emerged – but no thanks to the government.

Instead, the forces behind an agreement that would see owner Tata Steel keep 
the twin blast furnaces running for at least five years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/07/tata-steel-commits-to-keeping-port-talbot-open>
 are these: the improvement in global steel prices; the fall in sterling that 
has made the south Wales plant more competitive; dogged pressure from the trade 
unions; and Tata patriarch Ratan Tata’s wish for his company to be seen as a 
genuinely long-term investor and employer.

Wednesday’s agreement hinges on a proposal to close the £15bn pension scheme 
to future accruals and offer workers a “competitive” defined contribution 
scheme instead. It is impossible to judge the details until they emerge and, 
note,Tata <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tata> said it iwas still 
working on “a necessary structural solution” to the £15bn scheme. There is 
potential for eleventh-hour slip-ups.

But, if the agreement succeeds, Tata should be applauded for its willingness 
to rethink and negotiate on Port Talbot. It is also fair for Tata to appeal “to 
other stakeholders such as the UK government” to lend a hand on energy costs 
for heavy users like the steel industry.

A business select committee report last year concluded the government could 
have done more, and earlier, to support UK steel. Greg Clark, new business 
secretary in a new government that says it believes in having an industrial 
strategy, should make himself useful.
 