
Surrounded by some of the boys he coached, this is the paedophile Barry 
Bennell in his Manchester City strip during the days when his talent-spotting 
for the club earned him a reputation as one of the best star-makers in the 
football business.

Bennell spent many years coaching and scouting boys for several junior teams 
affiliated to City, bringing through several players who went on to become 
international footballers for the club and elsewhere. Although City did not 
formally employ him, he was paid expenses to run teams such as Whitehill FC, 
where David White,the future England player says Bennell sexually abused him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/23/david-white> at the age of 11.

Crewe director of football Dario Gradi expresses sympathy for victims of Barry 
Bennell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/crewe-director-football-dario-gradi-sympathy-barry-bennell-victims>
Bennell’s teams were based at Platt Lane, City’s old training ground, and wore 
the team’s strip for matches. He also had past links with Stoke City before 
joining Crewe in a role that led to becoming youth-team coach at Gresty Road.

Manchester City said in a statement: “The club is aware of allegations that 
Barry Bennell had an association with Manchester City football club in the 
1980s. As a result the club is currently undertaking a thorough investigation 
of any past links he might have had with the organisation.”

The Guardian has also learned Bennell was previously involved with a junior 
team that had a tie-up with Chelsea and trained at Stamford Bridge once a 
season. Bennell was once a young prospect at Chelsea and it was there he first 
met Dario Gradi, the manager who employed him at Crewe, having originally been 
one of the coaches at Stamford Bridge.

Bennell, pictured here in 1983, has served three prison sentences totalling 15 
years in England and the United States since he was first arrested in 1992 and 
has multiple convictions for sexually abusing boys he coached. Now 62, he is 
out of prison on licence.Andy Woodward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/andy-woodward> and Steven 
Walters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/steve-walters-andy-woodward-crewe-alexandra>
, two former Crewe players, waived their right to anonymity to tell the 
Guardian they had been targeted by Bennell, who has been described by the 
American authorities as having “almost an insatiable appetite” for young boys.

White has since come forward to say he was another of Bennell’s victims and 
another former England international,Paul Stewart, has said he was sexually 
abused 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/paul-stewart-sexual-abuse-coach>
 by another coach in the Manchester area. Cheshire Police said on Wednesday that
11 new people had come forward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/23/cheshire-police-expand-football-sexual-abuse-inquiry-more-come-forward>
 since Woodward went public about the man who had abused him for several years 
from the age of 11. Many other potential victims have contacted Woodward 
directly and the Guardian has spoken to two former players who have 
independently named another man from the football world who abused them in the 
1980s.

Crewe Alexandra: how a football talent factory has been thrown into turmoil | 
Owen Gibson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/crewe-alexandra-barry-bennell>
On Thursday Gradi, Crewe’s director of football and former manager, expressed 
sympathy for Bennell’s victims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/crewe-director-football-dario-gradi-sympathy-barry-bennell-victims>
. Gradi, who was manager of Crewe from 1983 until 2007, also said no one at the 
club was aware of Bennell’s crimes until Bennell was arrested in the US in 1994.

“I would like to express sympathy to the victims of Barry Bennell not only at 
Crewe Alexandra, but at other clubs in the north-west,” Gradi said. “The first 
I knew of Barry Bennell’s crimes was when he was arrested in the United States 
in 1994. I knew nothing of his crimes before this time when he was employed by 
us. No one at the football club knew of Bennell’s crimes until his arrest in 
1994 and his subsequent prosecution in the United Kingdom.

“The football club also co-operated fully with the authorities in 2003. The 
club are in the process of a review and I won’t be making any further comment 
until this is finalised.”

A new NSPCC hotline for footballers, opened with the support of the Football 
Association, received more than 50 calls in the first two hours.

• The NSPCC’s hotline is 0800 023 2642 and Child Line for children and young 
people can be contacted on 0800 1111.

• NAPAC, the National Association for People Abused in Childhood, can be 
contacted on 0808 801 0331.

• In the UK, The Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the 
National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis 
support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14.
 