
Anna Longthorp likes looking at her pigs. She stands, hands on hips, with the 
relaxed gait of a woman used to the challenges of keeping upright in a cracked 
and furrowed field, and watches her animals. “If your pigs are happy they’ll be 
more productive,” she says, bluntly. The sturdy porkers in front of us, part 
Landrace for the long loin, part Duroc for the intra-muscular fat, certainly 
look the part. Outdoor bred, free range reared, they snuffle in the sandy 
earth, breaking off to chase each other from one end of their low-density plot 
to another. Away in the distance are the heavy industry of the Drax and 
Eggborough power stations, but here, on this reclaimed airfield, is pig heaven.

“A story sells,” Longthorp says, wryly. She knows that the manner in which she 
raises many of her animals is exactly what a lot of Britain’s food-aware 
customers want. Attach words such as “outdoor reared” and “free range” to the 
crackled Sunday roast and the price goes up. If the story is right it will 
attract a premium.

But the bigger story of the British pig business is nowhere near as 
straightforward or cheery. It is an example of the way agriculture has become a 
globalised business; one in which even the produce raised closest to our 
kitchens is at the mercies of economic imperatives shaped far away. Shoppers 
may say they want a certain type of product: cared for in Britain by someone 
like Anna Longthorp; working for a family farm rather than some huge 
corporation; supplying their meat through as few hands as possible. But the 
reality can be rather different.

What rural issues are important to you?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/05/what-rural-issues-are-important-to-you>
One of the reasons Longthorp likes looking at these pigs, spending their last 
few weeks on her unit near Snaith on Yorkshire’s East Riding, is that these are 
the ones she could afford to fatten up herself. The British pig industry goes 
through cycles of boom and bust and right now it is recovering from a major 
bust. In response to EU sanctions on Russia for its invasion of the Crimea in 
2014,Russia introduced a tit-for-tat embargo on various food stuffs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/16/cheap-imports-hit-pig-farmers>
, including pig meat, from western Europe. Germany had ramped up production to 
meet Russia’s growing appetite. Suddenly that market was gone. That meant 
oversupply which in turn meant the European-wide price of pig meat plummeted. 
Britain has not generally exported to Russia. Still Britain’s pig farmers, 
locked into the European market price, suffered.

It costs about 130p a kilo to produce pork. Earlier this year the price 
farmers were receiving dropped to just 112p. Many British farmers were losing 
between £10 and £20 a pig for every one they sold. Longthorp was partly 
protected from the worst of this. Eight years ago, in her mid-20s, she took 
over the pig business that had been established by her mother 25 years ago and 
set up a brand called Anna’s Happy Trotters. It sells her outdoor bred and free 
range animals and products such as bacon and sausages produced from them. 
Through hard marketing work, she established a premium price of 220p a kilo for 
meat sold under that brand, to take account of her much higher costs, and has 
been able to stick to it. There’s money in a good story.

The business has two units, each with 700 breeding sows, and produces 650 pigs 
a week for slaughter, at a rate of around 23 piglets a year from each sow, 
across just over two litters annually. Only a quarter of that is free range due 
to lack of land. Her more standard production has been subject to lower prices. 
She also breeds too many pigs for the amount of space she has. She used to send 
some out for what’s called “bed and breakfasting”: getting another farmer to 
fatten them up before returning them to her for slaughter. But with prices 
plummeting she could no longer afford to do this. “I now sell a lot of 
weaners,” she says, referring to the piglets. “It’s a way of reducing risk and 
locking in some profit.” She’s not happy about it.

The result of the past few rocky months has, unsurprisingly, been a 
contraction in the British industry. “We think we can identify about 20,000 
breeding sows that have gone out of the national herd,” says Peter Crichton, a 
pig market expert who writes a trade magazine column on the industry. “That’s 
about 5% of the breeding herd. In the long term we will be shorter on domestic 
pork.” In the 1980s the UK breeding herd was more than 800,000. Now it’s fallen 
below 400,000. At one point we were about 80% self-sufficient in pork. Now it’s 
55%. However, because of exports, only 40% of the pork we consume in Britain is 
actually produced here.

That matters because Britain is unique in the way it raises its animals. In 
this country while only 2–3% is entirely free range, 40% is outdoor reared and 
another 30% is raised on straw in open sheds. Accreditation systems such as the 
Red Tractor mark, which require four visits a year from vets, enforce higher 
welfare regimes. In the rest of Europe – including the likes of Denmark and the 
Netherlands – pig farmers have historically followed lower welfare regimes. 
Almost all of it is intensively reared indoors on a slatted system without 
straw. This has cost efficiencies. In the straw-based system there’s the 
obvious cost of the straw and the labour to remove it when it’s soiled. In 
slatted systems, used for just 30% of UK pig production, faeces simply fall 
through the floor.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fbritish-pig-farmers-china-pork-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12b1c5941f36e875fff44dc28fd9c761d8c446ce%2F0_129_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pigs%2C%20Brexit%20and%20China%3A%20what%E2%80%99s%20the%20future%20for%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20farmers%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fbritish-pig-farmers-china-pork-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pigs%2C%20Brexit%20and%20China%3A%20what%E2%80%99s%20the%20future%20for%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20farmers%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fbritish-pig-farmers-china-pork-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12b1c5941f36e875fff44dc28fd9c761d8c446ce%2F0_129_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Pigs on Anna Longthorp’s Yorkshire farm. Photograph: Murdo MacLeod/Observer 
Food Monthly 
Longthorp’s pigs are raised in circumstances that could be described as 
bucolic; the slatted system really isn’t pretty. Those who are appalled by the 
very notion of farming pigs, who regard the realities of the industry described 
here as repellent, will make little distinction between methods. It will all be 
atrocious. But to many consumers these things matter, not that retailers always 
respond. The big supermarkets are still buying lots of this lower welfare pork, 
much of it imported, for their standard ranges.

That pressure on price has partly come about through the rise of the 
discounters, Aldi and Lidl. Because they buy small ranges in large volume and 
spend little on frills, the discounters generally pay a good price and are 
regarded as good customers. “It’s the way the big four supermarkets try to take 
them on that’s the problem,” says Crichton. “When foreign pig meat is cheaper 
than ours they’ll simply bring it in.”

Historically one of the reasons so much of Britain’s pig industry is less 
intensive is the difficulty of getting planning permission for the facilities. 
But there is also simply a greater interest in animal welfare in the UK 
compared to much of continental Europe. There is an understanding that pigs are 
not dumb; that they need stimulation. As Anna Longthorp says: “The consumer is 
willing to pay enough if the story is right.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fbritish-pig-farmers-china-pork-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a2225b6796e19c9e14067d9db7ab1ec8882af06%2F0_1180_3840_3839%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pigs%2C%20Brexit%20and%20China%3A%20what%E2%80%99s%20the%20future%20for%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20farmers%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fbritish-pig-farmers-china-pork-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pigs%2C%20Brexit%20and%20China%3A%20what%E2%80%99s%20the%20future%20for%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20farmers%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fbritish-pig-farmers-china-pork-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a2225b6796e19c9e14067d9db7ab1ec8882af06%2F0_1180_3840_3839%2F3840.jpg>
 David Owers in Lincolnshire. Photograph: Fabio De Paola for the Observer 
David Owers, a pig farmer from Lincolnshire these past 45 years, uses an 
indoor straw-based system. He says he thinks it’s best for welfare, though the 
supermarkets aren’t prepared to pay enough for it. We stand looking into one of 
his open-sided sheds, at sprightly pigs, now at around 35kg each, bouncing 
around bales of hay. “A slatted system would be cheaper but this is the most 
viable if you care about welfare,” he says.

I suggest the best welfare system actually involves having them free range and 
outdoors. He disagrees; having sows indoors in crates for weaning stops them 
rolling over on to piglets. “Our mortality rate is about 5.5%. Outdoor reared 
systems have a mortality rate of 10% to 13%.” I put this to Longthorp, who 
surprises me by agreeing. “Our mortality figures aren’t as good as indoors,” 
she says, as she leads me around the fields housing the breeding unit. Here the 
sows come and go from the sheds in which they wean. And yes, they lose piglets. 
“But it’s about quality of life. Truth is, the label doesn’t mean much. You can 
have good free range and bad free range, good indoor and bad indoor.” So what 
can the consumer do? “Look for things like theRed Tractor mark 
<http://www.redtractor.org.uk/>,” she says.

One of the big problems for British pig producers is the volatility of the 
market. After that low of 112p a kilo, producers in Germany slaughtered 
breeding sows to reduce supply. That lifted prices. Then Brexit happened and 
the pound began to slide, a nightmare for importers but for exporters paid in 
euros it was a godsend. Not only was the base price on the up, but so was the 
value of that currency.

Brexit would be disastrous for Britain’s farm animals | Sam Barker
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/27/brexit-disastrous-britains-farm-animals-eu-laws-cruel>
But the greatest international influence on prices has been the Chinese market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/20/chinas-meat-consumption-climate-change>
. The country now produces half of all the pork on the planet. A surprisingly 
large amount of that production has been on what would be recognised in Britain 
as a 19th-century model: peasant farmers keeping two or three pigs in their 
backyard. In the past year the Chinese introduced a new five-year plan to phase 
out backyard pig rearing and expand modern production. They also want to spread 
production more evenly around the country, rather than have it concentrated in 
small pockets. In response to the uncertainty, production in China has 
plummeted and prices have risen. Pork producers in China are now getting around 
220p a kilo, ahead of most premium producers in the UK.

They’ve also been importing more. It used to be just the so-called “fifth 
quarter” – offal that the British didn’t want. Now they are taking whole 
animals. Shipments to China from Britain in the year to May were up 72%. China 
now accounts for half of all British exports. This suggests opportunities for 
the future. However when prices settle, as they invariably will, it’s likely 
that the Chinese will come after the intensively reared European production, 
leaving the British once more out in the cold.

As a result there are expectations that the industry will continue gently to 
contract and the family-owned model will become increasingly difficult to 
maintain. You may like the idea of your roast coming from an army of Anna 
Longthorps. The reality may well be rather different. “What we’ve seen for the 
past few years,” says Mick Sloyan, pork director of the industry body AHDB, the 
Agriculture and Horticulture Development Board, “is individual farms staying 
the same size but being taken over by farming corporations. Already just 16 
farm businesses produce 50% of all the pigs in this country.” Currently, he 
says, there is a market in the UK for the 40% that are outdoor reared and then 
finished inside on straw. “They’ll be fine.” The rest will just have to hope 
the supermarkets are prepared to pay enough, or go intensive.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fbritish-pig-farmers-china-pork-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F423783056f0d33d92842f75588c857f66677d205%2F255_1028_3489_4361%2F3489.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pigs%2C%20Brexit%20and%20China%3A%20what%E2%80%99s%20the%20future%20for%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20farmers%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fbritish-pig-farmers-china-pork-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pigs%2C%20Brexit%20and%20China%3A%20what%E2%80%99s%20the%20future%20for%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20farmers%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fbritish-pig-farmers-china-pork-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F423783056f0d33d92842f75588c857f66677d205%2F255_1028_3489_4361%2F3489.jpg>
 Pigs at David Owers’ farm Photograph: Fabio De Paola for the Observer 
Or farmers will simply quit. Tim Chapman, from North Yorkshire, is one of 
these. He’s been at it for 36 years. He’s been through spikes in feed price and 
the foot and mouth crisis. Finally he’s had enough. He’s winding down his 
550-strong breeding unit. “In the end it wasn’t just the money we were losing,” 
he says. “I needed further investment which was going to be tricky and there 
were staffing issues. It was just everything.” Then he had a conversation with 
a local butcher and discovered that however little he was paid as the farmer, 
the processor always made the same profit. “In this industry all the risk goes 
on the farmer.”

And so another part of Britain’s pig-rearing tradition goes. What does all 
this mean for the future? In the long term, the pig industry will probably 
become more like the wine business. At one end will be a high-welfare, 
low-intensity premium product, flogged to those whose interest in the way the 
animals they eat are cared for is matched only by the depths of their pockets. 
The rest of the industry will be buffeted by the cold winds of the 
international markets. Mainstream consumers may claim an interest in welfare. 
They may say they want the best. But all too often it comes down to simple 
pounds and pence. At which point it’s the pigs that suffer.
 