
The loss-making company behind Pink Panther wafers has gone into 
administration, with the loss of about 100 jobs, after taking a hit from the
fall in sterling since the Brexit vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/oct/11/pound-pressure-city-fears-hard-brexit-bank-of-england-business-live>
.

Rivington Biscuits, which is based in Wigan, Lancashire, was already in the 
red but its financial position worsened after the June referendum, as the sharp 
fall in sterling pushed up the cost of ingredients used to make its biscuits. 
As a small firm it was unable to pass the price rises on to its supermarket 
customers and its losses escalated to several hundred thousand pounds a month.

This prompted Rivington’s Dutch owner Van Delft to appoint FRP Advisory as 
administrators on Tuesday night. Staff were told they had been made redundant 
on Wednesday.

Scottish spirits are soaring (but it’s gin, not whisky)
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/11/scottish-distillers-new-formula-for-success-gin-whisky>
The vast majority of the workforce, 99 people, have left while 24 people have 
been kept on to help fulfil existing contracts with supermarkets. However, 
their future is uncertain while FRP, which is also handling the liquidation of 
collapsed department store chain BHS, tries to find a buyer for the business.

Rivington is a key employer in Wigan, which voted 63.9% to leave the EU in 
June.

Half of those who have lost their jobs at Rivington have already put in their 
claims and hope to get their redundancy cheques by Christmas.

Apart from Pink Panthers, Rivington also makes own-brand biscuits for 
supermarkets including Lidl. Van Delft has invested £7m in its factory in Wigan 
since buying the business in 2009, but has been unable to turn it around.

Larger food suppliers have more clout. Unilever, the consumer goods giant 
whose brands range from Marmite to Persil, became embroiled in apublic spat 
with Tesco last month after hiking the prices 
<http://ps//www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/13/tesco-unilever-resolve-marmite-dispute-price-supermarket>
 it charges supermarkets. Theprice of a basket of 20 Unilever products has gone 
up by an average of 5.7% since the Brexit vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/07/price-of-20-unilever-products-up-by-average-of-57-since-brexit-vote>
, according to analysis by the Guardian and price comparison site 
MySupermarket.com published last month.
 