
Don't pay off just the minimum on your cards each month. This has always been 
a recipe for disaster, but card companies have cut the minimum payments they 
require, from 5 per cent of debt outstanding, the norm a few years ago, to 3 
per cent. One card launched recently by Northern Rock requires a payment of 
just 2 per cent.

Other ways to avoid the debt trap are:

 If a card company asks you to sign a direct debit for payment, the amount is 
likely to be the minimum monthly payment. You need to be paying much more to 
keep on top of the debt, especially if you use the card frequently.

 Keep a tally of the total debt you have run up.

 Don't take out more cards than you can handle. The truth about card debt is 
that you can only really afford it if you can pay off your bill in full each 
month. Of course, up to half of us do not and, for most, the debt will remain 
manageable. But running several cards up to their maximum credit limits will be 
a huge burden if your income falls. Even if you can maintain payments, interest 
mounts and you will never get your finances on an even keel if you are 
borrowing to the maximum all the time.

 Many card companies are wooing new customers by offering low introductory 
rates of interest. Banks are also promoting low-rate personal loans. But with 
cards in particular, cheap will only be cheerful if you use the low rate to 
your advantage, which means reducing debt at a lower cost than on another card. 
Even at a rate of less than 10 per cent, a credit card will be a burden if you 
keep increasing your debt.

 Beware store cards. Retailers promote them with offers of discounts off 
clothing and other consumer items. But once you've had the discount, cut up the 
card. Rates for borrowing on store cards are up to 30 per cent.

 Be clear about what interest rate you are paying. Don't look at the monthly 
rate, look at the annual percentage rate, which gives a picture of what you 
will pay over a year. A monthly rate of less than 2 per cent works out at an 
annual rate of nearly 27 per cent.

 Be aware that low introductory rates usually come to an end after a few 
months. After that, the rate will rise sharply, so always look at both rates 
when choosing a card.

 Cheap introductory rates often apply only to debt transferred from other 
cards. new purchases cost more. If you want to pay off an old, stubborn credit 
card debt, a low-rate debt transfer deal could work to your advantage. But you 
should aim to pay off that debt within the low-rate period and then pay off 
bills in full after that.

 It doesn't make sense to keep money in a savings account if you are carrying 
a big credit-card debt. On a good savings account, the most you are likely to 
be earning, after basic-rate tax, will be well under 6 per cent, and possibly 
next to nothing on an instant access account. If you pay off credit-card debt, 
your effective return will nearly always be higher and tax-free. Use some of 
the savings to pay off the debt and rebuild the savings later, when you have 
got your budget sorted out.

 Your problem with credit may be secondary to a problem with spending. Many 
people succumb to the temptation to have now and pay later. One way to deal 
with this, according to television financial guru and lecturer Alvin Hall, is 
to wait 48 hours and only buy if you still think you need the item.There is 
also no substitute for old-fashioned budgeting. Former debt counsellor Nick 
Pearson says: 'If you spend £50 clubbing on a Friday night, you need to build 
that in. If you want to buy a car, sit down and think about what you can 
afford. You may get the car but you may never be able to go out on a Friday.'
 