
Unless you’ve spent the past three weeks living in the actual wild west, you 
will have heard of – if not already become addicted to –Westworld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/westworld>, HBO’s sci-fi mystery 
about a theme park populated by sentient robot cowboys. One of the most 
talked-about elements of the show is its soundtrack, which features old-timey 
western renditions of rock hits. So far, we’ve been treated to Radiohead and 
Soundgarden performed on a saloon-bar player piano, and an orchestral version 
of the Rolling Stones’ Paint It Black, which provided the dramatic soundtrack 
to a climactic, and gory, gun battle in the show’s opening episode.

The man responsible for ageing these contemporary classics is Ramin Djawadi, a 
German-Iranian composer whose credits include Iron Man andGame of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/15/game-of-thrones-music-live-concert-ramin-djawadi>
. “I wish it was my idea, but I have to give credit to Jonathan Nolan, my 
showrunner,” Djawadi explains. “He came up with the idea of planting these 
contemporary songs within the show. The audience has responded very well to it; 
everyone’s talking about it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Framin-djawadi-westworld-old-timey-rock-song-piano-covers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdc3b3629fdd772134dab4d39ebb4ee6d1bc4901%2F0_0_2079_2145%2F2079.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Play%20it%20again%2C%20Ram%3A%20meet%20the%20man%20behind%20Westworld%E2%80%99s%20old-timey%20rock%20covers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Framin-djawadi-westworld-old-timey-rock-song-piano-covers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Play%20it%20again%2C%20Ram%3A%20meet%20the%20man%20behind%20Westworld%E2%80%99s%20old-timey%20rock%20covers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Framin-djawadi-westworld-old-timey-rock-song-piano-covers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdc3b3629fdd772134dab4d39ebb4ee6d1bc4901%2F0_0_2079_2145%2F2079.jpg>
 ‘The audience has responded very well’ ... Westworld composer Ramin Djawadi. 
Photograph: Kevin Winter/Getty Images 
The choice of these tunes isn’t mere crowd-pleasing – there’s a deeper 
intention here. In Westworld’s titular theme park, a painstakingly recreated 
wild west town where human visitors can befriend, have sex with and even kill 
their droid hosts without guilt or repercussion (at least, that’s the idea), 
the use of these modern songs acts as a jarring presence. “It’s a great way of 
reminding the audience that: ‘Wait, this is a theme park, you’re not really 
back in time,’ Djawani explains. “It just reminds you that something is not 
right here. It’s all fake.” The fact that these songs are performed on a player 
piano, an automated device that is in essence a robot itself, adds to this 
metaphor of creepy artificiality.

What’s more, in a show that seems to encourage wild speculation about every 
detail, from the flies that land on the robot-park workers’ faces to the 
repeated use of white and black, some are suggesting that Westworld’s musical 
cues are clues, perhaps indicating where and when the show is set. Are these 
songs old bar-room classics in a distant future? Or is something else going on? 
Like those playing poker in Westworld’s saloon, Djawani is keeping his cards 
close to his chest. “We’re in the middle of the season, so I don’t want to give 
anything away. What I can say is that these songs are hooky hits that – if we 
are talking about the future – are still being played 100 years from now, 
because they are so great.” There’s no arguing with that.
 