
Key points

A sustained debate on the government’s plans to turn all schools into academies
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/15/every-english-school-to-become-an-academy-ministers-to-announce>
, with Corbyn pushing Cameron to explain the rationale behind the plans and 
challenging him by listing all the people who are against the plans – from 
Cameron’s constituency to local schoolchildren. Cameron in turn insisted that 
school standards were rising and that the plans would free headteachers from 
the “dead hand of bureaucracy”.

Snap verdict

A solid win for Corbyn. Cameron managed to get his usual comic broadside into 
his final answer (although did you notice how he did not do his usual schtick 
about the importance of a strong economy –the unemployment figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/20/uk-unemployment-rises-and-pay-growth-falls>
 killed that off today), but Corbyn got the better of him with the sheer weight 
of evidence he was able to cite about the extent of opposition to the plan to 
turn all schools into academies. It seemed as if the quotes would never stop. 
If Labour’s research team did a good job, Cameron’s did too, because he had a 
sound response to Corbyn’s fifth question, about the school visit. But Corbyn’s 
quotes were better, and Corbyn successfully questioned both the need for more 
academies (claims that academisation raises quality is questionable) and how 
this could be seen as decentralisation.

The memorable lines

Corbyn, after citing the Tory MPs and councillors in Cameron’s own 
constituency who are opposed to the academy plan, cited three schoolchildren he 
met last week, forcing Cameron to address the issues they raised.

Cameron laboured a joke in which he welcomed the fact that John McDonnell, the 
shadow chancellor, was banned from Labour’s conference before realising that it 
was in fact McDonald’s that was banned, and then questioning whyLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> would not invite one of country’s 
the biggest employers. Here’s the punchline:

No wonder Labour MPs are in despair. Frankly I’m lovin’ it. 
 