
Key points

Jeremy Corbyn devoted his six questions to Theresa May’s speech on Tuesday  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/prime-minister-vows-to-put-final-brexit-deal-before-parliament>
setting out her plan for Brexit. He asked why, given that Britain’s jobs, 
living standards and future prosperity were at stake, her speech was not 
delivered in parliament. He appealed to May to stop her threat of “a bargain 
basement Brexit”, which would reduce Britain to a tax haven off the shores of 
the EU. May retorted by quoting Corbyn saying that, like her, he wanted access 
to the single market, and concluded: “I have a plan, he doesn’t have a clue.”

Related: Britain's Brexit deal must be inferior to EU membership, MEPs told - 
Politics live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/18/theresa-may-brexit-speech-reaction-pmqs-david-davis-will-not-get-option-of-reversing-brexit-says-david-davis-politics-live>

Corbyn followed up by saying that May had threatened to slash corporation tax 
if Britain did not get a deal on Brexit, which would cost the country £120bn. 
How would she fund public services? May replied that she had said during the 
remain campaign that if Britain left the EU the sky would not fall in, but 
Labour’s plans, including a maximum wage cap, would result in “no jobs, no 
wages and no skills”.

The Labour leader replied that May was refusing to answer how much the UK 
would have to pay for access to the single market, and pointed out that 
thousands of workers from the EU are employed in Britain’s public services – 
including 55,000 by the NHS. Public services are under pressure from her cuts 
in the social care budget, not from migration, he said.

May responded that workers would still come to Britain from the EU, but that 
the nation would be making its own decisions over migration. As a parting shot, 
she said: “When I look at Brexit, I consider the issue, I set out my plan and I 
stick to it – it’s called leadership, he should try it some time.”

Snap verdict

Perhaps Corbyn should stick to the NHS. Of course, that wasn’t really an 
option today, in the light of the huge interest in May’s Brexit speech, but 
having done well on health and social care in recent PMQs he came slightly 
unstuck when he tried to dismantle her speech with six questions all focused on
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. His point about May 
snubbing parliament was true, but a process point of little interest to people 
outside Westminster, and his “Irony Lady” line was groan-inducing. (He should 
just have nicked the line that Labour MP Stephen Doughty used yesterday about 
May and how “the lady’s not for turning up”.) His point about corporation tax 
and May’s threat to turn the UK into a offshore tax haven was a good one, but 
then he got sidelined into slightly obtuse questions about payments to the EU, 
where May’s reply (there will be payments for single market access, even if she 
is not saying how much they will be) was unusually direct by PMQs standards.

May seemed more confident than at previous PMQs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/pmqs>, and her mockery of Corbyn’s 
response to her speech on Tuesday was effective. She will be satisfied that she 
saw Corbyn off.

Memorable lines

“Restoring parliamentary democracy while sidelining parliament? She’s not so 
much the Iron Lady as the Irony Lady.” –Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> on Theresa May snubbing 
parliament and theBrexit committee’s call for a white paper.

“I’ve got a plan, he doesn’t have a clue.” – May, after quoting Corbyn saying 
that Labour wants access to the single market after Brexit.

 * For more on PMQs and the day’s politics, read our politics live blog with 
Andrew Sparrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/18/theresa-may-brexit-speech-reaction-pmqs-david-davis-will-not-get-option-of-reversing-brexit-says-david-davis-politics-live>
.

 * Click here <https://www.theguardian.com/series/andrew-sparrow-verdict> to 
read more of Andrew Sparrow’s verdicts on PMQS.  