
The concept of pressing has never been so revered in English football and this 
meeting between the Premier League’s top two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/02/tottenham-hotspur-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 teams was largely about compressing space and winning possession quickly.

Dele Alli leads vibrant Tottenham to inflict first loss on Manchester City
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/02/tottenham-hotspur-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
Tottenham Hotspur <https://www.theguardian.com/football/tottenham-hotspur> 
essentially won this game in the first half. They started at blistering speed, 
storming into midfield tackles with tremendous tenacity and closing down higher 
up the pitch to trouble the Manchester City goalkeeper, Claudio Bravo, when 
attempting to play out from the back.

Mauricio Pochettino’s shape was unusual – Christian Eriksen was in essence 
playing as a conventional midfielder, although he sometimes alternated 
positions with the right‑sided Moussa Sissoko. This rotation sometimes left 
Victor Wanyama isolated in front of the defence but the Kenyan was the game’s 
outstanding player in a destructive defensive midfield role. In a sense Spurs’ 
shape was not particularly important, as they were happy to go to man-for-man 
in midfield, denying City passing options – and they never appeared tempted to 
go long.

For all Tottenham’s brilliance at regaining possession, they were often rather 
panicked in the opposition third. Son Heung-min twice shot from acute angles 
when team‑mates were begging for a pass and Spurs’ goals came when Aleksandar 
Kolarov clumsily turned a cross into his own goal under little pressure, then 
when Son teed up Dele Alli after the midfielder had initially lost the ball 
with a poor pass.

Their decision-making without possession was more impressive than the 
decision-making with possession.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fpochettino-and-guardiola-react-after-tottenham-beat-manchester-city-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pochettino%20and%20Guardiola%20react%20after%20Tottenham%20beat%20Manchester%20City%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fpochettino-and-guardiola-react-after-tottenham-beat-manchester-city-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pochettino%20and%20Guardiola%20react%20after%20Tottenham%20beat%20Manchester%20City%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fpochettino-and-guardiola-react-after-tottenham-beat-manchester-city-video&media=>
Pochettino and Guardiola react after Tottenham beat Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/oct/02/pochettino-and-guardiola-react-after-tottenham-beat-manchester-city-video>
City struggled badly in the first half and Pep Guardiola’s decision to start 
Fernando in the side in the holding role, with Fernandinho deployed slightly 
higher, did not prove successful. Fernando was uncomfortable receiving the ball 
when pressed heavily and, though David Silva showed flashes of magic, City have 
looked so dangerous this season when using him alongside another creative 
midfielder, like Kevin De Bruyne, absent through injury, or Ilkay Gündogan, 
left on the bench. In the first half, Sergio Agüero received no service.

Pressing so intensely early on inevitably results in a second-half slump, 
however, and Spurs did not cope particularly well after the break. City 
dominated possession inside the opposition half and Pochettino was surprisingly 
slow to use his bench. Guardiola inevitably introduced Gündogan for 
Fernandinho, which meant he and Silva found pockets of space either side of 
Wanyama, but it took 20 minutes for Pochettino to respond by bringing on Eric 
Dier as a second holding midfielder. Later, Spurs required fresh legs with Son 
and Danny Rose tiring, but Pochettino waited until the final five minutes 
before using his other two substitutes.

City created chances, particularly in their inside left-channel, with 
Fernandinho and Silva slipping through-balls to Agüero and the substitute 
Kelechi Iheanacho respectively. Both were foiled by Hugo Lloris. Guardiola’s 
use of two strikers meant City switching to a diamond shape, the first taste of 
a genuine plan B.

Tottenham’s performance will be cited as the blueprint for playing against 
Guardiola’s City and their pressing was clearly effective in the opening 
stages. Sustaining that intensity over 90 minutes is impossible, however, and 
managers looking to follow suit must also prepare for a second-half City 
onslaught.
 