
Nick van der Kolk | Love + Radio <http://loveandradio.org/>

This column is about podcast creator Nick van der Kolk. He’s a thoughtful man. 
He pauses a lot when he speaks, considers what he’s saying as he says it, gives 
answers that you don’t quite expect.

We’re talking on the phone, about when he met a woman in a hotel, a long time 
ago. “It was clear we were never going to see each other again,” he says. “I 
commented on how travel gives you a bizarre anti-intimacy and intimacy 
simultaneously, and she was like, ‘Funny you should mention that, because I 
have a secret that I’ve only told my two closest friends.’ So I got my 
recorder…”

This is what Van der Kolk does. He gets people to tell him their secret 
stories. And then he turns them into one of my favourite podcasts: the 
multi-award-winningLove + Radio <http://loveandradio.org/>.

Love + Radio is intimate and strange. Van der Kolk thinks it’s to do with how 
close the microphone is to the speaker’s mouth. If you listen on headphones, it 
can feel as though the speaker is talking inside your head. The show plays with 
that feeling by using unconventional editing techniques. Words are repeated, 
strange noises murmur beneath, a voice you’ve not heard before suddenly breaks 
in. It’s woozy, spooky.

Van der Kolk, 35, was always interested in audio. As a child growing up in 
Boston, Massachusetts, he listened toNPR <http://www.npr.org/> and tapes of BBC 
dramas. He playedThe Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b03v379k> so often, he says, “that I knew it 
off by heart. Especially the first episode. I could download it when I needed 
it.” He used to run through it in his head while waiting for the bus.

His parents were therapists – “it all comes together now, huh?” – which meant 
that, at home, no topic was considered out of bounds. And this is true ofLove + 
Radio. Van der Kolk’s interviews, and those of the other producers, go deep and 
honest on subjects most radio stations wouldn’t touch: blackmail, fetishes, 
paedophilia, crises, people who make an off-beat decision to live their life 
another way. Gradually, all is revealed, no matter how appalling or sad.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fnick-van-der-kolk-love-and-radio-interview-miranda-sawyer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77af39042dddad9e0cd236bb74694314f44ed9be%2F0_0_1669_2500%2F1669.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Podcaster%20Nick%20van%20der%20Kolk%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20think%20people%20want%20to%20feel%20validated%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fnick-van-der-kolk-love-and-radio-interview-miranda-sawyer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Podcaster%20Nick%20van%20der%20Kolk%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20think%20people%20want%20to%20feel%20validated%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fnick-van-der-kolk-love-and-radio-interview-miranda-sawyer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77af39042dddad9e0cd236bb74694314f44ed9be%2F0_0_1669_2500%2F1669.jpg>
 Photograph: Chris McIntosh 
Van der Kolk can worry about this. He’s killed episodes before because he’s 
felt that they might lead to too much grief for the person speaking. He thinks 
about tone, a lot:L+R’s most recent episode opens with him wondering if the 
show should change, post-Trump, asking for listeners’ thoughts. And he works 
hard. He tends to interview the speaker three times, the final time after he’s 
edited the first two, to record phrases that tell the story more quickly where 
it’s needed. But the first two talks are long. “Oh yeah,” he says. “I can do 
eight-, nine-hour interviews easily.”

A fellow podcaster once joked to Van der Kolk that Love + Radio should be 
called “Wait For It”: there’s always a twist, a point where the story swerves 
in a way you don’t expect. Somehow, it’s always a surprise. The new series 
begins with a story calledA Girl of Ivory 
<http://loveandradio.org/2016/09/a-girl-of-ivory/>. The shift halfway through 
made me laugh, it was such a shock. Like a rabbit out of the hat, pure 
entertainment. It makes the programmes stay in your mind. I think often of past 
episodes, likeThe Living Room <http://loveandradio.org/2015/03/the-living-room/>
 orPoints Unknown <http://loveandradio.org/2015/11/points-unknown/>.

For the past couple of years, Love + Radio has been part of Radiotopia 
<https://www.radiotopia.fm/>, Roman Mars’s hand-picked stable of excellent 
podcasts that includes Helen Zaltzman’sThe Allusionist and Mars’s own 99% 
Invisible. The Radiotopians don’t hang out, says Van der Kolk, because they all 
live in different cities, but there is a definite camaraderie. (The podcasting 
world reminds me of indie music in its heyday: devoted fans, dedicated “label 
owners”, dogged creators doing their own thing until an audience is revealed.) 
The show is 11 years old now, and four episodes into its fifth season. It’s not 
a weekly podcast, and I’m always impatient for more. Should I be excited about 
episodes to come? Van der Kolk has a think.

“Oh there’s one I’m super-excited about,” he says. “I’m working on it with 
producer Sarah Geis and it’s about a guy who decides early on in his life that 
he’s not going to pay any attention to news. And as a result of that, he ends 
up going to Iraq.”

That sounds great! I say. From such a mundane decision, too.

“Oh,” says Van der Kolk, “you can get a lot of good stories about mundane 
things. If you just dig deep enough.”
 