
This was rather tiring, and very much a tale of two halves. At first, it was 
an extremely exciting episode if you are a fan of marine engineering. For 
everyone else, it was a bit rambling. Lots of things going on, but nothing 
really moving. Demelza is with bump and catching illegal fish. Francis is 
looking for a mine in the garden with his homemade divining rod. There’s a vote 
to curb the mine expansion. Ross is selling his shares. Elizabeth is taking 
refreshment with (soon-to-be-broken-nosed) Evil George. And here’s Verity! All 
these things, and yet all a bit dull.

Until ... suddenly it all kicked off! “Are you suggesting we go into 
partnership?” A renewed collaboration with Francis was a quick route to an 
unexpectedly graphic eye-gouging in the pub for Ross, an altercation which 
revealed that Evil George’s lessons with the weedy boxing master have not been 
as effective as he had hoped. Meanwhile Demelza was going into labour while 
doing a spot of fishing. “Give me the oars, Demelza.” “I can manage!” This was 
some hardcore baby-delivering, with Demelza seemingly set on the world’s first 
unassisted water birth. At sea. And straight back into a moss-green corset for 
the opening of the Grace Wheel within moments!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fpoldark-recap-series-two-episode-four-stick-your-oar-in-ross%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d13a3709bac9c5a6d5d39dbd45872dca20d2897%2F0_371_3939_2363%2F3939.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Poldark%20recap%3A%20series%20two%2C%20episode%20four%20%E2%80%93%20stick%20your%20oar%20in%2C%20Ross!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fpoldark-recap-series-two-episode-four-stick-your-oar-in-ross%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Poldark%20recap%3A%20series%20two%2C%20episode%20four%20%E2%80%93%20stick%20your%20oar%20in%2C%20Ross%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fpoldark-recap-series-two-episode-four-stick-your-oar-in-ross%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d13a3709bac9c5a6d5d39dbd45872dca20d2897%2F0_371_3939_2363%2F3939.jpg>
 ‘I can manage!’ Demelza was seemingly set on the world’s first unassisted 
water birth. At sea. Photograph: BBC/Mike Alsford 
I know fans of the original Poldark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/poldark> fiction are ranting below 
the line that we’re cantering through the plot at an unnecessary rate of knots, 
and I wonder if this is precisely the issue here. Things are not being allowed 
to proceed at their natural, televisual pace. I kept expecting Cliff Barnes to 
walk on and start talking about Wentworth Oil. (This is a Dallas reference, 
young people. Don’t bothering Googling it. I simply mean it has gone a bit 
soapy.)

Poldark works best when there’s less plot and more characterisation. And there 
was so much plot in this episode (much of it Groundhog Day-ish) that we didn’t 
get to see the characters smoulder in the way they should. Both literally and 
figuratively.

The human moments are when Poldark really comes alive. Verity was adorable at 
the meeting with her step-daughter. And who doesn’t have a not-very-secret soft 
spot for Captain Blamey? T’wouldn’t be right nor proper not to admit that a 
tear sprang to the eye when he said to Francis: “She would dearly love it. 
That’s why I also desire it.” Like many actors in this series, Richard 
Harrington puts a lot into what isn’t a huge role and it is most satisfying. 
More acting, fewer shenanigans, please!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fpoldark-recap-series-two-episode-four-stick-your-oar-in-ross%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F962a9cd0e9fa94a6c4bc156ee303197d4c5d650f%2F173_0_4346_2609%2F4346.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Poldark%20recap%3A%20series%20two%2C%20episode%20four%20%E2%80%93%20stick%20your%20oar%20in%2C%20Ross!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fpoldark-recap-series-two-episode-four-stick-your-oar-in-ross%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Poldark%20recap%3A%20series%20two%2C%20episode%20four%20%E2%80%93%20stick%20your%20oar%20in%2C%20Ross%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fpoldark-recap-series-two-episode-four-stick-your-oar-in-ross%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F962a9cd0e9fa94a6c4bc156ee303197d4c5d650f%2F173_0_4346_2609%2F4346.jpg>
 Who doesn’t have a not-very-secret soft spot for Captain Blamey? Photograph: 
BBC/Adrian Rogers 
The business of the Grace Wheel (did I understand that name correctly?) and 
the new-fangled pumping engine was neither here nor there. It wasn’t drawn out 
enough for us to get invested. I would rather have seen lengthy scenes of 
Francis trying to buy the perfect nose-gay for Elizabeth. In happier news: next 
week Ross is going to take a bath. Yes, you read that right. Better get in an 
extra order of Elizabeth Shaw Dark Mint Crisps and smelling salts.

Pewter tankard award for bonkers brilliance as supporting actor
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fpoldark-recap-series-two-episode-four-stick-your-oar-in-ross%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F08b971eaae76396b528c4d270a9313dfdfebefee%2F0_0_4110_2466%2F4110.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Poldark%20recap%3A%20series%20two%2C%20episode%20four%20%E2%80%93%20stick%20your%20oar%20in%2C%20Ross!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fpoldark-recap-series-two-episode-four-stick-your-oar-in-ross%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Poldark%20recap%3A%20series%20two%2C%20episode%20four%20%E2%80%93%20stick%20your%20oar%20in%2C%20Ross%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fpoldark-recap-series-two-episode-four-stick-your-oar-in-ross%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F08b971eaae76396b528c4d270a9313dfdfebefee%2F0_0_4110_2466%2F4110.jpg>
 It was a big week for Team Sindy Doll …Caroline Penvenen (Gabriella Wilde). 
Photograph: BBC/Mike Alsford 
It was a big week for Team Sindy Doll. If only we could all go around 
fluttering our eyelashes saying “I have a fancy to indulge the whim” 
(translation: “Because I want to”) and have Bergerac give us £50 at the drop of 
a hat with a shoe buckle on it. Caroline Penvenen (Gabriella Wilde) is proving 
divisive below the line. But your humble reviewer won’t be told, beloved 
‘Darkers! I adore this character, every red velvet inch of her, and I think 
Wilde is doing a fine job. Plus, Sindy doll had the only moments of comedy in 
this week’s episode which were much needed. “Dwight Enys is a scoundrel. For 
all he knows he may have been dead.” This is how to attract men: request that 
they come a-calling to assure themselves of your full recovery. Poor Sindy doll 
dog woman. Without a mobile to hand, she is having to send her flirty text 
messages in scratchy-quill paper form. How time-consuming! Her plan worked, 
though. “How kind of you to call. I haven’t been waiting above three months. 
Are you going to examine my throat or not?” Ooh, doctor, do tell me more about 
the treatment of scrofula and scurvy!

Classic Poldark lines

“All my business is urgent.” No, Evil George, all your business is evil, we 
say, evil.


“Children are the natural consequence of marriage, are they not?” Well, 
Verity, not exactly the consequence of marriage ... you see, when a man and a 
lady love each other very much ... oh, never mind. Pour us some rum for we are 
ravaged by thirst.

“You think you can do as you please while I always do as you bid me? Well, 
think again.” You tell him, Demelza.

Regulation reverse sexism bare chest moment

A momentary glimpse of deep-V-neck action in the mine reminiscent of Michael 
Douglas’ V-neck in the disco in Basic Instinct, only much less prolonged and 
far less disturbing. Same shirt worn for 
saving-Demelza-from-birthing-baby-alone-in-boat scene. Excellent wardrobe 
recycling. Not enough chest. That’s all changing next week, though. I might go 
blind.

Next week

Ross’s financial crisis worsens. There’s a betrayal in the Poldark household. 
Sindy doll dog woman makes her 159th pass at Dr Enys. And finally – and, truly, 
I sense this might be mildly important for some viewers – Ross has a wash.
 