
And so they send us off across the cliffs into the mist, the star cross’d 
lovers reunited, Sindy doll finally betrothed to the good doctor and Elizabeth 
up the duff and not knowing who’s the daddy. “Poldark will return.” Of course 
it will.

This was a most excellent send-off with all manner of ups and downs to give us 
some final thrills before we go into mourning for a year. Best bit? “Unless it 
comes sooner, the child ...” Aunt Agatha nails it yet again. Of course ‘tis 
only right to assume Evil George would be firing blanks.

There was an awful lot of poor quality wooden fencing in this episode, which 
could only signal that someone was going to pull it all down again. “Let’s burn 
Trenwith to the ground!” Oh, Jud, what have you done? The foe may have thought 
he was in possession of the field, but it did not last long. Because here comes 
Ross riding to the rescue! Much weeping at the look that passed between Ross 
and Demelza as he took her up on the horse. I sort of wish the villagers had 
torched Evil George, although I would have wanted to save Aunt Agatha.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fpoldark-recap-series-two-finale-ross-idiocy-has-been-spectacular-truly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd353a386d2ea2320888f71a616d3845fbb313258%2F0_213_4282_2570%2F4282.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Poldark%20recap%3A%20series%20two%20finale%20%E2%80%93%20Ross's%20idiocy%20has%20been%20spectacular%2C%20truly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fpoldark-recap-series-two-finale-ross-idiocy-has-been-spectacular-truly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Poldark%20recap%3A%20series%20two%20finale%20%E2%80%93%20Ross%27s%20idiocy%20has%20been%20spectacular%2C%20truly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fpoldark-recap-series-two-finale-ross-idiocy-has-been-spectacular-truly%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd353a386d2ea2320888f71a616d3845fbb313258%2F0_213_4282_2570%2F4282.jpg>
 Here comes Ross riding to the rescue! Photograph: BBC/Adrian Rogers 
There was a lot of random violence even before this bit. Evil George and Ross 
finally had the Fight Club showdown Evil George has been waiting for. Evil 
George’s Fight Club has many rules, but the one he called upon tonight was Rule 
No 37: “Call for bewigged footmen at the first sign of trouble.” Ross attempted 
to throw Evil George into the fire, but we all know Evil George is Teflon.

He soon recovered and was researching private schools for Geoffrey Charles. 
“He is about four years old. It’s time he stood on his own two feet like a 
man.” (I paraphrase.) The psychological trauma of this poor child is perhaps 
one of the most overlooked aspects of this dramatisation. “How long will Uncle 
George stay, Mama?” “Oh, sweetheart. Uncle George lives here now.” Meanwhile 
Evil George offered Elizabeth a portrait of the two of them together to hang 
over the fireplace. It’s the gift every woman wants about as much as she wants 
to hear the words “Call me Malcolm.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fpoldark-recap-series-two-finale-ross-idiocy-has-been-spectacular-truly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc77562afa42aaca23216957410f586a61e53bb5%2F0_0_4282_2570%2F4282.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Poldark%20recap%3A%20series%20two%20finale%20%E2%80%93%20Ross's%20idiocy%20has%20been%20spectacular%2C%20truly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fpoldark-recap-series-two-finale-ross-idiocy-has-been-spectacular-truly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Poldark%20recap%3A%20series%20two%20finale%20%E2%80%93%20Ross%27s%20idiocy%20has%20been%20spectacular%2C%20truly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fpoldark-recap-series-two-finale-ross-idiocy-has-been-spectacular-truly%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc77562afa42aaca23216957410f586a61e53bb5%2F0_0_4282_2570%2F4282.jpg>
 Fierce and proud and steadfast and true … Demelza. Photograph: BBC/Adrian 
Rogers 
Demelza was electric tonight. Isn’t she always? “You’ve marred my faith. 
You’ve broke my marriage.” Oh Demelza, please try to get your grammar right in 
front of Elizabeth. The scenes with Ross did credit to them both. “Demelza! It 
was one night! How long will it take you to forgive me?” “After your antics 
with Elizabeth, I decided I might have a turn myself.” Go, Demelza!

But just when we thought her carpet bag was packed ... “You’re leaving me? I 
came back for you.” “Why would I choose a man whose heart belongs to another?” 
Don’t tell Demelza she is imperfect and human and frail, you moron. “What do I 
care? For I am fierce and proud and steadfast and true.” “My idiocy has been 
spectacular.” Yes, it has. “My true, real and abiding love is not for her. It’s 
for you. She will never come between us again.” But can he mean it? And for how 
long?

Pewter tankard award for bonkers brilliance as supporting actor
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fpoldark-recap-series-two-finale-ross-idiocy-has-been-spectacular-truly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee0c77e2d7fbe9b7fb68bec5dde0ccc9ce60c92f%2F0_0_4361_2616%2F4361.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Poldark%20recap%3A%20series%20two%20finale%20%E2%80%93%20Ross's%20idiocy%20has%20been%20spectacular%2C%20truly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fpoldark-recap-series-two-finale-ross-idiocy-has-been-spectacular-truly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Poldark%20recap%3A%20series%20two%20finale%20%E2%80%93%20Ross%27s%20idiocy%20has%20been%20spectacular%2C%20truly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fpoldark-recap-series-two-finale-ross-idiocy-has-been-spectacular-truly%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee0c77e2d7fbe9b7fb68bec5dde0ccc9ce60c92f%2F0_0_4361_2616%2F4361.jpg>
 Twin heart-shaped tankards for you … Sindy doll dog woman and the good doctor 
are finally betrothed! Photograph: BBC/Adrian Rogers 
A miniature tankard brimming with raspberry leaf tea shall be awarded to Newly 
Gigantic Verity for her fortitude in childbirth and her adorable baby. (If that 
baby is for hire, put me on the list.) But there can be only two joint winners 
this week: we award twin heart-shaped tankards to Sindy doll dog woman and the 
good doctor.

We knew we had not seen the last of Caroline, nor of Bergerac. “Urine?” 
“Unusually sweet. So Dr Choake informs me.” Dr Choake is indeed aptly named if 
that’s what he’s been drinking. “This is the sugar sickness. Give up most of 
the things you eat and drink. Wine especially.” This was hardly going to make 
Dr Enys popular with Bergerac. But it was too late anyway. “I feel it only fair 
to tell you that Caroline will shortly be engaged,” he said with rather too 
much relish. Damn the eldest son of the Earl of Windermere! Sindy doll dog 
woman’s loss will surely be the navy’s gain. May he dissect many limbs in the 
ship’s galley.

But what’s this? Ross is visiting an amazing gold-encrusted drawing room ... 
and lo, Sindy doll dog woman is behind you, Dr Enys! I must admit, ‘Darkers, I 
wept at Caroline’s appearance as a vision in a moss green cloak in the tavern. 
And so their story summed up the moral of Poldark: “The ones who suffer most 
are those who ignore their heart’s desires and spend the rest of their lives 
regretting it.” I’m just sorry the pug didn’t get a look-in. I hope he’s signed 
on for series three.

Classic Poldark lines

“I had hoped George may be accommodating once the child is born.” Unless you 
are planning to make the child wear a wig and a mask for the whole of its life, 
it might be quite a good idea to get what you want out of Evil George before 
the child is born.
“Miss ‘e, you black worm? Leavin’ I alone to fend off blaggards!” I long for 
Jud and Prudie to set up a marriage guidance clinic.
“Against all odds, we struck tin!” This was maybe my favourite line in the 
whole thing. Say what you like about Aidan Turner, he is a trooper. To deliver 
this line with conviction and commitment ... Solid gold. Or tin, at least.

Regulation reverse sexism bare chest moment
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fpoldark-recap-series-two-finale-ross-idiocy-has-been-spectacular-truly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb90eb9edaac522b4b920b53fa27a14f6676e6f23%2F0_192_4282_2570%2F4282.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Poldark%20recap%3A%20series%20two%20finale%20%E2%80%93%20Ross's%20idiocy%20has%20been%20spectacular%2C%20truly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fpoldark-recap-series-two-finale-ross-idiocy-has-been-spectacular-truly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Poldark%20recap%3A%20series%20two%20finale%20%E2%80%93%20Ross%27s%20idiocy%20has%20been%20spectacular%2C%20truly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fpoldark-recap-series-two-finale-ross-idiocy-has-been-spectacular-truly%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb90eb9edaac522b4b920b53fa27a14f6676e6f23%2F0_192_4282_2570%2F4282.jpg>
 I suppose if you were desperate you might have had a swoon at Ross all done up 
in his military regalia. Photograph: BBC/Adrian Rogers 
The closest we got to a bare chest moment was Ross riding in on the charger 
and dispersing the peasants. It’s all gone a bit anti-bare chest since “that” 
scene and since our re-evaluation of Ross. I suppose if you were desperate you 
might have had a swoon at him all done up in his military regalia. I can’t 
possibly imagine for a microsecond how utterly sad you would have to be to get 
off on that, have palpitations and freeze-frame it when it popped up at 25 mins 
33 seconds, though. I mean, how tragic would you have to be? Who would do such 
a thing?


Next week

There is no next week! Roll on series three, due to be screened in 2017.

 