
The Australian federal police has raided a vocational education and training 
provider after investigating it over allegations of fraud.

The vocational education minister, Scott Ryan, said officers of the Department 
of Education and Training had assisted the AFP in the execution of two search 
warrants in theMelbourne <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> 
suburbs of Spotswood and Williamstown North on Tuesday.

Training college recruiters falsified signature of bereaved man, ACCC alleges
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/09/training-college-recruiters-targeted-man-whose-father-had-just-died-accc>
He said the raid followed an investigation into allegations of fraud relating 
to the student loan program.

Reports in Fairfax papers 
<http://www.smh.com.au/business/consumer-affairs/afp-raids-australian-careers-network-after-referral-from-department-of-education-20160412-go47ge.html>
 andthe Australian 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/higher-education/australian-careers-network-headquarters-raided-by-afp/news-story/f885e54c897748f78fb0bbe7eb677ceb>
 said the raid was of Australian Careers Network (ACN) offices, the owner of 
the private training provider the Phoenix Institute of Australia.

In October ACN requested a trading halt on the stock exchange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/14/crackdown-alleged-unscrupulous-vocational-education-providers>
 after it was warned it faced action from three separate regulators.

The Australian Skills Quality Authority gave notice that it intended to 
suspend the Phoenix Institute as a registered provider of vocational training.

A spokesman for the authority cited complaints from students, saying the 
resulting scrutiny had “uncovered significant non-compliance with the VET 
quality framework, which all registered training providers are required to 
satisfy to maintain registration as a training organisation”.

The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission brought a suit against the 
Phoenix Institute for alleged unconscionable conduct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/24/accc-jobless-indigenous-man-unaware-of-debt-from-training-college-course>
.

It claimed brokers and agents acting on behalf of Phoenix “targeted potential 
students within low socioeconomic communities across Australia by calling on 
them in their homes or the homes of relatives or friends, including in rural 
towns, remote communities and communities with significant Indigenous 
populations”.

ACCC: jobless Indigenous man unaware of debt from training college course
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/24/accc-jobless-indigenous-man-unaware-of-debt-from-training-college-course>
ACN rejected the claims and said students were told they were incurring a 
student loan.

In response to allegations of fraud by vocational training providers, the 
federal government froze their funding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/01/funding-to-private-training-colleges-frozen-and-medicare-safety-net-changes-shelved>
 in December.Reports suggest ACN stands to lose more than $100m 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/higher-education/australian-careers-network-headquarters-raided-by-afp/news-story/f885e54c897748f78fb0bbe7eb677ceb>
 in student loan funding as a result.

On 21 March ACN and its subsidiaries appointed Ferrier Hodgson as 
administrators 
<http://www.ferrierhodgson.com/au/administrations/australian-careers-network>.

Ryan said: “The investigations are continuing following these search warrants. 
No further details or comment can be provided in respect to this specific 
investigation.

“This should serve as a warning to all [vocational education and training 
program] providers that the commonwealth will investigate allegations of 
fraudulent conduct against not only the [student loan] program but all funding 
programs.”
 