
The easy assumption about politics in Northern Ireland is that it is a contest 
between two ideas of sovereignty. Unionists see the place as British; 
nationalists see it as Irish. And theGood Friday Agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/1998/apr/12/northernireland1>, in effect the 
constitution – according, as it does, sovereignty rights to each – is the best 
interim solution to the old quarrel.

This election has signalled a change in the old model of two mirror-image 
communities at odds with each other

But one of these two blocks is not sticking to the old template. Nationalism – 
if we can even call it that any more – is diversifying. And the strongest 
evidence of that is the fact that in the assembly electionsSinn Féin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein> has taken its first reversal 
in its traditional heartlands of Derry and West Belfast. The party was 
outflanked on the left by People Before Profit, an anti-austerity party that 
has also put economic policy before ending partition.

Elections in Northern Ireland are usually seen as effective plebiscites on the 
border. This is certainly how the largest unionist party,the DUP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/07/arlene-foster-northern-ireland-assembly-election-dup-stormont>
, still sees them. And it consolidated its vote last week by holding up the 
threat of the further ascendancy of Sinn Féin, to the point at which the 
republicans might appoint the first minister.

But it wasn’t the DUP that held Sinn Féin back; it was thousands of people in 
its own communities – areas which are too lightly labelled nationalist and 
Catholic.

Despite the murals, Belfast is not Bethlehem with rain | Giles Fraser: Loose 
canon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2016/apr/28/despite-the-murals-belfast-is-not-bethlehem-with-rain>
And Sinn Féin wasn’t the only nationalist party to suffer. The SDLP lost seats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/03/sdlp-fights-survival-sinn-fein-onslaught-northern-ireland>
 in both cities, too – and one of those, held by Fearghal McKinney, was fought 
over the question of whether abortion should be legalised. McKinney had allowed 
himself to be photographed beside strident anti-abortion campaigners – and paid 
for it.

The issue had risen to unexpected relevance with the prosecution of a young 
woman who had self-administered abortion pills. Both Sinn Féin and theSDLP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sdlp> are now caught in a dilemma over 
this issue and stand to lose voters whichever way they move. They can placate 
the conservative Catholics by holding fast to “pro-life” positions and lose the 
newly secular liberals; or they can go with them, as the Green party did to its 
advantage, and lose the religious.

Yet even among conservative Catholics who do want a united Ireland, some have 
put their moral causes before the constitutional question. In East Derry last 
week, a group of conservative Catholics campaigned for the DUP as the party 
most likely to resist abortion reform and the legalisation of same-sex 
marriage. Last year the Catholic church also supported DUP efforts to introduce 
a conscience clause allowingtradespeople to discriminate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/20/gay-cake-ruling-equality-northern-ireland>
 against gay people.

Northern Ireland gay community mobilises against DUP candidates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/18/northern-ireland-gay-community-democratic-unionst-party-marriage-equality-tactical-voting>
This election has signalled a change in the old model of two mirror-image 
communities at odds with each other, equally committed to their separate 
sovereignty claims. In short, for many nationalists, there are some things more 
important to them than getting rid of the border. Yet it can probably be said 
with confidence that there are fewer in the unionist/Protestant community who 
are as blase about the Union.

Nationalism was already ahead of unionism in divesting itself of the religious 
input into its politics. Thirty years ago,murals  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/gallery/2015/mar/04/belfast-murals-in-pictures>
in nationalist areas showed hunger strikers praying in their cells with the 
Virgin Mary watching over them. Today that would be unthinkable.

If the trend continues, of one community being far more concerned about the 
union than the other is about a united Ireland, a possible consequence will be 
that the solid phalanx of Protestant unionism will dominate the political scene 
while the more liberal, social and moral issues will divide the former 
Catholic/nationalists.

And when the symmetry has gone, another big question arises. What of the Good 
Friday Agreement, framed to manage that symmetry? Will it still then be a 
viable constitution forNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> even as, within it, the region 
drifts back towards majority unionist rule?
 