
A law protecting victims of domestic violence from controlling and coercive 
behaviour has been used just 62 times in the first six months since it was 
introduced.

Eight out of 22 police forces in England and Wales have not charged a single 
person with the offence, according to a Freedom of Information request. Nine 
forces have made two or fewer charges since the new law came into effect in 
December 2015, including Lincolnshire, Northamptonshire, Warwickshire and 
Wiltshire.

 Emma Pearmaine, head of family services at the law firm Simpson Millar, 
<http://www.simpsonmillar.co.uk/ourfirm/departments/family-law> which made the 
FoI request, called for increased awareness and understanding of the new laws 
and said more specialist training for police officers could be necessary.

“Coercive control can be many things but essentially it comes down to people 
exerting control via a pattern of behaviours, and these can sometimes be 
difficult to spot from the outside if you don’t know where to look or which 
questions to ask,” she said. “More dedicated training on the new legislation 
and how coercion can impact on a victim’s life might help push up the number of 
people who are identified as offenders and prosecuted.

“One of the biggest concerns when it comes to coercive control is that victims 
are not aware that being isolated from friends or family, having access to 
money and bank accounts restricted, or even having personal medical conditions 
revealed, is domestic abuse and, now, a criminal offence.

“With less than three coercive controls on average per police authority, more 
needs to be done so that people can involve the police at an early stage before 
coercion turns into physical abuse.”

Three forces – Kent, Hertfordshire and Norfolk – all reported prosecutions of 
10 or more, but most forces launched fewer than two coercive control actions 
between December 2015 and June 2016. Nine forces are yet to charge a single 
person under the law.

 On 29 December, under the Serious Crime Act 2015 
<https://www.gov.uk/.../Controlling_or_coercive_behaviour_-_statutory_guidance.pdf>
, controlling or coercive behaviour in intimate or familial relationships 
became anew offence 
<http://www.cps.gov.uk/legal/a_to_c/controlling_or_coercive_behaviour/>, 
punishable with a maximum prison sentence of five years.

Domestic violence victims are disappearing from homeless statistics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/jul/27/domestic-violence-victims-homelessness-centrepoint>
But although Citizens Advice 
<https://www.citizensadvice.org.uk/about-us/how-citizens-advice-works/media/press-releases/coercive-control-law-a-welcome-step-to-ending-suffering-of-domestic-abuse-victims-says-citizens-advice/>
 stepped in to help 3,000 victims of emotional abuse and 900 victims of 
financial abuse in 2014, take-up of the new powers to prosecute offenders has 
so far been low.

Lucy Hastings, a director at the independent charity Victim Support, said: 
“These findings demonstrate that there is still some way to go in improving the 
support provided to victims and witnesses, before they will be getting the 
information they need and the respect they deserve.

“Our research tells us that proper communication between the police and 
victims of crime is vital. Without it, victims may feel isolated and come to 
believe that their case is being neglected or not taken seriously. This makes 
them less likely to report crime in the future and ultimately undermines public 
confidence in the wider justice system.

“All police staff should be fully aware of their obligations under the 
Victims’ Code and measures put in place to ensure that those obligations are 
being met.”

The FoI data reveals little improvement has been made since May when Theresa 
May, then home secretary,lambasted officers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/17/police-treatment-of-domestic-abuse-victims-to-be-investigated>
 at the Police Federation’s annual conference for not protecting victims of 
domestic violence. She said new powers to tackle domestic abuse, including 
controlling or coercive behaviour, were effective but were “not being used 
anywhere near as systematically as they could be”.

Victims of domestic violence need help from employers as well as police | Keir 
Starmer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/17/domestic-violence-victims-need-help-workplace-criminal-justice-employers>
At the time of her speech, the first conviction for coercive control had taken 
place and many more cases were pending. Since then, however, use of the new law 
seems to have stalled. In the same six-month period there were more than 20,000 
prosecutions for domestic violence.


The coercive or controlling behaviour offence 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/statutory-guidance-framework-controlling-or-coercive-behaviour-in-an-intimate-or-family-relationship>
 aims to close a gap in the law around patterns of coercive and controlling 
behaviour during a relationship between intimate partners, former partners who 
still live together, or family members.

It was intended to help victims experiencing the type of behaviour that stops 
short of serious physical violence but amounts to extreme psychological and 
emotional abuse.

The law states that coercive or controlling behaviour does not relate to a 
single incident. Instead it is a “purposeful pattern of incidents that occur 
over time enabling someone to exert power and control, or coerce another”.

On the day the law was introduced, Karen Bradley, the minister for preventing 
abuse and exploitation 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/coercive-or-controlling-behaviour-now-a-crime>
, said: “Our new coercive or controlling behaviour offence will protect victims 
who would otherwise be subjected to sustained patterns of abuse that can lead 
to total control of their lives by the perpetrator.

“Victims who would otherwise be subjected to sustained patterns of domestic 
abuse will be better protected under [this] new offence.”
 