
To dance or not to dance? It’s a divisive question where police officers at 
London’sNotting Hill carnival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/nottinghillcarnival> are concerned. Supt 
Robyn Williams certainly doesn’t want to see stony faces and crossed arms, but 
says dancing is discretionary.

“We don’t tell our officers not to dance – the music can be seductive, it is 
difficult not to want to move, we’re only human,” says Williams, who is the 
deputy head of training for the Metropolitan police. “We do remind our officers 
that they are there for a specific role and to always have their mind on that.”

But where there are cheerleaders, there are also critics. “Some people love to 
see police officers immersed in the carnival, dancing and having fun, but 
anything that goes viral on social media will be met with a chorus of 
dissenting voices – ‘you shouldn’t be doing that’,” says Williams.
 Williams (front) will be one of more than 13,000 police officers on duty at 
the carnival. Photograph: Hendon Police Training School 
Nonetheless, there will always be those that participate in the revels – and 
those who don’t. “Please don’t be offended if an officer declines to have a 
dance, they might prefer not to – or simply have no rhythm,” she laughs.

The daughter of Jamaican immigrants, she is in the mood to celebrate what will 
be the carnival’s 50th anniversary this year, the largest celebration of 
African-Caribbean culture in Europe. “Minority migrant communities have done so 
much in London and there is a shared sense of pride,” she says.

The ultimate test of leadership

Williams began her police career with Nottinghamshire police and moved to 
London in 2003 to work for Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary (the body 
that independently assesses police forces), before joining the Met as an 
inspector five years later. Within a matter of years she was managing the 
criminal justice department for the London borough of Westminster and it was 
here she first came into contact with operations for the Notting Hill carnival. 
“I had to go on a public order training course where they threw petrol bombs 
and all sorts at me,” she recalls.

Public order training is the ultimate test of your leadership skills, 
according to Williams, it exposes your decision-making in a way no other space 
can.

With present security threats at severe, and a record number of arrests seen 
at the carnival last year, those leadership skills will be put to the test this 
weekend. More than 13,000 police officers will be working at the carnival on 
Sunday and Monday, making it the largest yearly Met operation.

There is a three-tiered command structure in place for the event – gold 
commander David Musker, who sets the strategy, silver commander Jane Connors, 
who delivers the tactical plan, and then a number of “bronzes” spread across 
the carnival, who put the plan into action on the ground.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Fpolice-at-notting-hill-carnival-its-difficult-not-to-want-to-dance-were-only-human%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e68a6c9315b9d0c84642df99cd1adae5f5e92fe%2F0_0_5100_3061%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Police%20at%20Notting%20Hill%20carnival%3A%20'It's%20difficult%20not%20to%20want%20to%20dance%2C%20we're%20only%20human'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Fpolice-at-notting-hill-carnival-its-difficult-not-to-want-to-dance-were-only-human%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Police%20at%20Notting%20Hill%20carnival%3A%20%27It%27s%20difficult%20not%20to%20want%20to%20dance%2C%20we%27re%20only%20human%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Fpolice-at-notting-hill-carnival-its-difficult-not-to-want-to-dance-were-only-human%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e68a6c9315b9d0c84642df99cd1adae5f5e92fe%2F0_0_5100_3061%2F5100.jpg>
 Some people love to see police officers immersed in the carnival, dancing and 
having fun. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
This year, carnival organisers have doubled their own number of stewards, but 
if tensions arise, the police’s strategic engagement officers will be 
dispatched with community ambassadors – well-respected locals – to help calm 
things down and prevent them from escalating into criminal activity.

And if that does happen, they’ll be there to speak to the crowds and explain 
what is happening. “We want to be open and transparent about policing and 
getting the right policing style is so important,” says Williams, though she 
admits the police force at large doesn’t always get this part right.

“Often people who make complaints talk about incivility and it isn’t about 
what is said but how it is said; it’s not unusual for minority communities to 
have that complaint.”

Find the good people in your organisation to watch and learn from
Supt Robyn Williams 
Not your average police officers

Williams is one of the bronzes and is the Met’s spokesperson for the carnival. 
She will be out on Sunday, and for the first time she will flanked by five 
strategic engagement officers she has recruited specifically for carnival. This 
isn’t your average police ensemble. Four of the team are women and they are all 
black and ethnic minority officers. Two are experienced detectives and the 
other three are young sergeants with less than three years in the role.

“These are young, energised, brilliant officers who all understand the 
different music scenes from grime through to soca, and the audiences that might 
be attracted to the different sound systems.”

As a black female officer, she is all too aware that London’s police force 
does not reflect the community it serves as well as it should. But things are 
moving in the right direction. “People think of us as shiny and new but 
actually there are now black officers completing their 30 years of service and 
retiring,” she says.

“The press wants to hang the Met out to dry in terms of representation, but 
the commissioner has set ambitious recruitment targets for BME and women; and 
we’re seeing things change,” she says, adding that the ambitions are 50% female 
and 40% BME. “For women we are at 26%, and BME we are at 13%. In terms of our 
recruitment, nearly a quarter are black and ethnic minority.”

This is not a plea for sympathy, but I want you to know police officers are 
people too
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/nov/28/plea-sympathy-police-officers-public-service-cuts>
At its best, Notting Hill carnival can be a recruitment tool because it 
showcases a diverse police force, but it does that by default and not by 
design, insists Williams. A passionate mentor, the superintendent is keen to 
give her strategic engagement officers exposure to senior leadership meetings 
and teach them what the command structure looks like, early on. “I want to 
support the development of our staff and bring them into spaces where they 
wouldn’t normally have access – it might take years for them to get there 
otherwise,” she explains.

Does she have any advice for other women aspiring to leadership roles? “See 
yourself in the wider context by going around and finding out what everybody 
else does and how you fit in, and find the good people in your organisation to 
watch and learn from,” she says. “And look after yourself – I do a lot of green 
juices.” The odd Nutriblast recipe has been known to find its way on to her 
Twitter feed.

Looking ahead to the bank holiday weekend, she says the best moments are when 
very little is happening other than the carnival itself. While she doesn’t eat 
meat, the superintendent will be sure to have some rice and peas, washed down 
with something tropical (non-alcoholic, she hastens to add), and possibly fish 
“because you can’t go to carnival and not have something with jerk seasoning.” 
Will she be having a dance herself? “I will leave it to the police cadets, but 
I will have a smile on my face.”

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 