
Trump Dubs

Top mimic Peter Serafinowicz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/peter-serafinowicz> turns the nominee’s 
words against him

His Wogan <http:// https://youtu.be/zQ4q80YVdks> is immaculate, his Caine 
<https://youtu.be/HdBZ3Pg0-OM> uncanny. But when it came to capturing the 
essence of Donald Trump, Peter Serafinowicz – actor, comedian and gifted mimic 
– took a very different approach. Here, suddenly, was Trump attempting to 
placate Hispanic voters in aplummy British luvvie voice 
<https://youtu.be/qUGT30gGtiI>, or firing broadsides at Hillary as a cockney 
hardman <https://youtu.be/ZH1ObUcBuV4>. 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2JEa1jhWjss&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2JEa1jhWjss>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2JEa1jhWjss&media=>
Donald Mohammed Trump: the satire holding a mirror up to Islamophobia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/03/donald-mohammed-trump-presidential-candidate-asian-satire-islamophobia>
Knocking up YouTube-ready redubs of Trump speeches on his MacBook at home, 
Serafinowicz has clocked up millions of views since the start of 2016 
<https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCi38HMIvRpGgMJ0Tlm1WYdw/videos>, as well as 
finding a way to skewer a man who often seems to exist beyond parody. His one 
rule? “They are all Trump’s words,” says Serafinowicz. “I may say them in a 
different accent but I say exactly what he said.” His most frequent dub is 
Sassy Trump, which sees the nominee revoiced as a camp thrower of shade. “I 
think Trump is a mix of being incredibly clever, incredibly stupid and 
incredibly vain. The vanity thing, that’s why I keep doing these Sassy Trump 
videos.

People seem to like Cockney Trump but if I do him with a tough guy voice, he 
might love it. He projects this image of himself as a tough guy. But if he sees 
a video with him bitching to an audience of coal miners in West Virginia for 
two minutes about hairspray –which he did! 
<http://theslot.jezebel.com/i-cant-stop-watching-trump-rant-about-hairspray-and-the-1775497234>
 – and suddenly he’s got this voice to match his gestures, I think that might 
get under his skin.” So with the election looming, is there an ultimate goal? 
“My ideal outcome would be Trump making a speech complaining about his 
depiction in one of my videos, and then I get to redub that video. That would 
be it: game over.”Graeme Virtue

Trump Leaks

The Twitter comic turning the campaign into a live sitcom script
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fdonald-trump-franz-ferdinand-samantha-bee-peter-serafinowicz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa55892a2ec927f46c4ced8bc936eca812c028cb9%2F0_0_634_336%2F634.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pop%20goes%20Trump!%20The%20artists%2C%20comedians%20and%20meme-makers%20deflating%20the%20Donald&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fdonald-trump-franz-ferdinand-samantha-bee-peter-serafinowicz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pop%20goes%20Trump%21%20The%20artists%2C%20comedians%20and%20meme-makers%20deflating%20the%20Donald&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fdonald-trump-franz-ferdinand-samantha-bee-peter-serafinowicz%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa55892a2ec927f46c4ced8bc936eca812c028cb9%2F0_0_634_336%2F634.jpg>
 One of Owen Ellickson’s Tweets. Photograph: Twitter/@onlxn 
This election might often seem beyond parody but a comedy writer and his 
Twitter account are doing their best to refute that notion. Since June, former 
American Office producerOwen Ellickson <https://twitter.com/onlxn> has been 
taking to the platform to pen Trump Leaks, an epic satirical imagining of 
leaked transcripts from the orange meanie’s inner circle, delivered 140 
characters at a time.

Trump Leaks <https://storify.com/michaeljweigel/trump-ryan-a-twitter-saga> 
sees the Donald and operatives such as lapdog governor Chris Christie and 
campaign manager Kellyanne Conway scramble to revive their flagging 
presidential run, usually managing to make things worse in the process. 
Responding to real news stories such as Trump’s flagging poll numbers andthat 
tape, Ellickson’s tweets resemble a sitcom script being delivered on the fly, 
complete with in-jokes and bizarre subplots involving wrestlers, killer clowns, 
and the revelation that former Fox News chief Roger Ailes is in fact a 
shapeshifting vampire squid. And at the centre of it all there’s Trump, the 
perfect sitcom antihero: amoral, cruel and buffoonish, like Archie Bunker but 
with access to the nuclear codes.

Ellickson’s tweets have proved popular: one recent effort, in which two 
Republican higher-ups debated Trump’s aquatic abilities 
<https://twitter.com/onlxn/status/772272129316233216>, got the absurd hashtag 
#TrumpCantSwim <https://twitter.com/i/moments/772983486684680192> trending. 
Another of Ellickson’s hashtags –#GiveMoreThanTrump 
<https://www.gofundme.com/GiveMoreThanTrump>, created in response to Trump’s 
alleged stinginess in donating to worthy causes – raised more than $80,000 for 
the American Refugee Committee.

Ellickson plans to keep the saga going until election day, and if recent 
tweets are any guide, things could get dark. One storyline saw a Trump acolyte 
obtain a warhead, while Trump himself has taken to shouting, “THE AGE OF MAN IS 
OVER. IT’S THE FIRE’S TURN NOW!” All of which sounds only marginally more 
ridiculous than real-world events.Gwilym Mumford

30 Songs, 30 Days <http://30days30songs.com>

Franz Ferdinand and pals unite for a musical mauling
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DniJtpcgtUQs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DniJtpcgtUQs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DniJtpcgtUQs&media=>
 Franz Ferdinand – Demagogue 
During an election involving the Donald, you’d expect musicians to have 
something to say. Music is the artform of protest after all, and plenty of 
words rhyme with “Trump”. But when author Dave Eggers decided to start a 
musical movement after attending a Trump rally, it was obvious to him it was 
going to take more than just one ditty to do the nominee of ignominy justice. 
So Eggers assembled a panoply of partisan protest: 30 acts contributing 30 
songs over the 30 days leading up to the election 
<http://www.30days30songs.com/>, featuring Death Cab For Cutie, Sun Kil Moon, 
REM, EL VY, Aimee Mann, Franz Ferdinand and a host of fellow disgruntlees.

'Isn't anybody going to stop me?' 30 songs protesting a President Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/19/anti-trump-30-days-30-songs-project-musicians>
“The tiny hands, Elnett hair construction, preposterous showboating, it was 
all comically ridiculous,” says Franz Ferdinand’s Alex Kapranos (pictured, 
inset), whose contribution,Demagogue 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=niJtpcgtUQs>, is a wonky, off-kilter stomper. 
“He was a joke, then... it wasn’t a joke. Then: a sense of ‘Fuck, is this 
really happening?’” Some songs were written solely for the project, while 
others, like Franz’s, were already written but were no less potent. “Musically 
we wanted it to reflect him: swaggering, instant on the ear, but unsettling,” 
continues Kapranos. “To feel that something is not quite right. We did that by 
adding an extra beat to every second bar in the verse, making it as confidently 
clumsy and revolting as a celebrity billionaire’s uninvited hand on your 
genitals.”Luke Holland

John Di Domenico

Trump’s top impressionist reveals his tricks of the trade
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fdonald-trump-franz-ferdinand-samantha-bee-peter-serafinowicz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7713a85f1320dcef49600d0daf1a836184333859%2F0_25_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pop%20goes%20Trump!%20The%20artists%2C%20comedians%20and%20meme-makers%20deflating%20the%20Donald&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fdonald-trump-franz-ferdinand-samantha-bee-peter-serafinowicz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pop%20goes%20Trump%21%20The%20artists%2C%20comedians%20and%20meme-makers%20deflating%20the%20Donald&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fdonald-trump-franz-ferdinand-samantha-bee-peter-serafinowicz%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7713a85f1320dcef49600d0daf1a836184333859%2F0_25_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
 Donald Trump Impersonator John Di Domenico. Photograph: Publicity image 
“The Guardian?” says Donald Trump, down the phone from Vegas. “It’s absolutely 
a tree-menn-dous newspaper. You guys backed Brexit right?” Ok, so it’s not the 
actual Donald Trump I’m speaking to. But if you’ve been hooked on Slate’s 
fantasticTrumpcast <http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/trumpcast.html> 
series, you’ll know it’s hard to distinguish between John Di Domenico’s wicked 
caricature, and the wicked caricature himself. In each episode of the podcast, 
before the guests delve into whatever grotesque thing Trump has done in the 
last day or so, Di Domenico reads out the latest ramblings from the man’s 
Twitter feed with pitch-perfect precision. It’s hard to encounter a Trump tweet 
afterwards without hearing them in Di Domenico’s nasal tones.

Streep, Depp, Fallon … who's the top Trump impersonator?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/08/who-is-top-donald-trump-impersonator-meryl-streep-johnny-depp-jimmy-fallon-snl>
Di Domenico first started impersonating Trump 12 years ago, locking himself in 
his house with an Apprentice DVD and breaking the Donald’s “unusual” voice down 
into its constituent elements. The key points you have to master, he says, are 
throat placement (“strain your throat a little bit, because he’s more gravelly 
than ever at the moment”) and injecting a dose of North Eastern nasality, so 
your voice emerges from the top of your nose rather than your mouth. Next, 
stretch out certain syllables a split-second too long – so that it sounds 
tree-menn-dous – and try not to open your mouth because, “he actually keeps his 
lips very tightly pursed.”

The billionaire’s perpetual presence in the headlines over the years means 
that Trump work has never dried up for Di Domenico, but with this election 
cycle he says impersonating the mogul has “consumed my life”: that means 
voiceovers, commercials, regular appearances on the Conan O’Brien show, and 
zero time for anything else. Surely this puts him in an odd position, where a 
Trump victory might not be desirable for the world, but would be good for 
business? “I think the actor David Spade summed it up best,” he says. “He said 
‘I don’t want to live in a world whereDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> is president. But I do want 
to live in a world where he’s constantly running for president’. I thought, ‘oh 
my God, that’s perfect.’”Tim Jonze

Samantha Bee

America’s best new satirist tears into Trump’s women problems 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fdonald-trump-franz-ferdinand-samantha-bee-peter-serafinowicz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F124b244caae37b7232ac6e533430965ceb03f953%2F0_124_1840_1104%2F1840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pop%20goes%20Trump!%20The%20artists%2C%20comedians%20and%20meme-makers%20deflating%20the%20Donald&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fdonald-trump-franz-ferdinand-samantha-bee-peter-serafinowicz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pop%20goes%20Trump%21%20The%20artists%2C%20comedians%20and%20meme-makers%20deflating%20the%20Donald&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fdonald-trump-franz-ferdinand-samantha-bee-peter-serafinowicz%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F124b244caae37b7232ac6e533430965ceb03f953%2F0_124_1840_1104%2F1840.jpg>
 Full Frontal presenter Samantha Bee. Photograph: PR 
It’s as if the US wished the best new TV satirist into existence in the depths 
of their Trump-induced despair. After more than a decade as a Daily Show 
correspondent, Samantha Bee was handed her own show in February and swiftly set 
about launching weekly satirical Exocets on US news happenings. Full Frontal, 
which airs on the TBS network (UK viewers can catch clips on the show’s YouTube 
channel <https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC18vz5hUUqxbGvym9ghtX_w>), has seen 
the Canadian-born comic grill big political names,including one Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/01/barack-obama-samantha-bee-halloween-episode-trump>
. But it’s Bee’s furious monologues that really mark the show out.

Samantha Bee on final election debate: 'Spare us the handwringing, GOP'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/25/samantha-bee-trump-clinton-debate-abortion>
Nothing provides better fuel to her furnace than the fact that Back To The 
Future’s Biff Tannen appears to be running for president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/23/back-to-the-future-writer-bad-guy-biff-was-based-on-donald-trump>
. Her thoughts on “adolescent boner boss” Trump are wrathful and bang on 
target; jet-propelled but never losing grip on her superb command of language. 
Her schooling of Trump on the facts around third-trimester terminations (“It 
sounds like he has confused abortions with bear attacks”) is a standout.

While other US hosts direct their fury within the bounds of decency, Bee 
leaves you gasping at her candour and roaring in appreciation for her verbal 
smackdowns. She may be preaching to the liberal choir, but the catharsis of her 
well-scripted anger makes her the nasty woman to watch.Julia Raeside

The Nuisance Committee

The foul-mouthed card-game makers who are pranking Trump with adverts
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fdonald-trump-franz-ferdinand-samantha-bee-peter-serafinowicz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad240f7115fdbd9cfd9d250f410755a21dc4ef01%2F0_275_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pop%20goes%20Trump!%20The%20artists%2C%20comedians%20and%20meme-makers%20deflating%20the%20Donald&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fdonald-trump-franz-ferdinand-samantha-bee-peter-serafinowicz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pop%20goes%20Trump%21%20The%20artists%2C%20comedians%20and%20meme-makers%20deflating%20the%20Donald&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fdonald-trump-franz-ferdinand-samantha-bee-peter-serafinowicz%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad240f7115fdbd9cfd9d250f410755a21dc4ef01%2F0_275_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
 The Nuisance Committee’s billboard in Dearborn, Michigan. Photograph: PR 
“Donald Trump can’t read this but he is scared of it,” says a sign on 
Interstate 94 in Dearborn, Michigan (below). The reason he can’t read it is 
because the phrase is written in Arabic. Dearborn has the highest proportion of 
Arab-American citizens in the US. Any of them reading it are encouraged to 
visit the website on the billboard,TrumpIsScared.org 
<http://www.trumpisscared.org/>, which lists Trump’s many acts of Islamophobia. 
The ad wasn’t erected by Dearborn residents, but by one of the makers ofCards 
Against Humanity <https://cardsagainsthumanity.com/>, the infamous board game 
where players are tasked with creating the most offensive phrase possible. “I 
knew we’d hit a home run when I posted [the billboard] on Facebook and a friend 
in Saudi Arabia typed in the comments: ‘LOL,’” says Melissa Harris of The 
Nuisance Committee.

Arabic billboard mocks Donald Trump's fear of Muslims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/18/arabic-billboard-mocks-donald-trumps-fear-of-muslims>
The committee was set up by Cards co-creator Max Temkin and a group of friends 
after Trump won the Republican nomination. A registered super PAC (campaign 
group), it is funded by sales of special editions of Temkin’s game – one 
Trump-themed, the other Clinton.So far it’s raised more than $430,000 
<https://americavoteswithcardsagainsthumanity.com/>. Much of the cash has 
funded mischievous stunts. As well as the Dearborn billboard, there have been 
others outside Virginia’s evangelical Liberty University (Trump’s claim that, 
“nobody reads the Bible more than me”) and one in Arizona featuring Trump’s 
line about local senator John McCain not being a war hero because he got 
captured. Best and weirdest of all was a sign that appeared outside a 
university in Florida: “DONALD TRUMPS MAINS HANZO AND COMPLAINS ABOUT TEAM COMP 
IN CHAT. 
<http://www.adweek.com/adfreak/one-2016s-coolest-anti-trump-ads-has-headline-most-you-wont-understand-174093>
” Which unless you’re a regular player of Blizzard’s first-person shooter 
Overwatch might as well be written in Arabic. The phrase roughly describes the 
kind of selfish player who chooses the wrong character and then moans about the 
rest of the people on his team.TrumpIsNotATeamPlayer.com 
<http://www.trumpisnotateamplayer.com/>, the website on the billboard, then 
explains all the ways Trump resembles a multiplayer jerk. There are more than a 
few.

One of the Committee’s final acts is taking a bus-load of comics to Iowa City 
to knock on doors the weekend before the election 
<https://en-gb.facebook.com/nuisancecommittee/posts/350344505316426>. Because 
what other group could face the wrath of angry voters like standups? “They 
are,” agrees Harris, “definitely used to having vitriol spewed at them.”Will 
Dean

Visions Of Trump

Plenty of artists have depicted the Donald…
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fdonald-trump-franz-ferdinand-samantha-bee-peter-serafinowicz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdad07041d55b191881689452e5ba07ea03048beb%2F0_0_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pop%20goes%20Trump!%20The%20artists%2C%20comedians%20and%20meme-makers%20deflating%20the%20Donald&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fdonald-trump-franz-ferdinand-samantha-bee-peter-serafinowicz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pop%20goes%20Trump%21%20The%20artists%2C%20comedians%20and%20meme-makers%20deflating%20the%20Donald&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fdonald-trump-franz-ferdinand-samantha-bee-peter-serafinowicz%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdad07041d55b191881689452e5ba07ea03048beb%2F0_0_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Composite: Matt Furie; Edel Rodireguez/Time Magazine; Molly Crabapple 
After comic character-turned-internet meme Pepe The Frog was appropriated by 
far-right groups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/28/pepe-the-frog-online-hate-symbol-database-anti-defamation-league>
, original creator Matt Furie stepped in, reclaiming the character “as a force 
for good” and including his own Bosch-ian take on Trump (pictured above) as 
part ofa new strip for cartoon website The Nib 
<https://thenib.com/pepe-the-frog-to-sleep-perchance-to-meme>. 

In rendering a recognisable Trump with as little detail as possible, Edel 
Rodriguez’s Meltdown cover for Time 
<http://time.com/4528598/donald-trump-meltdown-cover/> recalls British painter 
Julian Opie’s work. He updated the cover two months later when Trump slid 
further into the mire.

In Tangerine Mussolini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jul/25/50-shades-of-trump-parody-molly-crabapple>
 artist activist Molly Crabapple riffs on Bertelli’s Continuous Profile (Head 
of Mussolini) from 1933. Resembling a whirring, spinning drill head, this 
futurist work imagines the square-jawed Italian dictator as a series of stacked 
discs, so he appears the same from all sides while looking in every direction 
at once. Appropriately for Trump, that work was inspired by classical busts of 
the two-faced god Janus.Skye Sherwin
 