
A hulking, imperious Guy the gorilla 
<http://www.tiredoflondontiredoflife.com/2013/04/find-guy-gorilla.html> in 
south London’s Crystal Palace park; a stoic Winston Churchill watching traffic 
in Woodford Green, north London; a heroic embodiment of British miners 
originally installed on a roundabout in St Helens, Merseyside – just some 
­examples of Britain’s treasured postwar public sculptures.

 Others reside on housing estates, shopping centres and university campuses. 
All aim to bring some life and some sparkle to the often dreary ordinariness of 
what surrounds them.

Public artworks disappearing before our eyes, says heritage body
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/dec/15/public-artworks-disappearing-before-our-eyes-says-heritage-body>
Now, on the advice of Historic England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jun/17/historic-england-announces-newly-listed-weird-and-wonderful-structures>
, 41 of these artworks are being given the extra protection of a Grade II or 
Grade II*-listed status.

Roger Bowdler, director of listing at Historic England – the body that took 
over the listing, heritage protection and grant-making powers of the old English
Heritage <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/heritage> last year – said they 
were all works of art that deserved protection. “These sculptures were 
commissioned and created for everybody and have become a precious national 
collection of art which we can all share,” he said. “They enrich our lives, 
bring art to everyone and deserve celebration.”

The sculptures were meant to bring public spaces back to life after the second 
world war as authorities began to repair and rebuild shattered towns and cities.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fpostwar-public-art-treasures-in-need-of-protection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4400cf8c9d6f1f34aca3e8b65871c8e766539aff%2F279_21_3075_4613%2F3075.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Postwar%20public%20art%20treasures%20in%20need%20of%20protection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fpostwar-public-art-treasures-in-need-of-protection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Postwar%20public%20art%20treasures%20in%20need%20of%20protection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fpostwar-public-art-treasures-in-need-of-protection%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4400cf8c9d6f1f34aca3e8b65871c8e766539aff%2F279_21_3075_4613%2F3075.jpg>
 Gorilla by David Wynne, 1962, in Crystal Palace park, commissioned through the 
London County Council’s public art programme. Photograph: Historic England 
Sarah Gaventa, who is curating an exhibition of lost public art 
<http://www.somersethouse.org.uk/visual-arts/out-there> to tie in with the new 
listings, said there was a growing appreciation of post-war architecture but 
“the brave new art for that brave new world has not been under the same sort of 
spotlight … and it is vulnerable.

“It was democratic art and the artists who made it wanted their work to mean 
something to the public.”

Many of the artists creating the art were migrants who had a missionary zeal. 
For example Franta Belsky, who fled to England from communist Czechoslavakia, 
created a bronze sculpture of a mother teaching her baby son to walk, installed 
on the Avebury housing estate, Bethnal Green, in the late 1950s.

Belsky was passionate about about public art. “You have to humanise the 
environment,” he said. “A housing estate does not only need newspaper kiosks 
and bus-stop shelters but something that gives it spirit.”

Gaventa accepted there was a lot of post-war art commissioning, mainly by 
Labour councils. Was there perhaps too much? Did every new school in
Hertfordshire and Leicestershire really need a piece of art 
<http://www.vads.ac.uk/learning/designingbritain/html/schools.html>? 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fpostwar-public-art-treasures-in-need-of-protection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe15174a1139312d6fd610456a183b21359bde439%2F250_603_2436_3653%2F2436.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Postwar%20public%20art%20treasures%20in%20need%20of%20protection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fpostwar-public-art-treasures-in-need-of-protection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Postwar%20public%20art%20treasures%20in%20need%20of%20protection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fpostwar-public-art-treasures-in-need-of-protection%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe15174a1139312d6fd610456a183b21359bde439%2F250_603_2436_3653%2F2436.jpg>
 The Miner by Arthur Fleischmann, 1964, in St Helens. It was originally 
commissioned by the National Coal Board. Photograph: Alun Bull/Historic England 
“That is a bit like saying you can have too much laughter, you can have too 
much nature,” she said. “Art is about quality of life and you can’t say one 
piece of art on a housing estate is too much … it is probably not enough.”

The majority of the listed sculptures are in London, installed as emblems of 
renewal and optimism after the heavy bombing it suffered in the war. They 
include well-known works byBarbara Hepworth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/barbara-hepworth> such as her Winged 
Figure on the John Lewis store in Oxford Street and Single Form (Memorial) on 
the banks of Battersea Park boating lake – the artist’s personal response to 
the death of her friend, UN secretary-general Dag Hammarskjöld, killed in a 
plane crash on his way to a peace mission in the newly independent Congo.

More recent works include one of Antony Gormley’s first public sculptures, a 
listening man on a boulder which was commissioned by Camden council in the 
early 1980s as an expression of its commitment to peace.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fpostwar-public-art-treasures-in-need-of-protection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ecad02429d46da2684cf46f576664b9b4264ce2%2F0_375_5073_3043%2F5073.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Postwar%20public%20art%20treasures%20in%20need%20of%20protection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fpostwar-public-art-treasures-in-need-of-protection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Postwar%20public%20art%20treasures%20in%20need%20of%20protection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fpostwar-public-art-treasures-in-need-of-protection%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ecad02429d46da2684cf46f576664b9b4264ce2%2F0_375_5073_3043%2F5073.jpg>
 Untitled [Listening] by Anthony Gormley, 1983-4, in Maygrove Peace Park, 
London, the first of the artist’s pieces to be listed. Photograph: Historic 
England 
Outside London, the listed sculptures include Arthur Fleischmann’s 1964 The 
Miner, a large bronze bust of a miner on top of a mining cutting drum. 
Originally commissioned for outside the National Coal Board’s north-west 
headquarters in St Helens, it now stands close to the nearby Ravenhead 
Colliery, which closed when the reserves ran out.

That is a good example of recycling which Gaventa said there should be more 
of. A lot of lost work will have been melted down but there is plenty in 
storage which could be given a new home, she said.

The exhibition will have a list of works which have been lost, stolen or 
destroyed. The number stands at about 40 but Gaventa said: “I’ve added two 
today and will probably add two tomorrow and we will ask people to add more.”

Historic England announces newly listed weird and wonderful structures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jun/17/historic-england-announces-newly-listed-weird-and-wonderful-structures>
The new listings will provide important extra protection although Gaventa said 
vigilance was still needed, mentioning the case of a 2.5 metre bronze mermaid 
with fish feet called Miranda, created by Fleischmann for the 1951 Festival of 
Britain.It found a home in Leamington Spa and was listed, but was stolen in 2001
 <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/entertainment/1749497.stm>.

There is little hope for Miranda, but Gaventa is getting intelligence about 
lost public art mentioned in the exhibition including a tip that one of the 
two-metre-high fibreglass bulls which “disappeared” from Birmingham’s Bull Ring 
shopping centre may still exist.

“I feel a bit like Howard Carter when he found Tutankhamun … but hopefully 
without the curse and the untimely deaths.”

• Out There: Our Post-War Public Art is at Somerset House in London, 3 
February-10 April. <https://www.somersethouse.org.uk/visual-arts/out-there>
 