
My head in my hands, choking out words, tears rushing down hot, humiliated 
cheeks, I raised my head to look at the array of varying expressions looking 
back from the other side of the room; a Labour MP, two Conservative peers, and 
a Conservative MP looked back, a mixture of horror and sympathy as I publicly 
crashed and burned. Fear and humiliation and self-loathing leaping on me like a 
set of hyenas, as I sobbed: “I can’t even answer my telephone, any more. If 
it’s an unknown number, if it rings early in the morning, or I don’t know who 
it is. I can’t even open my own front door. It’s not the same front door, as 
the one I sat with my back to, morning and afternoon, cowering as bailiffs 
battered on the other side of it. It’s not the same phone number. It’s not the 
same front door. I’m not in debt. There are no more final demands, no more red 
capital letters, no more threats. But … I can’t even open my own front door.”

I gave evidence at the  all-party parliamentary group inquiry into hunger and 
food bank use 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/uk-news/2014/dec/08/tories-avert-rift-church-food-bank-report>
 in the UK a few months ago, one of over 1,000 pieces of evidence heard by the 
committee – expecting to recount a story told and retold at party conferences, 
charity events, radio interviews, to journalists, again and again and again 
over the past two and a half years. But the APPG wanted more than ‘hunger 
hurts’. They asked, probed, dug, questioned, opening up the old wounds, and 
made notes as I trembled in my seat, recalling nights of wrapping a baby up in 
a vest and a babygro and a dressing gown before putting him down to sleep. Of 
going to bed shortly afterwards because there’s nothing else to do, and it’s 
dark, and cold, and you sold the telly, so you go to bed at 7pm and curl up 
beside him and hold him, because it feels like the only good thing you have. Of 
being asked, very quietly, by a member of staff at my local children’s centre 
if a food bank referral form would help us out “for a little while”, as she 
noticed us having seconds at lunch, and thirds, and three or four sugars in 
endless cups of tea, of offering to wash up and boxing up the leftovers to take 
home, away from the eyes of the other mums in the group.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2014%2Fdec%2F10%2Fpoverty-unable-open-front-door-food-banks-parliamentary-inquiry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F8%2F1418054226554%2Ffcec4e96-f672-4b36-a0d1-925262369621-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Poverty%20has%20left%20me%20unable%20to%20open%20my%20own%20front%20door%20%7C%20Jack%20Monroe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2014%2Fdec%2F10%2Fpoverty-unable-open-front-door-food-banks-parliamentary-inquiry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Poverty%20has%20left%20me%20unable%20to%20open%20my%20own%20front%20door%20%7C%20Jack%20Monroe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2014%2Fdec%2F10%2Fpoverty-unable-open-front-door-food-banks-parliamentary-inquiry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F8%2F1418054226554%2Ffcec4e96-f672-4b36-a0d1-925262369621-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘I was asked very quietly if a food bank referral form would help us out ‘for 
a little while’’. Photograph: Trussell Trust 
I talked about the unexpectedness of it all, of applying for flexible working 
hours and day work roles in the fire service before I resigned, of applying for 
every job I saw in the 18 months afterwards – care work, shop work, minimum 
wage work, apprenticeships at £80 a week to be told I was “too old” at 23, when 
the 16-year-olds were cheaper to hire. Of the bank charges that mounted up when 
bills bounced, and the late payment charges, and how quickly a £6 water charge 
can spiral into hundreds of pounds in late fees and bank charges, and nobody 
will give you the smallest of overdrafts, to tide you over, because those 
charges and subsequent interest are worth far more to a high street bank..

I staggered out of parliament, clutching a friend, shaking and crying. I went 
home, phoned my partner at work, and wept down the line. The mental breakdown I 
had been holding back for two and a half years through keeping busy, writing 
books, smiling for the cameras, crashed down around me.

Poverty <https://www.theguardian.com/society/poverty> took me from being the 
girl who was always the lead in the school play, to a woman who can’t open her 
own front door. I suffer panic attacks, anxiety attacks, seemingly random 
triggers that immobilise me, render me useless but simultaneously unable to 
explain myself. I’ve cancelled talks and events, crushed into a corner of my 
sofa, sobbing until my guts ache at the drop of a final demand letter from a 
years-old debt landing on my door mat. One doorbell ringing unexpectedly last 
April sent me scuttling to hide at the top of my landing, peering fearfully 
down the hallway until whoever it was went away. I often miss interviews, 
because a certain broadcasting corporation calls from unknown or withheld 
numbers, and I just can’t bring myself to answer them. I’ve lost count of the 
number of people who tell me my poverty wasn’t real enough, or long enough, or 
whatever their particular factors deem to be poor enough – and all I can say to 
them, is that I can’t even open my own front door.
 