
First, a spoiler warning. This article will contain spoilers for something 
first transmitted on British television over 50 years ago. Why mention it? 
Because I would normally be desperate to avoid them.

I’ve been a fan of Doctor Who since Tom Baker was in the TARDIS. I remember 
being stunned the first time I found out that 100 or so episodes were missing, 
junked by the BBC in the 70s. I’ve spent decades fervently hoping they will 
turn up. But I also decided to avoid knowing anything about them beyond their 
names: I don’tlook at telesnaps 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/doctorwho/classic/photonovels/power/>, or watch 
reconstructions 
<https://wipednews.com/features/power-of-the-daleks-reconstruction-spotlight/>, 
orlisten to the audio versions 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/pressoffice/bbcworldwide/worldwidestories/pressreleases/2005/05_may/daleks.shtml>
. I even steer clear of the most basic synopsis.

This means that, very occasionally, I get to watch brand new Doctor Who. It 
happened when The Reign of Terror and The Underwater Menace came out on DVD, 
and most jaw-droppingly whenThe Enemy of the World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/oct/11/doctor-who-missing-episodes-enemy-of-the-world-web-of-fear>
 was rediscovered in 2013. Now, it has happened again:BBC Worldwide has brought 
Power of the Daleks back to life as an animation 
<https://store.bbc.com/doctor-who/the-power-of-the-daleks>. All I knew in 
advance was that the Daleks most likely got defeated. But essentially, I had 
six new episodes ahead of me.

The day Doctor Who changed face – and transformed TV for ever
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/28/doctor-who-changed-face-and-transformed-tv-for-ever>
It was much more tense than I anticipated. There’s huge interest in the 
story’s first episode in particular: it was Patrick Troughton’s debut as the 
Doctor, and it followed on directly fromthe first time Doctor Who ever changed 
face 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/28/doctor-who-changed-face-and-transformed-tv-for-ever>
. I assumed he would pick himself up then head off on a rip-roaring adventure 
with the Daleks (an enemy chosen to assure the audience that this was still the 
same show).

Instead there’s a lengthy adversarial TARDIS scene, where Troughton does 
nothing to reassure us he is the same man that the firstDoctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who>, William Hartnell, was. 
He keeps referring to The Doctor in the third person and past tense, leaving 
the viewer (and companions Ben and Polly) guessing. And the long pauses, with 
just the hum of the TARDIS audible, are excruciating.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fpower-of-the-daleks-review-doctor-who-story-lost-since-the-60s%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7f67708ef1784b94d300bbe284cac39bd621bf9%2F0_0_2065_1239%2F2065.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Power%20of%20the%20Daleks%3A%20first-look%20review%20of%20the%20Doctor%20Who%20story%20lost%20since%20the%2060s&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fpower-of-the-daleks-review-doctor-who-story-lost-since-the-60s%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Power%20of%20the%20Daleks%3A%20first-look%20review%20of%20the%20Doctor%20Who%20story%20lost%20since%20the%2060s&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fpower-of-the-daleks-review-doctor-who-story-lost-since-the-60s%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7f67708ef1784b94d300bbe284cac39bd621bf9%2F0_0_2065_1239%2F2065.jpg>
 Keeps us guessing … the second Doctor briefly sees the first Doctor’s 
reflection in a mirror. Photograph: BBC 
Despite being the big draw, the Daleks only feature for a fleeting moment in 
the first episode. Instead, it is all about setting up the environment in which 
the adventure will take place: a colony on Vulcan, your classic 
futuristic-base-under-siege.

A scientist named Lesterson is investigating a mysterious alien capsule found 
abandoned on the planet. Inside it are three inert Daleks. You don’t need to 
have avoided spoilers to realise that scientists attaching electrodes to 
dormant Daleks is a bad idea, but the slow awakening of the Dalek being 
experimented on in episode two is as chilling as it is inevitable.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fpower-of-the-daleks-review-doctor-who-story-lost-since-the-60s%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2132ec77945b9e8262e4b258beefdd03769bae76%2F1_0_2124_1276%2F2124.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Power%20of%20the%20Daleks%3A%20first-look%20review%20of%20the%20Doctor%20Who%20story%20lost%20since%20the%2060s&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fpower-of-the-daleks-review-doctor-who-story-lost-since-the-60s%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Power%20of%20the%20Daleks%3A%20first-look%20review%20of%20the%20Doctor%20Who%20story%20lost%20since%20the%2060s&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fpower-of-the-daleks-review-doctor-who-story-lost-since-the-60s%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2132ec77945b9e8262e4b258beefdd03769bae76%2F1_0_2124_1276%2F2124.jpg>
 As chilling as it is inevitable … Lesterson experiments on a Dalek in his lab. 
Photograph: BBC 
In some stories, Daleks can be reduced to little more than shouty 
stormtroopers, but they were excellently written by David Whitaker here. They 
are cunning, manipulative and duplicitous – and the sequence where it becomes 
clear they have been secretly manufacturing a Dalek army is brilliantly 
realised in the new animation (the original used cardboard cut-out Daleks to 
boost the ranks.)

Power of the Daleks has always been well regarded by fans. Despite being 
entirely missing, it was voted the 19th best story of all time inDoctor Who 
Magazine’s 50th anniversary poll 
<https://theparadoxcycle.wordpress.com/2014/05/31/doctor-who-magazine-474-2014-poll-results/>
. In part, this is because of the slow inexorable march over six episodes 
towards the grim conclusion. The leaders of the colony believe the Daleks will 
bring them wealth, fame or power. Only the Doctor (and of course the audience) 
have seen them in action and know what to expect.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fpower-of-the-daleks-review-doctor-who-story-lost-since-the-60s%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e1d4804933a41edb3d817d2270e36c7fe4d2b8e%2F0_0_872_644%2F872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Power%20of%20the%20Daleks%3A%20first-look%20review%20of%20the%20Doctor%20Who%20story%20lost%20since%20the%2060s&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fpower-of-the-daleks-review-doctor-who-story-lost-since-the-60s%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Power%20of%20the%20Daleks%3A%20first-look%20review%20of%20the%20Doctor%20Who%20story%20lost%20since%20the%2060s&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fpower-of-the-daleks-review-doctor-who-story-lost-since-the-60s%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e1d4804933a41edb3d817d2270e36c7fe4d2b8e%2F0_0_872_644%2F872.jpg>
 Only a few fragments of original footage survive. Photograph: BBC 
Lesterson’s descent into hysterical remorse as he realises the full horror of 
his Dalek revival was unexpected to me. All that remains of Robert James’s 
original performance is the audio, but the scientist sounds utterly broken by 
the time he faces death.

Power of the Daleks’ ending is very bleak indeed. There’s a panning shot of 
corpses littering the colony floor, exterminated. It’s amazing to remember that 
in 1966, when it aired, the show was unambiguously marketed at children, yet 
could still contain such an explicit on-screen massacre.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fpower-of-the-daleks-review-doctor-who-story-lost-since-the-60s%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdd806f0a0c97c38f995e42e99be6bf0b2321d53%2F0_0_720_230%2F720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Power%20of%20the%20Daleks%3A%20first-look%20review%20of%20the%20Doctor%20Who%20story%20lost%20since%20the%2060s&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fpower-of-the-daleks-review-doctor-who-story-lost-since-the-60s%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Power%20of%20the%20Daleks%3A%20first-look%20review%20of%20the%20Doctor%20Who%20story%20lost%20since%20the%2060s&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fpower-of-the-daleks-review-doctor-who-story-lost-since-the-60s%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdd806f0a0c97c38f995e42e99be6bf0b2321d53%2F0_0_720_230%2F720.jpg>
 Side-by-side comparison of a shot from the animated Power of the Daleks with 
the original scene. Photograph: BBC 
The animation has its limitations. While the sets and backgrounds look 
gorgeous and the faces are expressive, the technique doesn’t cope well when 
characters move around; at times it is rather moreOliver Postgate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/oliver-postgate> than Pixar. It’s 
also been made in 16:9, in a move that has shocked some fans. Animator Charles 
Norton argued that most people will watch it on widescreen TVs, so why not do 
it in that format? But if there’s one fandom adept at wrangling a 4:3 picture 
out of their DVD players it’s Whovians. Side-by-side comparisons of the 
programmewith surviving telesnaps 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/doctorwho/classic/photonovels/power/four/13.shtml> show 
the extent to which some shots have had to be reimagined.

Twelve televised Doctor Who stories from the 1960s remain that I know nothing 
about beyond the titles. Only time will tell whether this release will be 
enough of a hit for the BBC to animate another – or if there are any more 
missing episodes still lurking on a dusty shelf somewhere.

• Power of the Daleks 
<https://store.bbc.com/doctor-who/the-power-of-the-daleks> is available to 
stream or download from the BBC Store, and will be released on DVD on 21 
November.

 