
‘We’re all just people’

The season finale, more than anything, feels like a sequel to the Preacher 
pilot, with Sam Catlin back behind the camera. This is a good thing, but also 
makes things feel a little abrupt. It starts with a sleepy montage of Annville 
waking up, set to Willie Nelson’s Time of thePreacher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/preacher>.

There’s a strong sense of urgency here that’s been missing from the past few 
episodes: Jesse is running from the cops (literally, in one notable shot), the 
entire town appears to be buzzing about it (there’s graffiti and signs ordering 
Jesse to run, and asking about the presence of God), and Annville genuinely 
feels like it’s experiencing its end of days – more on that in a minute.

So much has changed that it feels like there’s a whole episode we haven’t 
seen. Cassidy is in jail, apparently nabbed at the whorehouse because of his 
association with Jesse. (A sequence I would have loved to see.) Sheriff Root 
puts two and two together, using Cassidy’s penchant for shade and long arrest 
record (why doesn’t he just use different names?) to suss out that he’s a 
vampire. The sheriff spends the night shooting him in an effort to find his son.

Also, has Donnie Schenk found mercy? Jesse has been staying with the Schenks 
apparently, because Donnie letting Jesse live proved to be a spiritual 
awakening. This is a good idea: Jesse finally saved someone not by using his 
power, but simply by being a good person. But it also feels like a scene we 
really needed to see. While the Schenks read Good Housekeeping and Gorillas in 
the Mist, Jesse and Tulip take it outside. Ruth Negga does a delightful 
impersonation of Dominic Cooper’s gruffness, and she leads Jesse flirtatiously 
by the belt buckle – only to show him that Carlos is, of course, in the trunk.

‘We’re all just people’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fpreacher-season-one-episode-10-call-and-response%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ab7a510a26e8e568b6c146ce7b66fee4785671e%2F0_36_4240_2544%2F4240.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Preacher%20recap%3A%20season%20one%2C%20episode%2010%20%E2%80%93%20Call%20and%20Response&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fpreacher-season-one-episode-10-call-and-response%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Preacher%20recap%3A%20season%20one%2C%20episode%2010%20%E2%80%93%20Call%20and%20Response&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fpreacher-season-one-episode-10-call-and-response%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ab7a510a26e8e568b6c146ce7b66fee4785671e%2F0_36_4240_2544%2F4240.jpg>
 Kiss, Kiss, Bang, Bang: W Earl Brown as Hugo Root. Photograph: Lewis 
Jacobs/Sony Pictures Television 
Carlos is played by the great Desmin Borges of You’re the Worst. It turns out 
the big incident in Dallas is a lot smaller in scope than we’d been led to 
believe: tired of being stepped on and mocked by the admittedly obnoxiously in 
love Jesse and Tulip, Carlos lets a security guard go during a bank robbery, 
forcing Jesse to kill the guard and causing Tulip to lose her baby in the 
process. It’s a strange development. Miscarriages are already anoverused plot 
device on TV <http://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/ConvenientMiscarriage>
, and the baby is in this case just a convenient reason why Tulip and Jesse 
hate Carlos so much.

Still, the final confrontation – in which Jesse first decides to kill Carlos 
out of despair and is then turned back by Tulip, who was never going to kill 
him anyway – is really sweet and fun. (It’s especially fun to watch couched in 
an argument over how messy the car would get if Jesse shot Carlos in different 
places.) This is a much better look for the show, and its central couple. By 
the time the camera pulls in on Jesse and Tulip preparing to mercilessly beat 
Carlos, firmly together in both goodness and mild sadism, their relationship 
has become the most important thing on the show.

‘You are all saved’

The next morning, Betsy Schenk appears to rat Jesse out to the cops, but it 
turns out that she and Donnie snuck him and Tulip to the church in the trunk, 
where she helps him set up the angel phone. All of this camaraderie is fun, and 
pleasant in the way that, say, an Oceans movie is, but it mostly serves to 
remind us that we’re not going to be spending much more time with these 
characters.

Finally, the last Sunday service. (I assume there won’t be many of these in 
the next season.) It’s cool to see the whole town assembled, maybe even more so 
than the last service – it feels like something the whole season has been 
building to. Of course, the phone doesn’t work at first. But then, God shows up 
in the video conference who is an old dude with a booming voice sitting on 
throne, surrounded by bright light. (Cue the unfazed Tulip: “Told you he was a 
white guy.”)

The video-conferencing God deigns to answer a few of the town’s questions, but 
everything he says is terrible, a series of religious cliches about divine 
authority and the “plan” that sends everyone into a tizzy. (It’s crazier than 
the time Cassidy drank a bunch of Red Bull and saw Justin Bieber.) Quincannon 
even confronts God about his family, who he is assured are safely in heaven. 
But when Jesse realizes that this “God” doesn’t know about Genesis, he sees the 
truth, and the foundation of the comic: God is missing. It turns out to just 
have been an angel (or something), stalling to fill the void on high. This 
knowledge sends the town into a riot, culminating in a fuzzed-out shot of 
Quincannon snapping off a crucifix.

‘Nothing’s changed’

Preacher’s first season concludes largely on a montage set to Blind Melon’s No 
Rain, which seems about right. Far from saved, Annville is in ruins – Emily 
tells her kids that they never needed God in the first place, but no one else 
seems to believe that. Death overtakes the town and it becomes a place that 
could inspire a thousand Murder Ballads: both of the mascots hang themselves on 
the scalp tree. The children murder Linus the creepy bus driver. Mrs Loach 
smothers her comatose daughter. There’s even a last Tom Cruise gag, with a TV 
showing his ashes being shot into space. Root stares into the distance, haunted 
(W Earl Brown has done really excellent work in these past few episodes.) And 
Quincannon cradles a baby made out of meat, stuffed into a parka.

In the chaos, the Quincannon power plant, which we’ve seen a few times over 
the course of the season, spews methane all over Annville and the town 
explodes. There’s no way the season wasn’t going to end with a massacre, which 
makes it a lot harder to invest in all of the characters we’ve been told to 
care about for the past 10 episodes. I suspect Quincannon will be back in some 
form, but will Emily? Donnie? Sheriff Root? As Cas says, what’s the bloody 
point?

At least our core trio is out of town, plopped down at a diner where Jesse 
lays out his plan: find God. This plan will, it seems, involve a road trip, 
lots of sin, and shooting a second season that sounds way more fun than this 
one. Preacher was always going to get to this point, which made a lot of this 
first season feel like a waiting game. It’s been a bit of a slog, but there 
have been enough genuinely fun, exciting sequences that Jesse, Tulip and 
Cassidy putting on shades and punching the gas feels like it’s been worth the 
wait. Let’s hope that season two delivers on the promise of this moment. Oh, 
also, the Saint (Cowboy) shows up in Annville, and starts his hunt for Jesse in 
earnest. This should be interesting.

Notes from the nave
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fpreacher-season-one-episode-10-call-and-response%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc21c144e291b8064c63065cbb5eec8f5dfe0ef8%2F0_131_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Preacher%20recap%3A%20season%20one%2C%20episode%2010%20%E2%80%93%20Call%20and%20Response&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fpreacher-season-one-episode-10-call-and-response%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Preacher%20recap%3A%20season%20one%2C%20episode%2010%20%E2%80%93%20Call%20and%20Response&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fpreacher-season-one-episode-10-call-and-response%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc21c144e291b8064c63065cbb5eec8f5dfe0ef8%2F0_131_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 RIP, Annville? Photograph: Lewis Jacobs/Sony Pictures Television 
 * Cassidy, to Sheriff Root: “I’m not an asshole, I’m the asshole.”

 * Also, he finally says “arseface” and Sheriff Root empties a round into him. 
(Related: Jesse still sees a hallucinatory version of Eugene – possibly God? – 
which is good, because Ian Colletti really needs to remain in this cast.) 
 * Clive asking, “Can I get my dick back on?” Everyone’s raucous, borderline 
wholesome laughter at this inquiry is hilarious.

 * Cassidy still hates the end of The Big Lebowski. 
Obligatory Johnny Cash song

Finally, another one and boy, is it appropriate.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqpYW3qng78E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqpYW3qng78E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqpYW3qng78E&media=>
Worst job in Texas

Whoever had to clean up after Cassidy bleeding out in a cell all night, then 
probably getting vaporized in the explosion. Bummer.

Scripture of the week

Revelation 18:13, graffitied on a wall in Annville. The passage, about the 
fall of Babylon, reads: “Cargoes of cinnamon and spice, of incense, myrrh and 
frankincense, of wine and olive oil, of fine flour and wheat; cattle and sheep; 
horses and carriages; and human beings sold as slaves.” I’m not totally sure 
what that means (if it’s supposed to mean anything), but I’m going to 
optimistically hope it means that next season is going to be batshit crazy.
 