
Straight out of college, I dated a guy from Washington DC who had just spent a 
few years working on the redevelopment of public housing projects in Chicago. 
We met at Harvard, where I was working as a receptionist at the department of 
Afro-American studies, which was his focus for a graduate degree. He was 
easygoing and honest, handsome and smart, with outstanding taste in music (I 
will be forever grateful to him for introducing me to Outkast – in particular,
Southernplayalisticadillacmuzik 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/southernplayalisticadillacmuzik-mw0000624115>). 
A light-skinned black man with a palpable sense of racial pride, the man I’ll 
call Tim would occasionally mention with fondness a friend he’d made during his 
time in Chicago. The two had bonded over basketball and politics, race and 
identity, local government policy and community service. His friend’s name was 
Barack.
President Obama (@POTUS) 
Been waiting to drop this: summer playlist, the encore. What's everybody 
listening to?pic.twitter.com/mqh1YVrycj <https://t.co/mqh1YVrycj>
 <https://twitter.com/POTUS/status/763744742072913920> August 11, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/POTUS/status/763744742072913920> 
Now, do I know for a fact that Tim had an influence on the president’s musical 
preferences? No. But judging from Obama’s summer playlist,released on Thursday 
<https://twitter.com/POTUS/status/763744742072913920>, I’m willing to posit 
that it’s not out of the question. Both Tim and the president have black 
fathers and white mothers, while firmly identifying as black, as opposed to 
biracial or mixed – which, given the current climate for black men in America, 
is not an unfraught declaration. Still, as Obama wrote in his bookDreams From 
My Father: A Story of Race and Inheritance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/29/100-best-nonfiction-books-5-barack-obama-dreams-from-my-father>
, he didn’t get there overnight, and he often turned to books and friends and 
black cultural markers for guidance.
There’s no black cultural marker more abiding than our music, and if Obama’s 
playlist indicates nothing else it’s that reaffirmation of one’s blackness can 
always be found right there in the bars. It also strikes me that although he 
has been frequently criticized for his handling of race and policies regarding 
the overall inequities experienced by black folks in America, among the most 
important aspects of his legacy is that he is going to leave that Oval Office 
as blackity black as he was when he entered. And that means mic drops, an 
entire absence of fucks, and dope playlists.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHGy9i8vvCxk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHGy9i8vvCxk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHGy9i8vvCxk&media=>
From the daytime list, which includes Wale, Jidenna, Nina Simone and Prince, 
the standout here is Aloe Blacc’s The Man, both because it’s a bonafide black 
man’s anthem – “Stand up now and face the sun/Won’t hide my tail or turn and 
run/It’s time to do what must be done/Be a king when kingdom comes” – and 
because Blacc is a national treasure. Enough so that I’m willing to cut Obama 
some slack on theSara Bareilles <http://waitress.sarabmusic.com/> selection, 
and the Beach Boys too, not because these aren’t talented singer/songwriters, 
nor because they are white (because let’s be honest, all popular music in 
America is in some way influenced by black music), but because they are just 
kind of cheesy.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F57131230&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F57131230> 
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F57131230&media=>
Most satisfying to see from the nighttime list is I’ll Be There for You 
(You’re All I Need to Get By) by Method Man featuringMary J Blige 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/mary-j-blige>. Who among us of a certain age 
can forget the dark beauty and elegant, sublime emotion in the video for this 
song – Method in cornrows, Mary with her bucket hat pulled down low over her 
eyes, just the gloss of her lips making out the lyrics, head bobbing, both 
sitting on the pavement, backs to the wall surrounded by a menacing cityscape. 
It’s the blackest, most glorious, magnificent display of camaraderie, love and 
loyalty. There isn’t a day that has gone by with Obama in the White House that 
it hasn’t been resolutely clear that Michelle is all he needs to get by: “Back 
when I was nothing/You made a brother feel like he was something/That’s why I’m 
with you to this day boo no fronting.” We will miss them.
 