
Press freedom groups have called for the release of two journalists and their 
driver who appear to have been abducted in Yemen. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/three-al-jazeera-journalists-kidnapped-in-yemen>

Al-Jazeera <https://www.theguardian.com/media/al-jazeera> TV correspondent 
Hamdi al-Bokari and Al-Masdar newspaper correspondent Abdul Aziz al-Sabri 
disappeared with their driver, Munair al-Subaie, shortly after having dinner 
together on Monday in the besieged south-western city of Taiz. Their car was 
later found abandoned.

Al-Sabri was seriously injured in December when hit in the neck and shoulder 
by shrapnel while covering the fighting in Taiz. But he continued to report for 
Al-Masdar throughout January.

Al-Bokari, in one of his last dispatches 
<https://www.facebook.com/hamdibokari/videos/10153869219609581/> before he 
disappeared, reported on civilians killed by pro-Houthi fighters’ shelling of 
the city.

Al-Jazeera and Al-Masdar did not accuse any specific group of abducting their 
correspondents, butAl-Jazeera said in a statement to the New York-based 
Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) 
<https://cpj.org/2016/01/two-journalists-missing-believed-abducted-in-yemen.php>
 that the network was in touch with unspecified “related parties” to secure 
their release.

The CPJ pointed out that Yemen is now one of the most dangerous places in the 
world to work as a journalist. ItsMiddle East and North Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/middleeast> programme coordinator, Sherif 
Mansour, said: “We call on all parties to cease targeting journalists and to 
free immediately all members of the media that they are holding.”

On Sunday, freelance journalist Almigdad Mojalli was killed during Saudi-led 
coalition airstrikes 
<http://en.rsf.org/yemen-journalist-killed-in-air-strike-18-01-2016,48746.html>
in Jaref, a Houthi-controlled district in the southern outskirts Yemen’s 
capital, Sanaa.


Saudi-supported fighters loyal to Yemen’s president, Abd-Rabbu Mansour Hadi, 
are battling against Houthi militia, backed byIran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>, in a war that has raged for nine 
months in which some 6,000 people are believed to have been killed.

Taiz has been under sieged by Houthis for several weeks. On Thursday, 
representatives of United Nations visited the city to evaluate the cost of 
damage.

Sources: Reuters via Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/three-al-jazeera-journalists-kidnapped-in-yemen>
/CPJ 
<https://cpj.org/2016/01/two-journalists-missing-believed-abducted-in-yemen.php>
/RSF 
<http://en.rsf.org/yemen-journalist-killed-in-air-strike-18-01-2016,48746.html>

 