
The average cost of a funeral in the UK has more than doubled in just over a 
decade, forcing some grieving families to “cut corners”, according to a new 
report.


Insurer SunLife’s latest annual Cost of Dying report found that the price of a 
typical funeral has increased by 5.5% in the past year to £3,897.

The report said the cost of dying was rising much faster than any cost of 
living, with the pace of growth outstripping inflation, wages and pensions.


The publication of the report coincided with a parliamentary debate on funeral 
poverty <http://calendar.parliament.uk>.

Let's talk about death: what does it mean to you?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/11/lets-talk-about-death-what-does-it-mean-to-you>
SunLife said the figure of £3,897 was an increase of 103% on the typical 
amount when the insurer first started tracking funeral prices in 2004. If the 
cost of a funeral had risen in line with the cost of living, it would now be 
£2,540 – some £1,357 less than the actual figure.


London remains “the most expensive place to die”, with the average funeral 
there coming to £5,529.


The report said the overall price of dying, including probate, headstone and 
flowers in addition to the basic cost of a funeral, had jumped by 8.3% in the 
past year to reach £8,802.


The insurer’s research found 40% of people organising a funeral said that it 
had cost more than they had expected, with more than a third (38%) of them 
saying it had cost a lot more. As a result, one in 12 people surveyed said they 
had had to cut back or change some of their send-off plans for their loved 
ones. In some cases, this included scaling back the catering, memorial or 
limousines for immediate family, or having to find a cheaper venue.


One in seven people who have organised a funeral in the past four years 
admitted that it had been financially challenging and had, in many cases, put 
them into debt. Of those, 10% had to sell belongings to cover the cost, 24% had 
to put the balance on a credit card, 10% had to take out a loan and 18% had to 
borrow money from a friend or relative.

Meanwhile, fundraising website JustGiving has revealed that the number of 
people turning to crowdfunding to help cover the cost of a funeral has surged 
more than 300% since 2015. So far this year, more than 2,000 people across the 
UK have crowdfunded on the site to help say farewell to loved ones.

SunLife has launched a funeral calculator 
<https://www.sunlife.co.uk/funeralcalculator/> to help people plan for the 
costs.

 