
What do a Pacific Islander on an emotional quest, the wilful leader of a small 
rebel band and a young girl who dreams of learning to fly an eagle have in 
common? They’re all set to dominate the box office this Christmas.

On the surface, Disney animation Moana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/04/moana-review-disney>, Star Wars 
spinoffRogue One and documentary The Eagle Huntress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/08/the-eagle-huntress-review-otto-bell-kazakh-falconry-mongolia>
 are three very different films. What they share, however, is a sense of 
indomitable purpose and the ability to move audiences at a time when they are 
desperately in need of good cheer – and it’s this that looks set to propel them 
to success.

“We’ve had a lot of girl guides, football teams and high school groups coming 
to watch the film and the reaction has been amazing,” says Otto Bell, director 
ofThe Eagle Huntress, which follows a young Kazakh girl, Aisholpan, as she 
battles prejudice and bad weather to become the first female to enter the 
country’s annual Golden Eagle competition. “We had one moment where we came out 
after Sundance and all these kids who’d seen the film spontaneously started 
applauding, cheering and shouting her signature eagle-calling shout. It was 
incredible.”

The intrepid and independent Moana <https://www.theguardian.com/film/moana> in 
Disney’s film, who has been described by many critics as an anti-princess, has 
received a similarly warm response. “What I love aboutMoana is its focus on a 
young leader who discovers her inner power and learns to trust herself,” says 
Anthony Breznican ofEntertainment Weekly. “Plus she shows the charming but 
pompous tough guy, Maui, that brawling isn’t always the best solution to a 
problem. Brothers everywhere, big and little, should take note.”

Meanwhile, the highly anticipated Rogue One, which opens this week, will see 
Felicity Jones’s Jyn Erso gather a ragtag band of rebels including Riz Ahmed, 
Forest Whitaker, Diego Luna and Donnie Yen to take on the might of the Empire – 
a plotline that has taken on slightly more resonance in the light of recent 
political events.

So are we seeing the rise of a new kind of heroine? Bell says that what drew 
him to Aisholpan was “her quiet determination”, and it’s certainly the case 
that all three women are shown as go-getting leaders. “I see Moana’s story as a 
classic hero’s journey regardless of gender,” says Osnat Shurer, producer of 
the Disney animation. “We see her courage and emotional intelligence, her 
determination and compassion, and it’s a fascinating tale.”

In recent years, Disney has made concerted efforts to move away from its image 
as the home of sparkling dresses, glass slippers, singing birds and princes 
swooping in to save the day.Brave was a story about the bonds between mothers 
and sisters,Frozen a tale of sisterly love and loyalty, and even though 
Rapunzel and Tiana – the respective heroines ofTangled and The Princess and the 
Frog – got their men, in neither case was it their main concern.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fmoana-rogue-one-eagle-hunters-film-female-heroes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35fb9500e5b81550a1e8a46028fea1aa166ca1c2%2F162_0_3285_1971%2F3285.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Princess%20Moana%2C%20the%20Rogue%20One%20rebel%2C%20the%20Eagle%20Huntress%3A%20meet%20film%E2%80%99s%20female%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fmoana-rogue-one-eagle-hunters-film-female-heroes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Princess%20Moana%2C%20the%20Rogue%20One%20rebel%2C%20the%20Eagle%20Huntress%3A%20meet%20film%E2%80%99s%20female%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fmoana-rogue-one-eagle-hunters-film-female-heroes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35fb9500e5b81550a1e8a46028fea1aa166ca1c2%2F162_0_3285_1971%2F3285.jpg>
 Aisholpan, the young Kazakh falconer whose story is told in documentary The 
Eagle Huntress Photograph: Allstar/Sony Pictures Classics 
“I just rewatched Sleeping Beauty and I forgot how passive she is: it’s the 
fairies and the prince who come to the rescue. Same forSnow White and Cinderella
,” says Monica Castillo, film writer for theNew York Times. “Starting with the 
1990s Disney renaissance, the princesses become more active, peaking with 
Mulan, who becomes a warrior to take her father’s place in the army. I was 
thrilled that Tiana had ambitions beyond big ballgowns and the real love story 
ofFrozen was between two sisters. It’s a whole new world from where we started: 
pretty things to be rescued from witches, dragons and evil stepmothers.”

Moana continues that evolution with a story that’s as much about helping your 
community as discovering yourself. Most notably, her figure is athletic and 
strong rather than wasp-waisted and delicate. “She had to look as though she 
could go on this journey to save her world,” says Shurer. “The way she looks 
shouldn’t be radical but it’s true that right now it is.” Hawaiian writer Robyn 
Lucas agrees. “Moana as a Disney princess was not only body-positive, but 
having her as a darker-skinned/brown girl made a huge impact,” she says. “I was 
mesmerised watching it, because it was the first time I saw anyone who looked 
like me on the screen in that capacity – as a leading actress.”

Many fans are also responding to the opportunity to celebrate a brown girl in 
a leading role. “I loved it – I’ve seen it twice now and think it does a very 
good job of both harking back to the Disney renaissance and moving the story 
forward in a progressive way,” says Aisha Harris, culture writer forSlate and 
the host of that site’spopular podcast, Represent 
<https://itunes.apple.com/us/podcast/slates-represent/id1135054499?mt=2>. 
“There’s no prince, no love interest. It’s a film about a girl and her journey 
and the heroine is a girl of colour, and that’s so important.”

Daniel Jose Older, author of the acclaimed young adult fantasy Shadowshaper 
and a new novella,Ghost Girl In The Corner 
<https://www.amazon.com/dp/B01NACSQ9S/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1480439483&sr=1-1&keywords=Ghost+Girl+in+the+corne>
, agrees: “Moana isn’t passive. She’s central to the story and I know from my 
own inbox how important that is – since I wroteShadowshaper, it’s been full of 
brown girls saying they hadn’t felt at home in a book before. It’s a really 
powerful experience to find yourself at home somewhere without being translated 
by others. To see that in a Disney movie is huge.”

Nor is it the only example. A recent piece in Vanity Fair 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2016/11/disney-films-inclusive> quoted 
Disney as saying that “between 2016 and 2018 about 24% of the studio’s 
live-action releases will feature ethnic minority leads”. A similar push has 
been made by Disney-owned LucasFilm regarding female leads – brunette and 
British ones, at least – with Emilia Clarke fromGame of Thrones set to join 
Daisy Ridley and Felicity Jones in theStar Wars universe.

“The Force Awakens and Rogue One absolutely show that female heroes can carry 
a blockbuster action-adventure movie,” says Breznican. “Similarly,Moana shows 
that we can continue to reach beyond the Brothers Grimm. The world is full of 
amazing folktales and mythology and animated films are just another step in the 
process of handing these stories to a new generation.”

Not everyone is singing Moana’s praises, however. Disney worked for six years 
on the film,establishing an Oceanic Story Trust 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2016/11/moana-oceanic-trust-disney-controversy-pacific-islanders-polynesia>
 made up of people from all walks of Pacific Islands life, from anthropologists 
and linguists to master navigators and tattooists. It employed a Samoan 
musician, Opetaia Foa’i, to co-write the music, and cast two stars with Pacific 
Island heritage, Auli’i Cravalho (Moana) who is Native Hawaiian and Dwayne “The 
Rock” Johnson (Maui) who is half-Samoan. But some Pacific Islanders remain 
unconvinced.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fmoana-rogue-one-eagle-hunters-film-female-heroes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd773ebe9671ad39fc9be4ae63d9162cae645da27%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Princess%20Moana%2C%20the%20Rogue%20One%20rebel%2C%20the%20Eagle%20Huntress%3A%20meet%20film%E2%80%99s%20female%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fmoana-rogue-one-eagle-hunters-film-female-heroes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Princess%20Moana%2C%20the%20Rogue%20One%20rebel%2C%20the%20Eagle%20Huntress%3A%20meet%20film%E2%80%99s%20female%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fmoana-rogue-one-eagle-hunters-film-female-heroes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd773ebe9671ad39fc9be4ae63d9162cae645da27%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Feleicity Jones as Jyn Erso in Rogue One. Photograph: Jonathan Olley/Lucasfilm 
“Disney is engaged in a sophisticated form of colonisation,” says Dr Teresia 
Teaiwa <http://www.victoria.ac.nz/pasifika/about/staff/teresia-teaiwa>, senior 
lecturer in Pacific studies at Victoria University of Wellington. “It has very 
cleverly manipulated some islanders’ deep desire to be affirmed by the dominant 
culture and it’s now selling this desire back to us. What is most insidious 
aboutMoana is that is offers us roles as a comical buffoon on one hand or an 
adolescent faux-feminist on the other, and distracts us from the deep and 
rebellious intelligence that is our true inheritance, in this ocean that has 
been our home for millennia.”

Tina Ngata <https://thenonplasticmaori.wordpress.com/author/tinangata/>, a 
teacher at Te Wananga o Aotearoa, New Zealand’s indigenous university, and a 
campaigner for indigenous rights, agrees. “Moana has taken a very broad-stroke 
approach to a very wide area that holds a very diverse set of cultures,” she 
says. “The film is problematic about many things, from rock-stacking, which is 
actually a very disrespectful and problematic practice in Hawaii, to Moana’s 
father banning the village from venturing beyond the reef – which is 
codswallop, and does not reflect our own world views and likely responses to 
the event of losing someone at sea.

“Our region has always been an exotic escape that people go to in order to 
turn their back on stress, and acknowledging distinctmana [rights] is not a 
part of that experience. A number of whanau [extended families] from islands 
across the Pacific are genuinely enjoying the movie. All I can say to that is – 
not all that we enjoy is good for us.”

Shurer remains sanguine. “Everyone has a right to their own opinion, 
particularly about their own culture,” she says. “My one hope is that people 
see the film and don’t make their decisions simply based on the trailer.”

Lucas agrees. “Although there were some problems with the film, the makers had 
clearly done a great deal of research and I understand that you can’t fully get 
Polynesian culture condensed for a two-hour film.

“I adore Moana because she was smart and yet vulnerable and her relationship 
with her parents was respectful, which is huge.”

It’s important, too, that the commitment to creating diverse and interesting 
characters continues. Older says: “It’s great that we’ve got to this point, but 
we can’t get stuck here. Our world and society are complex and diverse and the 
stories we tell and are told need to reflect that.”

Moana is out now. Rogue One and The Eagle Huntress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-eagle-huntress> are both released 
this week
 