
It’s been a hard year for prisons in England and Wales. As well as nine 
prisoner-on-prisoner killings – the highest ever recorded – there has been a 
self-inflicted death every few days, thousands of incidents of self-harm and 
record levels of violence and drug use. But however dire the situation in our 
prisons may become, nothing can extinguish hope. The annualPrison Reform Trust 
writing competition 
<http://www.prisonreformtrust.org.uk/GetInvolved/CompetitionsAwards> always 
brings good reason to be hopeful about the people who inhabit our prisons.

Can prison work? | Prisoner Ben
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/21/can-prison-work-crime> 
Now in its 18th year – it began in 1997 as the Andrew Groves short story 
competition – this year’s competition attracted a phenomenal 767 entries from 
male and female adult prisons and young offender and juvenile institutions from 
all around the country, an increase of 140 on last year’s record batch. Another 
reason to be hopeful is the change in government attitudes towards prisoners. 
The justice secretary Michael Gove’s recent quotation of Churchill in relation 
to prisoners that “there is a treasure, if you can only find it, in the heart 
of every man” breathed fresh hope that at last the punishment and 
rehabilitation pendulum may be swinging officially towards a more constructive 
use of prison time. As usual, glimpses of that treasure shine through amongst 
the winning PRT writing competition entries.

There are three sections to the competition: comment, lyric/rap and short 
story. As a judge of the comment section, born on prison wings and landings, I 
am always lifted by the enthusiasm and self-discipline demonstrated by the 
prisoners who decide to pick up the pen.

A prisoner may be a prisoner, but as Dostoevsky so pointedly wrote in Notes 
from a Dead House, “no brands, no fetters will make him forget that he is a 
man”. Or a woman, he might have added.

Year after year, this competition proves that prison bars are no obstacle to 
thinking and writing. Chris Mullin MP was my fellow judge on the comment 
section and we were both hugely impressed by the thoughtful quality of the 
entries and the insights into contemporary prison life they provided. Entrants 
were given the theme: Can Prison Work? Christopher was our winner who began his 
essay with a Radio 4 Voxpop: “I vote Tory, coz I’m scared of crime … and they 
won’t let prisons become holiday camps.” He then goes on to reveal the often 
duplicitous and cynical nature of different elements of prison life. “The 
system cannot care,” he concludes, “it can only count.”

Rapper Kingsley “Akala” Daley and actor Femi Oyeniran were the judges for the 
rap/lyric section.This year’s winner was a eulogy to remorse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/audio/2015/dec/21/working-it-out-2015-rap-lyric-winner-prison-reform-trust-competition>
: “If anything I wear my hurt like a comfortable jumper / Knowing there’s not 
much further left to fall …” We learn from the author, Terrianne, that in fact 
she is in a good place – when you are at the bottom in life, the only way to go 
is up.

The winning short story reflected on the number of people in prison with 
serious mental health problems. Judged by writers Minnette Walters and Rachel 
Billington, the winner was Michael, whose entry was an apt, though painful 
portrait of Pete, a prisoner in a state of total mental breakdown. Pete is 
determined not to be driven “crazy” by the incessant chattering of his cellmate 
– a figment of his damaged imagination – and of Brian, his guard, determined 
not to be driven crazy by men like Pete. “A witty, well-crafted, 
excellently-written story with a genuine surprise at the end. Many prisoners 
will identify with the situation it portrays,” said the judges. A sad, but 
revealing truth.

 * Erwin James’s book Redeemable: a Memoir of Darkness and Hope 
<http://www.bloomsbury.com/uk/redeemable-9781408813973/> is published by 
Bloomsbury on Feb 11.  