
Parental alienation – a phenomenon where one parent poisons their child 
against the other parent – has become such a feature of the most difficult 
family breakdowns that Cafcass, theChildren and Family Court Advisory and 
Support Service <https://www.cafcass.gov.uk/>, is to offer targeted support for 
those affected following a government-fundedintensive therapeutic pilot 
programme 
<https://www.cafcass.gov.uk/news/2015/february/partnership-pilot-helps-to-re-focus-parents.aspx>
 .

Distinct from the all-too-common acrimony between divorcing parents, the 
syndrome is an internationally recognised phenomenon. In America and Canada, 
“parenting coordinators” are ordered and supervised by the courts to help 
restore relationships between parents and children identified as “alienated”. 
In Mexico and Brazil, alienating a child from a parent is a criminal act.

Psychiatrist Richard Gardner <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_A._Gardner>
 developed the concept 20 years ago, defining it as “a disorder that arises 
primarily in the context of child custody disputes. Its primary manifestation 
is the child’s campaign of denigration against a parent, a campaign that has no 
justification. It results from the combination of a programming (brainwashing) 
parent’s indoctrinations and the child’s own contributions to the vilification 
of the target parent.”


The assistant director of Cafcass, Sarah Parsons, said: “Parental alienation 
is responsible for around 80% of the most intransigent cases that come before 
the family courts … We already train our social workers to recognise the issue, 
but this takes helping families experiencing it one step further.”

Parental alienation is estimated to be present in 11%-15% of divorces 
involving children 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/fcre.2010.48.issue-1/issuetoc>, a 
figure that is thought to be increasing. Other research has found about1% of 
children and adolescents in North America experience parental alienation 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/01926180903586583?journalCode=uaft20>
.

Miriam, a lecturer and artist, whose name has been changed, was packing to 
take her young son on holiday when her former husband emailed to say she would 
never see her child again. The boy was staying with his father for the weekend 
and, the email said, had made such serious allegations against his mother that 
he wouldn’t ever be coming home. It would be 592 days before Miriam next saw 
her son.


“I’m just a normal mum and out of nowhere, I was being accused of false and 
fabricated allegations of a sexual nature against my son that were absolutely 
harrowing,” she said. “It was horrendous.”

Since their divorce, seven years previously, Miriam’s former husband had waged 
a campaign of parental alienation against her, using almost all the17 specific 
strategies <http://www.amyjlbaker.com/parental-alienation-syndrome.html> 
identified through research studies with adults who were alienated as children 
and with targeted parents.

These include a parent constantly badmouthing and belittling the other parent 
to the point that the child sees no value in the targeted parent at all, 
limiting contact with the targeted parent, forbidding discussion and pictures 
of them, creating the impression that the targeted parent does not love the 
child or is dangerous, forcing the child to reject the other parent, and asking 
the child to spy and keep secrets from them.

Judges in Britain are also increasingly recognising the phenomenon. In one 
case, the judge wrote about a case where she was forced to transfer residence 
to re-establish a relationship between a child and an alienated parent. “I 
regard parental manipulation of children, of which I distressingly see an 
enormous amount, as exceptionally harmful,” shewrote in her summary 
<http://www.familylawweek.co.uk/site.aspx?i=ed130204>.


Joanna Abrahams <http://www.setfords.co.uk/our-people/profile/joanna_abrahams/>
, head of family law at Setfords Solicitors, is one of only a limited number of 
lawyers in the UK who specialise in cases of parental alienation. She has seen 
a steady increase in cases in the past few years.


“Although awareness is increasing, I’m not convinced that judges or social 
workers have the training and exposure that enables them to identify parental 
alienation and act on it,” she said. “The only real chance a victim of parental 
alienation has to get their child back is to find a specialist solicitor who 
has the expertise to ask the court to order psychological assessments, directed 
therapy and, if necessary, a change of residence of the child back to the 
alienated parent.”

These are expensive interventions, however, and cuts to Legal Aid mean 
parental alienation is something only wealthier parents are likely to have 
recognised. She said it can cost as much as £50,000 to have parental alienation 
properly identified.

The syndrome is not without controversy. It is not recognised in the DMS (
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 
<https://www.psychiatry.org/psychiatrists/practice/dsm>) or by the World Health 
Organisation <http://www.who.int/en/>. In addition, some campaigners maintain 
the syndrome is a tool used by men to seize custody of children from any mother 
who claims abuse. Paul Fink, president of theLeadership Council on Child Abuse 
and Interpersonal Violence <http://www.leadershipcouncil.org/>, has called 
parental alienation syndrome“junk science at its worst” 
<http://www.leadershipcouncil.org/1/pas/PR_PAS.html>.

But Dr Amy Baker <http://www.amyjlbaker.com/>, a developmental psychologist, 
researcher and author of Adult Children of Parental Alienation Syndrome: 
Breaking the Ties that Bind, says severe parental alienation can poison a 
child’s mind towards a previously much-loved parent in an alarmingly short 
period of time.

“When children have become alienated … parents who were once loved and valued 
seemingly overnight become objects of hatred and fear,” she said. “They appear 
to feel no loss over the end of the relationship with their parent and are 
willing to share their views [of hatred] without experiencing any shame or 
discomfort. Such children would likely be willing to make a false allegation of 
the other parent.”

This, said Baker, is the difference between an abused child and an alienated 
one. “Children do not typically reject a parent, even a relatively bad one, 
unless they have been manipulated to do so,” she said. “Children who have been 
maltreated are typically quite reluctant to talk about and to admit that was a 
parent who harmed them. Even once they admit the maltreatment, they are still 
typically reluctant to reject that parent, often blaming themselves for the 
abuse instead.”

Karen Woodall <https://karenwoodall.wordpress.com/>, a specialist in parental 
alienation at the Family Separation Clinic, said there is a “lack of 
understanding in family courts, professionals and in family services in 
general”. Cases of severe parental alienation, she said, are rare but 
“absolutely terrifying”.

 “We have a system that doesn’t do what needs to be done in these cases,” she 
added. “These cases go on for years, with the children getting more and more 
stuck. We should be applying differentiation at the start: is this rejection by 
the child justified or not? If not, intensive psychological help needs to be 
given immediately.”

 The silver lining is that all specialists agree that children can recover 
very quickly, with the right help and, if necessary, separation from the 
alienating parent.

 “I’ve seen it time and time again, even with children who have refused to see 
their alienated parent for as many as 10 years, or made allegations of horrific 
sexual abuse and even cannibalism,” said Woodall. “No matter what age the child 
is, if you put them back into a normal, family environment with the alienated 
parent, they ‘flip’ back to their former loving selves in an astonishingly 
short time.”

Miriam, however, is losing hope that she will ever have a meaningful 
relationship with her son again. The criminal court dismissed the allegations 
of sexual assault, but after having no contact with his mother during those 592 
days, her son will now only consent to supervised visits in a contact centre 
with his mother every six weeks.

“I have to be prepared for my ex-husband to tell my son that he doesn’t have 
to see me any more, and the visits to stop,” said Miriam. “My son has been so 
severely manipulated by his father that it may not be until he has his own 
children that he comes back to me. But in case he hasn’t come back by the time 
I die, I’ve put letters and videos for him alongside my will to tell him how 
much and how unconditionally I love him.

“I try to be hopeful,” she said. “But every night, I go to sleep crying.”

 * This article was changed on 14th July. It originally stated that the 
Cafcass was launching a government-funded therapeutic programme. In fact, the 
support it is offering followed a government pilot programme. The article also 
originally quoted Joanna Abrahams as saying that identifying parental 
alienation can cost “upwards of £50,000”. She subsequently corrected her 
estimate to “as much as £50,000”.  