
I saw Psycho when I was 21, and it had a permanently disruptive effect on my 
psyche. It terrified me in part because it is a weird, unconventional horror 
film that mixes reassuring touchstones of American life – motels, state 
troopers, the lure of the open road – with the grotesque in a new and 
unexpected way.Psycho <https://www.theguardian.com/film/psycho> seems real in a 
way that The Ring does not. It seems like something that could happen to you. 
If you check into the wrong motel. And since I saw it in 1972, I have proceeded 
on the assumption thatall motels are the wrong motel.


 But the film also terrified me because of the circumstances in which I saw 
it. Psycho was already 12 years old when I first took it in while living in 
Paris in 1972. I am not sure why I had never seen it before, as I loved Alfred 
Hitchcock’s films, and had already seen more recent, far less successful 
offerings likeMarnie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2012/aug/13/my-favourite-hitchcock-marnie>
 and Topaz and Torn Curtain. But none of those movies have creepy, scary names. 
The word “psycho” itself is scary. At the time, the word “psycho” was almost 
pornographic. Maybe that’s why I stayed away from it in my early teens. I was 
raised Catholic, and the film was on a list of officially “condemned” motion 
pictures. That meant that you could go to hell for all eternity if you went to 
see it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNG3-GlvKPcg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNG3-GlvKPcg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNG3-GlvKPcg&media=>
At the time, I was living in a microscopic maid’s room on the sixth floor of a 
building not far fromLe Bon Marché 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Le_Bon_March%C3%A9>. To get to the room, you had 
to climb a flight of winding stairs. You had to climb a spiral staircase, the 
name ofa famous horror film from the 1940s 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WtsHKMQ6048>. The lights kept switching off, 
so you had to race to the next landing and press the button to illuminate the 
staircase every ten seconds or so. There were about six rooms on the top floor 
of that building, but only two other people were living there. One was a woman 
of easy virtue with a boyfriend who worked as an Elvis impersonator. The other 
was a mysterious old man. The bathroom was out in the corridor. Once you locked 
yourself in for the night you avoided going out into the corridor because it 
was creepy and unnerving. The old man was creepier than the Elvis impersonator. 
But they were both creepy.

 I saw the film in a shabby revival house in the Latin Quarter. I saw it 
alone. Psycho itself was frightening enough because Janet Leigh’s murder was 
totally unexpected. The film seemed to be about one thing; then Hitchcock 
suddenly switched gears and turned it into something else. Gorgeous movie stars 
didn’t get chopped up in films back in those days. Especially not so early in 
the film. Nothing prepared you for her demise. Butchering her that way seemed 
cruel and arbitrary, given that she was all set to return the money she had 
stolen. It suggested that the universe was not just unfair, but downright mean.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8VP5jEAP3K4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8VP5jEAP3K4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8VP5jEAP3K4&media=>
 Psycho was also frightening because it was in black-and-white, and 
black-and-white films have always seemed real to me in a way that colour films 
do not. This is because I grew up reading newspapers filled with 
black-and-white photographs, and every major event in history was in 
black-and-white. The Russian soldier waving the flag on top of theReichstag in 
May 1945 
<http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/1/14/Reichstag_flag_original.jpg> did 
it in black-and-white. The blood onJackie Kennedy’s pink dress was 
black-and-white 
<http://i.dailymail.co.uk/i/pix/2013/11/19/article-2510064-1984284100000578-699_634x794.jpg>
.

 Returning home to that sixth-story room was a terrifying experience. The 
lights were out between the fourth and the fifth floor, and I kept expecting to 
see a transvestite wielding a butcher knife waiting for me when I got to the 
top of the stairs. A delusional transvestite ornithophile with mommy issues, 
the worst kind. I have seen hundreds of horror films since then, and they have 
had little effect on me once they are over. But I never take a shower in a 
hotel or motel room without making sure that the bathroom door is locked. Even 
if my wife is in the next room.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDjRzj_Ufiew&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDjRzj_Ufiew>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDjRzj_Ufiew&media=>
 Such is the daunting power of cinema.

Read the full series

Peter Bradshaw on Threads
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/oct/20/threads-the-film-that-frightened-me-most-halloween>
Stuart Heritage on The Ring
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/oct/21/ring-ringu-the-film-that-frightened-me-most-halloween>
Sian Cain on The Sixth Sense
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/oct/22/the-sixth-sense-film-frightened-me-most-sian-cain>
Peter Kimpton on The Shining
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/24/the-shining-the-film-that-frightened-me-most>
Steve Rose on Blair Witch Project
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/oct/23/blair-witch-project-film-frightened-me-most-steve-rose>
Xan Brooks on Texas Chainsaw Massacre
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/oct/27/the-texas-chainsaw-massacre-film-that-frightened-me-most>
Ellie Violet Bramley on The Orphanage
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/oct/28/the-orphanage-the-film-that-frightened-me-most-kinderhorror>
Alex Hess on Eden Lake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/29/eden-lake-the-film-that-frightened-me-most>
Phil Hoad on Watership Down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/oct/30/watership-down-the-film-that-frightened-me-the-most>
 