
Puerto Rico <https://www.theguardian.com/world/puerto-rico> has run out of 
time and money and will default on $37m of its debt repayments on 1 January, 
Governor Alejandro Padilla confirmed on Wednesday.

The troubled commonwealth is at loggerheads with investors over plans to 
restructure $70bn in debts that havetriggered a financial crisis on the island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/07/puerto-rico-economic-migrants-escape-us-mainland-in-search-of-stability>
 leading to mass migration, school closures and escalating unemployment and 
poverty.

Puerto Rico's 'unpayable' debt: is this the Greece of the western hemisphere?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/06/puerto-rico-debt-crisis-poverty-migration>
The island began defaulting on payments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/03/puerto-rico-defaults-dept-repayment>
 in August and faces close to $1bn in interest payments in 2016. Padilla said 
Puerto Rico would pay $354m of its obligations but will default on $35.9m of 
Puerto Rico Infrastructure Financing Authority debt and $1.4m of Public Finance 
Corp bonds, Padilla said. He also warned that the island did not have the cash 
to pay $400m due in May in Government Development Bank bonds.

Padilla said the island’s government would do “all [it] can to avoid” the 
shutdown of vital government services.

Puerto Rico’s unemployment rate is 12.5%, more than twice the US national 
average, and 45% of its population now lives below the poverty line. Padilla 
has warned its crushing debts have sent the commonwealth into a “death spiral 
<http://money.cnn.com/2015/06/29/news/economy/puerto-rico-default/>”.


Unlike mainland municipalities, notably Detroit, the commonwealth is legally 
barred from declaring bankruptcy. Padilla has pushed, unsuccessfully, for 
Congress to change the law and allow Puerto Rico to declare bankruptcy.

“The consequences of a default without any legal framework to restructure our 
liabilities are so disastrous that for the past six months we have been 
executing emergency measures to continue meeting our obligations with our 
creditors and avoid a disruption of essential services to our citizens,” 
Padilla said inearlier this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/01/puerto-rico-debt-govenor-alejandro-garcia-padilla-senate-repayment>
. “These emergency measures are unsustainable.”


The US treasury secretary, Jacob Lew, said this week it was inevitable for 
Puerto Rico to default on its debts. “Look, they’re effectively in default” 
already, he said in an appearance on Fox Business Network. “They’ve already 
been taking money out of pension funds to pay current bills. They’ve been 
shifting money from one creditor to pay for another creditor. That’s 
effectively default. You don’t have to wait until you miss a coupon payment to 
say you’re in default.”


A Treasury spokesman said: “Today’s announcement that Puerto Rico will miss 
additional payments demonstrates the gravity of the commonwealth’s fiscal 
crisis and the need for Congress to act now. Puerto Rico is at a dead end, 
shifting funds from one creditor to pay another and diverting money from 
already-depleted pension funds to pay both current bills and debt service.

“This increasingly urgent situation demands swift Congressional action to give 
Puerto Rico access to an orderly restructuring regime paired with independent 
oversight. Congressional leaders have committed to act, and the administration 
remains committed to working with Congress to address this crisis and put 
Puerto Rico on a sustainable path forward that protects the 3.5 million 
Americans who live in the commonwealth.”
 