

Pulling: Rebekah Staton as Louise, Sharon Horgan as Donna and Tanya Franks as 
Karen. Photograph: BBC

Like Little Miss Jocelyn 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/bbcthree/programmes/little_miss_jocelyn/>, Pulling 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/bbcthree/programmes/pulling/index.shtml> is a BBC3 comedy 
which has found its way on to the BBC2 schedule - the first series begins a run 
of repeats tonight. But do the similarities end there?

Probably: Pulling is funny. Not "funny" in a 
let's-repeat-this-catchphrase-often-enough-while-cueing-the-canned-laughter 
way. Neither does it resort to questionable caricatures seemingly based onsome 
cultural or racial stereotype <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i1yboQlYPrE>. No, 
it's "funny ha-ha" and "funny peculiar" assisted by a healthy portion of 
bite-knuckle-with-sheer-embarrassment-I-can't-bear-to-watch funny.

Often akin to No Angels 
<http://www.channel4.com/entertainment/tv/microsites/N/no_angels/index.html 
albeit> with both No Nurses and No Morals, this actually revolves around a main 
character played brilliantly by (the series' co-writer)Sharon Horgan 
<http://arts.theguardian.com/theatre/comedy/story/0,,1987059,00.html> alongside 
her equally dysfunctional flatmates (brought to life by Tanya Franks and 
Rebekah Staton). We could keep withJocelyn Jee Esien 
<http://arts.theguardian.com/features/story/0,,1867013,00.html>'s Roger 
Hargreaves-esque theme and describe those roles as Little Miss Hapless, Little 
Miss Alky and Little Miss Stalker, yet they're actually known here as Donna, 
Karen and Louise.

The writing is sharp and the language is coarse yet it's that ever-changing 
"sit" in this sitcom that provides those (never pre-recorded) laughs. Pulling 
is seriously uncomfortable viewing at times (breakdowns, suicide attempts, 
stalking, the actions of the kind of family members that can only be described 
as "Lynne Perrie meets Wolverine", etc) yet it's definitely worth persevering 
with. Not for a happy ending of course. Maybe that will come with thesecond 
series <http://www.sitcom.co.uk/news/news.php?story=000109> that the BBC has 
already commissioned. Although I seriously doubt it: this is "black comedy" in 
the truest sense.
 