
Punch Taverns <https://www.theguardian.com/business/punchtaverns> is at the 
centre of a takeover battle, with the Dutch brewer Heineken and one of the pub 
group’s founders both vying for the company.

Shares jumped 39% to 179p on Wednesday after Punch said it had received two 
competing offers.

The group, which has more than 3,000 pubs across the UK, said it was in 
advanced discussions with Patron Capital Advisers about a potential 174p a 
share offer, which would value the company at about £390m.

Before the approaches were revealed, Punch had a market value of about £286m.

Under the terms of the proposal, Heineken would buy a portfolio of about 1,900 
pubs from Patron immediately on completion of the deal, leaving Patron with 
about 1,300.

The pub operator has received a second, higher, offer from Emerald Investment 
Partners, the private family firm run by Alan McIntosh, one of Punch Taverns’ 
founders.

Emerald has approached Punch with a potential cash offer of 185p a share. In a 
brief statement confirming the offers 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/punch-taverns-plc--pub-/rns/possible-offer-for-punch-taverns-plc/201612141217328533R/>
, Punch said: “The Emerald proposal is conditional on, amongst other things, 
arranging committed financing, confirmatory due diligence, and the 
recommendation of the board. The board is in discussions with Emerald regarding 
the Emerald proposal.

“There can be no certainty that any firm offer will be made by either Patron 
or Emerald. A further announcement will be made in due course.”

Both suitors have a deadline of 5pm on 11 January to announce a firm intention 
to make an offer or walk away.

A deal would follow a complex restructuring of Punch Taverns over recent years,
including the demerger in 2011 of its managed pub division Spirit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/mar/22/punch-taverns-demerger>, 
which was later bought by Greene King. Last month Punch reported its first 
annual pre-tax profit since 2013.

Heineken already owns 1,100 leased pubs in the UK through its Star Pubs & Bars 
business. The brewer’s brands include Strongbow, Bulmers and Foster’s.
 