
David Blaine <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/david-blaine> has always 
looked a bit weary. The illusionist once said that he only feels alive when 
close to death, which might explain it. Unless he’s having a flutter with 
oblivion, life’s just a bit… leaden. Judging by the dark circles under his eyes 
and a monotone more glacial than ever, Blaine’s new showDavid Blaine: Beyond 
Magic (Monday, 9pm, Channel 4) depicts a man who may not have felt a thrill in 
years. What better pep, then, than to shoot a gun into your own mouth and catch 
the bullet in your teeth?

The bullet trick – “Twelve magicians faked it… and died,” warns the narrator 
over a lemon barley water Aphex Twin soundscape – is built up as the climax of 
this one-off. Without giving too much away, Blaine doesn’t fake it and he 
doesn’t die. Which should come as a surprise to no one. Can you really imagine 
if this were being written after Blaine had not, in fact, caught a bullet from 
a .22 caliber rifle in his gob and instead it had fired out the back of his 
big, handsome skull and that was that? You can’t, can you?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEpOQmjhHvb0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEpOQmjhHvb0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEpOQmjhHvb0&media=>
Because Blaine’s life never really feels precarious. Even with shotguns. Even 
with mates, fellow magicians and even his dentist shaking their heads and 
telling him over and over that he’s one crazy son of a bitch. You absolutely 
know he is not going to die or else David Blaine: Beyond Magic would not have 
been finished or broadcast. You know it like you know you’re going to blink 
again before you get to the end of the next sentence. It makes the 
attention-seeking stunt by far the least exhilarating in this 42-minute 
extravaganza. It makes you want to pat him on the head and say: “It’s all 
right, mate. You don’t have to be such a try-hard.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fdavid-blaine-beyond-magic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa40547e21cae8cbb3d776da95840407db7f0a694%2F78_0_2813_1688%2F2813.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Put%20the%20shotgun%20down%2C%20David%20Blaine%3A%20the%20real%20magic%20is%20your%20audience's%20reactions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fdavid-blaine-beyond-magic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Put%20the%20shotgun%20down%2C%20David%20Blaine%3A%20the%20real%20magic%20is%20your%20audience%27s%20reactions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fdavid-blaine-beyond-magic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa40547e21cae8cbb3d776da95840407db7f0a694%2F78_0_2813_1688%2F2813.jpg>
 Hooked… Cara Delevingne on Beyond Magic 
Naturally, there are no such dissenting voices here. For TV, Blaine has roped 
in the usual gaggle of celebrities to look bedazzled. There’s Arnold 
Schwarzenegger, who now resembles less a human man and more some sort of glazed 
crocodile puppet as he looks on at Blaine doing some classic end-of-pier 
wine-glass eating. Jennifer Lawrence – very much still all human woman – 
screams at Blaine over FaceTime that he’s a witch, after an impressive 
cross-continent card trick. Later, Blaine enters John Travolta’s home and does 
something with his wedding ring, a clothes hanger and his oesophagus. Stop 
sniggering.

For the Beckhams (also in their home) and for Drake, Blaine does actually seem 
to go beyond magic, somehow turning his stomach into an aquarium and bringing 
up a medley of live frogs for his lucky hosts. There is literally nothing not 
to like about watching Drake and at least 20 entourage members reduced to a 
collective babbling mess while watching writhing amphibians slip out from 
between the lips of a man.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fjimmy-fallon-shocked-by-david-blaines-human-aquarium-trick-on-tonight-show-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jimmy%20Fallon%20shocked%20by%20David%20Blaine's%20'human%20aquarium'%20trick%20on%20Tonight%20Show%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fjimmy-fallon-shocked-by-david-blaines-human-aquarium-trick-on-tonight-show-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jimmy%20Fallon%20shocked%20by%20David%20Blaine%27s%20%27human%20aquarium%27%20trick%20on%20Tonight%20Show%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fjimmy-fallon-shocked-by-david-blaines-human-aquarium-trick-on-tonight-show-video&media=>
Jimmy Fallon shocked by David Blaine’s ‘human aquarium’ trick on Tonight Show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2016/nov/14/jimmy-fallon-shocked-by-david-blaines-human-aquarium-trick-on-tonight-show-video>
And ultimately that’s what makes Blaine a commanding performer: not the card 
tricks, the glass eating, the endurance tests, being electrocuted for three 
days straight etc, in and of themselves, but the reactions he draws from those 
bearing witness to them. It’s the squeals of terrified rapture he elicits from 
people he meets on the street whose money and belongings he makes disappear 
(look out for the proper weird one involving an iPhone and a river). In the 
end, watching 1,000-volt human emotion trumps Tesla coils and chainmail. So put 
the gun down, David, and stick to coughing up sea creatures in the company of 
rap megastars.
 