
One of the world’s richest men cannot be sued in London over claims that 
agents acting on his behalf falsely imprisoned and tortured a British citizen, 
because he is protected by diplomatic immunity, the high court has ruled.

Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin Jaber al-Thani, the former prime minister of Qatar 
who is worth an estimated £8bn, claimed that because he haddiplomatic and state 
immunity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/13/diplomatic-immunity-of-qatars-former-billionaire-pm-questioned-in-high-court>
 the UK did not have jurisdiction to hear a case brought by Fawaz al-Attiya, a 
British citizen and former official spokesman for the emirate.

Attiya alleged that Hamad bin Jassim had ordered his detention for 15 months, 
the majority of which he spent in solitary confinement and where he was also 
“subject to threats and psychological abuse”. He also claimed that Thani, also 
known as HBJ, arranged for his property to be confiscated.

The claims were rejected by HBJ, whose lawyers say the “extremely serious 
allegations are, without exception, a combination of distortion, exaggeration 
and wholesale fabrication”.

Attiya, 47, was born in London, educated in Roehampton and now lives in 
Newmarket. He had been seeking damages of hundreds of millions of pounds for 
the loss of ancestral land when the case was rejected. Attiya said he would 
lodge an appeal.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fqatari-billionaire-cannot-be-sued-over-torture-claim-london-court-rules%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffac355612e26b52973f5ef982eb07dfe881be51b%2F0_799_2988_1792%2F2988.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Qatari%20billionaire%20cannot%20be%20sued%20over%20torture%20claim%2C%20London%20court%20rules&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fqatari-billionaire-cannot-be-sued-over-torture-claim-london-court-rules%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Qatari%20billionaire%20cannot%20be%20sued%20over%20torture%20claim%2C%20London%20court%20rules&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fqatari-billionaire-cannot-be-sued-over-torture-claim-london-court-rules%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffac355612e26b52973f5ef982eb07dfe881be51b%2F0_799_2988_1792%2F2988.jpg>
 Fawaz al-Attiya. Photograph: Social media/Randeep Ramesh 
Justice Blake ruled the court had no jurisdiction to hear the claim on two 
grounds, explaining that there was “no judicial authority on how a former prime 
minister of a sovereign state could be sued in a private capacity for inducing 
breaches of duty by other public officials”.

HBJ is a well-known business figure, having been in charge of Qatar’s $200bn 
sovereign wealth fund from 2000 until 2013, overseeing a series of high-profile 
investments in Harrods, the Shard and London’s Olympic Village.

In June 2013 HBJ stepped down from the posts of prime minister, foreign 
minister and head of the Qatar Investment Authority after his ally, the Qatari 
emir,abdicated in favour of his son, Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/24/qatar-emir-steps-down-son-tamim>.

Six months later HBJ was added to the Foreign Office diplomatic list, 
eventually given the rank of “minister-counsellor”. The listing as a diplomat 
means he and his two wives and 15 children enjoy legal immunity in Britain 
under the Vienna convention of 1961.

The Foreign Office said it was “ultimately for the court to decide whether a 
foreign diplomat enjoys immunity”.

Qatar's former PM invokes diplomatic immunity over Briton's torture claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/12/qatars-former-pm-invokes-diplomatic-immunity-over-britons-torture-claims>
The judge accepted that there was “nothing in the factual information provided 
to suggest that [HBJ] has ever undertaken … any function representing the 
interests of Qatar”.

However, in a ruling he said that it was up to the Foreign Office to rescind 
the appointment of a diplomat “if it considers appropriate … [this] avoids the 
risk of inconsistency and leaves the exercise of the prerogative untrammelled 
by a rival judicial enquiry”.

A spokesman for HBJ said: “Sheikh Hamad is obviously very pleased with the 
judgment. He is particularly pleased that, having considered all the available 
evidence and having heard argument over the course of two days, the judge has 
rejected Mr Al-Attiya’s case as to state immunity.

“That case rested on a version of events that was intended to persuade the 
court that Sheikh Hamad had pursued some form of oppressive personal vendetta 
against Mr Al-Attiya.”

In response Attiya said he would appeal the judgement. He pointed out that 
earlier this month the high court had refused a diplomatic immunity claim by 
Saudi billionaire in divorce proceedings, saying it was “spurious”.

“I am disappointed that the court was not able to hear my claim against HBJ on 
the basis that he has claimed diplomatic and state immunity.

“I have instructed my lawyers to lodge grounds of appeal against this decision 
and I trust that my case will be heard. I am confident that justice will 
prevail and HBJ will answer for what he has done; diplomatic immunity is 
intended to facilitate relations between states, not to arbitrarily lift the 
rich and powerful above the law.”
 