
The prolonged unconventional, quantitative easing (QE) monetary policy of the 
Bank of England <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> 
has effectively hijacked fiscal policy from the government, with disastrous 
effects on savers and pensioners and in a way that makes wealth inequality 
worse more generally.

The reasons for this are subtle, which is why they are also insidious.

As quoted by Steve Baker MP in a recent House of Commons debate on QE, John 
Maynard Keynes once explained how, via inflation, “governments can confiscate, 
secretly and unobserved, an important part of the wealth of their citizens,” 
and, “while the process impoverishes many, it actually enriches some. The sight 
of this arbitrary rearrangement of riches strikes not only at security, but at 
confidence in the equity of the existing distribution of wealth”.

As arguably the single most influential economist of the 20th century, we 
should give Keynes’ thoughts on this matter due consideration.

It may be true that consumer price inflation remains relatively low due to 
what economists call slack in the labour market, which tends to reduce or 
prevent wage growth. But because of the artificially low asset yields 
associated with QE, savers and pensioners now find they must outright liquidate 
assets in order to maintain a middle-class lifestyle or to enjoy a comfortable 
retirement. While that can work for a time, in the end it erodes the 
middle-class capital base and leaves households with less to pass down to their 
children and grandchildren.

QE enriches those who have already accumulated enough assets such that they 
generate sufficient income without the need to liquidate their accumulated 
capital base.As the Bank itself determined in a 2012 paper  
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/news/2012/nr073.pdf>
analysing, among other things, the distributional effects of QE, “the top 5% of 
households own 40% of the assets,” and hence they have been the primary 
beneficiaries of the rampant asset price inflation following the financial 
crisis of 2008 and large devaluation in sterling.

QE can also be an effective tool to weaken the currency, which makes imports 
and basic goods more expensive, squeezing the middle class further. While some 
argue that it is possible to “devalue your way to prosperity”, history has not 
been kind to the countries and empires that have followed this path. Countries 
that have pursued stable or outright strong currency policies have generally 
fared much better. Germany and Switzerland come to mind, as does the pre-1970s 
United States.

Claudio Borio <http://www.bis.org/speeches/sp160906.htm>, the head of the 
monetary and economic department at the Bank for International Settlements, 
claimed in a recent speech that radical unconventional monetary policy “is just 
fiscal policy dressed up”.

Indeed, it is time to start calling QE what it is: a hidden tax on the wealth 
of middle-class savers and pensioners which, on the one hand, the government 
can use to finance the deficits associated with a large, modern welfare state 
and, on the other, redistribute wealth to the top 5% of households. That is not 
only monetary policy. It is fiscal policy, which the Bank has de facto taken 
over.

Related: UK 'will probably need monetary stimulus' to limit Brexit vote effects
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/28/uk-bank-of-england-monetary-stimulus-brexit-vote-effects-minouche-shafik>

It remains to be seen whether it was a wise decision, but UK citizens recently 
exercised their democratic right by voting to leave the comparatively less 
democratic EU. The government has already set about considering what changes 
its newfound independence might enable it to make to fiscal policy, such as 
lowering the corporate tax rate to attract much-needed private investment.

It would be even more refreshing to see it reassert its right to determine 
fiscal policy more generally by telling the Bank to end QE and with it the 
associated insidious, pernicious distributional effects in favour of the 
wealthy. The economic policy focus can then turn to where it truly belongs, on 
how best to generate increasing rates of savings, investment and productivity 
growth, and in a way that does not disproportionately benefit any one group – 
whether rich or poor – over another.

The British public was recently allowed to vote on whether they wished to 
leave the EU. Shouldn’t they also be allowed to vote on whether they would like 
their accumulated private savings to be devalued?

John Butler is vice president and head of wealth services for Goldmoney and a 
consultant to Cobden Partners, an economic consultancy

 