
The US should completely quit the United Nations forum to tackle climate 
change in order to quickly exit theParis climate agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/paris-climate-agreement>, according to 
a conservative lawyer who is part of Donald Trump’s transition team.


Abandoning the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
<http://newsroom.unfccc.int/> (UNFCCC) would allow the US to back out of the 
international climate effort within a year, far sooner than the four-year 
period that would be required to ditch the Paris accord, whichcame into force 
in November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/04/paris-climate-change-agreement-enters-into-force>
. Such a move would probably prove a severe blow to global efforts to avoid 
dangerous warming.

Steven Groves <http://www.heritage.org/about/staff/g/steven-groves#>, a lawyer 
at the conservative Heritage Foundation, said exiting the UNFCCC would be the 
“most practical” way for the US to drop its climate change commitments. Groves 
is part of the state departmenttransition team 
<https://diplopundit.net/tag/steven-groves/> for the president-elect, who has 
promised to “cancel <http://www.bbc.com/news/election-us-2016-36401174>” the 
Paris deal.

“There’s a practical reason for canceling the UNFCCC in that it would provide 
the shortest timeframe,” Groves, who said he was speaking on the Heritage 
Foundation’sposition on the issue 
<http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/2016/06/the-us-should-withdraw-from-the-united-nations-framework-convention-on-climate-change>
 as he was not authorised to speak on behalf of the Trump transition team, told 
the Guardian.

“If we only withdrew from the Paris agreement, that’s still three or four 
years. We’ve declined to join other international agreements and there were 
dire threats of the end of US influence in the world and that hasn’t come to 
pass. It’s not as if Nato would disband if we did that.”

Although Trump recently said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/donald-trump-paris-climate-deal-change-open-mind>
 he has an “open mind” about the Paris agreement, he has consistently 
threatened to exit the deal. Reince Priebus, Trump’s incoming chief of staff, 
told Fox News Sunday that Trump’s position on the climate accord remains that 
“most of it is a bunch of bunk”.

Trump, who has himself called global warming a hoax, has appointed a number of 
people who reject the overwhelming scientific position on climate change to his 
transition team.

Myron Ebell, who has said climate science is “phony” 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/frontline/article/meet-myron-ebell-the-climate-contrarian-leading-trumps-epa-transition/>
, is heading the transition team for the Environmental Protection Agency, while 
Groves, albeit in a less influential position, has used Twitter to assail “
climate change alarmists 
<https://twitter.com/steven_groves/status/708132161216339969>” and Hillary 
Clinton for “shilling for the orthodox climate change ‘consensus’ 
<https://twitter.com/steven_groves/status/780461128220565505>”.

Meanwhile, Bob Walker, a Trump campaign adviser who is not part of the 
transition process, hasadvocated eliminating climate research at Nasa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/22/nasa-earth-donald-trump-eliminate-climate-change-research>
 and claimed that scientists are deeply divided on the cause of warming.

Trump to scrap Nasa climate research in crackdown on ‘politicized science’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/22/nasa-earth-donald-trump-eliminate-climate-change-research>
In fact, the vast majority 
<http://www.skepticalscience.com/global-warming-scientific-consensus-intermediate.htm>
 of peer-reviewed science, along with all of the world’smajor scientific bodies 
including Nasa <http://climate.nasa.gov/scientific-consensus/> and the Royal 
Society 
<https://royalsociety.org/topics-policy/projects/climate-change-evidence-causes/question-2/>
, agree that the world is warming and that human activity is the primary cause. 
Nine of the 10 warmest years on recordhave occurred since 2000 
<https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/sotc/global/201513>, with 2016 set to be the warmest 
yet. Separate lines of evidence, such as rising sea levels, shrinking glaciers 
and the shifting range of species, all point to a rapidly changing climate.

President George HW Bush, with ratification from the Senate, committed the US 
to the UNFCCC in 1992 following the Earth summit in Rio. Following two decades 
of often fraught negotiations, 196 nationsagreed in Paris last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/paris-climate-agreement> to cut 
emissions in a bid to avoid a temperature rise of 2C globally.

Trump’s election has raised concerns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/18/poor-nations-pledge-deep-emissions-cuts-at-marrakech-climate-change-summit>
 that the US, the world’s second largest emitter, could exit the process and 
discourage other nations during a period when emissions must be radically 
reduced to avoid disastrous heatwaves, sea level rise and the mass displacement 
of people.

The new president could choose to simply ignore the Paris agreement but Groves 
said the US should quit the entire framework to undo what he said was Barack 
Obama’s improper signing of the deal. Obama did not ask the 
Republican-controlled Senate to ratify the Paris agreement, which has a binding 
goal but leaves emissions reduction targets and methods to individual nations.

“The current administration wouldn’t submit it to the Senate, where it 
would’ve gone up in flames,” Groves said. “It’s being a little too clever with 
the constitution and the treaty-making power. There is a balance between 
Congress and the executive on this issue and the Paris agreement has thrown 
that balance off for raw political reasons.

“Just because you’re the president, you don’t become a dictator. President 
Obama was betting that another president, such as Hillary Clinton, wouldn’t 
withdraw the agreement. He made a political calculation and we’ll soon find out 
if that was right or not.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ftrump-break-from-paris-climate-deal-unfccc-exit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa33bc70bc35667b3fc1dc10243d60fe487c422c4%2F0_233_4584_2750%2F4584.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Quitting%20UN%20climate%20change%20body%20could%20be%20Trump's%20quickest%20exit%20from%20Paris%20deal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ftrump-break-from-paris-climate-deal-unfccc-exit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Quitting%20UN%20climate%20change%20body%20could%20be%20Trump%27s%20quickest%20exit%20from%20Paris%20deal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ftrump-break-from-paris-climate-deal-unfccc-exit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa33bc70bc35667b3fc1dc10243d60fe487c422c4%2F0_233_4584_2750%2F4584.jpg>
 Barack Obama and the UN secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, shake hands during a 
joint ratification of the Paris climate deal in September. Photograph: How Hwee 
Young/AP 
Other legal experts have maintained that Obama was well within his powers to 
put the US’s name to the Paris deal, given that it is largely unenforceable. 
John Kerry, the secretary of state, successfully pushed for key parts of the 
text to use the word “should” rather than “shall” in order to negate the need 
for Senate approval.

David Wirth 
<https://www.bc.edu/bc-web/schools/law/academics-faculty/faculty-directory/david-wirth.html>
, of the Boston College law school and formerly of the state department, said 
that previous Senate approval of the UNFCC, along with the language of the 
Paris deal, meant there was no executive overreach.

“There’s no question that it’s constitutional,” Wirth said. “The state 
department was extremely precise in making sure of that. If anything, they were 
extra cautious. These are aspirational provisions and the president has the 
authority to review an existing situation, that’s self-evident. The legal 
authority is already there.

“Withdrawing from the UNFCC would leave the US without a seat at the table, 
having withdrawn from a set of requirements that are procedural rather than 
onerous. That would be political grandstanding and contrary to the national 
interest. There would be opprobrium and criticism from the rest of the world, 
for no apparent benefit.”

Scientists have warned that renewed efforts are required to avoid breaching 
the 2C threshold, with the current Paris commitments still leaving the world on 
course for a temperatureincrease of 3C or more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/03/world-on-track-for-3c-of-warming-under-current-global-climate-pledges-warns-un>
.

Adam Sobel, a climate scientist at Columbia University, said Groves had 
presented 
<http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/2016/06/the-us-should-withdraw-from-the-united-nations-framework-convention-on-climate-change>
 “a misleading and inaccurate portrayal of both the science and economics of 
climate mitigation, greatly understating both the risks of human-induced 
climate change and the benefits of the Paris agreement while overstating the 
costs.

“It is transparently a piece of advocacy on behalf of the short-term interests 
of fossil fuel companies, against the broader interests of both the US and the 
rest of the world.

“The majority of the American people support US participation in the Paris 
agreement. If the US withdraws from the UN convention and the Paris agreement, 
history will judge us harshly.”

The US’s status in international climate talks will be heavily influenced by 
Trump’s choice for secretary of state. Former presidential nominee Mitt Romney, 
ex-New York mayor Rudy Giuliani and former CIA chief David Petraeus have all 
been linked to the role.

There has also been speculation 
<https://twitter.com/JoeNBC/status/804422830372823040> that Rex Tillerson, 
chief executive of oil giant Exxon, is being considered by Trump for the 
position, a prospect that has horrified environmental groups due to the 
company’s history of concealing the full impact of climate change.

“If the goal is to drain the swamp in DC, Tillerson might not be your man; 
Exxon’s business plan continues to require raising the level of the ocean to 
the point where Foggy Bottom will be well underwater,” said Bill McKibben, 
co-founder of climate group350.org <http://350.org/>.

“But this is certainly a good way to make clear exactly who’ll be running the 
government in aTrump administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration> - just cut out the 
middleman and hand it directly to the fossil fuel industry.”
 