
Wednesday night greyhound racing at Wentworth Park is a quiet affair. The 
silence is only punctuated by the whir of the mechanical rabbit spinning around 
the track, the flurry of the greyhounds footsteps and the relentless drone of 
country and western music.

“I can remember going to Wentworth Park and you couldn’t move before the TAB 
come in,” says Ron Johnston, an 86-year-old truck driver who lives across the 
road. “A lot of people don’t go now, if it’s raining and wet you’re not going 
to go down there, [it is] only the owners and trainers.”

Inside the stadium there are as many reporters as there are punters, because 
this occasion is the first race night at the tracksince New South Wales premier 
Mike Baird announced that the sport would be banned in the state next year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/07/new-south-wales-to-ban-greyhound-racing-from-next-year-after-cruelty-investigation>
. Before racing starts, a spokesperson for the Greyhound Breeders Owners and 
Trainers Association encourages the trainers to share their story with the 
journalists, sign a petition, and write letters to their local MP.

The inquiry commissioned by the NSW government 
<http://www.greyhoundracinginquiry.justice.nsw.gov.au/> that provoked the ban 
found that “around 10% to 20% of trainers” were engaged in the practice of live 
baiting, and that the wastage rate of greyhounds is “70% to 50%”.

Johnston used to train greyhounds. He stopped a few years ago, but admits he 
has used rabbits as live bait, and that “all the trainers” have done it.

“We did give them a rabbit, but that’s all,” he says. “Once the greyhound 
would grab the rabbit it would die, you know. I don’t believe in [live baiting 
with] cats and possums and things like that. I’ve never ever done that.”

Judith and John Richardson have been married for 51 years, and have raced 
greyhounds for the past 45. At their home in Dapto they have three pups, two 
racing dogs and two more in retirement. “We haven’t got the money to be horse 
trainers,” says Mrs Richardson. “You can race a dog, it can turn out here and 
it can be a champion.”

They Richardsons usually race at country tracks, but since the beginning of 
this year, they have been entering dogs at the races at Wentworth Park in 
Sydney. The Wentworth Park website says that it is “the most affordable and 
easiest code of racing to become involved in as an owner.”

As to the reasons for the ban, Mrs Richardson says: “I haven’t really seen a 
bad side of this industry.”

Rod Moon, a storeman and regular punter, says he is “disappointed” at the ban, 
which will come into force on 1 July 2017, but readily admits that live baiting 
is “disgraceful”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fgreyhound-ban-it-will-break-our-hearts-if-we-have-to-stop-racing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe28d6637039db1c20d0d74d48c7b10bf7cd30f7e%2F0_0_2362_1574%2F2362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Race%20night%20at%20Wentworth%20Park%3A%20greyhound%20owners%20begin%20the%20long%20goodbye&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fgreyhound-ban-it-will-break-our-hearts-if-we-have-to-stop-racing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Race%20night%20at%20Wentworth%20Park%3A%20greyhound%20owners%20begin%20the%20long%20goodbye&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fgreyhound-ban-it-will-break-our-hearts-if-we-have-to-stop-racing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe28d6637039db1c20d0d74d48c7b10bf7cd30f7e%2F0_0_2362_1574%2F2362.jpg>
 An owner prepares her dog before a race. Photograph: Jonny Weeks for the 
Guardian 
“We’ve been resigned to [Wentworth Park] going, I’m surprised this didn’t go 
five years ago, maybe 10 years ago,” says Moon. “I feel sorry for the Gosfords, 
the Daptos and the Bathursts.”

Then there’s Bob Shirley, a 73 year-old semi-retired accountant, has sold 
tickets at the Wattle Street end for the past four years. He too says that live 
baiting is “disgraceful”, but adds that the trainers he knows are “terrific 
people” who “dote on their dogs”.


“It has to be properly policed,” he says. “If you know this is going on, 
you’ve got to become a dobber. It won’t be popular, of course, but there you 
go. If you want an industry, it has to happen.”

Labor vows to repeal greyhound racing ban as backlash mounts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/jul/11/labor-vows-repeal-greyhound-racing-ban-backlash-baird>
These are the “battlers” that have invested money and time into a sport that 
the NSW Labor opposition leader, Luke Foley, has called a “great Australian 
institution”. Foley hasformed an unlikely coalition 
<http://www.skynews.com.au/news/top-stories/2016/07/11/labor-to-oppose-greyhound-racing-ban.html>
 with the Shooters, Fishers and Farmers party and the Reverend Fred Nile in 
opposition to the Baird government’s decision to ban greyhound racing.

Class has become a focal point in the debate. Foley has urged National party 
MPs to stand up to “elitist north shore liberals and inner-city Greens”, while 
Max Solling, a local historian, toldABC Radio 
<http://www.abc.net.au/radionational/programs/lifematters/dishlickers-ditched---greyhound-racing---a-history/7585060>
: “There’s been a long history of dog racing being singled out for 
discriminatory treatment, both here and in Britain. The middle-class society 
particularly was always ready to attack greyhound racing.”

The Richardson’s greyhound, Ace I Am — named after the rapper Will.I.Am — 
finishes third in Race 7. John lets the dog out of the starting box, and Judith 
gathers it at the end of the race.

“What are we going to do?” says Mrs Richardson. “We can’t pack up and go to 
another state. We’ve got grandchildren, we’ve got our kids, what’s our life 
going to be? I don’t know what John and I are going to do.

“It will break our hearts if we have to stop racing.”
 