
There’s a storm brewing about player welfare in rugby. The honed of today will 
be the crocked of tomorrow, the durable of spirit will be the crushed of hope 
in the sorry years left to them after retirement. Goodness, who would ever play 
the game?

Dan Carter probably had to weigh up a few things in his mind in the months of 
inactivity before the 2015 World Cup. He was already the wrong side of 30, had 
a history of injury – the groin strain that had kept him out of theclosing 
stages of the 2011 tournament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/oct/02/dan-carter-new-zealand-groin-injury>
 seemed to have spread to many more parts of his body – and the All Blacks 
seemed to be doing pretty well without him. Aaron Cruden and Beauden Barrett 
were developing a healthy competition for the vacant No10 shirt.The world 
champions were moving on 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/oct/23/rugby-world-cup-richie-mccaw-new-zealand-france>
 after the fractured age of Carter.

He decided to give it another go – to put himself through rehab and rebuilding 
his credentials on the field. Why would he ever want to do that? To enjoy the 
exercise of control in the middle of a field, where 15 opponents would do him 
serious and legitimate harm if ever they could grab him. To be the defining 
character in front of scores of thousands in his theatre and multimillions 
watching on television. To be king again.

Job done. Surely that was enough. What could possibly beat that? He had ruled 
the final and won the World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/01/dan-carter-new-zealand-australia-rugby-world-cup-final->
 with his special mates, the All Blacks. Richie McCaw knew the moment had come 
and took to his helicopter for the next rush in life. What are you going to do, 
Dan?

He headed for France and a dressing room of strangers at Racing 92 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/11/racing-92-dan-carter-northampton-european-champions-cup>
. He had done it before, using his 2008 sabbatical from New Zealand to give it 
a go in Europe. This first stint, at Perpignan, ended painfully after only five 
games. France may then have been unfinished business but it was still a risk. 
Sure, there was the money, but he was already Dan Carter Inc and unlikely to be 
stressed financially for the foreseeable future.

Dan Carter: 'The future will always be bright in New Zealand rugby' | Aaron 
Timms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/nov/25/dan-carter-the-future-will-always-be-bright-in-new-zealand-rugby>
The All Blacks looked after Carter. They nursed him through the injuries and 
gave him space. They gave him time off – that pass to leave and play for 
Perpignan. Steve Hansen believed in him and told him he would be supported 
whatever his decision.

Faith and support. They may be a little lacking in this country as we 
contemplate the damage professional rugby may cause. Over here, the manual of 
development too often recommends hard weights and easy disposal. Make them big 
and discard at will.

Carter is a couple of inches off six foot, and weighs in well below 15st. He 
is officially vulnerable. But off he went again. Paris here he was coming. To 
the slightly erratic Racing but here they are, in the Champions Cup final no 
less, facingSaracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> in Lyon. And 
their star turn is to relive the thrill all over again.

Star? His performance against Leicester in Nottingham in the semi-final  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/24/leicester-racing-92-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
was far from conventional. It was nevertheless one of the most astute games of 
his career but far from typical. He was well known for languidly passing the 
ball to others – to Ma’a Nonu in particular – if no opportunity readily 
presented itself. He was perfectly happy to kick the leather off the ball for 
territory and to restart the process of building pressure on the opposition, 
whom he had just put in possession. He was, that is, perfectly happy to bide 
his time, let others do the work until his moment came.

But what he did for Racing in the semi took this non-involvement to a new 
level. It required a partner and, here, Maxime Machenaud stepped forward, a 
half-back colleague more than happy to use Carter as the ultimate dummy. The 
scrum-half kicked and ran the show, linking with his forwards, prodding the 
team forward by hand and boot. It was a performance worthy of Carter himself.

The underused 10 showed his willingness – his gratitude – by contributing 
elsewhere. No one in the world would have complained if he sat back and simply 
watched as Machenaud ran the show and as Racing’s less languid New Zealander, 
Chris Masoe, led the brutal defensive assault on the Leicester attackers.

Carter, however, joined in just when it appeared Leicester, knocked out of 
their rhythm by Masoe’s men, were finally starting to put their 
counterattacking game back together. Carter did not suddenly take over from 
Machenaud but signed up for the defence. He made two tackles that did as much 
as any to put Racing into the final. It was not a conventional contribution but 
it was certainly as telling as any. It is a feature of Carter’s career that he 
can redefine himself at will, change his role on command for the good of the 
team.

Not everyone can be as good as Carter. Or even half as good but as the storm 
blows about how not to abuse the bodies and minds of players, there will always 
be his example. It will hurt along the way but it’s worth it. To rule the game 
– just to play a little part in a successful team – is why people are drawn 
towards danger. To beDan Carter <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/dan-carter>, 
now there’s a dream …
 