
1) Treve wins the Prix de l’Arc de Triomphe, 5 October 

The Head family has been bound up with the Prix de l’Arc de Triomphe for three 
generations since William Head saddled the winner in 1947, and they have been 
associated, as either trainer or jockey, with 10 successes in all. This, 
though, was surely their finest moment. For much of the year, Treve, the 
brilliant winner of the 2013 Arc, had seemed to be a diminishing shadow of her 
three-year-old self, but Criquette Head-Maarek never lost faith andcoaxed the 
filly back to her best to become the first dual winner for 36 years. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/05/treve-wins-2014-prix-de-larc-de-triomphe>
 Her “Papa”, Alec Head, bred Treve at the family stud. “I am in a dream, in a 
dream,” he said afterwards. “I have trained several Arc winners, but Treve is 
the best of them.”

2) Sire De Grugy wins at Cheltenham, 12 March 


If the days are gone when cheaply bought horses from unheralded yards could 
win feature races at Cheltenham – and, on the whole, they probably are - then 
Sire De Grugy was a glorious exception to prove the rule. Trained by Gary 
Moore, a grafter’s grafter, and ridden by his son Jamie, brother of the 
multi-millionaire Flat jockey Ryan,Sire De Grugy’s win in the Queen Mother 
Champion Chase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/mar/12/sire-de-grugy-champion-chase-cheltenham-festival>
cleared the weighing room as Moore’s colleagues emerged to applaud both horse 
and rider back to the winner’s enclosure. It was the first Festival victory for 
both trainer and jockey, and in all likelihood the last as well, unless Sire De 
Grugy can follow up in three months’ time.

3) Noble Mission wins the Champion Stakes, 18 October 


A famous and talented sibling can be a burden for any athlete to bear, and 
Frankel’s younger brother spent much of his career reminding everyone that a 
flawless pedigree can only take you so far. He got lucky when it mattered, 
though, as heavy rain before Champions Day not only reduced the field for the 
feature race, but also left the ground ideal for a mud-loving front-runner.
Noble Mission refused to yield in a duel with Al Kazeem through the final 
quarter-mile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/18/noble-mission-champion-stakes-frankel>
, and guaranteed an ecstatic welcome into the winner’s enclosure for his 
trainer Lady Cecil, the widow of Sir Henry, who trained Frankel. Britain’s most 
valuable raceday needed an abiding memory, and Noble Mission arrived to save 
the day.

4) Toast Of New York finishes second in the Breeders’ Cup Classic, 1 November 


As unlikely a story as any in racing this year, or any year. Jamie Osborne, 
bashed-up jump jockey turned trainer, sends many more horses to lowly 
Wolverhampton than he does to Ascot, Epsom and Newmarket put together, but he 
was a nose away from becoming the first British trainer to win the Classic, 
America’s most valuable race, on dirt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/nov/02/toast-of-new-york-breeders-cup-santa-anita-jamie-osborne>
. After a compelling three-way battle down the straight, Toast Of New York, a 
brave bull of a horse, should probably have got the race in the stewards’ room, 
but he is due to get another go at Bayern, the winner, in the most valuable 
race of them all, the Dubai World Cup, in March.

5) The Cheltenham Gold Cup, 14 March 


All 23 minutes of it. It was thrilling enough on the track, as the race 
changed completely after the last fence when Silviniaco Conti, who led over it, 
faded badly asLord Windermere charged down the outside to short-head On His Own 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/mar/14/lord-windermere-cheltenham-gold-cup-stewards-inquiry>
. But there is nothing like a good stewards’ inquiry to drag out the drama, and 
this was a knife-edge belter. It took the officials 15 minutes before they 
decided to leave the result unaltered. Cue delight for Jim Culloty, successful 
three times in the Gold Cup as a jockey on Best Mate and now as a trainer too, 
and despair – but, sportingly, no appeal – in the Willie Mullins camp. He must 
wait to join the elite club of trainers who have won the Grand National, 
Champion Hurdle and Gold Cup.

6) Pineau De Re wins the Grand National, 5 April


The biggest yards tend to divvy up most of Cheltenham’s main events these 
days, but the Grand National remains a defiantly different beast. Dr Richard 
Newland has space for just 12 horses at his stable near Worcester, butone of 
the dozen was good enough, and fortunate enough, to emerge in front at the end 
of the first National with a million-pound prize fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/apr/05/pineau-de-re-grand-national-aintree>
. Leighton Aspell, the winning jockey, had a story to tell too, having U-turned 
out of retirement back in 2007 after 18 months because he missed the buzz of 
the weighing room too much. Cheltenham is for National Hunt’s 
mega-corporations, but Aintree, happily, will always be a place that gives 
everyone a chance.

7) Estimate tests positive for morphine, 23 July


Of all the horses in all the yards in Newmarket that could have munched on a 
batch of contaminated feed in mid-June, one of them had to be Estimate. Runners 
from several well-known stables tested positive for morphine this summer, 
apparently thanks to poppy seeds in a rogue batch of foodstuff, but only 
Estimate allowed news organisations to link the head of state with a Class A 
drug and it was not a chance that any were about to miss.Estimate gave the 
Queen one of the greatest moments of her many decades on the turf when 
successful in the Ascot Gold Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/jun/20/queen-horse-estimate-royal-ascot> 
in 2013, butwas disqualified from second place in this year’s race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/sep/25/the-queen-estimate-disqualified-gold-cup-morphine>
, costing her owner nearly £100,000 and no end of uncomfortable headlines.

8) Roger Varian wins his first Classic, 13 September 


And if it is not the first of many, it will be a major surprise. Varian has 
been quietly impressive, and progressive, ever since taking over the licence at 
Kremlin House Stables in Newmarket in 2011 from the late Michael Jarvis, who 
would be proud of the way in which his former assistant has maintained his 
record of understated excellence. Varian had a Group One winner in his first 
season and took another significant step forward when Kingston Hill, who was 
second in the Derby,landed the St Leger at Doncaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/sep/13/kingston-hill-st-leger-roger-varian-grey-gatsby-irish-champion-stakes>
. Richard Hannon, who inherited a championship-winning stable from his father, 
also Richard, landed a Classic at the first attempt in May whenNight Of Thunder 
took the 2,000 Guineas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/may/03/kieren-fallon-2000-guineas-night-of-thunder>
, and it will be a surprise if Varian is not a title contender too in the near 
future.

9) Sheikh Mohammed spends big, 7-9 October


It takes more than the wealth of a mere king to compete at the top of Flat 
racing these days. Most of the major players are billionaires several times 
over with immense egos to match, who use the major bloodstock auctions as a 
chance to invite their rivals to feel the size of their wad. The al-Thani 
family from Qatar have been moving into thoroughbreds in a big way in recent 
years, but with the bruises fromthe Godolphin doping scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/apr/25/mahmood-al-zarooni-godolphin-doping-scandal>
 now starting to fade, Sheikh Mohammed sent out a message at this year’s most 
exclusive sale in Newmarket that the big boss is back in the hood. The Sheikh 
splashed out on nearly 40 of the most choicely bred yearlings and is clearly 
not going to shuffle quietly from the stage. The next few years will see plenty 
of ego-wrestling in the world’s biggest races.

10) Births. To racing: a right, 3 December 


The subject of racing’s financial structure is, even for most keen followers 
of the turf, about as dull as a January morning in Reykjavik,but one of the 
more obscure announcements in George Osborne’s Autumn Statement could prove to 
be highly significant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/03/government-consult-racing-right-levy>
 for a sport which needs to grow up and look after itself. The racing right, 
which will have plenty of support in parliament whatever the result of May’s 
general election, is supposed to allow racing to sell itself to the general 
public via the money they lose from betting on it, and could yet prove to be 
the most significant development since betting shops were legalised in the 
early 1960s. A sport which dates back to the late 1600s could yet be about the 
join the 21st century.

• This article was amended on 5 January 2015. An earlier version said that 
Noble Mission is Frankel’s older, rather than younger, brother.

 