
One of the genies uncorked by the referendum on the EU has been low-lying 
fascism and extreme nationalism. This is not to say that all leavers were 
racists. Far from it. But one of the political forces that have been unleashed 
is a form of dangerous nativism that unchecked will threaten us all.

It’s clear from the barrage of reports that a form of bigotry in everyday 
conversation is being legitimised. It is not racist to worry about high levels 
of immigration buta climate of fear is being created 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/27/brexit-racism-eu-referendum-racist-incidents-politicians-media>
 in the name of leavers. There are reports of schoolchildren terrified of being 
deported. “Polish vermin”, “Paki cunt” and “send them home” seem to be becoming 
something that immigrants and non-whites have toonce again have to endure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/26/racist-incidents-feared-to-be-linked-to-brexit-result-reported-in-england-and-wales>
.

Monday night’s BBC news 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/b07hj6hm/bbc-news-at-ten-27062016> report 
featured a neo-Nazi in a balanced piece about the fallout for eastern European 
immigrants of Brexit in Leeds. Outside a Polish shop,in an interview 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-36643794> a heavily inked Lee described himself 
as a “nationalist” and a “fascist”. He openly displayed his swastika tattoo and 
talked of a “sense of relief” after the Brexit vote. It was, said Lee, time to 
“take our country back”.

Brexit has given voice to racism – and too many are complicit | Miqdaad Versi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/27/brexit-racism-eu-referendum-racist-incidents-politicians-media>
For the leave campaigners, it must weigh on their conscience that their 
slogans have been easily adopted by the far right. That’s the trouble with 
words, you never know whose mouth they have been in. Seven years ago the 
country had an impassioned debate over the right of theBritish National party’s 
Nick Griffin to appear on Question Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/oct/23/bnp-poll-boost-question-time>
. Griffin did appear. His cause died a political death, eviscerated by his 
fellow panellists’ fury.

The aftermath of the Brexit vote threatens to reanimate that corpse. It is 
increasingly clear that the language of extremists is becoming part of the 
British street. Words are weapons-grade material. They can be made into 
political bombs. How long before “send them back” becomes a line in a manifesto 
that suggests voluntary repatriation for the last wave of European migrants?

The cause of free speech is worth defending. But it’s not absolute. Britain’s 
politicians have long policed the boundaries of political debate. Those who 
resort to fists and baseball bats have been excluded. However this referendum 
has seen not-so-coded appeals to racial and ethnic resentment surface.Nigel 
Farage’s poster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/nigel-farage-defends-ukip-breaking-point-poster-queue-of-migrants>
, which resembled a scene from a Nazi propaganda video, with the strapline 
“Breaking point” was such a loathsome entreaty.

Those who trade in xenophobia are on the march in Europe. Extremists, playing 
on people’s cultural and economic insecurity, have been gaining ground. In 
Sweden the extremist anti-migrantSwedish Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/24/swedish-asylum-support-far-right-nationalist-sweden-democrats>
 are making the political weather. In Austria, theextreme right came within a 
whisker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/24/austria-far-right-wake-up-call-europe>
 of winning the nation’s presidency. Marine Le Pen, the leader of the French 
far-right Front National party, described the British Brexit vote asa “victory 
for freedom” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/24/european-far-right-hails-britains-brexit-vote-marine-le-pen>
. She put the union jackon her Twitter homepage 
<https://twitter.com/MLP_officiel>.

Like Donald Trump it is presented as “no filter” politics, a refreshing blast 
of common sense. If only we could say the unsayable then we’d be free. That’s 
the problem. These so-called nationalists love their country so much that they 
would push it over a cliff edge, risking everything so that the people can be 
themselves alone. Do we want such nativist furies to be guiding our politics in 
years to come – a time when we face some of the most complex and difficult 
issues of our time? I think not.

'My family doesn't feel safe here any more': eastern Europeans on Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/27/family-safe-eastern-europeans-brexit-britain-eu-referendum>
It is a paradox that the victory of the secular age is that political 
arguments are won by beliefs rather than facts. No longer is debate rooted in 
opinions that can be tested by rivals presenting a case based on empirical 
evidence. Referendums, which can unlease pent-up passions and where small 
conspiracies can seize the democratic process, are particularly well suited to 
this subversion. Yes the people have spoken. But the facts did not.

Proper democracy is far more than a ballot. A referendum can be a “safety 
valve” but it should not be the locomotive that drives the politics. That 
democratic process must include deliberation, mature institutions and checks 
and balances. There are big questions to answer: on why our economic model of 
growth has failed to deliver for many people. On what our role in the world 
should be. On how we need to come together – rather come apart – as a country. 
This requires an atmosphere of civil rational debate.

The far right preys on the weakest members of society and by letting 
anti-immigrant rhetoric bed in we are eroding civil rights not strengthening 
them. We must take into account how seductive extreme messages of hate can be. 
Any comparison with religious fundamentalists fails to recognise that they 
could never take over mainstream political debate. Extremists can do this 
simply by popularising racism. This is the arsenic in the water supply of any 
nation. Britain should be wary of being seduced by the charms of people who 
trade in the politics of poison.
 