

BBC2’s lavish period drama Versailles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/versailles>, said to be the sexiest 
TV drama ever made, began with nearly 2 million viewers on Wednesday night – 
and prompted only a handful of complaints.

Versailles review – all hail Louis the Phwoarteenth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/jun/02/versailles-review-louis-the-phwoarteenth-is-a-lot-of-fun>
The most expensive French TV series ever made 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/22/french-tv-hit-versailles-reaches-uk-screens-bbc2>
, the story of the Sun King Louis XIV has been heavily trailed in the press, 
with the Daily Mail promising “four racy scenes in just 17 minutes – along with 
gay sex, cross-dressing and nudity galore”.

“All hail Louis the Phwoarteenth,” said the Guardian’s review of the show, 
which began with 1.8 million viewers from 9.30pm on Wednesday.

But despite the Daily Express declaring that it contained the “most explicit 
sex scenes ever shown on TV”, the show had generated only two complaints to 
media regulator Ofcom by Thursday lunchtime. TheBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> said it had no complaints.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fbbc-drama-versailles-viewers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d94b58f2d9efbb97ebeb9c2df9f0adbcf439b25%2F999_0_2284_2855%2F2284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Racy%20drama%20Versailles%20attracts%201.8m%20viewers%20%E2%80%93%20and%20just%20two%20complaints&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fbbc-drama-versailles-viewers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Racy%20drama%20Versailles%20attracts%201.8m%20viewers%20%E2%80%93%20and%20just%20two%20complaints&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fbbc-drama-versailles-viewers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d94b58f2d9efbb97ebeb9c2df9f0adbcf439b25%2F999_0_2284_2855%2F2284.jpg>
 Drama king: George Blagden as Louis XIV. Photograph: Canal Plus/ BBC 
Made by French broadcaster Canal+ and bought by the BBC, Versailles is written 
by two Hollywood-based British writers, David Wolstencroft and Simon Mirren, 
who met while working on the BBC1 spy seriesSpooks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/spooks>.

The Guardian said the drama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/jun/02/versailles-review-louis-the-phwoarteenth-is-a-lot-of-fun>
 was “fruity, sticky and far more entertaining than when you learned about it 
at school – this opulent French production is not (quite) all about the sex”.

The Daily Telegraph said it had 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/tv/2016/06/01/versailles-sex-intrigue-and-great-hair---review/>
 “got the lot … torture, espionage, wet-look camisoles, slavering wolves, 
adultery, self-flagellation, incest and an epic gardening project.

“An all-you-can-eat buffet of everything a historical drama will ever need, 
but it’s lacking one ingredient – alas somewhat important – which is characters 
worth keeping your eyelids open for.”

The Huffington Post’s reviewer said it was just the thing 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/entry/versailles-episode-1-review_uk_574f5093e4b04a0827f0fd5f>
 for viewers missing another period romp,The Tudors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/aug/28/the-tudors-review>, while they 
wait for the next series ofWolf Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/wolf-hall>. “There’s a lot to enjoy 
here, even if it does occasionally appear like a children’s drama.” Only 
occasionally, mind.

While it was a solid start for the acquired drama, it was not in the league of 
BBC2’s biggest rating series such as Wolf Hall, which began with 3.9 million 
viewers last year.

It was, however, only a whisker behind the 1.9 million who watched the opening 
episode of Jane Campion’s acclaimed Elisabeth Moss drama Top of the Lake in 
2013.

The opening episode narrowly had the better of BBC1 documentary The Big C and 
Me, which had 1.7 million viewers, and the latest outing for Channel 4’s 24 
Hours in Police Custody, which also attracted 1.7 million viewers, both from 
9pm.
 