
It really shouldn't work on radio, but Going Out with Alan Carr (Radio 2, 
Saturdays) is a life-affirming delight. His voice is never going to be ideal 
for the wireless – it's screechy in places, and draws attention to itself – and 
there are bumpy moments. Last weekend's show began with Carr seemingly only 
realising he was going to be on air once he was. "We've got to fill this bit," 
he noted. "How long have we got?"

But you forgave him and co-host Melanie Sykes, as soon as the first track (Dan 
Hartman's Instant Replay) kicked in, a song that's made for shimmying around 
the kitchen while cooking, or the bathroom while applying sparkly eye-shadow. 
Judging by the calls and texts, most of the audience is doing one or the other 
during the show.

The banter between Carr and Sykes is genuinely funny, and more 
natural-sounding than it was with Emma Forbes, who left the show in April. It 
centres on the mundane aspects of life, with topics including harem pants, 
football, dental work, Carr's DIY experiences – as well as the show's tendency 
to follow listener input with some unfortunate song choices. "That woman was 
saying how fat she was and then we played The Fatback Band," Carr observed.

There's also a strong sense of audience connection; as with the old Wogan 
breakfast show, listener input is a key part of the fun. One correspondent 
begged the duo to stop laughing: "You keep setting my key finder off."

Carr is witty but nice, and his teasing of callers is only ever with their 
gleeful consent. One contestant on the show's TV quiz listed her favourite 
television shows, and it took a while. "Do you leave the house?" Carr wondered. 
He was harder on the England football team, turning a verbal fluff – calling 
Rooney "Wayne Reenie" – into a gag. "I'm going to call him Reenie, 'cos he 
played like an old woman."
 