
In the first episode of Fleabag, there’s a line that perfectly skewers the 
mood of the entire series. Fleabag – we never learn her real name – is in the 
art studio of her passive-aggressive stepmother (Olivia Colman) late at night 
and says, in a confiding aside to the camera, “She’s not an evil stepmother, 
she’s just a cunt.” She smiles tightly. She’s livid. The c-word is like a 
bullet.

Fleabag, which began life as a fringe play at Edinburgh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/19/fleabag-mrs-browns-boys-why-riskiest-tv-comes-from-stage>
, is a dark, filthy comedy of many layers. It is, at first glance, the story of 
a city-dwelling young woman in that painfully familiar territory of taking too 
long to figure out who she really is and being a bit of a dick along the way – 
to others and herself. Very quickly, though, Phoebe Waller-Bridge’s series 
unfolds into a ferocious dissection of grief, memory, trauma, friendship, 
family dynamics, self-esteem and the pain of love. The seam that binds this 
emotional patchwork is female anger. This shouldn’t feel revolutionary, but it 
does.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Ffleabag-tv-needs-far-more-seething-devastating-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0657ba0e59cac8331d29f409c91dee2215de168%2F176_0_2643_1586%2F2643.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rage%20revolution%3A%20TV%20needs%20far%20more%20seething%2C%20devastating%20women%20like%20Fleabag&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Ffleabag-tv-needs-far-more-seething-devastating-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rage%20revolution%3A%20TV%20needs%20far%20more%20seething%2C%20devastating%20women%20like%20Fleabag&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Ffleabag-tv-needs-far-more-seething-devastating-women%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0657ba0e59cac8331d29f409c91dee2215de168%2F176_0_2643_1586%2F2643.jpg>
 Fleabag, a ferocious dissection of grief, trauma, friendship, family dynamics 
and self-esteem. Photograph: BBC/Two Brothers Pictures Ltd. 
In a recent interview 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/women/life/fleabag-star-phoebe-waller-bridge-on-female-anger-emotional-hone/>
, Waller-Bridge said, “I know a lot of my female peers feel really angry. I 
think that a woman’s response at first is to feel guilty and apologetic about 
it without knowing why … The idea of the ‘angry young man’ is so deeply 
embedded [in culture] but the angry young woman seems never to be addressed.” 
With Fleabag, she’s done just that.

'Am I still a feminist if I watch porn?' Meet Phoebe Waller-Bridge, the 
British Lena Dunham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/08/phoebe-waller-bridge-fleabag-britains-lena-dunham>
For years, it feels like mainstream TV has shied away from female anger unless 
it was victim’s rage or the simple, dreaded, female “hysteria”; the crazy gal 
who can’t hold it together. Women around Fleabag’s age grew up with shows like 
Friends and Sex and the City, in which the anatomy of female friendships were 
explored at length, but in which a woman’s individual anger was scripted to be 
saved up and shared with a best friend. The safe spaces for emotional 
jettisoning in SATC, the real, raw stuff, were the brunch table or a funky 
Midtown bar – not pavements, as we see in Fleabag, pounded alone with hot, 
angry tears dripping black lines down her face. The pockets of despair, both 
quiet and loud, come with no apologies.

Comparisons to Lena Dunham’s Girls have been plenty. But while Fleabag doesn’t 
deserve to be pitted against other shows written by women of a certain age, it 
is part of a steady sea-change, it seems, of television writing that allows the 
complexity of female characters to stretch and breathe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Ffleabag-tv-needs-far-more-seething-devastating-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e825acc342ed60809dae0baeaa0f0c891f2fd6e%2F0_180_4008_2405%2F4008.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rage%20revolution%3A%20TV%20needs%20far%20more%20seething%2C%20devastating%20women%20like%20Fleabag&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Ffleabag-tv-needs-far-more-seething-devastating-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rage%20revolution%3A%20TV%20needs%20far%20more%20seething%2C%20devastating%20women%20like%20Fleabag&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Ffleabag-tv-needs-far-more-seething-devastating-women%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e825acc342ed60809dae0baeaa0f0c891f2fd6e%2F0_180_4008_2405%2F4008.jpg>
 In Top of the Lake, Elisabeth Moss almost vibrates with tension. Photograph: 
Parisa Taghizadeh/AP 
They are very different shows (one packs far more one-liners about anuses), 
but I got a similar feeling watching Fleabag as I did watchingJane Campion’s 
magnificent Top of the Lake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/aug/28/top-of-the-lake-box-set-review-moss-campion>
, which returns to our screens next year. Robin Griffin (Elisabeth Moss), the 
Sydney police officer returning to her remote hometown of Laketop, New Zealand, 
to investigate the pregnancy and then disappearance of a 12-year-old girl, Tui, 
from her rural home, almost vibrates with tension.

In one episode, she sinks a dart into a man’s back in a dive bar, angry at the 
way he is talking about the case – an act made more violent by her casualness. 
But, as we discover, Robin has a lot to be angry about. She is enraged by 
sexual violence and the prospect of what could have been done to Tui, the 
endemic misogyny within both her hometown community and the local police force, 
her strained relationship with her fiance back home, her mother’s cancer and 
the gradual hinting of a childhood trauma involving some of the men she’s 
having to deal with now. Top of the Lake was astonishing for many reasons, but 
the way Robin’s anger – tall as the South Island mountains that surrounded her 
– was made so central to the storyline was defiant and thrilling.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Ffleabag-tv-needs-far-more-seething-devastating-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc27240eb63c026d80419ba139b0edfe45f721c0%2F0_0_2854_4288%2F2854.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rage%20revolution%3A%20TV%20needs%20far%20more%20seething%2C%20devastating%20women%20like%20Fleabag&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Ffleabag-tv-needs-far-more-seething-devastating-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rage%20revolution%3A%20TV%20needs%20far%20more%20seething%2C%20devastating%20women%20like%20Fleabag&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Ffleabag-tv-needs-far-more-seething-devastating-women%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc27240eb63c026d80419ba139b0edfe45f721c0%2F0_0_2854_4288%2F2854.jpg>
 In Happy Valley, Catherine Cawood’s anger is bound up with tragedy, grief and 
a humour that only a woman who has known great pain can have. Photograph: Ben 
Blackall/BBC/Red Productions 
Sally Wainwright’s Happy Valley packed such a punch for this reason, too. The 
sharp edges of female emotion glint like knives. Like Top of the Lake and, 
indeed, Fleabag, the protagonist’s (Sarah Lancashire’s Catherine Cawood) anger 
is bound up with tragedy, grief and a flinty kind of humour that only a woman 
who has known great pain can have. Some of Fleabag and Catherine’s funniest 
lines are devastating because they ring with indignation. “You just hear 
yourself talking wank,” Catherine reflects on therapy in series two. “Dripping 
off the ceiling and crawling down the walls. The room’s so full of it by the 
time you’ve finished, you’ve to wade through it in your wellies to get out.”

Another fine character brimming with anger is Transparent’s Sarah Pfefferman. 
It’s a show rich with humanity both ugly and beautiful and Sarah, the oldest 
child, is often the most horrible of the lot; snarky, impatient and selfish. 
But she, of course, is confused and in pain, both at the tangible things life 
has thrown at her – her father’s transition and the associated grieving 
process, divorce, another failed relationship with Tammy – and at the passage 
of life in general. There’s one scene at the end of series two that really 
stuck with me. We see Sarah completely naked, eating like a sulky teenager at 
her kitchen worktop, and when the camera pans out it’s not just scanning her 
perfectly imperfect bare flesh; it’s taking in all her frustrations, identity 
crises and rage at the world too.

Through the strength of the script and the actors playing them, these female 
characters regularly unleash rage, and it’s not always righteous. Sometimes 
it’s un-pretty and without clear reason. But this is what it’s like for so many 
women, who live and breathe a lifetime of cumulative anger but feel they should 
keep a cork in it for fear of the seepage being seen as a character defect. 
That is why these women are so thrilling to watch – and why a second season of 
Fleabag can’t come a minute too soon.
 