
For almost a month now rains have been falling consistently in Katine 
sub-county, north-easternUganda <https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda>, 
giving people hope that water shortages will soon be history.

Even Katine parish, which for several months last year was one of the worst 
hit among all the local villages, is receiving considerable rainfall.

Unfortunately, much of this water is being wasted, leaving the community still 
short of water, rain or no rain.

The African Medical Research Foundation (Amref) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/katine/amref/>, which is implementing the 
three-yearKatine community development project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/katine/2008/sep/23/background.news/> funded by 
Guardian readers and Barclays Bank, is working to help communities tap into 
this water resource that seems abundant yet remains elusive.

In a bid to increase safe water <https://www.theguardian.com/katine/water/> 
coverage in Katine, about 10 local families with iron-roofed houses have each 
been given a 2,500-litre capacitywater jar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/katine/2010/mar/22/water-news/> (tank) to catch 
rainwater running off the roof. Sadly, no jar has ever been completely filled - 
some have filled up to half-way but others remain empty.

Several residents say the jars are not receiving enough water because 
construction work on them has not been finished.

"The tank does not get full, however much it rains," said Antasia Apio, a 
beneficiary from Olano village in Ocholoi parish. "My tank has a connection 
problem. We get only six jerricans each time it rains and then the tank dries 
up." She added that despite this, fellow residents have been flocking to her 
home to take a share of the little water the jar collects.

At Omariai village in Katine parish, Sharon Arupo, the daughter of a retired 
police officer, Gerald Enyidu (also a beneficiary), says their tank captured a 
good amount of water though it too had connection problems."We have some good 
water, only we are not the only ones using it," she said. "Almost all the 
village fetches water here."

Sam Emolu, a retired police officer from Abata village, says his tank had 
never filled up, meaning his family still has to fetch water from a borehole. 
"My tank serves the whole of this community and this leaves us still suffering 
from water shortages because the capacity of this water jar cannot sustain a 
big population," he said.

According to Emolu, attempts to set up more water jars would be hampered by 
the fact that most people lived in mud and wattle, grass-thatched houses.

At Agora village, Rebecca Awiyo complained about incomplete work. She said her 
family's tank hardly held any water. When the Guardian visited the site, it 
found the water jar open without a top cover, and a lot of dirt accumulating 
inside.

Initially, Amref built the water jars to support vulnerable residents such as 
the elderly, widows, and people living with HIV/Aids. But severe water 
shortages have forced the whole community to share the same limited resource.

Amref project manager Fredrick Kabikira 
<https://www.theguardian.com/katine/2010/aug/17/katine-manager-kabikira/> said: 
"[We] undertook construction of water facilities and one of these was water 
jars in selected homes. However, like all construction work, small defects were 
discovered later although, for some cases, these resulted [from] misuse 
especially when children played with taps and the rain harvesting gulleys.

"[Amref] has made assessment of all these problems and plans to correct all 
the defects in advanced stages. Therainwater harvesting systems (tanks) in 
schools <https://www.theguardian.com/katine/2008/mar/04/water.education> have 
just been corrected and the children now have clean water - the next phase will 
be the water jars."
 