
An Ivan Rakitic brace and further goals by Ivica Olic and Luka Modric helped 
Croatia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/croatia> return to winning ways 
againstAndorra in Zagreb. Slaven Bilic's side had taken a blow to their morale 
in their Group Six humbling at the hands of England but last night's 4-0 win 
moved them into second place.

Scotland's qualification hopes were dealt a knock when the Group Nine leaders 
Holland maintained their 100% record with a 1-0 success in Norway. Mark van 
Bommel sealed the points. Elsewhere,Iceland secured their first win, 1-0 at 
home againstMacedonia

Andrei Arshavin was on target in Russia's 3-0 win over Finland which took them 
past Wales into second place in Group Four behind Germany.

In Northern Ireland's group the Czech Republic claimed their first win, 1-0 
overSlovenia, but Slovakia are the new leaders of Group Three after two late 
goals by Stanislav Sestak helped his side come from behind to beatPoland 2-1.

The Republic of Ireland's hopes were boosted when Bulgaria were held 0-0 in 
Georgia. Giovanni Trapattoni's side stay in touch with the Group Eight leaders 
Italy, 2-1 winners over Montenegro. 

Portugal's chances remain in the balance after Carlos Queiroz's team were held 
to a surprise 0-0 draw at home by 10-manAlbania. Hungary entered the Group One 
mix after beatingMalta 1-0. 

Spain preserved their perfect start, coming from behind to win 2-1 in Belgium, 
David Villa scored the winner for the European champions.Turkey moved second in 
Group Five after a goalless draw inEstonia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/estonia>, and Bosnia-Herzegovina beat 
Armenia4-1.

The Group Two leaders Greece lost 2-1 at home to Switzerland but Israel failed 
to capitalise after being held 1-1 inLatvia. Yossi Benayoun, the Liverpool 
forward, had givenIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/football/israel> the lead.
Luxembourg and Moldova drew 0-0.

Serbia and Lithuania are level at the top of Group Seven after respective wins 
overAustria and the Faroe Islands.
 