
A consortium made up of private-equity firms and the Church of England has 
received at least £180m fromRoyal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup> for backing the 
bailed-out bank’s aborted attempt to float off 300 branches on the stock market.

The Edinburgh-based bank, 73% owned by the taxpayer, has already admitted that 
the ill-fated attempt to carve out the 300 branches under the Williams & Glyn 
(W&G) brand has cost £1.5bn.


Documents filed at Companies House  
<https://beta.companieshouse.gov.uk/company/OC388127>shed light on the sums 
paid by RBS to the consortium – which, as well as the Church of England, 
included Corsair Capital and Centerbridge – formedthree years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/sep/27/rbs-branches-church-corsair-consortium>
 to participate in the flotation of W&G. In a complex deal, they put £600m into 
RBS through a bond, which was intended to be exchanged for shares when the new 
bank floated on the stock exchange.

RBS may reveal further costs associated with the troubled branch spinout when 
it publishes its third-quarter results on Friday, at the end of a week in which 
rival bailed-out bank LloydsBanking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> Group also reports, along with 
Barclays.

RBS posts £2bn half-year loss and drops Williams & Glyn flotation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/05/rbs-blames-2bn-half-year-loss-on-string-of-legal-challenges>
The sale of the 300 branches was forced upon RBS by the EU as a penalty for 
its £45bn taxpayer bailout in 2008. It has run into repeated problems and must 
now be completed by the end of next year. Ross McEwan, the RBS chief executive,
warned last month that RBS faces unchartered territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/sep/27/merlin-entertainments-sir-john-sunderland-nick-varney-alton-towers-rollercoaster-crash>
 if he cannot find a solution.

 An attempt to sell the branches to Santander collapsed in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/oct/12/rbs-branch-sale-santander-falls-through>
 and the deal with the consortium clinched the following year. But any attempt 
at stock market flotationwas abandoned in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/05/rbs-blames-2bn-half-year-loss-on-string-of-legal-challenges>
 and the bank is now looking for a buyer.

The consortium was to have ended up with a stake of between 30% and 49% when 
W&G floated and the £600m bond converted into shares. The consortium used £330m 
of its own money to pay for the bonds and borrowed £270m off RBS.

Documents at Companies House for 
<https://beta.companieshouse.gov.uk/company/OC388127> Lunar Investors – a 
limited-liability partnership set up by members of the consortium – show that 
in the period 26 September 2013 to end-December 2015 RBS paid £184m in interest 
to the holders of the bond. The consortium was charged £18m in interest for its 
£270m loan.


RBS said at the time the transaction was announced in September 2013 that it 
would pay the consortium a rate of interest between 8% and 14% a year. The 
documents at Companies House indicate that RBS was paying the higher rate of 
interest to the investors. It paid £100m for the 15-month period to end of 
December 2014 and £84m for the 2015 calendar year.

RBS would not comment on the payments, nor would Corsair. The Church 
Commissioners, which manages £7bn of the Church of England’s investments and 
helps funds dioceses and parishes and helps pay the pensions for clergy, said 
it had invested in W&G “due to our belief in the importance of competition in 
the banking sector and the vital role of challenger banks.


“We are pleased to have been able to work with Williams & Glyn on ethics in 
banking and are grateful to the management team for their enthusiasm on this 
issue,” the Church Commissioners said. It is reported to have a 10% stake in 
the consortium.

There had been hopes that W&G would be a new high-street competitor to the big 
four – RBS, Lloyds, Barclays and HSBC – along with TSB, which was spun out of 
Lloyds under instructions from the EU because of its taxpayer bailout. TSB is 
nowowned by Sabadell of Spain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/20/lloyds-sells-50-of-tsb-to-spains-sabadell>
.

 