
Royal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup> is to start 
charging major financial institutions for any cash it holds on their behalf for 
trading purposes, in the latest illustration of the impact of Mark Carney’s 
post-Brexit vote stimulus package.

 It is the first time a bank has started to make charges for sterling deposits 
since the governor of the Bank of England announced on 4 Augustthat interest 
rates would be cut from 0.5% to 0.25% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>
to stave off any economic downturn following the vote to leave the EU. Carney 
said he was not a fan of negative rates.

Even so, from Monday, about 70 RBS customers will start to receive negative 
rates because they will charged for any cash they place as collateral for 
trading in complex financial products, such as futures or options. The move 
will not affect the small business customers whom the bank, and its NatWest arm,
warned last month it may have to charge for making deposits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/natwest-paves-way-for-introduction-of-negative-interest-rates>
.

Negative rates, though, will be applied for customers who trade through RBS on 
deals guaranteed by clearing houses. RBS is 73% owned by the taxpayer.

An RBS spokesman said: “Until recently, RBS has applied a 0% floor to the 
overnight rate charged for deposits required by clearing houses for futures 
trades. However, due to the sustained low interest rate environment, RBS will 
now be passing the cost of holding such deposits on to a limited number of our 
institutional clients. Futures are entered into by sophisticated financial 
investors looking to hedge risk.”

While the rate cut has reduced borrowing rates for mortgage customers, savers 
are paying a price.


“We are still a long way from banks imposing negative interest rates on 
personal customers, which would be a deeply unpopular move, though clearly the 
direction of travel is concerning for savers,” said Laith Khalaf, senior 
analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown.

A table of savings rates compiled by Savings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/savings> Champion, a consumer website, shows 
the lowest rate offered at 0% by specialist bank Weatherbys for a 45-day and 
90-day notice account. Other accounts are offering 0.01% – such as that offered 
by Danske Bank – while Barclays on Friday announced it would cut its “everyday 
savers” rate to 0.05% on 1 December.

The rate was previously 0.25% on this account although Susan Hannums of 
Savings Champion said Barclays was transferring some savers to this account who 
had previously been getting 1%. “This means the savers who originally were in 
the [previous account] will see their rate drop from 1% to 0.05% in less than 2 
months,” said Hannums. The rate was for customers who joined Barclays when it 
bought the UK arm of ING.

Barclays joined other banks – such as HSBC’s First Direct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/08/savers-suffer-first-direct-cuts-rates-further-bank-of-england>
 – in passing on a cut to savings rates that was larger than the Bank of 
England’s quarter point reduction. For instance, the rate on an instant cash 
ISA will fall from 0.8% to 0.4%.

It was reported on Friday that the Bank of Ireland, which is 14% owned by the 
state, will charge big companies 0.4% to place deposits overnight. Rates are 
negative in the eurozone.
 