
Royal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup> has been ranked 
bottom out of more than 30 rivals for customer satisfaction, despite pledges by 
the bailed out bank to improve its battered reputation.

The survey, carried out by consumer group Which? between September 2015 and 
January 2016, asked more than 20,000 people how satisfied they were with their 
current account, savings account, credit card and mortgage provider. As well as 
placing RBS last, the results put NatWest (which is owned by RBS) in the bottom 
10 alongside Barclays, Bank of Scotland (part of LloydsBanking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> Group) and Clydesdale, which was 
recently listed on the stock market. Lloyds is tenth from the bottom.

Which? said the gap between RBS at the bottom and First Direct, owned by HSBC, 
at the top was 21 percentage points, illustrating the battle faced by the 
73%-taxpayer owned bank. The consumer group published the survey as part of its 
campaign to encourage the Competition and Markets Authority to rethink its 
ongoing investigation into the banking sector. Which? is concerned the 
competition watchdog is too focused on encouraging customers to move between 
providers rather than on dealing with the way banks treat their customers and 
charge for overdrafts.

Which? executive director Richard Lloyd said: “It’s high time the industry put 
its customers first, and the competition inquiry needs to ensure banks are held 
to account for the way they treat them. The big players in this market need to 
get on the front foot and improve services instead of waiting to be forced into 
action.”

The CMA investigation has already been delayed beyond its deadline of May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/29/overdraft-fee-concerns-delay-inquiry-into-banking-competition>
. When this was announced, Alasdair Smith, chairman of the retail banking 
investigation, said: “A number of new suggestions have been made, including 
proposals aimed at achieving better outcomes for current account customers with 
overdrafts”.

The findings from Which? will be seen as a blow to Ross McEwan, chief 
executive of RBS, who has said the bank needs to win back support from 
customers. He has attempted to make the bank’s products easier to understand by
scrapping “teaser rates” and 0% credit card transfers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/feb/27/rbs-bonuses-loss-pay-market-rate>
. But customers have also had to contend with IT failures at the bank,including 
on New Year’s Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/01/natwest-rbs-customers-hit-another-banking-glitch>
 when debit cards were declined in shops.

Les Matheson, who runs the personal and business banking operations at RBS and 
NatWest, said: “While we are disappointed in these results, we are determined 
to do more and are working with Which? to support its campaign, including 
raising awareness and education of products, not just for our customers but 
across the banking industry.”
 