
In the 70s and the 80s, the young Donald Trump was mentored by none other than 
Roy Cohn 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/21/us/politics/donald-trump-roy-cohn.html>, the 
infamous cold war prosecutor who helped sendthe almost certainly innocent Ethel 
Rosenberg 
<https://www.bostonglobe.com/opinion/editorials/2016/11/23/for-ethel-rosenberg-presidential-pardon/Hh7NyQed8ZIRSaueBqnadK/story.html>
 to the electric chair in 1953.

The playwright Lillian Hellman once recounted a story about how Cohn had 
helped remove novels by her lover Dashiel Hammett from government-funded 
libraries.

Burst your bubble: five conservative articles to read this week
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/01/conservative-news-articles-this-week-media-bubble>
Hammett was eventually summonsed before one of Senator Joe McCarthy’s 
red-baiting committees where he was asked: “If you were in our position, would 
you allow certain books in the library?”

Hammett shot back, “If I were you, senator, I would not allow any libraries!”

The tale’s probably apocryphal. Nonetheless, it captures something about the 
importance of books during bleak political periods.

In that spirit, here are some titles that might help those feeling overwhelmed 
by what has been a long and miserable year. It’s a random and arbitrary 
selection (alternatives welcomed in the comments!). Still, one way or another, 
all of these books have been brought to mind.

The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness, by Michelle 
Alexander

Anyone interested in US politics needs to engage with Alexander’s argument 
about the effects of that nation’s swollen prison-industrial complex. All races 
in the US use and traffick drugs at roughly equal levels. But African Americans 
are far more likely to end up in jail.

In fact, the US incarcerates a larger percentage of its black population than 
South Africa did during the apartheid era. In Washington DC, 75% of young black 
men will spend time in prison, an astonishing statistic replicated in urban 
centres throughout the country.

Alexander argues that the war on drugs was launched in the wake of the civil 
rights movement to target “urban” (that is, black) crime: a key element of the 
so-called southern strategy by which Republicans dog-whistled to white voters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Freaching-for-perspective-books-to-make-sense-of-the-new-world-order%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09ade66e7c4c3880a21335db5ca42a3c71f2e000%2F0_0_948_1443%2F948.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reaching%20for%20perspective%3A%20books%20to%20make%20sense%20of%20the%20new%20world%20order%20%7C%20Jeff%20Sparrow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Freaching-for-perspective-books-to-make-sense-of-the-new-world-order%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reaching%20for%20perspective%3A%20books%20to%20make%20sense%20of%20the%20new%20world%20order%20%7C%20Jeff%20Sparrow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Freaching-for-perspective-books-to-make-sense-of-the-new-world-order%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09ade66e7c4c3880a21335db5ca42a3c71f2e000%2F0_0_948_1443%2F948.jpg>
In the first half of the 20th century, racist Jim Crow laws controlled where 
and how black people could live, work and vote. Today, the law forbids 
discrimination on the basis of race. But it’s perfectly acceptable to 
discriminate against felons and ex-felons – a high percentage of whom happen to 
be black.

That’s what Alexander means by the “new Jim Crow”. She writes: 

“The total population of black males in Chicago with a felony record … is 
equivalent to fifty-five percent of the black adult male population and an 
astonishing eighty percent of the adult male workforce in the Chicago area … In 
Chicago, as in most cities across the country, ex-offenders are banned or 
severely restricted from employment in a large number of professions, job 
categories, and fields by professional licensing statutes, rules, and practices 
that discriminate against potential employees with felony records … They are 
also routinely denied public housing and welfare benefits, and they find it 
increasingly difficult to obtain education … “

Formally, these restrictions are colour blind, affecting all races equally. In 
practice they replicate the patterns of Jim Crow, excluding African Americans 
from public life.

Alexander published The New Jim Crow book back in 2010 but it makes 
particularly interesting reading in the wake of the Trump ascendancy, partly 
because she identifies the Clinton administration as playing a crucial role in 
extending mass incarceration but also because the book is a polemic against the 
liberal anti-racist strategies associated with Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama.

“The notion that giving a relatively small number of people of colour access 
to key positions or institutions will inevitably redound to the benefit of the 
larger group is belied by the evidence,” she declares.

That’s something to think about (and not just in respect of race) in the 
renewed debates about identity politics and its limitations.

Deer Hunting with Jesus: Dispatches from America’s Class War, by Joe Bageant

“I helped cast out a demon the other day, Joey. I wish you could have been 
there.”

That’s Joe Bageant’s brother: a blue-collar working-class man from Winchester, 
Virginia, who also happens to be a conservative Christian.

In this compelling piece of what we might call gonzo class analysis, Bageant 
writes of returning to his hardscrabble hometown after a 30-year absence, and 
trying understand the gulf between his old friends and the progressive liberals 
he knew from the publishing world.

It’s difficult to remember now but the re-election of the hapless George W 
Bush in November 2004 spurred a similar debate to that prompted by Trump’s 
victory.

One New York editor says to Bageant: “It is as if your people were some sort 
of exotic, as if you were from Yemen or something.”

In Winchester, he talks to his old buddy Tom, once an acid-dropping 
freethinker and now a Fox News-watching Republican, and to Nancy, a forklift 
driver whose life is dominated by her church. Both of them work dead-end jobs 
in the town’s Rubbermaid plant. Both of them feel that America’s gone off the 
rails – and both of them voted for Bush.

“There is no good reason,” Bageant concludes, “why for the past thirty years 
the uncertainty and dissatisfaction of people like Tom and Nance was 
automatically snubbed as unenlightened by so many on the Left. If the Left had 
identified and dealt with this dissatisfaction early on, if they had 
counteracted the fallacies the Republicans used to explain that dissatisfaction 
… and maybe offered some gutsy, comprehensible and practical solutions, we 
might have witnessed something better than the Republican syndicate’s lying and 
looting of the past six years. Real movements take advantage of the 
protest-potential to be found among dissatisfied and disappointed people – 
people disenfranchised by bureaucracy, technocracy and ‘experts’.”

Bageant died in 2011 but this funny, mournful and angry book remains vital and 
relevant today.

Hand to Mouth: The Truth About Being Poor in a Wealthy World, by Linda Tirado

In 2013 Tirado wrote a blog post entitled “Why I make terrible decisions, or, 
poverty thoughts” – an attempt to explain why poor people made the choices they 
did.

Yes, she said, she knew smoking was hazardous and expensive – but it was also 
the best option.

“You see, I’m always, always exhausted. It’s a stimulant. When I am too tired 
to walk one more step, I can smoke and go for another hour. When I am enraged 
and beaten down and incapable of accomplishing one more thing, I can smoke and 
feel a little better, for just a minute. It is the only relaxation I am 
allowed. It is not a good decision but it is the only one that I have access 
to. It is the only thing I have found that keeps me from collapsing or 
exploding.”

That post went viral – and Tirado eventually followed it with a full-length 
book.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Freaching-for-perspective-books-to-make-sense-of-the-new-world-order%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f8c4060c1718ed69a61d4c8ebfd7e4667c7f78d%2F0_0_1808_2759%2F1808.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reaching%20for%20perspective%3A%20books%20to%20make%20sense%20of%20the%20new%20world%20order%20%7C%20Jeff%20Sparrow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Freaching-for-perspective-books-to-make-sense-of-the-new-world-order%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reaching%20for%20perspective%3A%20books%20to%20make%20sense%20of%20the%20new%20world%20order%20%7C%20Jeff%20Sparrow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Freaching-for-perspective-books-to-make-sense-of-the-new-world-order%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f8c4060c1718ed69a61d4c8ebfd7e4667c7f78d%2F0_0_1808_2759%2F1808.jpg>
In some respects, Hand to Mouth recalls Deer Hunting with Jesus. But where 
Bageant’s emphasis on the small town of his childhood sometimes feel nostalgic, 
even dated, Tirado describes a contemporary experience of shift work in the 
service industry. In that sense her book’s a kind of updated, US version of 
Friedrich Engels’ The Condition of the Working Class of England, but set in 
suburban fast-food chains rather than Manchester mills.

Tirado endures constant low-level pain because she can’t access medical 
treatment. She describes a working life controlled by capricious, vindictive 
bosses in an environment in which she’s expected to display servility and – 
worse still – gratitude.

Though she writes of a base solidarity among her workmates, it’s expressed 
mostly through day-to-day acts of little kindnesses rather than through 
industrial action. And she understands why many have no interest in politics at 
all.

“I think that most poor people have too many disasters in their own immediate 
future to worry about to be concerned about whatever natural or political 
disasters might be occurring way outside their circle … It’s not that I don’t 
care about global warming or the environment; it’s that there’s only so far out 
of my way I’m willing to go. I don’t really have the time or energy to worry 
about macro concerns.”

The Ragged-Trousered Philanthropists, by Robert Tressell

Tressell was the pseudonym of a house painter named Robert Noonan, who died of 
tuberculosis in 1911, having been unable to convince a publisher to accept his 
1,600-page handwritten manuscript.

The book, which eventually became a classic of the British labour movement, 
tells the story of Robert Owen and his attempts to break his companions in the 
fictional town of Mugsborough from their conservative ideas.

For many in the 20th century, The Ragged-Trousered Philanthropists appealed 
because of Owen’s didactic presentations of social theory. The book was often 
circulated as a kind of novelised primer of leftist ideas – and even lauded, as 
Alan Sillitoe put it, as “the book that won the ’45 election for [the British] 
Labour [party]”.

But the contemporary reader might take something different away.

It is, after all, very much a novel about being leftwing in a rightwing era. 
The philanthropists of the title are Owen’s workmates. They’re men so poor that 
they can barely clothe their families and yet they insist on supporting the 
bosses who exploit them.

At times, Owen despairs of his fellows. Yet the book shows him, over the 
course of a year, trying again and again to explain his ideas, looking for 
different ways to make progressive theories meaningful in the lives of ordinary 
people.

That’s why it repays re-reading. The Ragged-Trousered Philanthropists may be 
set in an Edwardian world very different from our own, yet the process it 
depicts – essentially, the slow and sometimes painful work of rebuilding a left 
from the bottom up – could not be more relevant.

Oh, it’s also very funny. 

Pitched Battle, by Larry Writer

Pitched Battle gives an account of the 1971 Springbok rugby tour of Australia: 
a key moment in anti-racist activism in this country.

Today everyone agrees that apartheid was an abomination. But in the early 70s, 
plenty of Australians found a great deal to admire in South Africa’s racist 
regime, and it took considerable political courage to protest against a popular 
sporting code.

 The Liberal prime minister Billy McMahon described anti-Springbok campaigners 
as “stooges of communists” and declared sporting tours to be “non-political” – 
even though, as Writer explains, the South Africans were quite clear as to 
their propaganda value. In fact the Springbok manager openly announced: “South 
Africa and Australia have very much in common … We have come here to try to 
foster good relations and friendship.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Freaching-for-perspective-books-to-make-sense-of-the-new-world-order%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20306743376d58233ef35460c03a828ad039c812%2F0_0_1800_2764%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reaching%20for%20perspective%3A%20books%20to%20make%20sense%20of%20the%20new%20world%20order%20%7C%20Jeff%20Sparrow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Freaching-for-perspective-books-to-make-sense-of-the-new-world-order%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reaching%20for%20perspective%3A%20books%20to%20make%20sense%20of%20the%20new%20world%20order%20%7C%20Jeff%20Sparrow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Freaching-for-perspective-books-to-make-sense-of-the-new-world-order%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20306743376d58233ef35460c03a828ad039c812%2F0_0_1800_2764%2F1800.jpg>
Most of the newspapers editorialised in favour of the Springboks. When the 
ACTU placed black bans on the tour, the Sydney Morning Herald accused it of 
usurping the role of government. Despite a few honourable exceptions, the 
dominant right wing of the Labor party wanted no part in any protests, 
terrified by the prospect of an electoral backlash.

Most of the organising came from a tiny number of very young activists. The 
demonstrations faced considerable violence, both from police and from local 
neo-fascists. At the Melbourne protest at Olympic Park, more than 140 people 
were arrested – and many were beaten up. Watching the violence, the Victorian 
premier, Henry Bolte – an enthusiastic supporter of the Springboks – declared, 
“The police deserve a medal for the way they handled those ratbags.”

Nevertheless, the campaign proved remarkably successful, not only in 
preventing future tours but in making apartheid a national issue in Australia. 
As Meredith Burgmann, one of the key activists, explained to Writer, the 
demonstrations “put the issue of racism on the agenda in this country, racism 
as regards non-white South African and our own Indigenous people as well as the 
white Australia policy that was then in place.”

In times like today, it’s worth remembering the Springbok protests as an 
example of how a determined minority can win over others and of how what once 
seemed impossible can become suddenly inevitable.

It Can’t Happen Here, by Sinclair Lewis

“The Senator was vulgar, almost illiterate, a public liar easily detected, and 
in his ‘ideas’ almost idiotic, while his celebrated piety was that of a 
traveling salesman for church furniture, and his yet more celebrated humor the 
sly cynicism of a country store … There was no more overwhelming actor on the 
stage, in the motion pictures, nor even in the pulpit. He would whirl arms, 
bang tables, glare from mad eyes, vomit Biblical wrath from a gaping mouth; but 
he would also coo like a nursing mother, beseech like an aching lover, and in 
between tricks would coldly and almost contemptuously jab his crowds with 
figures and facts – figures and facts that were inescapable even when, as often 
happened, they were entirely incorrect … ”

Remind you of anyone?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Freaching-for-perspective-books-to-make-sense-of-the-new-world-order%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd44e27e2ef68a43956468351b7336ba71a2a626%2F0_0_2792_3380%2F2792.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reaching%20for%20perspective%3A%20books%20to%20make%20sense%20of%20the%20new%20world%20order%20%7C%20Jeff%20Sparrow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Freaching-for-perspective-books-to-make-sense-of-the-new-world-order%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reaching%20for%20perspective%3A%20books%20to%20make%20sense%20of%20the%20new%20world%20order%20%7C%20Jeff%20Sparrow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Freaching-for-perspective-books-to-make-sense-of-the-new-world-order%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd44e27e2ef68a43956468351b7336ba71a2a626%2F0_0_2792_3380%2F2792.jpg>
 US writer Sinclair Lewis (1885 - 1951). Photograph: Hulton Archive/Getty Images
When Lewis wrote his description of Senator “Buzz” Windrip seizing power in 
the elections of 1936 he drew upon reports about the rise of the Nazis in 
Germany, compiled by his partner, the journalist Dorothy Thompson.

More interestingly, he also modelled his characters on the populist Louisiana 
governor Huey Long and the antisemitic radio priest Father Coughlin. Largely 
forgotten today, they’re both fascinating figures: staunchly anti-communist and 
yet populist rather than rightwing (Long’s organisation was called Share the 
Wealth; Coughlin’s was the National Union for Social Justice).

It Can’t Happen Here isn’t a particularly good novel, though, as the 
description above suggests, Lewis captured the distinctive tones of US 
demagoguery. Aside from anything else, the book reminds us that there were 
other periods in which the country’s democracy did not seem at all stable.

The Struggle Against Fascism in Germany, by Leon Trotsky

Trotsky provides a better guide to the Trump phenomenon than Lewis, not so 
much by explaining what’s taking place in the US today as by clarifying what’s 
not happening.

The book is a collection of articles written as the exiled Russian 
revolutionary watched – and tried to prevent – the growth of National Socialism 
in Germany. As such, it’s a useful corrective to those who see Trump’s 
inauguration in 2017 as analogous to Hitler’s victory in 1933.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Freaching-for-perspective-books-to-make-sense-of-the-new-world-order%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26826381577b0b1d67c5f7a908d66d91118a24d5%2F0_0_2347_3000%2F2347.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reaching%20for%20perspective%3A%20books%20to%20make%20sense%20of%20the%20new%20world%20order%20%7C%20Jeff%20Sparrow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Freaching-for-perspective-books-to-make-sense-of-the-new-world-order%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reaching%20for%20perspective%3A%20books%20to%20make%20sense%20of%20the%20new%20world%20order%20%7C%20Jeff%20Sparrow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Freaching-for-perspective-books-to-make-sense-of-the-new-world-order%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26826381577b0b1d67c5f7a908d66d91118a24d5%2F0_0_2347_3000%2F2347.jpg>
 Leon Trotsky in 1940 in Mexico City. Photograph: AP 
In these increasingly desperate essays, Trotsky describes the organised Nazi 
gangs mobilising to physically smash the organisations of the labour movement, 
while the German industrialists prevaricate about whether or not to throw their 
weight behind a demagogue they increasingly see as the only hope out of an 
intractable economic crisis.

The US today simply isn’t a comparable situation. Trump might be a demagogue 
and a bigot but he’s not Hitler. The “alt-right” might be growing but neither 
Steve Bannon nor Richard Spencer commands the army of well-drilled thugs with 
which the fascists took control of the Berlin streets.

Which isn’t, of course, any reason for complacency.

In an oft-quoted passage, Trotsky describes what he calls the “physiology of 
National Socialism”:

“Fascism has opened up the depths of society for politics. Today, not only in 
peasant homes but also in city skyscrapers, there lives alongside of the 
twentieth century the tenth or the thirteenth. A hundred million people use 
electricity and still believe in the magic power of signs and exorcisms. The 
Pope of Rome broadcasts over the radio about the miraculous transformation of 
water into wine. Movie stars go to mediums. Aviators who pilot miraculous 
mechanisms created by man’s genius wear amulets on their sweaters. What 
inexhaustible reserves they possess of darkness, ignorance, and savagery! 
Despair has raised them to their feet and fascism has given them a banner. 
Everything that should have been eliminated from the national organism in the 
form of cultural excrement in the course of the normal development of society 
has now come gushing out from the throat; capitalist society is puking up the 
undigested barbarism.”

It’s a disturbing passage, not least because, in 2016, we know exactly what he 
means.
 