
Taken any great travel shots lately? Dramatic or understated, home or abroad, 
we want to see your best shot 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/577a3890e4b0b320cf128dbe>.


We’ll choose and publish a selection of our favourites, and the winning image 
will be mounted and displayed to the public with the other monthly winners in 
an end-of-year exhibition at the Guardian offices in London. Plus digital 
printersPoint 101 <http://www.point101.com/> will send you a copy of your 
winning shot to hang on your own wall.

The winner will be entered for the overall prize, a seven-night ‘Secret 
Fjords’ self-drive holiday to Iceland for two people, courtesy ofDiscover the 
World 
<https://www.discover-the-world.co.uk/destinations/iceland-holidays/secret-fjords>
.

Please read this before you post your image:

• You must be a UK resident to enter
• We need you to upload the highest possible resolution of your shot via 
GuardianWitness.
• We’ll only consider one photograph from each person, so don’t submit more 
than one.
• We can’t consider photos that have been published elsewhere.
• You’ll also need to provide a caption of up to 50 words on where it was 
taken, what’s happening in the shot, what inspired you to take it, any 
technical details if pertinent. You must also supply your full name with the 
caption.

• Don’t forget to read the terms and conditions before you enter. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/jan/11/travel-readers-photography-competition-2016-terms-conditions>
• Click here to see previous winners. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/series/readers-travel-tips-photo-competition>

The closing date for entries is 23:00 on 25 July 2016.

GuardianWitness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/56fbbadfe4b00bae9a99a667> is the 
home of user-generated content on the Guardian. Contribute your video, pictures 
and stories, and browse news, reviews and creations submitted by others. Posts 
will be reviewed prior to publication on GuardianWitness, and the best pieces 
will feature on the Guardian site.
 