
It would be easier to cheer Paul Simon if he'd made his stand earlier. It's 
all very well appearing on theToday programme 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/today/hi/today/newsid_9722000/9722706.stm> – as he did 
on Tuesday – and dismissing talk of a Simon & Garfunkel reunion on the grounds 
that "Art has some problem with his vocal cords" and "I would just as soon not 
go back and visit the past." But Simon actually spends quite a lot of time 
visiting the past. Otherwise he wouldn't have reunited with Garfunkel in 1972, 
1975, 1981, 1982-3, 1990, 1993, 2003, 2004, 2007 and 2009 (a 2010 reunion was 
cancelled owing to Garfunkel's vocal problems).

True reunion refuseniks must look further afield for the heroes of the 
counter-reformation, the musicians who would rather scoop out their eyes with 
melon-ballers than perform with their old bands. Top of the list is Paul 
Weller, who is asked in every interview if the Jam will re-form. The most 
recent answer – from November last year – was: "Hopefully I'll never be that 
skint, mate." He's instead suggested From the Jam, the tribute group formed by 
the other two members of the group, should get back together. "Which would be 
interesting, conceptually,"he told the Guardian a couple of years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/aug/26/paul-weller-interview>.

Interestingly, the most devoted hold-outs have all come from the more 
bloody-minded end of the 80s UK alternative scene (we'll consider the Jam an 
80s group for these purposes). The Smiths have long resisted, aided by bad 
blood caused when drummer Mike Joyce sued Morrissey and Johnny Marr in 1989, in 
a successful attempt to get more royalties from the pair. It was no surprise 
when last month's reunion rumours were promptly dismissed by the band.

The Cocteau Twins were offered a reputed £1.5m each to re-form for the 2005 
Coachella festival – a sum that would persuade most musicians to put aside 
misgivings for a weekend. And, indeed, their headline slot was announced. And 
then cancelled when singer Elizabeth Fraser saidshe wouldn't be taking part 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/nov/26/cocteau-twins-elizabeth-fraser-interview]>
.

Only those artists tempted by the promise of vast sums to reunite can ever 
know how hard they are to resist. Which is why – strictly in the interests of 
research – I'm looking for promoters willing to offer me a million to reunite 
Tambourine Sex, the hopeless Leeds group for whom I was the hopeless drummer in 
the late 80s. I like to think artistic integrity will stop me taking this 
backward step. But I do really, really need to get our house tarted up. So 
email me your offers.
 