
The case study

Alan Carr <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alan-carr> picks up last 
month's OMM and thumbs through the pages for the Grace Jones interview. 
'Somebody told me that she used to live in Northampton, where I grew up,' he 
says. Intrigued, he sidled up to Jones at this year's Q Awards, which the 
Celebrity Ding Dong star was hosting and where she, resplendent in a 'mask and 
these antennae', was the recipient of the Idol award. 'So I said, "Grace, 
Grace, I hear you lived in Northampton. I grew up there. Where, exactly, did 
you live?" She looked at me like this' - he adopts the frozen gaze of an 
autocratic teacher whose bottom has been pinched by a roguish eight-year-old - 
'and said, "What is Northampton?"' He laughs uproariously. 'I can't ever see 
Grace coming off at junction 15 on the M1.'

We are sat in a private members' club in Soho, where Carr, orange juice in 
hand, is as invisible to the lunchtime drinkers as he was to the ageless disco 
queen. Then again, today at least, he could be anyone, not least because his 
glasses are perched atop his head. 'I'll put them on for the photo shoot and be 
Alan again,' he says. He greets his press officer and, sweating slightly, 
smiles. 'Right now, though, I'm... I'm... God, I'm so shallow I don't even have 
an alter ego.'

This isn't strictly true. Musically, certainly, the 32-year-old cherishes 
acts, chief among them Portishead, whose music intimates they're familiar with 
despair. 'Maybe it's the old comedy/melancholia-type thing. It's not deliberate 
though,' he says, nervously, loth perhaps to stray too far from his public 
image as an exponent of 'oo-er missus' gags, whether on Alan Carr's Celebrity 
Ding Dong or Channel 4's The Sunday Night Project. 'I mean, I love Barbra 
Streisand too.'

Before Streisand and Portishead, before Grace Jones and soul ('At heart I am a 
soulboy. My mum was a big fan'), Carr listened to one man and one man only: 
Prince. He was eight, he says, when the girl next door, Colette, lent him a 
tape of Purple Rain. He was mesmerised. 'I loved his whole image, the mystique. 
I used to buy every single, every album, every shitty little film that he was 
in.' This he did for six years until, in 1990, Prince released Graffiti Bridge, 
alienating Carr. 'I was like, "No, that's it,"' he says, swatting, 
contemptuously, the air with his right hand, as if attempting to erase all 
Prince-related thoughts. 'He's fucked it all up, hasn't he? You can't play any 
of his stuff on YouTube or whatever. He doesn't let it happen. And I just 
think, "Fuck ya". You can only be like that if you're making great music. If 
you're making shit music and you're being an arse, well, just fuck off.'

Surprisingly, for a genial, mild-mannered soul, Carr is displeased by myriad 
topics, from 'monotonous' gangsta rap ('I'm sick of seeing videos in which 
bitches in chains throw money at the screen') to Madonna's recent Wembley shows 
('She's so scared of coming across as old') via the skinny-trousered, 
Libertines-lite bands who appear on the Sunday Night Project ('They all think 
they're going to be huge and you know you're never going to hear from them 
again'). Even Portishead, whose latest album, Third, is as astounding as Dummy, 
he believes, leave him quietly frothing at the mouth.

'Have you seen that Roseland DVD?' he asks, referring to the recording of the 
band's first New York gig at the Roseland Ballroom in 1997. 'Beth [Gibbons] 
does this wonderful song then afterwards goes [puts on Dot Cotton-type voice], 
"Oh thanks for clapping. I thought I was going to shit meself."' He cringes 
and, open-mouthed, gazes at the floor. 'I was like, "No, don't. Shut up. 
Please."'

One day, who knows, in his role as More magazine's celebrity interviewer, Carr 
will get the chance to quiz Portishead as well as his other current favourites 
Kings of Leon ('I love the fact that the singer has a bit of Michael Bolton in 
his voice'), brooding singer-songwriter Ray LaMontagne and Estelle, whose 
'American Boy' his Sunday Night Project pal Justin Lee Collins loves too.

'We go on holiday together,' says Carr, 'and it's great when my iPod is on 
shuffle because I've got all the songs he likes. Our two favourite ever tunes 
are "Misty" by Johnny Mathis and Ray Charles's "You Don't Know Me".'

Collins no doubt shares Carr's passion for Grace Jones. On second thoughts, 
scratch that. Nobody does.

'After Grace had had her photo taken at the Q Awards she said, "I must go. I 
am like a butterfly, not a moth. A butterfly." And she waltzed out of my life. 
That's probably the only time I've met someone and wanted to see them again.' 
Grinning, he sits upright and puts on his glasses, immediately recognisable as 
Alan Carr again. 'I must have more Grace Jones,' he says. 'I must have more 
Grace.'

â€¢ Alan Carr's DVD, 'Now That's What I Call a Ding Dong', is out now

The symptoms - his favourites

Grace Jones 
I've Seen That Face Before (Island)

'I first heard this when me and Justin were in Miami and I was like, "God, 
what's this?" I'd only ever heard "Slave to the Rhythm" before. It's so 
atmospheric and her voice is amazing.'

Aretha Franklin 
Sister From Texas (Atlantic)

'This is the B-side to "Angel". Her voice is just fantastic and the lyrics are 
great too. I remember thinking of the line "here for the moment, gone for 
ever", isn't that the truth? I'd love people to hear this rather than, you 
know, "Respect" and "Think".'

Billie Holiday 
I Get Along Without You Very Well (Columbia) 

'It's from her Lady in Satin album and was recorded when she was going through 
all her troubles. Her voice sounds cracked, as if she's trying to get over 
someone. Beautiful.'

Prince 
Hot Thing (Warners)

'It's an amazing song recorded when he was at the height of his powers. The 
lyrics are great - "Hot thing, tell them you're coming home late". I remember 
thinking, "Oh my God, what is Prince getting up to in his bumless trousers?" I 
found it both erotic and sinister.'

The diagnosis

Much like Prince, if less glamorous, the evergreen Todd Rundgren is a singular 
talent whose oeuvre encompasses everything from pop to soft rock to prog rock 
via blue-eyed soul. What would the Patient make of 'Just One Victory', from 
Rundgren's 1973 magnum opus A Wizard, A True Star.

What, too, given his regard for female vocalists - strong-willed, inimitable 
female vocalists - would he make of the one and only Nico and her frosty 'It 
Was a Pleasure Then', a highlight of 1967's Chelsea Girl.

As the Patient takes most of his pleasures from the past, the Doctor opted to 
dispatch two further golden oldies in the shape of, first, 'Mushroom' by 
Krautrockers Can - whose brutal beats informed Portishead's Third - and 
Rodriguez's recently exhumed 'Sugar Man', a funk tune par excellence that reeks 
of marijuana and which should delight a self-proclaimed soulboy.

Finally, the Doctor chucked in the Afghan Whigs ('Crazy'), who spent the 
Nineties on the cusp of stardom. Like the Patient, the quartet were huge soul 
fans. Like Kings of Leon, they made sleazy rock'n'roll.

The cure

The Doctor was convinced that, if nothing else, the Patient would fall for 
Todd Rundgren. He was wrong. 'I didn't hear any playfulness or flashes of 
genius. His song sounded a bit like Prince, yes, but I couldn't help thinking 
that if there were a video, it would have men in stonewashed jeans.'

Rodriguez and Can, however, he loved equally. Strangely, the former, 'soulful 
and atmospheric', reminded him of the Mamas and the Papas, and made him want to 
play it 'in my car with the top down. If the top of my car could go down, that 
is.'

As for the latter, the Patient was astonished that it was crafted in 1971. 
'Really? I would never have imagined that in a million years. This one is 
genuinely timeless and it's very, very me. I love a lot of trip hop and, for 
me, this has the same atmospheric qualities.'

Alas, while he enjoyed the 'tone' of the tune by Nico, he couldn't detect any 
other qualities. 'I just wanted to say, "Cheer up, love, it might never 
happen." I wouldn't play it before I went out clubbing, put it that way. If she 
went on X Factor, she wouldn't get past boot camp.'

But if Nico was too solemn, Afghan Whigs were 'too upbeat. I know: I'm like 
Goldilocks. I'm never happy, am I?'
 