
Nine refugees have been found hidden in the back of a lorry near the Channel 
tunnel, in one of the first such discoveries since theclosure of the Calais 
migrant camp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/24/panel-calais-camp-france-demolition-refugees-migration>
.

Police were called to Gillingham business park in Kent at 1.20pm on Friday 
when a lorry driver heard banging from the back of his HGV. Eight men and a boy 
believed to be under 18 were taken to Dover and processed by Home Office 
immigration officials after being assessed by paramedics who found them fit and 
well.

It is understood that three of the men had Syrian passports while four 
identified themselves as Iranian nationals and four as Iraqi nationals.

The Home Office said all nine had claimed asylum and were having their 
applications processed. The boy has been placed into the care of social 
services.

A Home Office spokesman said: “Where someone is found to have no right to 
remain in the UK, we will take action to remove them.”

It is unclear whether the group had crossed the Channel following the 
demolition of the Calais camp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/02/calais-refugee-children-evacuated-as-camp-clearance-winds-up>
. Thousands of refugees, including more than 1,600 young asylum seekers and 300 
women and children, were moved on from the camp over 10 days.

Gillingham business park is 40 minutes from the Channel tunnel and 15 minutes 
from four docks.

The group is among the first to be picked up since the closure of the Calais 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/calais> camp, which charities said would not 
stop people risking their lives to try to reach Britain.


On 27 October, four refugees were spotted disembarking from a lorry in Bridge, 
near Canterbury, and handed over to Home Office immigration officials. On the 
same day, five suspected illegal immigrants were filmed in footage posted 
online getting out of an HGV near junction 1B of the M25 near Dartford.

Caroline Browne, a community engagement coordinator at the Devon-based refugee 
charity Samphire <http://www.samphireproject.org.uk/>, said: “We are not 
surprised to hear of new arrivals in the UK after the chaotic closure of the 
‘Jungle’ in Calais.

“We argued at the time and still believe this to be true that merely closing 
the camp, while a short-term solution for the humanitarian disaster facing 
people there and the terrible conditions facing lorry drivers passing through 
Calais, would not be a long-term solution.

“Closing the camp does not deal with the push and pull factors that lead a 
small number of asylum seekers who arrive in Europe to seek sanctuary in the 
UK. While these push and pull factors still exist and the UK continues to be 
slow in creating safe routes for refugees to arrive some people will continue 
risking their lives to cross to the UK and seek asylum.”

In September, four refugees were picked up walking along the M2 
<http://www.kentonline.co.uk/medway/news/four-illegal-migrants-spotted-on-102121/>
 two miles from Gillingham business park and taken to Home Office immigration 
officials. The men, aged between 22 and 33, said they were from Eritrea. It is 
not known how they entered the UK.

 