
Regional museums are being invited to pitch for some seriously expensive 
contemporary art, beyond the wildest dreams of their curators’ budgets, but now 
available through a new philanthropy project.

Under the scheme launched by the Contemporary Art Society 
<http://www.contemporaryartsociety.org/> (CAS), six-figure sums will be 
available to purchase works by internationally renowned British artists such as
Rachel Whiteread 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/apr/06/rachel-whiteread-life-in-art>
,Antony Gormley <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gormley>, Sarah Lucas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/may/06/sarah-lucas-venice-biennale-interview>
 orMark Wallinger <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/mark-wallinger>, or 
artists based in Britain like the German Turner prize winnerWolfgang Tillmans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/sep/18/photographer-wolfgang-tillmans-best-shot>
, as gifts for the museums.

The scheme is named Great Works 
<http://www.contemporaryartsociety.org/news/contemporary-british-masterpieces-for-our-collections-a-new-scheme-to-acquire-great-works/>
 because it is intended to allow museums outside London to aspire to owning 
works not only by young hopefuls – although in the contemporary art market, 
many young and newly launched artists are already beyond their means – but also 
by some of the biggest names in the art world who have forged an international 
reputation, such as theChapman brothers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/oct/24/jake-dinos-chapman-review-hastings-jerwood-gallery-realm-unmentionable>
 orDamien Hirst 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jun/30/damien-hirst-what-have-i-done-ive-created-a-monster>
.

Caroline Douglas, the director of the CAS which has been buying works of art 
for museums for more than a century, said that while regional museums and their 
19th-century industrial benefactors had in the past built up fantastic 
collections – for instance,Birmingham’s world class collection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2002/jul/31/artsfeatures.museums> of 
pre-Raphaelite art – the soaring price of contemporary art meant it had become 
almost impossible to view such artists’ work in permanent collections outside 
London.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fregional-museums-chance-buy-renowned-british-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F676c89949a51dd96a210a1e53e32e8d31e38d4fb%2F0_83_1480_2161%2F1480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Regional%20museums%20given%20chance%20to%20buy%20renowned%20British%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fregional-museums-chance-buy-renowned-british-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Regional%20museums%20given%20chance%20to%20buy%20renowned%20British%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fregional-museums-chance-buy-renowned-british-art%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F676c89949a51dd96a210a1e53e32e8d31e38d4fb%2F0_83_1480_2161%2F1480.jpg>
 The Three Dancers by Pablo Picasso, given to Tate by the Contemporary Art 
Society in 1965. Photograph: Succession Picasso/DACS 2011/Tat/PA 
Douglas said: “Collecting the art of our time is the lifeblood of a museum, 
but it has now become practically impossible for many museums in the UK to do 
so without philanthropic support. It is particularly important because 
contemporary art appeals to young people and is often the way they are 
introduced to our great museum collections.”

The art society is inviting 69 museums with CAS membership – almost all 
outside London – to submit their case for the artist’s work they would most 
like to acquire, outlining how it would benefit their collection and how it 
would relate to their town or region, by the end of February. The winner will 
be announced in March and the work should go on public display within the year.

The work of art will be a gift, but with strings to prevent any cash-strapped 
local authority from imagining they have acquired an asset that could swiftly 
be returned to the auction room. If the museum for any reason can no longer 
care for or display the work, it will return to the society.

Since 1910 the CAS has given works by artists including Picasso, Matisse, 
Anthony Caro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/oct/24/sir-anthony-caro> and 
Hirst to Tate; a major painting byFrancis Bacon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/nov/16/new-francis-bacon-catalogue-to-reveal-more-than-100-unseen-works>
 to Huddersfield in the mid-1940s; in the 1990s an installation to Eastbourne by
Olafur Eliasson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/aug/07/top-10-suns-in-art-monet-turner-raphael-olafur-eliasson>
, who would go on to create in 2003 the glowing midwinter sun ofthe Weather 
Project 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/exhibition/unilever-series-olafur-eliasson-weather-project/olafur-eliasson-weather-project>
, one of the most spectacular and popular installations in Tate Modern’s 
Turbine Hall; and most recently a work by the German artist and film-makerHito 
Steyerl <http://hito%20steyerl/> to Glasgow.

In the past, the CAS also gave to Tate a work by Gormley – Bed 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/gormley-bed-t06984>, created using the 
hollow space of the sculptor’s body nibbled out of thousands of pieces of white 
sliced bread – from his first major exhibition at the Whitechapel Gallery.

At the launch of the scheme at Gormley’s London studio, the artist recalled 
the significance of that purchase, “not just for the cash – though for a young 
artist that was very important – but for the recognition and the fact that now 
the work was making its way into the world”.

Douglas will not disclose exactly how much the society will spend each year, 
in case galleries and agents promptly add the CAS gift to their baseline price, 
but it is a substantial six-figure sum. Artists want to see their work in 
museums, Douglas said, and she is confident that the money will stretch far 
enough to buy some genuinely great works.
 