
Matteo Renzi is preparing to formally submit his resignation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/matteo-renzis-future-in-the-balance-amid-high-turnout-in-italy-referendum>
 to Italy’s president after defeat in Sunday’s referendum, as the country faces 
questions over whether it is on the brink of a takeover by populist and 
rightwing parties.

The prime minister conceded shortly after midnight on Monday and is expected 
to head to the presidential palace, the Quirinale, on Monday afternoon.

His attempt to overhaul the constitution and parliament was rejected by 59.1% 
of voters, on a turnout of 68%.

Italy referendum: 'Period of uncertainty' predicted after Matteo Renzi's 
defeat – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/dec/04/italian-referendum-and-austrian-presidential-election-live>
As newspaper headlines noted the demise of the man who was Italy’s youngest 
prime minister when he took office in 2014 – one headline said Renzi, 41, 
simply had “too many enemies” – attention quickly turned to what may happen 
next, with few certain answers.

The anti-establishment Five Star Movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/five-star-movement> (M5S) and the xenophobic 
Northern League quickly sought to capitalise on Renzi’s defeat and said they 
wanted snap elections, even before a planned reform of electoral laws is to go 
ahead.

Luigi Di Maio, one of the M5S’s rising stars, declared that the populist 
movement was ready to form a government, while the Northern League head, Matteo 
Salvini, said his fringe party – which has its roots in secessionism – ought to 
be considered a “serious alternative”.

Salvini said the result – and the strong showing of the far right candidate in 
theAustrian presidential election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/far-right-party-concedes-defeat-in-austrian-presidential-election>
 on Sunday – was a clash of “all against one”.

Daniele Caprera, the UK spokesman for the M5S, told BBC Radio 4’s Today 
programme that it was on the brink of coming to power.


“We are very credible. We want to change Italy. We want to participate in 
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> but we need somebody who 
will listen. So far they have failed … All they have been focused on is 
economics and austerity,” Caprera said.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fmatteo-renzi-resignation-italian-prime-minister-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Matteo%20Renzi%20announces%20his%20resignation%20as%20Italian%20prime%20minister%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fmatteo-renzi-resignation-italian-prime-minister-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Matteo%20Renzi%20announces%20his%20resignation%20as%20Italian%20prime%20minister%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fmatteo-renzi-resignation-italian-prime-minister-video&media=>
Matteo Renzi announces his resignation as Italian prime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/05/matteo-renzi-resignation-italian-prime-minister-video>
Most analysts dismissed the idea that the main forces behind the no vote would 
succeed in their bid for immediate elections. They agreed that the president, 
Sergio Mattarella, would be able to install a new prime minister and caretaker 
government, which would oversee changes to the electoral laws that would make 
it more difficult for the M5S or Northern League to win a strong majority in 
parliament.

If Mattarella is able to cobble together a coalition government, it could 
delay elections until as late as 2018.

Giovanni Orsina, a professor of Italian politics at Luiss University in Rome, 
said one of the most immediate questions was what kind of control Renzi could 
maintain over his party and his delicate ruling coalition.

“This very much depends on what happens in the bowels of the PD [Renzi’s 
Democratic party], and nobody knows,” he said.

What happens now after Matteo Renzi's referendum defeat?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/what-happens-now-after-matteo-renzis-referendum-defeat>
Orsina said a majority of the PD may want to install a prime minister such as 
Dario Franceschini, currently the culture minister, who could lead the party 
through all of next year. Franceschini is seen as a dynamic potential rival to 
Renzi, and some analysts believe choosing him would raise questions about 
Renzi’s ability to stage a comeback.

Orsina said Renzi would probably prefer a caretaker government to be in place 
for as long as is needed to pass the electoral laws, and then take his chances 
at a new election, still at the helm of the party.

If a caretaker government is decided, other possible replacements for Renzi 
include Pier Carlo Padoan, the finance minister, or Pietro Grasso, the speaker 
of the senate.

While Italy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> grapples with the 
complicated political chess game – including questions about whether Renzi has 
enough support in his party to remain at the helm and therefore continue to be 
a possible kingmaker – the result has been viewed by many as yet another win 
for populist and anti-Europe forces.


After weeks of crisscrossing the Italian peninsula to try to persuade Italians 
to votesi (yes), final results on Monday showed that only relatively small 
pockets of voters backed the prime minister’s proposals, including areas of his 
native Tuscany, Emilia-Romagna, and the city of Bolzano.

Italians living abroad also backed the plans, but the no victory was 
overwhelming, with areas of southern Italy, such as Catania, voting more than 
70% against change. While it is still unclear what motivated the vote, the 
outcome reflected a view that Renzi has not paid enough attention to the 
beleaguered south during his tenure.


Italy’s referendum result is not another Brexit or Trump | Luigi Scazzieri
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/05/italy-referendum-result-not-another-brexit-trump>
The referendum result will be seen as a rejection of establishment politics in 
favour of populist and anti-immigrant forces, much like the UK’s vote in June 
to leave the European Union and the election last month of Donald Trump in the 
US.

But that could be an over-simplification of the results 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/referendum-win-may-lead-nowhere-for-five-star-and-northern-league>
. Many voters interviewed by the Guardian in the weeks leading up to the vote – 
including those who said they were to the left of Renzi and were not supporters 
of Grillo or Salvini – expressed concern about the proposed changes to the 
constitution.

The changes, in effect, would have neutered the senate and given much more 
power to Renzi and future prime ministers. Prominent no voices included Mario 
Monti, the former prime minister and ex-European commissioner, who is hardly an 
anti-establishment figure.

Renzi made constitutional reform a central plank of his premiership and argued 
for months that the changes would make Italy more stable and more likely to 
adopt tough-but-needed economic and labour policies.

But the prime minister did not overcome the steep decline in his own 
popularity and the mistrust of voters, who were disappointed that he could not 
or did not do more to improve the economy and cut unemployment.

For many, the plebiscite became a vote of no confidence in the premier. 
Renzi’s personality – jovial but verging on arrogance – made him seem far 
removed from the worries of ordinary Italians, some said.
 