
Voting rights rulings could deal blow to Republicans in 2016 elections
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/31/north-carolina-voting-rights-law-republicans-november-elections>
Last Friday was a big day for voting rights in the United States. Federal 
courts struck down restrictive voting laws inKansas 
<http://electionlawblog.org/?p=84742> and Wisconsin. 
<http://electionlawblog.org/?p=84746> And in a particularly important decision 
<https://www.thenation.com/article/the-countrys-worst-anti-voting-law-was-just-struck-down-in-north-carolina/>
, the fourth circuit court of appeals delivered a stinging rebuke to North 
Carolina’s egregious vote suppression law. As the court observed, North 
Carolina legislators didn’t even try to hide the core purpose of the law: to 
stop African Americans from getting to the polls.

The politics of North Carolina are a perfect illustration of what led the 
Republican party to nominate Trump. The southern state, which has seen a large 
influx of people into its prosperous urban centers, is becoming more liberal – 
Barack Obama carried the state in 2008, and Mitt Romney carried it by only two 
points in 2012. North Carolina Republicans have not reacted to these trends, 
however, by becoming more moderate.

The clash between a Republican party running at full speed to the right while 
its population was trending to the left led North Carolina to pass a 
particularly terrible anti-voting law. In 2013, a bare majority of the US 
supreme courtgave the green light 
<http://prospect.org/article/supreme-courts-war-great-society> to North 
Carolina by striking down a provision of the Voting Rights Act that required 
states, such as North Carolina, that had a history of discrimination to 
preclear electoral law changes with the Department of Justice.

In addition to a requirement that voters show particular forms of ID, the 
state eliminated Sunday voting, narrowed the window for early voting and 
eliminated same-day vote registration and early registration for 16- and 
17-year olds. Voter ID requirements at least have the superficial appearance of 
addressing the integrity of elections, although in practice thejustification is 
bogus 
<http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/2014/10/another-winner-late-period-posner>
. But most of the provisions in North Carolina’s attack on the right to vote 
had no purpose, even in theory, other than to make it harder for people to vote.


Or, to put it more accurately, make it harder for some people to vote. In a 
careful, detailed, and absolutely devastatingopinion 
<http://electionlawblog.org/?p=84702> for a unanimous three-judge panel, Judge 
Diana Motz demonstrated that the law “target[ed] African Americans with almost 
surgical precision”. The discriminatory intent that could be clearly inferred 
from the nature of the statute itself was not well hidden.

As Motz pointed out: “[B]efore enacting that law, the legislature requested 
data on the use, by race, of a number of voting practices. Upon receipt of the 
race data, the General Assembly enacted legislation that restricted voting and 
registration in five different ways, all of which disproportionately affected 
African Americans.” When you request data about how changes in vote laws will 
affect the African American vote, and then change laws in ways deliberately 
designed to suppress it, there’s really no room left for doubt.

The story in Wisconsin is similar, although its legislature was a little 
better at hiding its tracks. Republicans in the state have used lower off-year 
turnouts to win elections and pursue a very aggressive conservative agenda in a 
state that perennially votes Democratic in presidential elections. It passed 
vote restrictions that disproportionately affect people of color and the poor, 
and these restrictions were also struck down on Friday. Both of these decisions 
materially affect the elections in November. Not only will Trump be targeting 
North Carolina and Wisconsin; both states have Senate elections, with control 
of the chamber responsible for confirming (or not confirming) supreme court 
nominees looking to come down to the wire.


The nakedness of these vote suppression tactics is so obvious that earlier in 
July, the conservative fifth circuit court of appealsstruck down 
<http://theweek.com/articles/637587/why-gopcontrolled-court-couldnt-stomach-texas-voterid-law>
 similar legislation in Texas. While the supreme court made it harder to 
challenge these tactics by gutting the voting rights law, there are still 
remedies available and federal courts have finally begun to push back against 
these attempts to suppress the votes of people of color and the poor.

These are important victories. But they also underscore the importance of 
getting a supreme court majority that will fight back against vote suppression 
rather than facilitating it. Whether this happens will be determined in 
November, not only in the contest between Clinton and Trump but in the contest 
to control the Senate.
 