
"I am not pleased with the quality of our game, that is not what I am used to 
seeing." When the manager of Armenia, who began their Euro 2012 campaign ranked 
105th in the world, just below Qatar, makes that declaration after a 4-1 home 
victory over Macedonia that lifts his country to the top of their qualifying 
group, you know things are not as you thought. And theRepublic of Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/republicofireland> have cause for concern.

That win for Armenia on Friday afternoon temporarily took them to the top of 
Group B before Russia and Ireland won later that evening to go first and second 
respectively and bumpArmenia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/armenia> 
back to third, but still in with a chance of becoming perhaps the most 
surprising qualifiers for the finals in the history of the tournament.

Until now their best campaign had been for the 1998 World Cup, when they 
finished fourth in their group but still won only one of 10 qualifiers and 
scored just eight goals â€“ in every other post-independence campaign since their 
first one in 1994, they finished either last or second last. Yet now they go to 
Dublin on Tuesday as by far the most prolific scorers in Group B, thanks 
notably to that win over Macedonia and last month's 4-0 triumph in Slovakia, 
who just days previously thought they themselves had taken a big step to 
qualification by drawing 0-0 in Dublin.

What is going on? An Englishman can shed some light. Tom Jones, the former 
Swindon Town player and until recently manager of Swindon Supermarine, ran the 
Armenian national team for three years between 2006 and 2009, first as Ian 
Porterfield's assistant and then, when Porterfield died in 2007, as the manager 
himself.

He gave debuts to most of the young players who are now transforming the 
perception of Armenian football. He also shaped the thinking of the current 
manager, Vardan Minasyan, who worked as a coach under Porterfield and Jones 
while also managing Pyunik Yerevan, the club who have been Armenian champions 
for the past 10 years and for which most of the current squad play or have 
played.

"Vardan is very organised but he took a bit of convincing about our methods at 
first," recalls Jones, who soon after his arrival in Armenia set about the 
national team's mentality. "They used to be all about damage limitation. They 
weren't losing too heavily, but nor were they getting in any shots because they 
weren't trying to go forward and win the game.

"We had to convince them of the potential that they have. At first even Vardan 
was saying 'no, we can't leave ourselves too open, we can't disgrace the 
country', but in our first match in charge [at start of Euro 2008 qualifiers] 
we won in Kazakhstan and then beat Poland at home and then the guys truly 
believed."

Armenia did not win another game in that campaign, but they did earn 
creditable draws with Portugal and Serbia and, more importantly, the teenagers 
that Jones introduced gained valuable experience, the fruit of which they are 
now showing. Nine of the 11 players who are likely to start in Dublin are under 
25, including the midfielder Henrikh Mkhitaryan and the striker Gevorg 
Ghazaryan.

"They were both teenagers when we called them up for the senior team, but I 
had seen them play for the under-21s and knew that they had quality," says 
Jones. "Henrikh, in particular, is definitely good enough to play in the 
Premier League. He is very creative, gets his fair share of goals and is also 
extremely hard-working and has a great attitude."

The attitude of the Armenia team has been one of the most striking aspects of 
their campaign: their high goal tally is testament not only to their skill, but 
also their tremendous dynamism and enterprise. "Armenia is a very poor country 
and for most of these guys, football is the only outlet they have to make a 
decent life," says Jones. "As well as the pride it brings the country, it 
brings professional rewards because breaking into the top 50 world rankings 
makes it much easier for them to get work permits to go abroad."

Mkhitaryan and Ghazaryan have both moved from Pyunik to clubs in Ukraine and 
their other biggest threat to Ireland, the powerful striker Yura Movsisyan, 
plays in Russia. That trio alone have scored more goals in the qualifying 
campaign than the entire Irish team put together

Giovanni Trapattoni, the Republic's manager, organises his team primarily not 
to concede. For the last eight games he has been successful. The next one may 
be the toughest of all.
 