
You have paid £4.5m for a luxury London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>
 flat with floor to ceiling windows and glorious views across the Thames to St 
Paul’s Cathedral. So do you want to put up net curtains?


Residents in the block Neo Bankside should consider it if they want their 
privacy to be maintained, the director of Tate SirNicholas Serota 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/nicholas-serota> said on Wednesday.

They are the nearest neighbours to Tate Modern’s £260m Switch House Extension; 
some are little more than 20 metres away and they have found themselves 
directly overlooked by visitors to Tate Modern’s 10th floor viewing gallery 
which opened in June.

Don’t let it be curtains for Tate’s neighbours | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/23/dont-let-it-be-curtains-for-tates-neighbours>
Switch House and surrounding area 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/09/tate_modern-zip/giv-22601OK9p2p3KHLts/>
On Wednesday, Serota, the director of Tate, said there was a simple solution 
open to residents. He said privacy would “be enhanced if those people decided 
that they might put up a blind or a net curtain or whatever, as is common in 
many places”. He added: ”I need to repeat the fact that clearly people 
purchasing those flats were in no doubt thatTate Modern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tate-modern> was going to build its 
new Switch House building and the character and uses of that building were 
widely known. People purchased with their eyes wide open.”

Serota said Tate had put up signs encouraging visitors “not to gesticulate, to 
recognise that people who live nearby have a right to some privacy”.


The residents are undeniably overlooked. The 10th floor viewing gallery offers 
panoramic views of London but the most startling view on the south-west side is 
the beautiful, spotlessly clean interiors of the flats.

It is a sensitive subject for those living in Neo Bankside: all the residents 
approached by the Guardian spoke only on condition of anonymity.

“When we moved in, the entire side [of the Tate Modern] was covered and it was 
under construction, so we didn’t know how bad the situation was going to be,” 
said one resident.

“When it did open, I realised there was a window right outside ours. It was a 
surprise … We’re renting, but if we had purchased it we would be really upset.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fnet-curtains-tate-modern-nick-serota%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4bcc055db3be27703e830edd5946a905c686fd4%2F0_340_5439_3263%2F5439.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Residents%20overlooked%20by%20Tate%20Modern%20extension%20should%20'get%20net%20curtains'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fnet-curtains-tate-modern-nick-serota%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Residents%20overlooked%20by%20Tate%20Modern%20extension%20should%20%27get%20net%20curtains%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fnet-curtains-tate-modern-nick-serota%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4bcc055db3be27703e830edd5946a905c686fd4%2F0_340_5439_3263%2F5439.jpg>
 The Neo Bankside building seen from the viewing deck on the 10th floor of the 
new Switch House building at the Tate Modern. Signs have been erected by Tate 
Modern asking visitors not to photograph their neighbours. Photograph: Alicia 
Canter for the Guardian 
Another resident entering the lobby with two children said the living room of 
her rented flat faced directly on to the restaurant. “It’s quite horrible,” she 
said. “At first, we thought it may be offices or something else there … It’s 
really bad, because I have young girls and there are strangers looking in. It’s 
no fun … I counted 50 people looking at me when I was in my house.”

She kept the blinds down much of the time, she said, but this made the flat 
very gloomy. The flat’s owners had been unaware of the issue when they bought 
it, she said, adding: “I feel like I’m on display all the time.”

Another resident pointed out that the flats were overlooked by other 
buildings, too. “I used to live on the first floor over there,” she said, 
pointing to a Neo Bankside building at the back of the development. “Literally 
everybody from the Blue Fin building [offices just behind the Tate Modern] 
could see in anyway. All the residents can see into each other’s flats. You’re 
living in a goldfish bowl.”

She said: “If you buy a flat with so much glass and think you’re buying 
privacy, you’re stupid. I think people are being a little hysterical.”

The Southwark Liberal Democrat councillor, Adele Morris, has tried to help 
broker a solution. She called Serota’s comments an insult, saying: “I think 
that is an atrocious comment for a man of his stature and his position to make. 
A director of a big, public institution making a flippant comment like that 
about something which he knows is directly affecting people’s lives and their 
privacy.

First look: inside the Switch House – Tate Modern's power pyramid
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/may/23/first-look-inside-tate-moderns-power-pyramid>
“Would he be saying the same thing if it was a council flat? Is it to do with 
the presumption that these people are rich and they get what they deserve 
buying a flat like that? I don’t agree with that, I think everybody is entitled 
to a certain amount of privacy.”

Morris helped set up a meeting between Tate, the building’s architects Herzog 
and de Meuron, Southwark council and the developers Native Land, to try to come 
up with a solution. None could be agreed and Morris’s idea of having 
strategically placed planters, to deflect attention from the flats, was 
rejected.

She said it was clear that some gallery visitors were not pointing their 
cameraphones only to sights like Big Ben – they were zooming in to people’s 
homes.

“It is the behaviour of people which has taken everybody by surprise,” said 
Morris. “There are certain points on that balcony where there isn’t much to see 
apart from directly into the flats. People didn’t realise there would be such a 
problem. They didn’t realise how people would use the viewing balcony. They 
knew it was there but I don’t think they thought for one minute this would 
happen because, after all, it’s Tate; it’s an art gallery, people are supposed 
to be going to look at the art.”

Morris said she did not think it was Tate Modern’s fault but now the problem 
had arisen and it was making residents’ lives miserable. She said Tate should 
not appear to condone the situation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fnet-curtains-tate-modern-nick-serota%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4cdb8c4511c816b3776ef66aa0c77e3197d57f68%2F0_313_4729_3170%2F4729.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Residents%20overlooked%20by%20Tate%20Modern%20extension%20should%20'get%20net%20curtains'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fnet-curtains-tate-modern-nick-serota%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Residents%20overlooked%20by%20Tate%20Modern%20extension%20should%20%27get%20net%20curtains%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fnet-curtains-tate-modern-nick-serota%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4cdb8c4511c816b3776ef66aa0c77e3197d57f68%2F0_313_4729_3170%2F4729.jpg>
 The Neo Bankside building, where some of the flats worth millions of pounds 
can be viewed from the viewing deck on the 10th floor of the new Switch House 
building. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian 
A flat in the block costs in the region of £4.5m 
<http://www.knightfrank.co.uk/riverside-property/neo-bankside-se1>. The final 
available penthouses are being marketed at £5.95m. The residents so far have 
chosen to remain anonymous and talk of legal action may be premature, although 
Morris said she was aware that “legal people are talking to legal people”.

Tate is declining to make any changes to its viewing terrace which is open to 
6pm for five nights and 10pm Friday and Saturday. In a statement, it said: “The 
Viewing Level is an intrinsic part of the free public offer of the new 
building, providing a 360-degree experience that is virtually unique to London. 
Since the very first plans were drawn up in 2007, we have been through an 
extensive consultation and planning process and have maintained an ongoing 
dialogue with local residents.

Neo Bankside: how Richard Rogers's new 'non-dom accom' cut out the poor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2015/jul/21/neo-bankside-how-richard-rogers-new-non-dom-accom-cut-out-the-poor>
“At no point during this process were any concerns raised regarding the 
viewing platform. There is signage encouraging the public and visitors to use 
it respectfully and responsibly.”

Native Land said: “We are aware that public use of the new viewing gallery of 
the Tate Modern’s Switch House has caused concern over the privacy of some of 
the residents of Neo Bankside, whose apartments can be seen by visitors.

“While development of Neo Bankside had already begun when plans for the new 
gallery were submitted to the authorities, potential buyers at Neo Bankside had 
access to marketing material which showed the location of the planned viewing 
gallery. A model showing the planned Tate extension in context to Neo Bankside 
was also available. We, the Tate and Southwark council are liaising with the 
affected residents and neighbours to consider the concerns raised.”
 