
Emmanuel Macron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/11/emmanuel-macron-will-frances-young-economy-minister-launch-presidential-bid>
, France’s rebellious economy minister, has quit the government, increasing 
speculation that he will launch his own presidential bid in an attempt to 
capitalise on French distrust of the political class.


François Hollande <https://www.theguardian.com/world/francois-hollande>’s 
office confirmed that Macron had resigned as economy minister and that the 
minister of finance,Michel Sapin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/11/french-minister-michel-sapin-sorry-inappropriate-gesture-journalist>
, would take over what is one of the government’s most important jobs.

Macron, who has left little doubt regarding his presidential ambitions, has 
not yet launched a campaign for next year’s presidential race.

Le comeback kid? Sarkozy shapes up for presidential run on hardline platform
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/19/le-comeback-kid-sarkozy-shapes-up-for-presidential-run-on-hardline-platform>
His departure puts an end to two years of government tension stoked by his 
outspoken criticism of the president and one-time mentor, Hollande. It opens up 
the possibility that the 38-year-old could launch an outsider bid to leadFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, playing on what he sees as France’s 
disillusionment towards conventional politicians and political parties.

The philosophy postgraduate and former Rothschild banker is a relative novice 
in politics. He belongs to no political party and has never run for elected 
office. His rise to government minister was so extraordinary and unconventional 
that he is still known as a “flying saucer” on the political scene.

Five years ago the notion that someone with no constituency or political party 
and no electoral experience could be a serious contender for the presidency 
would have been unthinkable.

But Macron – a pro-reformist, pro-business figure who served for two years in 
the Socialist government while insisting he was “neither left nor right” – has 
spent months building up financial and strategic backing for a presidential 
bid. He is seen as a product of the times; a non-politician wanting to take on 
politics. For him, the fact that he is not in a political party is an advantage 
in a political climate that is tired of old party structures.

Macron was catapulted by Hollande from presidential adviser to economy 
minister just two years ago. In office he regularly launched scathing attacks 
on all of the left’s defining characteristics – from the 35-hour-week to the 
large public sector – and embarrassed the Socialists by repeatedly criticising 
the discrimination and inequality that still defines France’s high-rise 
suburban estates. He stated this month: “I am not a socialist.” Not afraid of 
grand metaphors, Macron has likened his own rebellious streak to France’s 
15th-century saint and saviour,Joan of Arc 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/26/joan-of-arc-ring-stays-in-france-after-appeal-to-queen>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Ffrances-economy-minister-emmanuel-macron-resigns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb35f5386e97cb93a0bb56073270d8906bdf1995%2F0_0_3300_1980%2F3300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Resignation%20of%20French%20minister%20Macron%20fuels%20presidential%20bid%20rumours&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Ffrances-economy-minister-emmanuel-macron-resigns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Resignation%20of%20French%20minister%20Macron%20fuels%20presidential%20bid%20rumours&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Ffrances-economy-minister-emmanuel-macron-resigns%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb35f5386e97cb93a0bb56073270d8906bdf1995%2F0_0_3300_1980%2F3300.jpg>
 Macron, pictured with Hollande in July, was promoted from presidential adviser 
to economy minister two years ago. Photograph: Jacques Brinon/AP 
Macron has quickly become one of the most popular political figures in France, 
second only toAlain Juppé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/01/alain-juppe-from-cold-grey-automaton-to-saviour-of-france>
, who is currently favourite to win the right’s primary race to nominate its 
presidential candidate.

Only two years ago, when Macron was Hollande’s chief advisor in the Élysée 
Palace, he was unknown to the general public.

This year, when doubts were swirling about whether the deeply unpopular 
Hollande could run again for office, Macron launched his ownpolitical movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/07/frances-emmanuel-macron-launches-political-movement>
 – En Marche! (Forward!) – which has gained 50,000 members. The movement 
enlisted volunteers to go knocking on doors across France to hear the public’s 
ideas on where the country was going wrong. Macron is seeking to build on the 
results of this in a political programme and book that he will probably publish 
this autumn.

“At least I’ve had a trade,” he said in office when opponents on the hard left 
mocked him as a banker. “I learned the life of business, commerce – it’s an 
art. I discovered the international [scene] and a financial savoir-faire that 
still serves me today,” he said of his time at Rothschild bank, where he is 
said to have earned €2m (£1.7m).

Polls show that he is most popular among rightwing, older and professional 
voters. Pollsters have warned that Macron has his work cut out to expand his 
support base.

In recent months, Macron has seen a slight dip in his poll ratings after a few 
PR mishaps, including being filmed having an argument with a demonstrator in a 
T-shirt in which he told him “the best way to afford a suit is to work”.

He was also criticised for falling into the celebrity trap after he and his 
wife appeared on the front page ofseveral glossy magazines 
<http://www.parismatch.com/Actu/Politique/Exclusif-Brigitte-Macron-dans-Paris-Match-944509>
. He controversially blamed his wife for a criticised personal interview in 
Paris Match, only to appear on the front cover later this summer, wearing 
swimming trunks in an issue that got higher than average sales.

Macron’s marriage has been fodder for the gossip press. The son of two 
doctors, he grew up in the northern town of Amiens, but his parents sent him 
away to Paris to finish high school in an attempt to break up his relationship 
with his school French teacher, Brigitte Trogneux, 20 years his senior. Macron 
and Trogneux stayed together and have now been married for nine years.

Hollande’s opponents on the left and right said Macron quitting made the 
unpopular president look increasingly isolated. Key figures on the left of the 
party, such as the former economy ministerArnaud Montebourg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/25/arnaud-montebourg-profile-france-maverick-minister>
, have already broken from Hollande. With Macron’s departure, Hollande has now 
lost a key figure on the centre-right of his government.
 