
Another day, another tweet 
<https://twitter.com/RichardDawkins/status/494012678432894976> from Richard 
Dawkins proving that if non-conscious material is given enough time, it is 
capable of evolving into an obstreperous crackpot who should have retired from 
public speech when he had the chance to bow out before embarrassing himself.
Richard Dawkins (@RichardDawkins) 
Date rape is bad. Stranger rape at knifepoint is worse. If you think that's an 
endorsement of date rape, go away and learn how to think.
 <https://twitter.com/RichardDawkins/statuses/494012678432894976> July 29, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/RichardDawkins/statuses/494012678432894976> 
“Date rape is bad. Stranger rape at knifepoint is worse,” huffs Dawkins. 
Seeming to have anticipated, although not understood, the feminist reaction 
this kind of sentiment generally evokes, he finishes the tweet: “If you think 
that’s an endorsement of date rape, go away and learn how to think.”

You can almost imagine him tweeting this, his fingers jabbing away at the 
keyboard as his glasses slide down a face contorted with disappointment at how 
irrational everyone is being. This is Dawkins in 2014: a figure of mockery, a 
man so convinced that he possesses God-like powers of omniscience that he can’t 
understand why everyone’s getting angry at him for pointing out the obvious. 
Why won’t we all just learn how to think, damn it! Then we could all live 
together in a peaceful society where nobody wears “bin liners 
<http://www.theweek.co.uk/people-news/12569/dawkins-my-revulsion-bin-liner-burka>
”, and womenshut up about sexual harassment 
<http://www.thewire.com/national/2011/07/richard-dawkins-draws-feminist-wrath-over-sexual-harassment-comments/39637/>
.

Remember when Dawkins was widely respected? When his biggest detractor was 
late evolutionary biologist Stephen Jay Gould 
<http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/1997/jun/12/darwinian-fundamentalism/>
? I don’t. Having grown up after Dawkins made the transition from lauded 
science communicator to old manwho shouts at clouds 
<http://31.media.tumblr.com/tumblr_lvxhzrMX421r4d22do1_400.jpg>, it’s hard for 
me to understand why anyone continues to listen to him about anything.

Sure, he wrote some pop science books back in the day, but why do we keep 
having him on TV and in the newspapers? If it’s a biologist you’re after, or a 
science communicator, why not pick from the hundreds out therewho don’t tweet 
<https://twitter.com/RichardDawkins/status/492729120418430976> five or six 
Islamophobic sentiments before getting off the toilet in the morning? If you 
need an atheist, there are many philosophers, scholars of religion, and public 
intellectuals available who don’trefuse to acknowledge 
<https://twitter.com/RichardDawkins/status/324171554491596803> the existence of 
theology.

Dawkins has been arrogant for years, a man so convinced of his intellectual 
superiority that he believes the one domain in which he happens to be an 
expert, science, is the only legitimate way of acquiring or assessing 
knowledge. All of his outbursts in recent years follow from this belief: he 
understands the scientific method, a process intended to mitigate the 
interference of human subjectivity in data collection, as a universally 
applicable way of understanding not just the physical world but literally 
everything else as well. Hence his constant complaint that those appalled by 
his bigoted vituperationsare simply offended by clarity 
<https://twitter.com/RichardDawkins/status/482061025853063170>; feeble-minded 
obscurantists who cling to emotion, tradition or the supernatural to shield 
themselves from the power of his truth bombs.

You don’t have to be religious to find this level of hubris baffling. In his 
review of The God Delusion, Terry Eagletonremarks 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v28/n20/terry-eagleton/lunging-flailing-mispunching>:

Imagine someone holding forth on biology whose only knowledge of the subject 
is the Book of British Birds, and you have a rough idea of what it feels like 
to readRichard Dawkins <https://www.theguardian.com/science/dawkins> on 
theology.

Dawkins’ narrowmindedness, his unshakeable belief that the entire history of 
human intellectual achievement was just a prelude to the codification of 
scientific inquiry, leads him to dismiss the insights offered not only by 
theology, but philosophy, history and art as well.

To him, the humanities are expendable window-dressing, and the consciousness 
and emotions of his fellow human beings are byproducts of natural selection 
that frequently hobble his pursuit and dissemination of cold, hard facts. His 
orientation toward the world is the product of a classic category mistake, but 
because he’s nestled inside it so snugly he perceives complex concepts outside 
of his understanding as meaningless dribble. If he can’t see it, then it 
doesn’t exist, and anyone trying to describe it to him is delusional and 
possibly dangerous.

All we can do at this point is hope his decline into hysterical dogmatism 
culminates in a reverse deathbed conversion. But if there’s one thing Dawkins 
has tried to impress upon us, it’s that miracles don’t exist. So I’ll do him 
the courtesy of not holding my breath.
 