
Here we go again. Giovanni Trapattoni's Republic of Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/republicofireland> got the result they 
needed to advance into another play-off decider and the seventh in the nation's 
history after a game shaped by controversy, comedy and dodgy goalkeeping.

The challenge for them now is to bury the ghosts of Paris 2009, when they were 
wiped from the World Cup picture at the very last by Thierry Henry and France. 
Ireland have only ever triumphed in one play-off. But before Thursday's draw, 
in which Ireland will be seeded, they might reflect upon a zany tie in which 
they broke Armenia's hearts to finish second in Group B behind Russia. They 
also enjoyed the benefit of two crucial handball decisions. Henry would surely 
have smiled ruefully.

The game turned on the 26th-minute dismissal of the Armenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/armenia> goalkeeper Roman Berezovsky, who 
was adjudged to have handled outside his penalty area as he leapt to block 
Simon Cox's attempted lob. The best of the numerous TV replay angles seemed to 
show that the ball had hit him somewhere between the side of his chest and 
armpit.

The decision felt harsh, and it was compounded in Armenia's eyes as Cox 
appeared to have brought the ball down, initially, with the aid of his arm. The 
striker did nothing to dispute that view. "Some you get, some you don't," he 
said. "It wasn't handball from their [goalkeeper's] point of view."

Armenia, needing victory to make the play-offs, shot themselves in the foot 
with an own goal of quite ludicrous proportions. Only Valeri Aleksanyan knew 
what he was thinking when he got his feet into a dreadful tangle in front of 
his own goal, prodded the ball into the net and set Ireland on their way.

The home side's largely disjointed display, however, left plenty of scope for 
damage. After Richard Dunne had scored from close range, Shay Given allowed 
Henrikh Mkhitaryan's shot to wriggle underneath him and Ireland's record 
sequence of eight consecutive clean sheets was gone.

More harmful was the suspension Kevin Doyle picked up. He was booked for a 
late challenge on Levon Hayrapetyan, which ruled him out of the play-off 
first-leg, and dismissed in the 81st minute when he used his elbows as leverage 
to climb for a header and caught Karlen Mkrtchyan.

Armenia lived up to their reputation for slick and technical football and 
Trapattoni was forced to conceded that the visitors had played "very, very 
well", and been the better side in the first half. Apart from an enterprising 
spell early in the second half, Ireland were not pretty but, then again, they 
rarely are under Trapattoni.

Armenia's anger and anguish was summed up by the manager Vardan Minasyan, who 
walked into the press conference, barely completed two sentences and walked 
straight back out.

Trapattoni justifiably pointed out that he could not remember Given being 
extended or any "particularly dangerous situations for us" but, as usual, this 
was a night to savour the result over the performance. Ireland, who needed only 
a point here, will face either Turkey, Bosnia, Montenegro or Estonia in the 
play-off. "For us, this was a great result," Trapattoni said. "We have 
completed 50% of the job."

The Italian had stressed the importance of a dynamic start and Doyle did force 
a low save out of Berezovsky but it took the red card to raise the temperature 
of the crowd â€“ and that of the Armenians, for different reasons. They 
complained bitterly that Berezovsky had blocked Cox's effort with his chest, 
even if he had both arms outstretched, which certainly did not help his cause. 
But the Spanish referee Eduardo Iturralde did not hesitate. "The goalkeeper was 
outside the box so it was a normal decision," Trapattoni said.

The own goal left Armenia reeling. Damien Duff crossed low from the right and 
Doyle would have scored had he executed his back-heeled flick at the near post 
with more precision. He got it wrong but not as wrong as Aleksanyan. You had to 
feel for the defender. The home crowd actually laughed at the replays on the 
big screen.

Ireland's second goal came when the debutant replacement goalkeeper Arsen 
Petrosyan flapped embarrassingly at Aiden McGeady's cross and Dunne bundled 
home. It would not be Ireland, though, without a wobble and Given's error 
provided it. Attention now turns to the draw. Further drama will come as 
standard.
 