
Sir Richard Branson <https://www.theguardian.com/business/richard-branson> on 
Tuesday heralded the rebirth of supersonic passenger flights with the unveiling 
of a prototype aircraft promising 3.5-hour flights from London to New York for 
an “affordable” $5,000 return.

The billionaire Virgin Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/virgin-group> founder said his Spaceship 
company would help Denver-based startup Boom build a new generation of 
supersonic jets and reintroduce transatlantic flight times unseen since 
Concorde was scrapped.


Supersonic jet startup vows 'affordable' travel – if you have $5,000 to spare
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/23/boom-supersonic-jet-travel-affordable-business-class>
“I have long been passionate about aerospace innovation and the development of 
high-speed commercial flights,” Branson said. “As an innovator in the space, 
Virgin Galactic’s decision to work with Boom was an easy one. We’re excited to 
have an option on Boom’s first 10 airframes. Through Virgin Galactic’s 
manufacturing arm, the Spaceship Company, we will provide engineering and 
manufacturing services, along with flight test support and operations as part 
of our shared ambitions.”

Branson is partnering with Blake Scholl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/23/boom-supersonic-jet-travel-affordable-business-class>
, a pilot and former Amazon executive, who will later on Tuesday unveil a 
prototype of the new jet in a hangar in Denver, Colorado. While several other 
companies, including Boeing and Lockheed Martin, are developing new supersonic 
jets, Scholl said his plan was likely to beat them to market as it does not 
require any new technology that would need approval by regulators.

Scholl said test flights would begin in southern California, with plans to 
launch the first commercial departures in 2023. If the plans stick to schedule, 
Boom flights will launch 20 years after British Airways and Air France 
decommissioned Concorde. He said Boom would succeed where Concorde failed 
because developments in technology and lighter materials meant tickets would be 
much cheaper.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Frichard-branson-supersonic-flight-virgin-boom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86a74ec66e724f9a5408d8ede0a32803b687fee7%2F0_146_4000_2401%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Richard%20Branson%20reveals%20prototype%20for%20supersonic%20passenger%20aircraft&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Frichard-branson-supersonic-flight-virgin-boom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Richard%20Branson%20reveals%20prototype%20for%20supersonic%20passenger%20aircraft&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Frichard-branson-supersonic-flight-virgin-boom%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86a74ec66e724f9a5408d8ede0a32803b687fee7%2F0_146_4000_2401%2F4000.jpg>
 A rendering of a Boom interior. Photograph: Boom 
“Sixty years after the dawn of the jet age, we’re still flying at 1960s 
speeds,” Scholl, the founder and CEO of Boom, said. “Concorde’s designers 
didn’t have the technology for affordable supersonic travel, but now we do. 
Today, we’re proud to unveil our first aircraft as we look forward to our first 
flight late next year.”

Scholl said tickets would cost “about the same as tickets in business class”. 
“I don’t know a single person who wouldn’t want to get there in half the time, 
rather than have some free champagne,” he said. “It won’t be a bucket-list 
purchase any more. There is a huge market and the margins are enormous.”

Richard Branson: ‘Millions of people would love to become astronauts’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/apr/10/virgin-galactic-richard-branson-interview>
Boom will have just 45 to 50 seats, compared with Concorde’s 92 to 128. Scholl 
reckons the demand for affordable supersonic flights could make this a $100bn 
market. He said his plane could work on 500 different routes, but would 
concentrate initially on London to New York, San Francisco to Tokyo, and Los 
Angeles to Sydney.

Scholl declined to state how much money Virgin had pumped into the venture, 
but listed a dozen well-knownSilicon Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/silicon-valley> venture capital firms 
and angel investors who had invested funds.

“I started this because I was sad that I never got to fly on Concorde. I 
waited but no one was doing it, so I decided to,” Scholl said. “Ultimately I 
want people to be able to get anywhere in the world in five hours for $100. To 
get there you have to improve fuel efficiency, but step-by-step supersonic air 
travel will become available for everyone.

“This is supersonic passenger air travel, no bullshit, and it’s actually 
affordable.”

 * This article was amended on 15 November 2016. An earlier version 
incorrectly referred to Boom as a Silicon Valley startup. Boom is based in 
Denver.  