
Former Hollyoaks actor and Strictly Come Dancing finalist Ricky Whittle has 
scooped the lead role in one of the most hotly anticipated new TV shows of the 
coming year – the adaptation of Neil Gaiman’sAmerican Gods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/jul/29/book-beach-american-gods-neil-gaiman>
.

Oldham-born Whittle has been announced today as Shadow Moon, the protagonist 
of Gaiman’s 2001 novel which posits a war between the gods of the ancient 
pantheons and the newer deities representing modern life.

American Gods TV adaptation to begin production in March
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/25/neil-gaiman-american-gods-tv-adaptation-casting>
Production is due to start 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/25/neil-gaiman-american-gods-tv-adaptation-casting>
 on the TV series, which will be broadcast on the American channel Starz, this 
spring. Since Fremantle Media was given the green light to begin work on the 
show last year, there has been much speculation as to who would play the part 
of Shadow, an ex-con who gets drawn into the war between the gods.

Gaiman said he was “thrilled” by the casting. “[Whittle’s] auditions were 
remarkable. The process of taking a world out of the pages of a book, and 
putting it on to the screen has begun.American Gods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/aug/19/american-gods-neil-gaiman-book-club>
 is, at its heart, a book about immigrants, and it seems perfectly appropriate 
that Shadow will, like so much else, be ‘Coming to America’. I’m delighted 
Ricky will get to embody Shadow. Now the fun starts.”

In Gaiman’s novel, Shadow is an ex-con who becomes bodyguard and traveling 
partner to Mr Wednesday, a conman but in reality one of the older gods, on a 
cross-country mission to gather his forces in preparation to battle the new 
deities.

Showrunners Bryan Fuller and Michael Green said in a statement: “We searched 
every continent and country and all the islands in between for our Shadow Moon, 
and we are lucky to have found Ricky. Fans of the novel will find he has every 
bit of the heart of the character they fell in love with.”

UK television ahead of US on diversity, says ex-Hollyoaks star Ricky Whittle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jul/06/uk-tv-us-diversity-hollyoaks-ricky-whittle>
Whittle’s TV work includes The 100 and Hollyoaks, the soap that made his name, 
as well as British TV staple Holby City. The son of a former RAF serviceman, 
Whittle spent his early years travelling around the world and represented 
England and the United Kingdom at youth level in football and rugby. He came 
second inStrictly Come Dancing <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IJ3Bj-GowHc> in 
2009.

American Gods been translated into more than 30 languages and earned numerous 
accolades including Hugo, Nebula and Bram Stoker awards for best novel. It was 
the first novel from Gaiman, then primarily known for his comics work on titles 
such asSandman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/oct/22/how-we-made-sandman-gaiman> 
from DC/Vertigo. The novel reinvents the gods of myth and places aspects of 
them in modern-day America, brought over by waves of immigration in US history.

When the adaptation was announced, Gaiman said: “I am thrilled, scared, 
delighted, nervous and a ball of glorious anticipation. The team that is going 
to bring the world of American Gods to the screen has been assembled like the 
master criminals in a caper movie: I’m relieved and confident that my baby is 
in good hands.”
 