
The actor and comedian Ricky Harris, who made a name for himself as a standup 
comedian in the 90s and onscreen in films such as Michael Mann’sheist classic 
Heat <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/17/heat-crime>, has died aged 
54.

The star’s manager confirmed his death on Monday and peers of the performer, 
including Snoop Dogg and Cedric the Entertainer, paid tribute to him on social 
media. The cause of his death has not been confirmed, but his manager told the 
Los Angeles Times thathe suffered a heart attack two years ago 
<http://www.latimes.com/local/obituaries/la-me-ricky-harris-20161226-story.html>
.

Harris was from Long Beach, California, and was a close friend of Snoop Dogg, 
featuring on his albums, on which he performed skits.Snoop Dogg said 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BOf9TlgjE69/>: “I lost one of my dear friends 
today. [He] was the first comedian to make it from Long Beach, the first 
entertainer from Long Beach to make it. My big brother.”

Harris was a regular on the Russell Simmons-produced Def Comedy Jam, with the 
likes of Chris Rock and Chris Tucker, who led the new generation of African 
American comics that emerged in the 90s.

Harris’s acting career began with Poetic Justice in 1993, in which he starred 
alongside Tupac Shakur and Janet Jackson, and two years laterhe appeared in 
Heat with Al Pacino <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lQ1-7J3XKYo>. 


Harris also had roles on the small screen, appearing on Everybody Hates Chris 
and Moesha, and last year he made an appearance in the Sundance favourite Dope.

The contemporary funk artist Dam Funk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/03/dam-funk-snoop-dogg-stones-throw-hudson-mohawke-ariel-pink>
 wrote about Harris’s little-known musical past on his Instagram page. Funk 
said he used to play drums for Harris’s band, which he would use on comedy 
nights, and said Harris also appeared in a G-funk group called the Dove Shack 
and another group called the Ghetto Clownz.
 