
It’s hard to keep the attention of TV viewers. If there’s not a dedicated 
fanbase built early on whose appetite is whetted between seasons, as there was 
withGame of Thrones <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones> 
for example, it can be difficult for shows to bring the audience back. The 
solution for some series has been to repeatedly reinvent themselves, offering a 
new entry point with each subsequent season. But does it work? Well, sometimes.

The Affair, which returns to Showtime on 20 November with its third season, 
cast off in 2014 with an intriguing premise: each episode showcased the same 
scenes from two viewpoints – one from married novelist Noah Solloway (Dominic 
West) and the other from struggling waitress Alison Lockhart (Ruth Wilson). As 
the inaugural season unfolded, we got to see how differently two people can 
view the same thing. The show, created by Sarah Treem and Hagai Levi, was a 
lesson in perspective and narrative form. It feltcompelling because it was 
original 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/may/14/the-affair-dominic-west-ruth-wilson-long-island>
 and duly won awards because of it. It also unveiled a central mystery – the 
murder of a secondary character – which the showrefused to solve in its first 
10 episodes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/may/28/the-affair-is-compelling-television-but-will-we-ever-get-the-truth>
.

Seven reasons to start a relationship with The Affair
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/may/10/us-tv-series-the-affair-dominic-west-ruth-wilson>
As much as people liked it, though, viewers wondered how the premise could 
sustain. Was it interesting to keep watching these same two people uncover the 
same situations? Treem and Levi had a solution for season two: change the 
narrative structure, relocate the action from Montauk to Manhattan, and bring 
in new characters. Instead of two perspectives, season two had four. At its 
close, the second season finally solved the mystery of the first. But where now?


Last year, Treem told the New York Times: “Television audiences have become so 
savvy and there’s so much out there to choose from that I, at least, am quite 
aware that you have to give your audience something new to come back to, season 
after season, in order to keep their interest. They expect to be challenged.”

So season three is yet another reinvention. There are new perspectives, a 
three-year time jump, less of a formal structure and another mystery – of 
sorts. The first three episodes of the season feel scattered, giving us very 
little sense of where most of the characters are now and why we should still 
care. It’s unclear whether this is a reinvention done for reinvention’s sake, 
or whether it will actually challenge the viewers. It’s similar to what Lost 
did for several seasons, constantly reframing the narrative to give it a fresh 
feeling each year. It’s whatHomeland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/homeland> did last year and will do 
again next year when season six premieres on Showtime in January.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fthe-affair-homeland-american-horror-story-tv-reinvention%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9059ebefa00adafa6d71a10f552600c436b67a32%2F0_2_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rip%20it%20up%20and%20start%20again%3A%20can%20shows%20like%20The%20Affair%20survive%20constant%20reinvention%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fthe-affair-homeland-american-horror-story-tv-reinvention%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rip%20it%20up%20and%20start%20again%3A%20can%20shows%20like%20The%20Affair%20survive%20constant%20reinvention%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fthe-affair-homeland-american-horror-story-tv-reinvention%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9059ebefa00adafa6d71a10f552600c436b67a32%2F0_2_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 Mother of reinvention: Claire Danes as Carrie Mathison in Homeland. 
Photograph: Stephan Rabold/SHOWTIME 
For Homeland, there was a sense of finality after the loss of a major 
character at the end of season three. That character was the impetus for most 
of the action prior to his death, which could have put Homeland into a creative 
rut. But instead of getting stuck, the show used that loss as a liberation. The 
show-runners relocated the narrative to Kabul, then to Berlin, and in the 
upcoming season they will tackle terrorism in New York City.

The ongoing shifts allow for new characters to feel organic rather than forced 
and for the show to purge things that don’t work (remember Brody’s annoying 
kids?). It’s a strategy that clearly works for anthology series, such as Ryan 
Murphy’sAmerican Horror Story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/15/american-horror-story-season-six-review-ryan-murphy>
, which retains cast members and concepts each season but switches its theme 
and setting. Likewise, Murphy’s American Crime Story will shift its focus from 
OJ Simpson in season one toHurricane Katrina in season two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/10/ryan-murphy-people-vs-oj-simpson-hurricane-katrina>
 and Gianni Versace’s murder in season three.

Audiences clearly like these self-contained yet connected seasons. People want 
things to feel fresh – and for good reason. While it might work to have 
characters in the same place doing the same things repeatedly on a sitcom like 
Modern Family or The Big Bang Theory, that can get stale on a drama, especially 
a high-concept one like The Affair. After a few seasons, Lost got trapped by 
its own plot devices. At some point, the show-runners started changing things 
up because it was expected, not because it was actually necessary to the 
storyline or the characters.

So will this work on The Affair? Can the show sustain these constant narrative 
shifts for several more years to come? The first three episodes don’t really 
offer a concrete reply. Maybe it’s a gimmick to keep viewers onboard, or maybe 
it’s integral to the story at play. Either way, one theory is that we prefer 
our dramas to evolve because we ourselves want to. If Noah Solloway or Carrie 
Mathison can reimagine their lives, we can as well. We see a reflection of 
ourselves in that sensibility. TV shows have to change in order to survive and, 
perhaps, so do we.
 