
What is it? A ridiculously underrated Victorian crime thriller with writing so 
deft and nimble it takes your breath away.

Why you’ll love it: Creator Richard Warlow’s Ripper Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/23/ripper-street-review-fourth-time-out-serial-killer>
 shouldn’t have been called that, because it was always far more focused on the 
living, stinking creatures of Whitechapel than the unfortunate victims of Jack 
the Ripper. Begun on BBC1 in 2012 and cancelled the following year, the show was
picked up by Amazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/may/13/ripper-street-to-return-for-two-more-series-of-blood-guts-and-pocket-watches>
, given a hot meal and offered new lodgings thanks to the uproar from an angry 
fan mob (though it’s still aired on the BBC – the previous Amazon series, four, 
just finished its run there).

Matthew Macfadyen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/oct/25/matthew-macfadyen-little-dorrit-interview>
 is Inspector Edmund Reid, the still, central maypole around which the 
inhabitants of late-19th-century east London caper, occasionally stepping out 
of the fray to slaughter one another. He works H Division, the most feared 
patch in London, aided by Captain Homer Jackson (Adam Rothenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/sep/21/adam-rothenberg-favourite-tv>
) and Sergeant Bennet Drake (Jerome Flynn) and is often thwarted by former 
madam, “Long” Susan Hart (MyAnna Buring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/dec/08/myanna-buring-favourite-tv>
).

It’s impossible to sum up the preceding four series here, but the weekly 
stories of ghastly Victorian degeneracy were gradually shoved aside to give 
room to morecharacter-led stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/jan/15/ripper-street-the-feelbad-drama-that-just-gets-better>
 about the central players. Above all, I love this show, and am now nursing a 
broken heart at its end, because I’ve never come across a piece of TV which so 
enjoys words.

Every spoken mouthful is sucked on like a navvy lapping gin from a mug. Warlow 
and his fellow writers have adopted a house style that combines antiquity with 
immediacy, finding that sweet spot between period escapism and visceral 
nowness. The characters live through the words, rather than existing in the 
gaps between them. It’s like a magic trick. That care for words is the 
foundation of Ripper Street, the integrity on to which the writers layer ever 
more gothic plots, flights of fancy that other shows couldn’t get away with.

The story-telling is everything. This final, quite remarkable series breaks 
free of the crime-of-the-week format and focuses entirely on Reid and co as 
they push towards their finish line. Because when your series is so nearly 
culled before its time, you have every right to take your revolver in hand when 
the time is right and see your characters off with commensurate dignity.

So Reid, the Whitechapel gamekeeper, is now hunted along with Jackson and 
Hart, for their mounting tally of crimes. These six exceptional episodes, four 
by Warlow and two byToby Finlay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/sep/11/dorian-gray-film-review>, a 
frequent Ripper series stealer, do more than justice to the richly brocaded 
cesspit of a world they built together. It’s a grand, high-piled and 
devastating bonfire to see them off. In structure, it’s extraordinary. At times 
it feels as if the story has broken loose and is telling itself, on instinct.

Reid’s nemesis, Jedediah Shine (played with eye-bulging intensity by Joseph 
Mawle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2011/mar/20/joseph-mawle-women-in-love-interview>
) returns to finish things, while assistant commissioner Augustus Dove (Killian 
Scott) becomes ever more desperate in his attempts to conceal his inconvenient 
past. The conductor’s baton goes into overdrive as the series builds towards 
its truly operatic conclusion.

All too soon you reach the final episode, which gives Ripper Street the most 
shattering, emotionally raw ending imaginable. In fact, you couldn’t imagine 
it, but they did. And that’s why I’m hanging out for whatever they do next.

Length: Six feature-length episodes of series five, all available to binge on 
now.

Stand-out episode: The Dreaming Dead (written by Finlay), in which Reid’s 
nemesis, Shine, faces Reid down like General Zod subjugating Superman in 
Superman II.

If you liked Ripper Street, watch: Ripper Street seasons 1 – 4 (Amazon Prime). 
Seriously, don’t waste your time with anything else.
 