
Police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> struggling to cope with a huge 
escalation in the number of child sexual exploitation cases fear it “may grow 
to threaten other aspects of effective policing”, the new chair of police 
commissioners has warned.

Vera Baird QC, in her first public statement since being elected chair 
<http://www.apccs.police.uk/press_release/vera-baird-qc-new-chair-apcc/> of the 
Association of Police and Crime Commissioners <http://www.apccs.police.uk/>
(APCC) last month, said the cost of police efforts to tackle the “growing and 
tragic menace” of child sexual exploitation could treble to £3bn a year by 2020.


Baird, who is also the police and crime commissioner (PCC) for Northumbria, is 
calling on the Home Office to urgently consider how the financial pressure of 
investigating more child sexual exploitation cases could affect other branches 
of policing. “Such totals place significant strain on police resources – 
especially as PCCs are also responsible for commissioning services for victims 
– and may grow to threaten other aspects of effective policing,” she writes in 
a piece for the Guardian.

“The home secretary may wish to consider this as a matter of urgency, to 
ensure forces are adequately resourced to deal with these investigations and 
provide care for victims. PCCs do have concern over the impact this may place 
on overall force budgets, and are keen to safeguard our ability to continue to 
provide the most effective overall service to the public.”

David Lloyd, PCC for Hertfordshire and leader of the Conservative group of the 
APCC, agreed with Baird. He said that his total policing budget was £200m a 
year. “If investigations into child sexual exploitation continue to rise at the 
rate they are predicted to do, they will swallow up … 15 police forces the size 
of Hertfordshire-worth of cost,” he said. “Police budgets are unlikely to rise, 
so these costs will have to come from other policing areas.”

That financial pressure is why, Baird writes, she is on Monday launching a 
campaign to pressure the government to make sex education compulsory in all 
schools, at both primary and secondary levels. “It is imperative that there 
should be more action through health and education to prevent these crimes 
taking place in the first place and to arm potential victims to resist them,” 
writes Baird.

Sex education is the only way to combat the terrible toll of child abuse | 
Vera Baird
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/01/sex-education-child-abuse-savile-young-people-phse-compulsory>
Sex education <https://www.theguardian.com/education/sexeducation> is 
currently only compulsory in maintained schools from the age of 11. Academies, 
which make up the majority of secondary schools, and free schools are not 
required to give students any personal, social, health and economic (PSHE) 
education.

Earlier this year, England’s then-education secretary rejected MPs’ calls to 
make sex and relationship education compulsory in all schools. 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-35549295> Nicky Morgan infuriated 
campaigners by making her decision despite four key House of Commons 
committees, which pressed for sex education to be made statutory in primaries 
and secondaries.

Baird’s call comes just days after more than 500 children were identified as 
“victims or potential victims” of online sexual abuse, and 77 people arrested 
and charged as part ofan important investigation in Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/29/more-than-500-children-identified-victims-or-potential-victims-of-online-sexual-abuse>
 after 30m indecent images were recovered. “Online child sexual abuse is a 
national threat,” said Malcolm Graham, the assistant chief constable who led 
Operation Lattise. “The reality is it is happening now, not only in Scotland 
but across the world, to children of all ages, from infants to teenagers.”

Also last week, 28-year-old Daniel Rodriguez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/29/daniel-rodriguez-jailed-filming-himself-sex-underage-girls>
 was sentenced to 16 years in jail for grooming five teenage girls using social 
media. Det Supt John Macdonald, of the Metropolitan police, said: 
“Unfortunately this is a pattern of abuse we are increasingly seeing. Social 
media enables people who want to have sex with children to approach scores if 
not hundreds or thousands of them online in an attempt to meet up,” he said. 
“[These crimes] are greatly underreported to the police.”

On Monday, supported by PCCs across the political divide, Baird is calling on 
anyone “who cares about protecting our young people” to email her personally to 
discuss how to persuade the government to make PSHE a compulsory part of the 
national curriculum.


“If you are a teacher, parent, classroom assistant or just someone who cares 
about protecting our young people, get in touch,” she writes. “It may be that 
we can tip the desirable into the attainable if we all act together now. My 
email address isenquiries@apccs.police.uk <mailto:enquiries@apccs.police.uk>.”

A Department for Education spokesperson said: “High-quality sex and 
relationship education (SRE) is a vital part of preparing young people for life 
in modern Britain – helping them make informed choices, stay safe and learn to 
respect themselves and others.”
 