
On a day when all three of the Premier League’s pacesetters flexed their 
attacking muscles, Liverpool relied on their own lust for goals to turn a 
potentially awkward contestinto a celebration of blistering intent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/oct/29/crystal-palace-v-liverpool-premier-league-live>
.

Crystal Palace <https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace> 
contributed to a captivating encounter, twice pegging back Liverpool as they 
endeavoured to contain the surges from the away team – no mean feat – but 
Jürgen Klopp’s team were in one of those moods where they ooze goals. Philippe 
Coutinho and Roberto Firmino showcased bewitching skills. Sadio Mané should 
have helped himself to a strike or two himself. There was so much forward 
momentum it was not unreasonable to forget they even had Daniel Sturridge back 
waiting in those familiar wings.

As it was, the selection comprised a team goal based on slick passing, two set 
pieces and a sumptuous lob. All very tasty from Klopp’s perspective. He might 
well wonder about eradicating some of the defensive wobbles. But that is a 
poser for another day. Playing like this, Liverpool can be confident that if 
the opposition score, they will simply outscore them. They extended their 
dazzling run, picking up their sixth win from their last sevenPremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> games and had verve to 
burn.

“Sorry for this boring performance,” Klopp quipped at the end of it all. Then 
he acknowledged that while the inherent characteristics of his team help them 
to overcome defensive deficiencies he would sooner have a little more cool 
control. “We cannot strike back every day, but we are good enough to find a 
solution in situations like this,” he said. “But since I am atLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> I am happy with the character 
of my boys.”

Crystal Palace v Liverpool: Premier League - live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/oct/29/crystal-palace-v-liverpool-premier-league-live>
It still seems unfeasibly early to be stoking up a title-chase narrative 
before Halloween, but such is the bunched-up nature at the top, all eyes turned 
to Liverpool afterArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/29/sunderland-arsenal-premier-league-match-report-olivier-giroud-alexis-sanchez>
 and thenManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/29/west-bromwich-albion-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 swept to three emphatically won points earlier in the day. What ensued, in a 
helter-skelter match, was extraordinary. Goals always seemed likely given the 
encouragement Klopp gives his forwards to raid in a high-energy pack coupled 
with Crystal Palace’s clean sheet allergy this season.

From the 16th to the 21st minute it rained goals. Liverpool went ahead when 
the vibrant Coutinho’s scooped pass fell to Alberto Moreno, who hooked the ball 
back across goal. Emre Can arrived unmarked and his shot ricocheted in.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fjurgen-klopp-liverpool-crystal-palace&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=J%C3%BCrgen%20Klopp%3A%20%E2%80%9CI%20am%20happy%20with%20the%20character%20of%20my%20boys%E2%80%9D%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fjurgen-klopp-liverpool-crystal-palace>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=J%C3%BCrgen%20Klopp%3A%20%E2%80%9CI%20am%20happy%20with%20the%20character%20of%20my%20boys%E2%80%9D%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fjurgen-klopp-liverpool-crystal-palace&media=>
Jürgen Klopp: “I am happy with the character of my boys” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/oct/29/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-crystal-palace>
Perhaps some of smoke from the firecrackers hurled from the away end got in 
Dejan Lovren’s eye, as there was no obvious explanation for the undercooked 
back pass which gifted Palace a route back into the game. James McArthur was on 
hand to score with a clever header, nudging the ball instinctively over the 
onrushing Loris Karius.

The irresistible law of making up for painful mistakes ensured Lovren took 
centre stage again three minutes later. When Liverpool won a corner he was on 
point to beat his marker Scott Dann, thumping his team back into the lead with 
a header.

José Mourinho sent to stands as Manchester United are held by Burnley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/29/manchester-united-burnley-premier-league-match-report>
Liverpool’s threat bubbled constantly. The thirst for goals throughout the 
team is obvious and there could have been more as Firmino’s attempt was blocked 
by Joel Ward, Moreno struck a post and Mané scooped over with a free shot.

In the spirit of the goal glut, Palace responded. Christian Benteke glanced 
the ball to Wilfried Zaha, whose inviting cross was met by none other than 
McArthur. Having already patted his head in astonishment after his first goal, 
he was at it again after nipping ahead of Lovren to steer in another equaliser.

The heading contest was far from over. The crowd were almost confounded by 
disbelief as yet another looked goalbound – this time from Coutinho – only for 
Steve Mandanda to scramble the ball superbly on to the frame of the goal.

It came as no surprise when Liverpool duly did the deed again. Just before 
half‑time Coutinho delivered a corner for Joël Matip to meet with full power. 
Pardew lamented that the game was “a bit too open for us against a side as good 
as they are”, which was an honest enough appraisal.

Coutinho was at the heart of so much that was positive about Liverpool. Klopp 
rightly enthused about how much effort he puts in: “He is 24. His work rate is 
outstanding. You cannot be a genius every day so you have to be a proper 
football player. That is how the boys are.”

Olivier Giroud and Alexis Sánchez at the double as Arsenal ease past Sunderland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/29/sunderland-arsenal-premier-league-match-report-olivier-giroud-alexis-sanchez>
Palace returned after the restart intent on coming back into it again. Benteke 
was dominant (Klopp intriguingly described his performance as “warm”), taking 
aim at Karius’s goal on a number of occasions. Zaha looked plaintively at the 
referee as he bid for a couple of penalties but Andre Marriner was unmoved. 
Pardew gave a diplomatic answer when quizzed about Zaha’s appeals but was 
steadfast in defending his player’s need to avoid an obstacle at speed.

After one of the penalty shouts, the game swung suddenly, brilliantly, down to 
the other end. Jordan Henderson spotted Firmino’s run and found him with a 
superb forward pass. The Brazilian lobbed Mandanda with beautiful precision. 
The shirt twirling celebration was worth it.
 