
There’s not much of a happy ending for the characters in Roots, the remake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/24/malachi-kirby-on-remaking-roots-kunta-kinte-i-could-feel-the-pain-hear-the-screams>
 of the seminal TV miniseries that premiereson the History 
<http://roots.history.com/?mkwid=s4vzVzbzs|dc_pcrid_111001659674_pkw_roots_pmt_e&utm_source=google_tune&utm_medium=cpc&utm_term=roots&utm_campaign=G_Roots+-+ALONE&paidlink=1&cmpid=PaidSearch_google_tune_G_Roots+-+ALONE_roots&gclid=CPz11fzL_8wCFQ9Zhgod7aAKvA>
 channel on Monday.

Malachi Kirby on remaking Roots: ‘I could feel the pain, hear the screams'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/24/malachi-kirby-on-remaking-roots-kunta-kinte-i-could-feel-the-pain-hear-the-screams>
Each of the four episodes teases Kunta Kinte and his progeny with freedom, 
only for them to find out slavery will not let them go. In the end, the passage 
of time sweeps them out of bondage, but another form of prejudice awaits. All 
they have to hold on to is their family, their name and their pride. The best 
we can hope for these people is that they don’t allow the world to strip them 
of that pride.

It’s not really a story that causes viewers to rush into the streets in fits 
of unbridled joy, but it is without question the most popular piece of 
literature about slavery in America. The Alex Haley novel was a New York Times 
bestseller and the original ABC series boasts the all-time second-largest 
audience for a series finale. One hundred million people tuned in for the last 
episode of Roots, a number unheard of in today’s TV landscape outside of a 
Super Bowl.

This new version serves the same story of survival across generations in a 
slightly slicker package. The action scenes, such as they are, are rendered in 
a more visceral fashion. Even the cockfights of the brash Chicken George in 
episode three are thrilling, assuming you forget that this is a dramatic 
recreation of two animals forced to kill each other for sport.

The makeup and physical effects are also superior. Every scar and cut is 
affecting. The infamous scene of Kunta Kinte’s foot being severed is gruesome 
without drifting into exploitation. The new film’s score was even supervised by 
Questlove of The Roots, upping the hipness factor by a few degrees.

Apologies to LeVar Burton – the first Kunta Kinte and a co-executive producer 
– but the acting is also supremely improved. Anika Noni Rose plays Kizzy, 
Kunta’s daughter, with ample amounts of life and vigor, even in the most 
horrific situation imaginable. Special praise goes to Regé-Jean Page, who 
portrays the adult Chicken George. He channels the charming rogue but pivots 
nicely toward gravitas in the final episode.

Revisiting Roots: how was your family affected by the slave trade?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/25/revisiting-roots-how-was-your-family-impacted-by-the-slave-trade>
Befitting a slave narrative, the white characters are uniformly disreputable 
racists, though the original Roots series shoehorned Ed Asner to be a “kinder, 
gentler” slavemaster, out of a misguided sense of white guilt. In this Roots, 
the white characters are a never-ending parade of sadists and demons.


Jonathan Rhys-Meyers dusts off his Elvis accent 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n1KOFG7t6QI> to play Chicken George’s 
monstrous hillbilly rapist father. Matthew Goode plays another slavemaster like 
a darker (or maybe more realistic) version of his character from Downton Abbey. 
Anna Paquin pops up in episode four to sneer at people. I think it must be some 
sort of rite of passage for every British and Australian actor to play an 
American slaveowner at least once.

Each episode hews closely to one protagonist: Kunta in episode one, Kizzy in 
episode two, Chicken George in episode three and Tom in episode four. This 
keeps the whole affair fresh and propulsive. This is, after all, a sprawling 
tale of one family’s experience in America.

It does get a bit fuzzy by the final episode. Hip-hop star TI appears in a 
small role and a civil war espionage subplot I don’t remember from the original 
gets grafted on to what, up until that point, was a rather intimate story. The 
kids these days, they love their spy stories, don’t they? That must be why 
AMC’s Turn: Washington’s Spies is so bloody popular.

The modern slave narrative has changed thanks to Quentin Tarantino’s Django 
Unchained, a film that took the basic framework of a tale of subjugation and 
rearranged it to be a story of a lone black man who fights his way out of 
subservience to reclaim his personhood through extreme violence. That is a 
clear fantasy story, something that exists only in the modern conception of 
racial politics.

Django added blaxpotation and western tropes into the slave tales of films 
like the first Roots mini-series to create a completely new genre. Django is a 
revisionist history – a film that gives contemporary audiences the sort of 
happy ending we desire, befitting a nation that honestly, illogically believes 
that it has exorcised the demons of racism. It does it with the sort of 
cutting-edge special effects and film-making techniques that the new Roots 
hopes to take advantage of.

But Roots hasn’t endured because of high-concept action, wish fulfillment or 
fancy prosthetics. In fact, it has survived in the cultural consciousness in 
spite of the limitations inherent in the medium of television. It’s also 
survived the failings of its author.

Alex Haley was sued 
<http://articles.chicagotribune.com/1993-03-10/news/9303190620_1_pulitzer-board-philip-nobile-roots>
 and later admitted to plagiarizing an earlier work, plus the mislabeling of 
his work as more fact than fiction. Roots doesn’t have to be a true story to be 
powerful. It’s a fable – one with an origin in reality, but a fable 
nonetheless. It can stand for the millions of other stories just like it – 
stories of men and women in bondage, yearning to be unchained.

Though this version of Roots ends with Laurence Fishburne, playing Alex Haley, 
stepping out of his office and into a vision of his noble ancestors, it’s easy 
to project the struggle of Kunta, Kizzy, George and Tom as the same basic 
struggle African Americans are still fighting today. The chains are not literal 
anymore, but the need to retain one’s identity in the face of systemic 
dehumanization remains.

This new Roots works because it taps into the need for black people to embrace 
themselves, to know that they come from somewhere, and that they are not a 
simple “other” to be ignored or debased. Your name matters. You are free.
 