
The body of a 30-year-old homeless man was found at the back of a dark loading 
bay beside theBirmingham <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/birmingham> New Street 
railway station car park on Tuesday night, the coldest of winter so far. There 
are no flowers at the place he died, but the flattened, damp cardboard boxes 
where he slept are still there, along with a couple of woollen hats and a pair 
of green socks.

The man has not been named and none of the homeless people who sleep on the 
surrounding streets are quite sure who died. Police say he was a drug user. 
Charity workers fear his death is the inevitable consequence of radicalcuts to 
homelessness services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/09/britain-rough-sleepers-homelessness-housing-crisis>
, which have led to a new rough-sleeping crisis in the city.

Alan Fraser, the chief executive of Birmingham YMCA, which has been forced to 
reduce the number of beds it can offer rough sleepers, said: “We can’t say an 
individual died because of local authority cuts, but the reality is that the 
risks of people dying because of homelessness at this time of year are 
massively increased, because people cannot get into the places they need to be 
in.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Frough-sleeping-on-rise-in-birmingham-after-cuts-to-homelessness-services%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F794d6242ea5375b61856a090174cded1847e6567%2F0_284_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rough%20sleeping%20on%20rise%20in%20Birmingham%20after%20cuts%20to%20homelessness%20services&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Frough-sleeping-on-rise-in-birmingham-after-cuts-to-homelessness-services%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rough%20sleeping%20on%20rise%20in%20Birmingham%20after%20cuts%20to%20homelessness%20services&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Frough-sleeping-on-rise-in-birmingham-after-cuts-to-homelessness-services%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F794d6242ea5375b61856a090174cded1847e6567%2F0_284_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Alan Fraser, chief executive of YMCA Birmingham. Photograph: Fabio De Paola 
for the Guardian 
Previously the organisation was funded to help rough sleepers with addictions, 
but cuts have made that difficult. “We could have taken people like this man in 
before. Previously, if he had been given a place, he would have had a key 
worker who would have got him to a treatment programme. But people like that, 
with drug problems, we are now – even us – having to say we can’t take the 
risk, we can’t risk our safety, their safety and the safety of other 
residents,” Fraser said.

We had got it to manageable levels and made huge progress until 2009. Then the 
cuts started
Alan Fraser 
Birmingham city council’s chief executive, Mark Rogers, also acknowledges that 
one of the clearest consequences of the reduction in local authority budgets 
over the past six years is the rise in homelessness. He points to reductions in 
the funding of the Supporting People programme, which was designed to help 
people with addictions and mental health problems get into secure 
accommodation, as a key area of concern. “A very simple indicator of withdrawal 
of grant funding is the rise in homelessness. Rough sleeping has increased 
considerably in the city,” he said.

People who have worked to address homelessness for decades are despondent, 
because until 2009 and the start of large local authority cuts, huge progress 
had been made. Department for Communities and Local Government homelessness 
statistics show that rough sleeping in Birmingham wasregistered at nine people 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/homelessness-statistics#rough-sleeping>
 in autumn 2010, but by 2015 – the last available count – had quadrupled to 36. 
Outreach workers say these figures are a conservative estimate and note that 
there has been a further leap in numbers in the past 12 months.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Frough-sleeping-on-rise-in-birmingham-after-cuts-to-homelessness-services%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7b3e5df8b302da0470e82a06a511b99b716e14f%2F0_231_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rough%20sleeping%20on%20rise%20in%20Birmingham%20after%20cuts%20to%20homelessness%20services&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Frough-sleeping-on-rise-in-birmingham-after-cuts-to-homelessness-services%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rough%20sleeping%20on%20rise%20in%20Birmingham%20after%20cuts%20to%20homelessness%20services&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Frough-sleeping-on-rise-in-birmingham-after-cuts-to-homelessness-services%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7b3e5df8b302da0470e82a06a511b99b716e14f%2F0_231_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Rough sleepers outside shops in Birmingham city centre. Photograph: Fabio De 
Paola for the Guardian 
Paul Atkin, who has run homelessness charity Reachout Network in the city for 
20 years, said: “I have never seen it so bad. The number of people we are 
seeing on the street in Birmingham is frightening. In 1996, we would see 20 
people a night; now, we see four times that amount.”

Atkin was doing a 6am check of the streets near the railway station to ensure 
that no rough sleepers had died of hypothermia. By 8am, he and his wife, 
Jackie, had counted 27 people asleep in the streets around the station; this 
was a relatively quiet morning, he said.

“There are a lot of young women now, which is very alarming. They have cut 
back everything and these poor people are stuck in a cycle of homelessness. The 
numbers have snowballed in the past year. There is a massive need and a huge 
void of available services,” he said.

In John Bright Street, a council road sweeper was cleaning the area near where 
the homeless man died, contemplating whether to move a crate and some flattened 
cardboard that were clearly being used as bedding. He had noticed soaring 
numbers of people sleeping rough. “There are definitely more. It’s got to be 
double. It is shocking,” he said.

What you can do to help rough sleepers this winter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/oct/27/help-rough-sleepers-winter-homelessness>
Fraser said the notion of ending street homelessness had felt “tantalisingly 
close” in 2009. “It is really bleak because we felt as though we had made vast 
strides. I wouldn’t say we had solved homelessness, but we had got it to 
manageable levels and made huge progress until 2009. Then the cuts started and 
since then homelessness has increased,” he said.

“I’ve been in this area 25 years. It feels worse now than I have ever seen it. 
What is all the more depressing is that we know what works and we were doing it 
and it was having a positive impact. We had got it sussed.”

In Birmingham there was a pot of £50m for Supporting People programmes, but 
the money got radically cut back after 2010; there is now £25m–£27m available 
for the initiative, of which the YMCA receives £320,000.


“Now we can only take a small number of high-needs people in each team; you 
have to be more circumspect about how many you can cope with, so those higher 
needs people – people with mental health problems or drug and alcohol problems 
– often end up sleeping rough. If someone comes in with multiple problems, drug 
and alcohol, history of violence, history of offending, mental health problems, 
or self-harming, we struggle to take those people,” Fraser said.

“We haven’t got the staff to do door knocks; we don’t have the ability to keep 
them safe and we can’t take the risk. It’s too dangerous for the safety of 
other residents. We still take people who would otherwise be homeless, but they 
tend to have lower needs.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Frough-sleeping-on-rise-in-birmingham-after-cuts-to-homelessness-services%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbb9740bbe99561634a7b367dce89f748ec0fbe2%2F0_374_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rough%20sleeping%20on%20rise%20in%20Birmingham%20after%20cuts%20to%20homelessness%20services&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Frough-sleeping-on-rise-in-birmingham-after-cuts-to-homelessness-services%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rough%20sleeping%20on%20rise%20in%20Birmingham%20after%20cuts%20to%20homelessness%20services&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Frough-sleeping-on-rise-in-birmingham-after-cuts-to-homelessness-services%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbb9740bbe99561634a7b367dce89f748ec0fbe2%2F0_374_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Jackie Atkin from the Birmingham Reachout Network. Photograph: Fabio De Paola 
for the Guardian 
Supporting People ceased to be a ringfenced programme in 2009. “From the point 
that it was unringfenced and went into the general fund, the amounts of money 
available to spend effectively reduced, because that coincided with general 
reductions to revenue support grants, so we are spending considerably less on 
something we still call Supporting People, but isn’t a distinct programme any 
more,” Rogers said.

The cost of homelessness has emerged in other ways. “Between July and 
September this year, we have had a 25% increase in the costs we are incurring 
to support rough sleepers and homeless people,” he said.

Around the corner from the car park where the man died, Mary, 39, has been 
sleeping in a doorway near the station for more than a year, since her partner 
went to prison and she lost her home. She had noticed an increase in homeless 
people in the past year. “There has been a rise in the number. I don’t know 
why,” she said.

Hostel workers are clearer about the reasons. Cuts to homelessness services 
have come at a time of wider welfare reform, and increased used of benefit 
sanctions – which can push people into debt, and make paying bills impossible – 
cuts to housing benefit, and the introduction of the bedroom tax and overall 
benefit cap have all contributed.

A homelessness analyst in a large Birmingham housing association, who is about 
to be made redundant as funding to rough-sleeping projects is reduced, said he 
was dismayed by how services to resolve homelessness had been cut by the NHS as 
well as the council. Previously, outreach workers would have been able to call 
on specialist drug and alcohol teams who could help get people into drug 
treatment programmes, nurses and mental health workers who specialised in 
helping the homeless, and housing workers who knew all the hostels and how to 
access them. Only the housing team remains.

“Rough sleeping is back to its peak of where it was about 20 years ago,” he 
said.

Tassawar Hussain, the team leader at the YMCA Northfield hostel, is annoyed by 
volunteer groups that distribute tents and quilts to the homeless. “It doesn’t 
help. It allows them to stay on the streets. You need to be brought into a 
building,” he said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Frough-sleeping-on-rise-in-birmingham-after-cuts-to-homelessness-services%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F564bb83b9fb83b5ba6f3fa63b5bfb23ded3c66ca%2F0_258_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rough%20sleeping%20on%20rise%20in%20Birmingham%20after%20cuts%20to%20homelessness%20services&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Frough-sleeping-on-rise-in-birmingham-after-cuts-to-homelessness-services%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rough%20sleeping%20on%20rise%20in%20Birmingham%20after%20cuts%20to%20homelessness%20services&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Frough-sleeping-on-rise-in-birmingham-after-cuts-to-homelessness-services%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F564bb83b9fb83b5ba6f3fa63b5bfb23ded3c66ca%2F0_258_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Tassawar Hussain, team leader at YMCA Northfield. Photograph: Fabio De Paola 
for the Guardian 
A couple, who have had drug problems in the past, said they were on the 
streets because of the bedroom tax, which made their three-bedroom house 
unaffordable, after their daughter was taken into social services’ care because 
of drug use. “It’s very depressing. I cry every day. The police keep moving us. 
Where do they expect us to go?” said Anna, 26, who asked for her real name not 
to be published. “We’re supposed to be getting some help with housing. I don’t 
know if we will.”

By New Street station, Darren, 38, who has been sleeping rough for two months 
since losing a place in supported housing (for reasons that are not clear), 
said he thought there were more people on the streets and he felt increasingly 
vulnerable. Other people stole his food and money when he was asleep, he said, 
so he tried to find places where he could sleep underneath security cameras.

“I’ve got schizophrenia. I am supposed to be getting help. I don’t get any 
help,” Darren said, holding on to his duvet (greying, with no cover) and a 
blanket. Once the shops open at about 9am, rough sleepers are moved on.

The fear of robbery is justified. Police said on Friday that CCTV images 
showed that as the unnamed homeless man lay dying, someone came and searched 
his pockets and may have stolen money from him.
 