

Classics rocker ... Art Garfunkel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/art-garfunkel>

Bob Dylan's Theme Time Radio Hour 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/6music/shows/bob_dylan/> isn't just a trove of obscure 
records; it's also worth listening to for the odd bits of trivia (and recipes) 
that Bob shares with his listeners. A few weeks ago Dylan mentioned that Art 
Garfunkel's websitelists every book the singer has read since 1968 
<http://www.artgarfunkel.com/library.html>. I'm sure I wasn't alone in 
immediately checking whether Bob was pulling our legs.

Happily, he wasn't. Art's mammoth list begins in June 1968 with Rousseau's The 
Confessions and runs until the end of last year, 1,023 books later, with The 
Magnificent Ambersons. That works out at just over two books a month - not, 
perhaps, an achievement for a serious reader. What's impressive is that 
Garfunkel's bothered to record what he's read for the last 40 years.

Art Garfunkel's fans already know he's a bookworm. His first solo album, Angel 
Clare, was named after a character in Tess of the D'Urbervilles and the songs 
he made famous with Paul Simon include references to Emily Dickinson and 
Tolstoy.

But what does the list tell us about the man who's most famous solo single 
remains Bright Eyes? For starters, as far as I can see, he's never read 
Watership Down. He probably thought an allegorical novel about rabbits a little 
lightweight. A random dip into the list (p19, Feb-Dec 1992, 23 books) offers a 
fairly typical glance onto Art's bookshelf. There are few contemporary novels; 
instead, many of the fiction choices will be familiar to anyone who's taken an 
Introduction to American Literature course (Hawthorne, Poe, Faulkner).

Art's a history buff too. Titles like Managing US Soviet Rivalry 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Managing-United-States-Soviet-Rivalry/dp/0865315000/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1201105908&sr=1-1>
 (July 1984) crop up regularly. One subject which makes a poor showing is 
music, though Art did make time to read Patrick Humphries' Bookends - The Simon 
and Garfunkel Story in June 1983.

The list becomes a more fascinating browse once you try to match Garfunkel's 
reading habits with what he was up to at the time. He read Catch-22 in February 
1969, 14 years after the book was published, but while he was making his acting 
debut in Mike Nichols' adaptation of the novel.

There was plenty of time for kicking back with a good book during Catch-22's 
long production. Paul Simon's The Only Living Boy in New York, from the duo's 
final studio album together, was a plea for his partner to get cracking with 
the record ("Tom, get your plane right on time/I know your part'll go fine"). 
Unfortunately for Paul, Art was firmly on location, reading doorsteps such as 
The Brothers Karamazov and Moby Dick.

The wheels came off the Simon and Garfunkel tandem again during their 1982-83 
reunion world tour. Paul wiped Art's vocals from the album they recorded 
together following the tour. Anyone who'd been paying attention to what 
Garfunkel was picking up in airport bookshops during the duo's global jaunt 
might have spotted signs of disharmony. In December 1982 Art got stuck intoThe 
Book of Job <http://king-james-bible.classic-literature.co.uk/the-book-of-job/>
, followed byRobin Lane Fox' 
<http://www.archaeology.org/online/interviews/fox.html>s biography of Alexander 
the Great. A few months later he was onto Emil Ludwig's Napoleon. Could the 
mild-mannered singer have been driven to weighty tomes about dictators and the 
nature of evil, one wonders, by spending too much time with his old pal?

In recent years, his 13-year (frequently staggered) Walk Across America has 
evidently led Art to ponder the state of the nation. In May 1988, while Ronald 
Reagan was back in the USSR, our constant reader was hiking through West 
Virginia with a copy Benjamin Franklin's Autobiography and Donald Regan's For 
The Record in his knapsack. (Regan was Reagan's former chief of staff.)

Until a Google search took me to Art Garfunkel's virtual library I can't say 
I'd given the singer too much thought. Now I know I'm a going to be making 
regular visits to see what he's reading - and I wish a few other singers would 
keep similar lists. The first section of Bob Dylan's Chronicles was an 
enjoyable guided tour of his early literary influences and Leonard Cohen must 
have got through a few books during his five years in a Buddhist retreat.
 