
Run the Jewels’ Killer Mike has taken aim at Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>, saying that his 
conscience wouldn’t allow him to vote for her.

Killer Mike, AKA Michael Render, was speaking at a Bernie Sanders rally at 
Claflin University in South Carolina on Sunday when he made the comments. In 
particular he criticised Clinton’s response toa recent question from Ashley 
Williams 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/us-elections/student-who-confronted-hillary-clinton-says-she-is-not-to-be-trusted-a6898876.html>
, an activist for the black liberation movement, Black Lives Matter. During a 
Clinton fundraiser, Williams asked her if she would “apologise to black people 
for mass incarceration” and held up a banner with a 1996 Clinton quote that 
said “we have to bring them to heel”. She was escorted out by security, but the 
incident was captured on video.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4G4RFH2Qo1E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4G4RFH2Qo1E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4G4RFH2Qo1E&media=>
Footage shows a young Bernie Sanders arrested during civil rights protest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/20/bernie-sanders-footage-arrest-civil-rights-protest>
Killer Mike contrasted Clinton’s dismissive reaction with the behaviour of 
Sanders, who has a long history of activism, and in August 2015 stood back at a 
rally and let a pair of demonstrators talk. He said: “If I could finda picture 
of you from 51 years ago chained to a black woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/20/bernie-sanders-footage-arrest-civil-rights-protest>
, protesting [against] segregation, and I know that 51 years later you’re 
willing to fold your arms, hold your head and listen to two black girls yell 
and scream – rightfully so – as opposed to telling them to ‘shut up’ after 
you’ve read your own words … as opposed to someone who will tell you ‘later’, 
when it comes to your children dying in the streets, I know that the only 
person that I have the conscience to vote for is Bernard Sanders. I know that 
the only person my logical beautiful black mind will allow me to vote for is 
Senator Bernie Sanders.”


Killer Mike has been heavily involved in the Sanders campaign, interviewing 
him for the Talking Shop YouTube series 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LCnrQZbqIQU> and speaking at his events. In 
2015, he introduced Sanders in his home town of Atlanta, Georgia.

However, Clinton has recently taken the upper hand in the race to be the 
Democratic candidate for the White House by winning South Carolina with a large 
majority.
 