
Rupert Murdoch <https://www.theguardian.com/media/rupert-murdoch> is likely to 
lose nearly all of the $100m he invested in Theranos, the blood testing startup 
beset by scandals exposed by the Wall Street Journal, his flagship business 
newspaper.


Murdoch is reported to have invested $100m in Theranos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/theranos> between 2014 and 2015, when 
its valuation was soaring thanks to the promise of being able to revolutionize 
blood testing by replacing needles with low-cost finger pricks.

The Wall Street Journal reported 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/big-names-take-hit-on-theranos-1480379536> that 
Murdoch was part of a group of wealthy families and individuals who invested 
$632m in Theranos’s latest funding round at about $17 a share, giving the 
Silicon Valley company a valuation of nearly $9bn, and making it the 
highest-valued private healthcare startup in the US.

Murdoch is reported to have toured Theranos’s laboratories in Palo Alto and 
inspected its proprietary devices prior to investing.

The Wall Street Journal, which is owned by Murdoch’s publishing group News 
Corp, has publisheda series of investigative stories 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/theranos-has-struggled-with-blood-tests-1444881901>
 questioning the accuracy of Theranos’s testing and unusual management 
techniques.

The WSJ investigation, which kept going despite intense pressure on its 
whistleblower 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/theranos-whistleblower-shook-the-companyand-his-family-1479335963>
 from Theranos and its board of high profile figures, led to a government 
investigation that found the company’s practices were putting patients’ lives 
at risk. Elizabeth Holmes, Theranos’s chief executive, wasbanned from the blood 
testing business for two years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/08/theranos-elizabeth-holmes-banned-medical-lab>
. Last month, the companyshut down its labs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/06/theranos-lab-closures-walgreens-centers-layoffs-elizabeth-holmes>
.

The company – which Holmes founded when she was 19, in 2003 – is also facing 
both criminal and civil investigations by the US attorney’s office in San 
Francisco and the Securities and Exchange Commission, which is looking into 
whether the company misled investors and regulators.

Silicon Valley's biotech firms: 'Theranos gave us a black eye'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/18/silicon-valley-biotech-firms-theranos-black-eye>
Some investors on Monday launched their own lawsuit against the company, 
claiming they were misled. They said they hoped their suit would attract others 
and become a class action.

High-profile Theranos investors include the billionaire Riley Bechtel, 
chairman of the private construction giant Bechtel Group, and Cox Enterprises, 
the family-controlled conglomerate.

As well as attracting prominent investors, Theranos also secured big names for 
its board, including Henry Kissinger and George Shultz, both former secretaries 
of state.

The WSJ revealed earlier this month Shultz’s grandson was the whistleblower 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/theranos-whistleblower-shook-the-companyand-his-family-1479335963>
 who approached the newspaper with his concerns about Theranos after they were 
dismissed by Holmes. Tyler Shultz, 26, joined Theranos in 2013 and quit in 2014 
after his concerns were labelled arrogant, patronizing and reckless.

News Corp and Theranos declined to comment. 
 