
Parliament ended the year with a mixture of bang and whimper.

The whimper was the legislative “fight”. It says a fair bit about the way the 
government is travelling that the big political issue was the backpacker tax 
(important as it is for farmers, it is not one that should have caused such 
grief) and the passing of the Building and Construction Commission legislation. 
This has been so laughably altered from its original intent that the main issue 
for unions is ensuring the ABCC does adhere to the legislation – such as the 
requirement that the commissioner performs his or her functions “in an 
apolitical manner”.

The bang was a protest that disrupted question time. 

There was, of course, a lot of hand-wringing over the protest – there always 
is when the left protests in Australia. After all, we had much the same 
response about disruption of democracy from the powers that be a couple years 
ago whenstudents protested against Christopher Pyne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/may/05/abc-q-and-live-show-student-protest>
 during an episode of Q&A.

Senate passes building watchdog bill after changes to boost Australian jobs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/30/coalition-agrees-to-new-procurement-rules-and-jobs-test-to-help-pass-abcc-bill>
The protesters certainly did disrupt the proceedings of parliament, but they 
did no one any harm and were no danger to anyone. Their putting a stop to the 
proceedings of question time actually produced a net benefit to the nation’s 
IQ, even if only for three-quarters of an hour.

That’s not to say question time is unimportant or always brain dulling in its 
idiocy. There are times, mostly by accident, when something worthwhile does 
occur, but for the most part it is just a poorly scripted play performed by 
mediocre actors.

Consider the question posed by the Liberal MP Melissa Price to the prime 
minister, which was interrupted by the protest:

“Will the prime minister update the house on the government’s achievements, 
including how our economic reforms are driving jobs and growth? How will the 
Australian Building and Construction Commission help to improve productivity 
and reduce construction costs?”

Not a question that the nation waited with bated breath to hear answered. 

But if you missed the answer, you needn’t have worried because the following 
day the member for North Sydney, Trent Zimmerman asked the PM this version:

“Will the prime minister update the house on the government’s achievements? 
How are those achievements, including reinstating the Australian Building and 
Construction Commission delivering stronger economic growth and benefitting 
hard-working Australians?”

Turnbull rejects conservative 'armchair critics' of ABCC bill
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/01/turnbull-rejects-conservative-armchair-critics-of-abcc-bill>
It should be noted that on Wednesday it took Malcolm Turnbull two sentences to 
deliver his answer about attacking the ALP, while on Thursday it took him three.

Notionally his answer was about the passing of the legislation to reinstate 
the ABCC, but perhaps because the legislation was so neutered he felt on surer 
ground to talk about the ALP’s faults rather than his government’s achievements.

The ABCC legislation, however, nicely encapsulated the government’s policy 
process – rushed, sloppy and actually failing to deliver what was intended.

The government was so desperate to get the legislation passed that it agreed 
to all manner of amendments – including those that were highly protectionist, 
made the commissioner’s position virtually untenable, and those that didn’t 
make a lot of sense.

Take for example the amendment 
<http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22legislation%2Famend%2Fr5692_amend_bf57eb85-5de1-4f5a-97f6-3defbd7a6328%22>
 that was moved by the ALP senator Doug Cameron. It was notionally designed to 
ensure that projects covered by the act’s “building code” (which projects must 
adhere to in order to qualify for government contracts) do not hire foreign 
labour unless there is proper testing of the domestic market.

The amendments are a significant increase on current labour market testing for 
such projects. As the Guardian’s Paul Karphas reported,  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/02/construction-red-tape-may-apply-regardless-of-hiring-australians-experts-warn>
the amendment means that the required advertising must be done “in such a way 
that a significant proportion of suitably qualified and experienced Australian 
citizens and Australian permanent residents would be likely to be informed 
about the position” and applies to all jobs regardless of how small they are.

But that isn’t the biggest issue. 

The way the amendment is actually worded makes it essentially impossible to 
hire anyone and also adhere to the code.

Construction red tape may apply regardless of hiring Australians, experts warn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/02/construction-red-tape-may-apply-regardless-of-hiring-australians-experts-warn>
The amendment states that “the Building Code must include provisions ensuring 
that no person is employed to undertake building work unless” there is that 
targeted advertising,and “the employer demonstrates that no Australian citizen 
or Australian permanent resident is suitable for the job”.

So no person can be employed unless the employer demonstrates that no 
Australian is suitable for the job.

That literally means that if employers can demonstrate that an Australian 
citizen is suitable for the job, they can’t employ them because they have 
failed to demonstrate that no Australian citizen is suitable for the job!

It’s a lovely catch-22 (or catch-23, subclause 2A (d)) 

Clearly it is meant to be no foreign person can be employed unless the 
employer demonstrates that no Australian citizen is suitable (note – suitable, 
not “available”) for the job.

Walkley Awards: wins for Guardian Australia's Ben Doherty and Greg Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/02/walkley-awards-wins-for-guardian-australias-ben-doherty-and-greg-jericho>
But that is not what has ended up in the act. 

Haste makes waste. 

This government wanted to end the year with a win and was willing to do 
anything to achieve it – including not bothering to closely check the 
legislation that it was attempting to enact.
 