
Russia’s biggest film studio and home of its greatest movies, Mosfilm 
<http://www.mosfilm.ru/eng/main.php>, has secured a £300m investment aimed at 
restoring its glory days after near collapse in the 1990s.

Amid a drive to boost Russia’s cultural output and offer an alternative to the 
Hollywood films that dominate the country’s box office, the government said 
earlier this month it had approved a private-sector investment in Mosfilm that 
will include building two studios, a costume storehouse, a cinema and a concert 
hall.


Ten great post-Soviet films
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/jun/10/ten-great-post-soviet-films-ukraine>
The backer, Altera Park, is a subsidiary of Altera Capital, a finance group 
headed by Vladimir Putin’s former deputy chief of staff,Kirill Androsov 
<http://www.weforum.org/young-global-leaders/kirill-androsov>. 

The total cost of the development, due to be completed in 2018, would be over 
half a billion US dollars (£300m), Androvsov told the Russian websiteGood To 
Know 
<http://xn--80ajgarobcee6b3h.xn--p1ai/finansyi-eng/mosfilm-develop-the-developer-of-the-fund-under-the-direction-of-kirill-androsov-3/>
.

The Russian state has become increasingly interested in the film industry in 
recent years. In 2014, the culture minister called fora cap on foreign movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/15/russian-culture-minister-vladimir-medinsky-quota>
, and inMarch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/02/russia-list-state-approved-themes-film-industry-ukraine>
 his ministry released a list of movie themes which it would support. These 
included family values, military glory and “Crimea and Ukraine in the 1,000 
year history of the Russian state”. It’s also a big business – Stalingrad, a 
war film, earned over $50m worldwide last year.

Many of Mosfilm’s recent productions have been been in line with the new 
patriotic turn.The Dark Story <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2318405/>, based on 
Chekov’s classic play The Cherry Orchard and patriotic blockbusters like 2012’s
White Tiger <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2318405/>, about a tank commander in 
the second world war, andRoad To Berlin 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wAaJzEDgzck&feature=player_embedded>, released 
this year to coincide with the 70th anniversary of Russia’s victory over the 
Nazis.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F24%2Frussian-films-soviet-cinema-mosfilm-studio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F23%2F1437652980663%2Ff1865c6b-0788-4c2b-a681-42ea724e26ba-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Russian%20film%20studio%20hopes%20to%20take%20on%20Hollywood%20after%20%C2%A3300m%20investment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F24%2Frussian-films-soviet-cinema-mosfilm-studio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Russian%20film%20studio%20hopes%20to%20take%20on%20Hollywood%20after%20%C2%A3300m%20investment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F24%2Frussian-films-soviet-cinema-mosfilm-studio%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F23%2F1437652980663%2Ff1865c6b-0788-4c2b-a681-42ea724e26ba-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A Mosfilm worker at a sound desk. The studio rents its facilities out to other 
film companies, as well as producing original films. Photograph: Pascal 
Dumont/The Moscow Times 
History

Mosfilm was formed in 1920 when two film studios merged. It is famous for 
producing such Oscar-winning Soviet classics as Moscow Doesn’t Believe in Tears 
and War and Peace. Many of the greats of Soviet cinema were filmed here, 
including Andrei Tarkovsky’sSolaris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/21/solaris-tarkovsky-science-fiction>
 and Sergei Eisenstein’sBattleship Potemkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/20/battleship-potemkin-eisenstein-arthouse>
.

Seven Soviet sci-fi films everyone should see
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/28/cinema-seven-soviet-sci-fi-films>
Like all Soviet studios, Mosfilm was funded by the state. When the flow of 
cash stopped abruptly withthe collapse of communism in 1991 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2014/jul/14/soviet-union-collapse-in-pictures>
, the studio’s output fell from 80 films a year to one or two .

“There was a period in the 1990s when Mosfilm produced no movies at all,” said 
deputy director, Vladimir Ryasov.

When Russian filmmaker Karen Shakhnazarov 
<http://www.mosfilm.ru/eng/company/shakhnazarov/> became head of the studio in 
1998, he made modernisation his priority. The financial crisis hit the studio 
hard –in 2008, more than 20 of its 89 films  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/oct/27/russia-film-industry>in 
production were cancelled.

Shakhnazarov also pushed for new infrastructure, and asked Putin two years ago 
to find an investor for the studio,Good To Know 
<http://xn--80ajgarobcee6b3h.xn--p1ai/finansyi-eng/mosfilm-develop-the-developer-of-the-fund-under-the-direction-of-kirill-androsov-3/>
 reports.



Movie theatre

“Mosfilm is the flagship of the Russian film industry. This investment will 
affect the whole sector, which is now in a rather difficult situation,” said 
Georgy Shabanov, the head ofAll Media Company <http://allmediacompany.ru/en/>, 
a distribution and production company.

The new movie theatre will screen films by Russian directors struggling to get 
their works released by local distribution chains, Ryasov said.

But others worry that the cash will be spent in vain. The value of the film 
production company no longer lies in its physical scale, but in the people and 
ideas it generates, said Oleg Berezin, head of St Petersburg film studioNevafilm
 <http://www.nevafilm.ru/english/index.html>.

A massive building project is unlikely to help, he said: “The money should be 
invested primarily in education, not in the construction of new studios.”

A version of this article originally appeared on The Moscow Times 
<http://www.themoscowtimes.com/business/article/massive-investment-to-transform-russias-legendary-mosfilm-movie-studio/525969.html>
 