
An EDF Energy Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anglowelshcup> semi-final 
place, it seems, is not enough of a prize. Perhaps the competition's stock is 
lower than that ofNewcastle's 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/newcastlefalcons> sponsors, Northern Rock, 
or maybe the north-east on a frosty Sunday afternoon is just an uncomfortable 
place to be, but despite relatively benign conditions, a weakened home side and 
plenty of chances,Gloucester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby>
 just could not get it together.

Their coach, Dean Ryan, said: "We are not bringing the right energy to matches 
at the moment. We forged a lot of opportunities but failed to execute them 
properly. We are not playing well right now and we cannot hide from that.

"Credit to Newcastle <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/newcastlefalcons>, 
whose work rate was superb, but we should have played much better. We are 
struggling with injuries and we do not have a lot of options, but we came here 
to win and book a semi-final spot and that's what we did."

Despite needing only a win, no matter the margin, Gloucester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby> eschewed four shots at goal 
in the first half and four more after the break. They failed to convert any of 
the resulting lineouts into tries.

Apo Satala's bruising try meant the biting cold was not the only reason for 
Gloucester's rosy cheeks at the end of the game. Newcastle, though, had opened 
the scoring through their loosehead prop, Jon Golding, who capped a destructive 
drive into the Gloucester 22. The substitute fly-half Rory Clegg stretched the 
Falcons' lead with a penalty just past the hour.

Forward passes, knock-ons, dropped balls - all these and more blighted Ryan's 
side at every turn, but neither side could get a handle on proceedings until 
Golding powered over after Willie Walker fluffed Rob Miller's neat kick on the 
edge of the 22. It was Newcastle's only attacking chance of the half but the 
former Rotherham prop made it pay when he drove over after some old-fashioned 
hard work through the middle.

Olly Barkley kicked two penalties to reduce the deficit to 10-6, but he and 
Ryan Lamb wasted a host of other eminently kickable shots. Thanks to Satala 
that didn't matter, and Gloucester seemed delighted to slip away with the 
slimmest and least impressive of wins.

Newcastle Jones; Williams, May, Davey, Rudd; Miller (Clegg, 56), Charlton 
(Young, 65); Golding, Vickers (Long, 56), Ward, Swinson (Perry, 66), Sorensen, 
Williamson, Wilson (Winter, 70), Dowson (capt).

Try Golding. Con Miller. Pen Clegg.

Gloucester Walker; Balshaw, Tindall (capt), Barkley, Vainikolo; Lamb, Cooper 
(Lewis, 64); Wood (Dickinson, 54), Titterrell (Azam, 45), Nieto, Eustace, 
Brown, Buxton, Hazell (Satala, 59), Strokosch.

Try Satala. Pens Barkley 2.

Referee S Davey (Sussex). Attendance 3,614.
 