
Betterlife Light Pad Starter SAD Light Box 
<http://www.lloydspharmacy.com/en/light-pad-starter-sad-light-box>, £59.99

As cold winter nights approach, the urge to hunker down under a warm duvet for 
as long as possible seems quite normal to me – and likewise, a healthy appetite 
for baked potatoes. But if you find yourself becoming persistently low in mood 
and lethargic towards winter each year, you may be somewhere on the Sad 
spectrum. The acronym for seasonal affective disorder reflects its nature: 
recurrent depressive illness with a seasonal pattern,usually worse in winter 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/seasonal-affective-disorder/Pages/Introduction.aspx>
. While full-blown Sad can be a debilitating condition requiring professional 
help, the light therapy lamps that can be used totreat it 
<http://ajp.psychiatryonline.org/doi/pdf/10.1176/appi.ajp.2015.15060773> are 
often marketed towards well people with mild symptoms. As someone who lays down 
extra fat reserves like a bear around this time of year and is often snoozy in 
the mornings, I felt well qualified to test one.

A Sad lamp sounds a bit like the naughty step – a joyless place where you sit 
and think about what you’ve done. Still, I was hopeful that mine would be a 
beautiful object, smooth and luminescent like an alien’s egg. I was let down by 
the unromantic appearance of the therapy light. The grey, clunky tablet looked 
like something you might find suspended over an amateur basement mushroom 
laboratory, or perhaps an unconvincing medical prop on a TV show.

The tablet emits a very bright, blue-white fluorescent light that delivers the 
optical equivalent of a freezing cold shower. The instructions recommend two 
hours of exposure each morning, held at six inches from the face. Perhaps part 
of its therapeutic effect is this enforced period of complete immobility, or 
the flood of relief when you eventually stop waterboarding your eyes with 
photons. I used it at the more reasonable distance of 12 inches and squeezed in 
the two hours of light exposure in between other activities. It had no 
discernible effect except for reducing my risk of napping to zero, which I 
appreciated.

A week into my one-woman trial, the tablet felt like an albatross in my life – 
a dead, grey albatross. Even looking at it while it was switched off nearly 
brought on a migraine. Despite this, the ritual of using the light convinced me 
that it’s worth trying to mitigate the effects of colder, darker days. Rather 
than staring at a lightbox, I’ll be getting outdoors whenever it’s bright and 
dry, and embracing festivals, roaring fires, and feasts.Farrah Jarral

Lumie desklamp 
<http://www.lumie.com/collections/light-therapy-sad/products/desklamp>, £120
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Flight-therapy-lamps-tested-alarms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbfb786d6ddbf5d80d5d12d46bcb62de2c3d3d49%2F0_70_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Therapy%20lamps%20tested%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20optical%20equivalent%20of%20freezing%20cold%20shower'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Flight-therapy-lamps-tested-alarms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Therapy%20lamps%20tested%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20optical%20equivalent%20of%20freezing%20cold%20shower%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Flight-therapy-lamps-tested-alarms%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbfb786d6ddbf5d80d5d12d46bcb62de2c3d3d49%2F0_70_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 ‘It feels more like a pet than a remedy’ ... Chitra Ramaswamy testing her 
desklamp. Photograph: © Murdo MacLeod 
It’s 4.30pm and I’m under the Sad lamp again. The Lumie’s broad head 
spotlights the pizza I’m about to put in the oven for my son, making the cheese 
glow an autumnal orange. This is gloomy hour, in the same indisputable way that 
6pm is happy hour. The lamp’s instruction booklet suggests I sit down, read, 
watch TV, or do some crafting while enjoying some teatime bright-light therapy, 
but if I could sit down and read I wouldn’t be sad and tired.

Bright-light therapy claims to make you feel more energised, alert, and to 
improve your mood. This sounds great. Aside from yawning and standing on little 
die-cast cars, I tend to get little done in the blue period when late afternoon 
slumps into early evening. Also I’m in Scotland, where darkness falls earlier, 
heavier and grimmer than down south. And I work from home, alone, and have a 
three-year-old. I need this.

I decide to remove the diffuser, intensifying the light to 2,500 lux and 
reducing the recommended therapy time from an hour to 30 minutes. This feels 
like cheating but later, when my son is in bed and I’m lying on the sofa 
watchingGreat British Menu <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b0071y6r>, I do 
feel more alert. I celebrate by watching two more episodes, then fret that I’ve 
luxed my eyeballs too close to bedtime and won’t be able to sleep. I pass out 
as usual.

The other key time to use a lightbox is in the morning, although I wake 
annoyingly early, no matter the season. Nevertheless, I do everything required 
of me between 7-8am by Sad lamplight and get a mild headache, though this might 
be down to worrying whether I’m prioritising Lumie time enough. Eventually I go 
outside and walk the dog in the weak light of the giant Lumie in the sky. I 
feel much brighter, even when I end up searching for dog poo hidden in dead 
leaves for 10 minutes. It turns out you can’t beat natural light, even when 
it’s a bit dark.

By day three I find myself wandering around the flat a lot, carrying the lamp 
by its flexible neck, looking for a place to plug in because I don’t have a 
desk. It starts to feel more like a pet than a winter blues remedy. I wonder if 
the dog might be getting jealous. I start to think Lumie looks a bit like ET. 
Eventually I commit to a bleak corner and sit in the white-blue light until I 
have to get up and do something else. It seems light therapy is incompatible 
with my life, or rather the early years of parenting. And there is no magic 
lamp for that.Chitra Ramaswamy

Beurer WL-80 wakeup light 
<http://www.johnlewis.com/store/beurer-wake-up-dawn-simulator-light-with-alarm-clock-white/p2611499>
, £90
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Flight-therapy-lamps-tested-alarms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F271f290f2c974898a11b1c8adad1a8fcd9341c06%2F851_851_3755_2253%2F3755.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Therapy%20lamps%20tested%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20optical%20equivalent%20of%20freezing%20cold%20shower'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Flight-therapy-lamps-tested-alarms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Therapy%20lamps%20tested%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20optical%20equivalent%20of%20freezing%20cold%20shower%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Flight-therapy-lamps-tested-alarms%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F271f290f2c974898a11b1c8adad1a8fcd9341c06%2F851_851_3755_2253%2F3755.jpg>
 ‘The screen was so bright it was difficult to get to sleep’ ... Tim Jonze with 
his wakeup lamp. Photograph: Rob Greig for the Guardian 
Of course, I jumped at the chance to test this alarm. Not because I struggle 
to get up in the morning (although I do, horribly) or that I struggle with Sad 
(I don’t), but because I’ve spent the last few months being woken up regularly 
by a crying baby. Reviewing this clock was the perfect excuse to grab a proper 
night’s sleep in the spare room (“Sorry darling, but it’s forwork”).

The idea is simple enough. Instead of a noisy alarm going off and leaving you 
a confused and frightened mess clambering around in the dark for a snooze 
button, sunrise alarms such as this one precede any noise with a gradually 
increasing light that mimics a beautiful summer sunrise. The idea is that by 
the time the alarm sounds you’re already awake, or at least coming around to 
the idea.

So did it make getting up any easier? It’s hard to be conclusive, because even 
if sunrise alarms do work, this one seemed pretty useless. It was annoying to 
programme and had an LCD screen so bright it made it difficult to get to sleep. 
By the time I drifted off I did so in a state of mild fury, which surely wasn’t 
the point. The sunrise function worked nicely anddid seem to wake me up. But 
did it prevent the sinking feeling that I would now have to get out of bed and 
trudge into the office that accompanies most mornings with a standard alarm 
clock? Not really. I felt no brighter or more refreshed – I just didn’t have to 
turn the light on to find my towel.

As alarm clocks go it was functional (actually, it was a bit rubbish – does 
anyone really want to be woken by disjointed four-second loops of waves or pan 
pipes?) but I was forced to accept that if you really want to ensure you get 
straight out of bed in the morning, there’s a more expensive and efficient 
piece of kit on the market called a baby.Tim Jonze

Lumie Bodyclock Starter 30 Wake-Up Light Alarm Clock 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Lumie-Bodyclock-Starter-Wake-Up-Features/dp/B002TEXEAI>
, £56.99
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Flight-therapy-lamps-tested-alarms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d31347615c33157307aabaebd6c83a45d5b3734%2F476_355_4179_2507%2F4179.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Therapy%20lamps%20tested%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20optical%20equivalent%20of%20freezing%20cold%20shower'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Flight-therapy-lamps-tested-alarms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Therapy%20lamps%20tested%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20optical%20equivalent%20of%20freezing%20cold%20shower%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Flight-therapy-lamps-tested-alarms%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d31347615c33157307aabaebd6c83a45d5b3734%2F476_355_4179_2507%2F4179.jpg>
 Wakey-wakey ... Stephen Moss with his alarm side light. Photograph: Sarah Lee 
for the Guardian 
The Lumie Bodyclock promises to “wake you with a sunrise that naturally helps 
to regulate your sleep and wake patterns … You’ll wake up in a better mood, 
find it easier to get up, and feel more energetic during the day. There’s also 
a fading sunset to help you unwind at the end of the day and drift off to 
sleep.”

It sounds marvellous, but there’s one problem. I have no idea how to set the 
damn thing. There are instructions in English, French, German, Swedish and 
Dutch, but they may as well be in Swahili, and after half an hour I’m in need 
of a comforting sunset.

The default setting is for 7am, so in the end I settle for that, even though – 
largely because of an addiction to late-night internet chess – it’s a bit 
earlier than I normally wake up. The translucent hemisphere is a beautiful 
thing to have on the bedside table, though at £59.95 such beauty does not come 
cheap. But will it work?

On our first night together I keep wondering when the sun will rise, and wake 
up at least twice – once at 4am. Eventually I am aware of the artificial dawn 
breaking – there is half an hour in which light gradually floods the room – and 
struggle into consciousness at about 6.50. Unfortunately I then go back to 
sleep, the light turns itself off, and I don’t get up until 8.15.

Day two is much better. I sleep soundly, don’t fret about the clock, and am 
eased into consciousness by the gradually increasing intensity of the light. By 
6.40 I am fully awake and watch the glow grow until it reaches its 7am peak. I 
haven’t yet mastered the sound setting – assuming there is one – but the light 
seems to have done the trick by itself. Despite going to bed at 12.30am I feel 
surprisingly alert, and my mood is much improved by a Haydn piano sonata on 
Radio 3.

That, though, is the high point. On day three, I sleep badly – perhaps I need 
to activate the sunset feature (if only I could find it) – and am so tired I 
don’t wake until 7.24am, with the light already blazing. The dawn has failed to 
wake me, showing I can sleep through anything if I am tired enough. It seems I 
need a sudden, piercing alarm, which rather defeats the object of the sunrise.

My conclusion is obvious: the key is not a £60 Bodyclock, but your own body 
clock. I need a lot of sleep, and really ought to try to go to bed not later 
than 11pm, having wound down soothingly beforehand (a warm bath, cocoa, 
Newsnight) rather than by playing intense chess against angry, abusive 
Americans online. I would then, quite naturally, already be stirring at 6.30am 
when the clock-induced dawn could guide me into the day.

But I’d like an even more sophisticated version. As well as the light, would 
it not be possible to have a crescendo of birdsong, reaching a peak just before 
7am; some Haydn or Mozart to ease me into consciousness and make me believe all 
is well with the world; and a cup of tea ready to drink at 7.10? A 
light-clock-radio-Teasmade. Preferably one that’s easy to set. That shouldn’t 
be too difficult, should it?Stephen Moss
 