
Peer of the week

Karren Brady: defending West Ham’s £701m public-funded stadium rental deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/16/west-ham-olympic-stadium-karren-brady-taxpayers-celebrate>
, six months after voting in the Lords tocut tax credits 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/11-millionaires-who-voted-tory-6713773>. 
Brady set our her position on state aidlast year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/07/karren-brady-interview-no-desire-to-become-an-mp>
: “I think it should always pay more to work than it should to be a burden on 
society.”

• Brady’s key austerity message last year while campaigning as Tory business 
ambassador: a warning over Labour’s record onreckless misuse of public funds 
<https://twitter.com/karren_brady/status/583719033410846720>. “Ed Miliband 
doesn’t want to talk about the past because they spent all the money! We can’t 
let them do it again!”

How West Ham struck the deal of the century with Olympic Stadium move
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/14/west-ham-deal-century-olympic-stadium>
• Also content with the deal, which reportedly earned Brady a “sizeable” bonus:
Boris Johnson- calling the terms, including free public money for corner flags, 
“a very good rental agreement <http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/football/34272622>.” (
2012:Boris reveals he’ll take no prisoners 
<http://news.sky.com/story/1021092/olympic-stadium-west-ham-poised-to-take-over>
 in the talks: “It’s a question of making sure that [the value of] an asset 
which is a public asset and something that taxpayers put half a billion pounds 
into is properly reflected in the commercial deal that is now being done with a 
private sector entity. People will understand that it’s my job is to get the 
best possible deal for the taxpayer.”)

Elsewhere: wrongdoing news

Last week’s governance highlights:

1) Best personal journey: Alfredo Hawit – who pledged last year to lead a 
fresh new era 
<http://www.concacaf.com/article/concacaf-announces-actions-taken-by-executive-committee>
 as Concacaf president after his two predecessors were arrested for fraud -
pleading guilty to fraud and forfeiting $950,000 
<http://www.newyorklawjournal.com/id=1202754628015/ExSoccer-League-Official-Acknowledges-Taking-Bribes>
. Hawit told the court in New York: “I knew it was wrong of me.”

2) Smoothest transition: Concacaf, looking to move on from the Hawit era, the 
Jeffrey Webb era and the Jack Warner era, facing a new presidential election 
dispute after the favourite for the jobfailed an integrity test 
<http://www.espnfc.com/blog/fifa/243/post/2849414/fifa-says-derrick-flunked-integrity-check-concacaf-president>
. Gordon Derrick denies wrongdoing.

3) Best staying power: Brazil FA head Marco Polo Del Nero, still wanted in the 
US on disputed fraud charges, returning to work refreshed after ataking 
three-month sabbatical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/04/fbi-corruption-charges-brazil-reform>
 “for personal reasons”.

4) And the best reformer: Gorka Villar, member of Fifa’s 2016 Reform Committee 
<http://www.fifa.com/about-fifa/committees/committee=1945421/index.html> and 
son of interim Uefa head Angel María Villar Llona, reportedlyfailing to appear 
before Uruguay’s Court of Organised Crime 
<http://www.insideworldfootball.com/2016/04/13/uruguayan-police-may-bring-interpol-bid-secure-gorka-villar/>
 to face extortion charges. He denies wrongdoing.

Other news: quote of the week

Wolves chief executive Jez Moxey – relaxed about fan unrest 
<http://www.expressandstar.com/sport/wolverhampton-wanderers-fc/2016/04/14/wolves-face-fan-petition-over-the-money-shop-sponsorship-deal/>
 around the club’s new shirt sponsor, payday lender The Money Shop, whose 
parent company wasforced to pay out £15.4m last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/oct/26/dollar-financial-ordered-to-repay-154m-to-customers>
 due to “serious failings” that “caused detriment for many customers”. Moxey: 
“I don’t think we could have associated with a more reputable firm.”

Most thorough inquiry

“The club distances itself from all acts which contravene our philosophy and 
condemns such acts strongly. However, after careful consideration and talks, we 
have come to the conclusion that the coach did not target the player’s race.” –
Milan Mandaric, owner of Slovenia’s Olimpija Ljubljana, reacting after coach 
Marko Nikolic called Nigeria’s Blessing Eleke a “black idiot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/12/olimpija-ljubljana-coach-apologises-blessing-eleke>
”.

Manager news: still got it
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fsaid-and-done-karren-brady-west-ham-olympic-stadium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F795532646c056cb8b93f49aa74e7d668a35da0f0%2F502_37_764_955%2F764.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Said%20%26%20Done%3A%20Karren%20Brady%3B%20Jez%20Moxey%3B%20and%20flipping%20the%20bird&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fsaid-and-done-karren-brady-west-ham-olympic-stadium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Said%20%26%20Done%3A%20Karren%20Brady%3B%20Jez%20Moxey%3B%20and%20flipping%20the%20bird&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fsaid-and-done-karren-brady-west-ham-olympic-stadium%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F795532646c056cb8b93f49aa74e7d668a35da0f0%2F502_37_764_955%2F764.jpg>
 Maurizio Zamparini: the victim in all this 
Italy: 74-year-old Palermo president Maurizio Zamparini. His season so far: • 
10 Nov: 
<http://www.goal.com/en/news/723/serie-a/2015/11/10/17175792/palermo-sack-iachini-and-appoint-ballardini-as-zamparini-strikes->
Sacks coach Giuseppe Iachini and hires Davide Ballardini.• 10 Jan: 
<http://www.football-italia.net/78181/zamparini-i-wont-sack-ballardini> Stands 
by his new man: “I will not sack Ballardini, even though I could.”• 11 Jan: 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/news/palermo-sack-ballardini-hire-schelotto-223612139--sow.html>
Sacks Ballardini and hires Guillermo Barros Schelotto.• 11 Feb: 
<http://www.espnfc.co.uk/palermo/story/2805095/giovanni-bosi-becomes-palermos-sixth-new-boss-of-the-season>
Discovers Schelotto doesn’t have his badges and hires Giovanni Bosi instead.• 
15 Feb: <http://www.football-italia.net/79895/official-palermo-re-hire-iachini> 
Sacks Bosi, reappoints Iachini.• 8 Mar: 
<http://www.football-italia.net/80989/zamparini-iachini-has-gone-mad> Calls 
Iachini “an idiot who has gone mad” and replaces him with Walter Novellino.• 12 
Apr: <http://www.football-italia.net/82679/zamparini-im-victim> Sacks Novellino 
and rehires Ballardini. “People say I’ve gone mad, but that is not true. It was 
the coaches who lost the plot and then lied about it. I’m the victim in all 
this.”

• Meanwhile – 24 Mar: 
<http://www.gazzetta.it/Calcio/Serie-A/Milan/24-03-2016/milan-berlusconi-mihajlovic-merita-restare-se-vince-coppa-italia-1401138104792.shtml#>
 Milan ownerSilvio Berlusconi: “I’ve never said anything bad about [Sinisa] 
Mihajlovic – it’s just newspapers copying and pasting quotes. I only complained 
about seeing a Milan I didn’t like, I don’t know why they attributed this to 
the coach.”12 Apr: Sacks him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/12/sinisa-mihajlovic-sacked-milan-christian-brocchi-silvio-berlusconi>
.

War of the week

Romania: Steaua director Mihai Stoica, back in the game after being released 
on parole from hismoney-laundering sentence 
<http://www.agerpres.ro/english/2016/01/04/court-paroles-former-steaua-manager-mihai-stoica-18-32-07>
, accusing Astra coach Marius Sumudica of being “born unlikable” and “dressing 
in the dark”. Sumudica responded: “It’s true I don’t look good, I carry a 
little weight, but at least I don’t wear striped shirts all day. Black and 
white striped shirts, you know? I’m glad we enter into such a war, I like to 
make war. War begins.”

Most misunderstood

Germany: Nürnberg’s Dave Bulthuis - banned for three games for making a 
two-fingered “gun gesture 
<http://sportbild.bild.de/fussball/2-liga/2-liga/dave-bulthuis-nuernberg-pistolengeste-45299154.sport.html>
” after being sent off. “I never meant a gun gesture. Last time I got sent off 
it was when the referee said I flipped him the bird, so this time I use two 
fingers and it’s a red again. What am I meant to do?”

Plus: changing course

Brazil: Miss Bumbum 2015 pageant winner Suzy Cortez, ruling out footballers - 
“they just don’t appeal to me, I’m no Maria Boot” - three months after 
celebrating São Paulo signing defender Diego Lugano by tweeting a nude photo at 
him: “Welcome #Lugano … #missbumbum2015”.
 