
Man of the week

 @Joey7Barton’s Rangers story so far: 
24 May: <https://twitter.com/joey7barton/status/735110574594523136> “To be a 
Ranger is to sense the sacred trust of upholding all that such a name means in 
this shrine of football.”
15 Sep: <https://twitter.com/Joey7Barton/status/776535490493288448> “I 
apologise unreservedly.”
16 Sep: 
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/sport/football/football-news/joey-barton-goes-radio-insists-8848113>
“I’ve done nothing to apologise for.”

• Barton’s full list of vows 
<http://www.thescottishsun.co.uk/scotsol/homepage/sport/spl/rangers/7172122/Joey-Barton-I-turned-down-bigger-bucks-to-join-Rangers.html>
 when he signed in May: a) “There’s pressure here, but I’m somebody who thrives 
on that.“b) “I’ve had the career I’ve had because I’ve got fantastic daily 
habits … I want to contribute to every facet of this organisation.” Andc) “When 
you get to the space I’m in, you have to tune out of what everyone says about 
you. There’ve been times when I haven’t been on best behaviour - but that’s all 
in the past. All I can do is be the man I am today.”

Speech of the week

Michel Platini: telling Uefa’s congress at the five-star Athens Grand Resort 
Lagonissi (top suite £26,000-a-night 
<http://biglike.com/instead-of-buying-a-new-condo-you-could-spend-a-night-in-any-of-these-suites-for-the-same-cash/>
) what he’ll be remembered for. “I fought hard to preserve football from the 
excesses that its global success has engendered … football is a game, not a 
product; a sport, not a market; a show, not a business.”

• Headlining Uefa’s agenda in Greece: news that Platini’s expanded Euro 2016 
format is set to deliver a record£712m profit 
<http://www.espnfc.co.uk/european-championship/story/2910112/uefa-expects-record-%C3%A2%E2%80%9A%C2%AC830-million-profit-from-euro-2016-in-france>
. Vice-president Ángel María Villar: “Michel can be proud, very proud, of his 
Euro.”

Plus: most upbeat

Russia’s sports minister Vitaly Mutko – denying links to the Fancy Bears 
hackers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/14/russian-sports-minister-vitaly-mutko-denies-link-wada-hackers>
 and state-sponsored doping, andcelebrating election victory 
<http://www.efe.com/efe/english/sports/russia-hopes-for-efficient-cooperation-with-uefa-new-president/50000266-3040142>
 for his choice as Uefa’s new president, Aleksander Ceferin. “He’s young and 
energetic. We hope for efficient cooperation.”

West Ham’s home discomforts risk bursting bubble around new ground | Owen 
Gibson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/17/west-ham-olympic-stadium-troubles>
Other news: calling it early

25 July: 
<http://www.whufc.com/News/Articles/2016/July/25-July/A-message-from-the-Vice-Chairman>
 Karren Brady, reflecting on her achievement inrelocating West Ham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/sep/12/west-ham-united-move-new-stadium-video-report>
, a week before their first game: “The move has been a complete success on 
every level … Be in no doubt, we are part of the most successful stadium 
migration in history.”

Strongest principles

Sky Italia – hiring openly fascist Paolo Di Canio 
<http://www.fourfourtwo.com/features/paolo-di-canio-one-one> as a pundit, then 
suspending him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/14/sky-sport-italia-suspends-paolo-di-canio-after-showing-dux-tattoo>
 when viewers saw his Mussolini ”dux” tattoo. “We apologise for those whose 
sensibilities were hurt. We decided to suspend this collaboration.”

Also cracking down

Russian club Rostov, issuing a robust message to fans 
<http://www.fc-rostov.ru/press/news/10447> after Uefa punished them for racism: 
“Dear fans, we kindly ask you to refrain from racism at home games.” Their last 
big crackdown:2014 - reacting after coach Igor Gamula told reporters: “We’ve 
got enough black players, we’ve got six of the things and you want me to sign a 
seventh?” Rostovmoved him to the U21s 
<http://www.fc-rostov.ru/doubles/trainers/55/news#trainer-body>.

Manager news: best relationship

Leeds manager Garry Monk 
<http://www.yorkshireeveningpost.co.uk/sport/football/leeds-united/leeds-united-cellino-behind-me-says-monk-1-8121244>
: “I speak to the owner near enough every day. He’s been great, very supportive 
to myself ... we’re working closely.”

(April, Steve Evans: 
<http://www.yorkshireeveningpost.co.uk/sport/football/leeds-united/leeds-united-manager-steve-evans-adamant-he-has-backing-of-outspoken-owner-massimo-cellino-1-7859798>
“I have very positive communications with the president, it’s been totally 
positive. He respects me.”Sept 2015, Uwe Rösler:  
<http://www.insidefutbol.com/2015/09/26/never-had-relationship-like-i-have-with-massimo-cellino-leeds-boss-uwe-rosler/243924/>
“Mr Cellino and myself have a special relationship. It’s exciting, fascinating, 
I learn something every day.”Aug 2014, Dave Hockaday: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/26/david-hockaday-leeds-united-champions-league>
“I appreciate you media guys have got stories to write and papers to sell or 
whatever, but the president’s great to work with - we talk about the way 
forward, and that makes me happy. I’m not just saying it, I mean it.”;Mar 2014, 
Brian McDermott: 
<http://www.yorkshireeveningpost.co.uk/sport/football/leeds-united/leeds-united-mac-gives-backing-to-cellino-takeover-1-6502677>
“We’ve had many conversations and he’s been nothing but supportive as far as 
I’m concerned. I’ve got to say that he knows his football, does Massimo.”

Moving on

• Romania, 7 Sep: Liga II side Pancota hire Italian coaches Giancarlo Oddi and 
Fausto Salfa to “turn it round” after running up an aggregate score from their 
first six league games of 1-56.14 Sep: Oddi and Salfa say they were “only 
visiting” and go home. Local media: “They came, they saw, they left.”

• Mexico, 12 Sep: Jaguares owner Carlos López Chargoy sacks his new coach José 
Cardozo after eight games for being “substandard”.13 Sep: Rehires him. “The 
players told me to. He’s got my full support.”

Fewest regrets

Argentina: Villa San Carlos keeper Gaston Sessa, 43, asked why he gave referee 
Julio Barraza “a quick strangle 
<https://twitter.com/AxelEBecker/status/775436375780892676>”. “He just brings 
it out of me. People think he’s a cool guy, but he’s not, he’s arrogant, he 
walks around in his pants before games and has a woman who carries his bag. Am 
I sorry? Forgiveness is something I ask of God, not of Barraza.”
La Pelota al 10 (@Lapelota10ok) 
AHORA | J.Barraza echó a Gastón Sessa y el arquero lo agarró del cuello al 
arbitro en#VillaSanCarlos <https://twitter.com/hashtag/VillaSanCarlos?src=hash>-
#TristanSuarez <https://twitter.com/hashtag/TristanSuarez?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/s4QSQzW9WP <https://t.co/s4QSQzW9WP>
 <https://twitter.com/Lapelota10ok/status/775435079250313216> September 12, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/Lapelota10ok/status/775435079250313216> 
Mama of the week 

Mexico: Monterrey’s Edwin Cardona issuing a video apology 
<https://twitter.com/Rayados/status/775914703247642624> after his mother 
“smacked down” a fan who booed him, leading to a club inquiry. “I am Edwin 
Cardona and I, in a respectful manner, offer an apology for what happened. Mama 
wrongly reacted to some bad words ... It won’t happen again.”

Most defiant

Greece: Larissa owner Alexis Kougias, denying he slapped keeper Matías Degra 
as punishment for an on-pitch gaffe,despite photos showing him do it 
<http://greece.greekreporter.com/2016/09/13/greek-football-club-owner-slaps-goalie-for-mistake-video/>
. “Nothing happened, so we move on. I’ve sacked him for being unprofessional.” 
Degra: “I’ve never been this sad.”

Most got at

Chile: Third tier Trasandino keeper Fabian Cerda, unhappy with viral video 
appearing to show adog saving a shot that had beaten him 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0a5KFUfKr4o>. “It was going wide, I left it on 
purpose. Now people say the dog saved the goal, the dog this, the dog that. It 
bothers me.”

Plus: most dedicated

Brazil: Miss Bumbum 2016 contender Danny Morais – cousin of 2015 finalist 
Sabrina Boing Boing – wrestling a steward at Grêmio beforechasing players 
across the pitch <https://twitter.com/SNewsGremio/status/775156522229825536>. 
“Of course I never expected such media attention from this. I only ever follow 
my heart.”
 