
Job of the week

Fifa’s ethics team: asked to rate the ethics behind Sepp Blatter, Jérôme 
Valcke and former finance director Markus Kattner sharing £55.7m in hidden 
bonuses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/09/fifa-opens-corruption-case-against-sepp-blatter-and-jerome-valcke>
. Lawyers called it a “coordinated effort at enrichment”; all three deny 
wrongdoing.

Fifa opens corruption case against Sepp Blatter and Jérôme Valcke
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/09/fifa-opens-corruption-case-against-sepp-blatter-and-jerome-valcke>
• Included in the £55.7m total 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/03/blatter-valcke-and-kattner-awarded-themselves-55m-in-bonuses-say-fifa-lawyers>
: a£17.8m three-way payout after 2010’s South Africa World Cup – a tournament 
Sepp pledged would end “old world” exploitation of the continent. “For 100 
years colonialists have only gone to Africa to exploit it, to take out all the 
best things, with no respect. Fifa is giving back.”

Meanwhile: fresh faces

a) Slovenia FA head Aleksander Ceferin – favourite to win Uefa’s presidency 
this week, thanks to the support of backers including Russia’s sports minister 
Vitaly Mutko. Mutko says voters should reject Ceferin’s rival,Michael van Praag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/07/fa-announce-backing-for-michael-van-praag-in-race-to-be-uefa-president>
, because “he caused splits in world football last year by speaking out against 
Blatter”.

b) And Qatar’s FA vice-chairman Saoud Al Mohannadi – aiming to win a seat on 
Fifa’s reform council despiteFifa opening ethics proceedings against him 
<http://www.insideworldfootball.com/2016/09/07/fifa-ethics-turn-al-mohannadi-case-formal-proceedings/>
 last week. He denies wrongdoing. “I am more convinced than ever of the value I 
have to offer.”

News cycle: moving on

2015: Barcelona president Josep Maria Bartomeu says they could drop Qatar as 
shirt sponsors 
<http://www.espnfc.com/barcelona/story/2267176/barcelona-reconsidering-qatar-sponsorship-josep-maria-bartomeu>
 due to the risk of reputational brand damage, citing “social and political 
issues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/may/20/slave-deaths-qatar-world-cup-2022-fifa>
”.2016: Barça open talks over a new four-year deal 
<http://www.football-espana.net/60895/barca-qatar-airways-deal-extension>.

Elsewhere: row of the week

Potential new Forest owner Evangelos Marinakis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/08/uefa-nottingham-forest-greece-evangelos-marinakis-olympiakos>
– reacting after an Athens prosecutor said he should be remanded in custody on 
disputed charges of fraud, extortion, bribery, running a match-fixing gang and 
having a referee’s bakery blown up. The Olympiakos owner says he’ll sue the 
prosecutor “for this brutal attack upon my person”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fsaid-and-done-sepp-blatter-ronaldinho-manchester-united-official-tractor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b1d12ecd7dc487beb244d10e43cb4fdd90a6fb2%2F0_28_3362_2017%2F3362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Said%20%26%20Done%3A%20Sepp%2C%20Ronaldinho%2C%20and%20Manchester%20United%E2%80%99s%20official%20tractor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fsaid-and-done-sepp-blatter-ronaldinho-manchester-united-official-tractor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Said%20%26%20Done%3A%20Sepp%2C%20Ronaldinho%2C%20and%20Manchester%20United%E2%80%99s%20official%20tractor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fsaid-and-done-sepp-blatter-ronaldinho-manchester-united-official-tractor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b1d12ecd7dc487beb244d10e43cb4fdd90a6fb2%2F0_28_3362_2017%2F3362.jpg>
 Evangelos Marinakis, centre. Photograph: Giorgos Mattheos/AFP/Getty Images 
Last week’s manager news

• Belgium, 9 Aug: Standard Liège executive Bob Claes rejects calls to sack 
coach Yannick Ferrera: “We don’t bother with what’s said and written, it’s just 
panic. Sacking a coach after two or three games would be totally 
over-emotional.”6 Sep: Sacks him after five.


• Italy: Palermo president Maurizio “Coach Eater” Zamparini, denying he forced 
out manager Davide Ballardini two games into the new season. “He walked out. 
He’s an unsatisfactory person. He texted to say: ‘I don’t agree with you, so 
I’m off.’ I’ll sue him for damages.” Zamparini says new coach Roberto De Zerbi 
is a “much better” long-term fit. “He has a winning mentality”.

• Bournemouth manager Eddie Howe 
<http://www.bournemouthecho.co.uk/SPORT/14730673.AFC_Bournemouth__Howe_dismisses_Arsenal_speculation_and_reaffirms_Cherries_loyalty/>
: “The speculation [over Arsenal] is meaningless. I don’t want to hear it, I 
don’t need to hear it. I’m loyal. I love this town”. (2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/jan/16/said-done-fifa-eddie-howe> – 
11 Jan:Howe turns down Palace: “It’d be very difficult to leave these players 
and fantastic supporters. I’m delighted to stay: there’s a good feeling in this 
town – it’s a joy to be around.”14 Jan: Joins Burnley.)

• England’s Sam Allardyce, two months into his £6m two-year FA contract: “It’s 
not for me to say where Wayne’s going to play.”

• And South Africa coach Shakes Mashaba, still feeling got at: “Criticism is 
everywhere. You’re criticised even if you are eating, people say you eat too 
much.” Last year he pledged to rise above it “like Jesus Christ himself. He 
went through it and just kept on preaching.”

PR news: big week for

Manchester United sponsors Apollo: upgraded from Official Tyre Partner to 
Official Global Tyre Partner 
<http://www.manutd.com/en/News-And-Features/Club-News/2016/Sep/Apollo-regional-deal-becomes-global-Official-Tyre-Partner-of-Manchester-United.aspx>
– alongside United’sOfficial Global Paint Partner, Official Global Noodle 
Partner, and Yanmar 
<http://www.manutd.com/en/News-And-Features/Club-News/2016/Mar/yanmar-extends-global-partnership-with-manchester-united.aspx>
, makers of theOfficial Tractor of Manchester United 
<https://twitter.com/NicoYork/status/774572562315669504?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>.
Craig Nicoll (@NicoYork) 
Modern football 🙈 #DerbyDay <https://twitter.com/hashtag/DerbyDay?src=hash> 
#Tractor <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Tractor?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/8kTK2h6Ia6 <https://t.co/8kTK2h6Ia6>
 <https://twitter.com/NicoYork/status/774572562315669504> September 10, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NicoYork/status/774572562315669504> 
Respect campaign news

Argentina: Fourth-tier game Tiro Federal versus Atenas de Río Cuarto ending 
early after referee Marcos Romerasent off eight Atenas players  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jJulsbuiueg>for “mauling me … When I got back 
in the changing room, their president came in and asked me to apologise to 
them. I can’t get my head round it.”

Saddest exit

Italy: Striker Dani Osvaldo, quitting football aged 30 to “focus on music 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/sport/football/news/former-southampton-striker-dani-osvaldo-8757536>
”, four months after Boca Juniors released him for “indiscipline” and smoking 
in the toilets. His vision when he joined Boca last year: “I’m here to lend a 
hand, with humility. I just hope it all goes well.”

The joke has been on Nicklas Bendtner for far too long | Daniel Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/10/nicklas-bendtner-ego-nottingham-forest>
Most picky

Ronaldinho: weighing up playing for one more year 
<http://www.sport-english.com/en/news/barca/ronaldinho-messis-the-best-his-time-and-was-the-best-mine-5366535>
 before he finishes. “Whatever I choose this year must be compatible with all 
my interests.” (Jan 2015: Mexican club Querétaro’s fitness coach reveals he 
gave Ronaldinho a tailored regime because “as a rule he does not do physical 
exercise - I cannot make him run because he doesn’t like it. There are many 
things he doesn’t like.”)

Coolest revenge

Italy: Sampdoria president Massimo Ferrero – reacting after Antonio Cassano 
ignored his advice to “get lost” in the transfer window. “He is not an 
intelligent person 
<http://www.football-italia.net/91100/ferrero-cassano-not-intelligent>. I spoke 
to him twice, then just gave up, so now it’s over. He’ll spend a year under a 
duvet and train in his socks.”

Plus: cameo of the week

Brazil: Stray dog Zulu - achieving meme status after chasing Goiás left-back 
Juninho <https://twitter.com/Esportudo/status/772070622394482688> during a 
Serie B game in Pelotas. Juninho said he panicked because “you can’t tell with 
dogs”; locals told RBS TV that Zulu is “just soppy … If he sees a ball, he goes 
chasing.”
Esportudo (@Esportudo) 
O cachorro que entrou ontem para trollar a comemoração do Goias. #futebol 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/futebol?src=hash> #goias 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/goias?src=hash> #cachorro 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/cachorro?src=hash> #cão 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/c%C3%A3o?src=hash> #invasao 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/invasao?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/L5554qINnd 
<https://t.co/L5554qINnd>
 <https://twitter.com/Esportudo/status/772070622394482688> September 3, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Esportudo/status/772070622394482688>  