
Best new brand

Fifa 2.0 
<http://www.fifa.com/about-fifa/news/y=2016/m=10/news=fifa-president-infantino-unveils-fifa-2-0-the-vision-for-the-future-2843428.html>
 – restoring “the image of Fifa and the respect of Fifa” with a focus on ethics 
and human rights. Week one’s highlight: confirmation that 2017’s congress will 
beheld in Bahrain 
<http://www.newsofbahrain.com/viewNews.php?ppId=25992&TYPE=Posts&pid=21&MNU=3&SUB=>
. Gianni Infantino: “It’s not just words, it’s actions.”

Meanwhile

Last week’s Fifa 1.0 news:
a) Former Thai FA head and Fifa executive Worawi Makudi given a five-year ban 
for forgery, buteyeing an appeal 
<http://www.bangkokpost.com/news/sports/1114545/worawi-plans-to-fight-against-fifa-ban>
. Makudi said last year he always stays upbeat, despite multiple fraud and 
bribe claims allegations: “I’m guilty of nothing.”

And b) extradited former Brazil FA head José Maria Marin, 84 - looking to rent 
out his £6m São Paulo mansion to fund the cost ofliving under house arrest  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/03/fifa-jose-maria-marin-extradited>
in his Trump Tower condo. Marin, who put up £12m bail last year, denies 
wrongdoing.

• Among Marin’s former Trump Tower neighbours: his former Fifa colleague Chuck 
Blazer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/03/fifa-chuck-blazer-bribes-world-cup>
, who rented his apartment for £11,700-a-month, and Blazer’s cats, who paid 
£3,900-a-month for theirs.

Plus: soundest vision

New Uefa head Aleksander Ceferin: a) looking to end football’s greed culture 
by bringing “winds of change”; and b) looking tomove the Champions League final 
to New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/20/uefa-president-champions-league-final-outside-europe>
. “We should think about other markets too.”

Sack Gary Lineker for a tweet? That’s the peevish cry of our toddler culture | 
Marina Hyde
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/21/sack-gary-lineker-tweet-the-sun-culture>
Elsewhere: big week for

The Sun - campaigning against “peddling migrant lies”, a year after retracting 
their “Six days to terror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/08/sun-apologises-over-misleading-six-days-to-terror-story#img-1>
” story about a reporter smuggling himself 2,000 miles through Europe without a 
passport: “Contrary to what we published, he used his passport.”

Result of the week

£19.6m: Man City’s pre-tax profit 
<https://www.ft.com/content/5214f452-951b-11e6-a80e-bcd69f323a8b>. £20.5m: Man 
City’s post-tax profit, via a £894k deferred credit for historical losses.

Bravest stand

Tory MPs Andrew Bingham and Jason McCartney – using last week’s select 
committee appearance by FA chairman Greg Clarke 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/sport/football/news/fa-chiefs-insulted-fans-giving-9065821>
 to attack the “avaricious” football industry for starving grassroots. Bingham: 
“My overriding concern is that this is the people’s game and it seems that is 
being taken away … it’s sickening for grassroots.” McCartney: “I have local 
clubs that are struggling to get enough money to pay for nets.” (6.7% – 
government cuts to council funding to 2020,on top of 30% cuts since 2010 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-35633213>.)

Best intentions

Italy: Sampdoria owner Massimo Ferrero – apologising to fans for saying no one 
had heard of the club “until I bought it”: “It was not my intention to offend 
the fans, the truest soul of Sampdoria.”• His previous best clarifications: 2014
, after calling Inter’s Indonesian owner Erick Thohir “that Filipino 
<http://www.football-italia.net/57784/ferrero-racist-gaffe-thohir>”: “It was 
not my intention to disrespect Mr Thohir or the people of the Philippines, with 
whom I have a wonderful rapport.”2015, after saying Catania’s match-fixing 
president “must die, don’t just throw away the key,he must die 
<http://www.football-italia.net/68560/ferrero-%E2%80%98pulvirenti-should-die%E2%80%99>
”: “It was never my intention to suggest he should die. It was allegorical.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fsaid-and-done-football-diary-fifa-migrant-lies-dive-of-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F704274d5c974feb807471cb61bac7821a654fad1%2F280_42_2491_1494%2F2491.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Said%20%26%20Done%3A%20Fifa%202.0%3B%20peddling%20migrant%20lies%3B%20and%20dive%20of%20the%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fsaid-and-done-football-diary-fifa-migrant-lies-dive-of-the-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Said%20%26%20Done%3A%20Fifa%202.0%3B%20peddling%20migrant%20lies%3B%20and%20dive%20of%20the%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fsaid-and-done-football-diary-fifa-migrant-lies-dive-of-the-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F704274d5c974feb807471cb61bac7821a654fad1%2F280_42_2491_1494%2F2491.jpg>
 Massimo Ferrero: best intentions. Photograph: Tullio M. Puglia/Getty Images 
Manager news

Germany, 5 Oct: Wolfsburg director Klaus Allofs says there’s “no decision to 
make” on manager Dieter Hecking: “Of course I can understand why the question 
comes up, of course I can understand why there’s public pressure – but I won’t 
be swayed.”16 Oct: Sways. 17 Oct: Sacks him 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-soccer-germany-wolfsburg-hecking-idUKKBN12H1ZG>
.

Most committed

Trinidad midfielder Kevin Molino – clarifying his world view 
<http://www.newsday.co.tt/sport/0,234764.html> after being fined twice for 
breaking pre-match curfews - once to go clubbing, once to go on a boat cruise: 
“Playing the beautiful game is all that matters to me. I’m 100% committed.”

Most put upon

Germany: Hamburg keeper René Adler, facing the cameras after a 3-0 home defeat 
left them bottom: “We slaughtered ourselves. What can I say? Once again here I 
am, standing here. I don’t want to be the arsehole who ends up having to 
explain it every week. I don’t want to do it. It pisses me off. ”

Said & Done: Karl Oyston, Fifa 2.0, and the Golden Bin awards
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/16/said-and-done-karl-oyston-gianni-infantino-football-diary-fifa>
Surprise news

Ronaldinho – hired as a global ambassador for Barcelona last week to expand 
the brand – missing his first Barça event andposting a photo of himself on a 
beach <https://www.instagram.com/p/BLl2aDThiFU/?taken-by=ronaldinhooficial> 
instead. Reports say officials “expressed surprise”.

Strongest stance

Paraguay: Model Vane Trinidad, unhappy with press links to players: 
“Footballers have only the most rudimentary personalities: foul-mouthed, 
ill-educated, base. I find them repellent. They chat at me and say ‘come and 
see me train’ or ‘I’m in the first team’, then wait for me to say ‘wow’. If 
they were a Nasa engineer then maybe I say ‘wow’. But a soccer player? Are they 
serious?”

Plus: most synchronised

Brazil: Vila Nova defender Marcelo Cordeiro, “unsettled” after a clip of him 
and Goias forward Rossipretending to have been headbutted by each other 
<https://twitter.com/goleada_info/status/787393451457441792?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
 went viral. “Simulation isn’t cool, I know that, but I couldn’t take the risk 
of not doing it. That’s just life. That’s the game we’re in.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D26FvVWD1fEE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D26FvVWD1fEE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D26FvVWD1fEE&media=> 