
Man of the week

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Fsaid-and-done-sebastian-coe-fifa-iaaf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa762f952af1c5182b6efe94c8d23a9285fa417da%2F1284_261_2004_3007%2F2004.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Said%20%26%20Done%3A%20Lord%20Coe%3B%20Roma's%20scapegoat%3B%20and%20a%20taste%20of%20onions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Fsaid-and-done-sebastian-coe-fifa-iaaf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Said%20%26%20Done%3A%20Lord%20Coe%3B%20Roma%27s%20scapegoat%3B%20and%20a%20taste%20of%20onions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Fsaid-and-done-sebastian-coe-fifa-iaaf%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa762f952af1c5182b6efe94c8d23a9285fa417da%2F1284_261_2004_3007%2F2004.jpg>
Sebastian Coe: using his experience as head of Fifa’s ethics committee between 
2006 and 2008 to nail the line on the IAAF crisis. Wednesday: “There was no 
cover-up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/13/no-cover-up-sebastian-coe-new-report-athletics-doping-iaaf>
”. Thursday: “There was a cover-up. We’re not in denial.”

• Coe’s best moment as head of Fifa’s transparent ethics team: handling a 2007 
Panorama investigation 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/programmes/panorama/7061626.stm> into Jack Warner. 
Journalist Andrew Jennings: “Lord Coe, good morning, BBC Panorama.” Coe: “Good 
morning.” Jennings: “Lord Coe, just a moment, could you reconsider your refusal 
to grant us an interview?” Coe: [Ignores him and greets officials] “Hello, how 
are you?”

Meanwhile: candidate of the week

New era contender Tokyo Sexwale - “my watchword is transparency 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-34868723>” – on why the press should 
lay off Sepp and Michel Platini 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-soccer-fifa-sexwale-idUSKCN0UQ01820160112>: 
“It is not like they’ve murdered or committed genocide. It’s a game.” His view 
on Sepp’s record: “Blatter’s work is a monument that stands for itself. It is a 
mountain that cannot be moved.”

Also last week from the family: 
• Guatemala’s Brayan Jiménez, a serving member of Fifa’s Fair Play and Social 
Responsibility committee 
<http://www.fifa.com/about-fifa/committees/committee=1903155/>, picked up by 
police after five weeks on the run.Jiménez told reporters outside court 
<https://twitter.com/soy_502/status/687017755174899713> he didn’t hand himself 
in because “I was in my cups … I like being drunk”. He denies all charges.

• Honduras official Alfredo Hawit, who took over Concacaf in May pledging to 
save it from fraud 
<http://www.concacaf.com/article/concacaf-announces-actions-taken-by-executive-committee>
, appearing in court to deny12 counts 
<http://www.insideworldfootball.com/world-football/football-americas/18664-concacaf-s-hawit-pleads-not-guilty-to-bribes-in-brooklyn-court>
 of fraud, racketeering, money laundering and “conspiracy to tamper with 
witnesses”.

• And Ghana’s FA president Kwesi Nyantakyi, who denies multiple allegations 
<http://ghanasoccernet.com/ghana-fa-boss-kwesi-nyantakyi-reveals-lack-of-funds-has-delayed-him-from-suing-uk-newspaper-over-match-fixing-allegation>
, feeling pleased to topa recent poll 
<http://www.ghanaweb.com/GhanaHomePage/NewsArchive/It-s-an-honour-to-be-the-most-insulted-GFA-boss-Nyantakyi-407232>
: “I feel honoured to be the most insulted football personality in the country. 
That may even win me some sympathy.”

Elsewhere: giving back

Mike Ashley – chastened by Newcastle fans unfurling a #SportsDirectShame banner
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/12/newcastle-united-fans-unfurl-protest-banner-against-mike-ashleys-sports-direct>
 to protest against his firm using poverty wages to fund bulk discounts – 
offering fans afree overstocked jacket 
<http://www.whoateallthepies.tv/kits/231059/newcastle-fans-take-offence-as-club-attempt-sports-direct-jacket-giveaway-on-twitter.html>
 from Sports Direct “worth £59.99 each 
<https://twitter.com/thenufcben/status/687721574846312448>”.

Most misunderstood

Portugal: Cristiano Ronaldo’s sister Katia Aveiro – fighting a “manipulated” 
backlash after she called vandals who graffitied a statue of her brother
“savages who deserve to live in Syria 
<http://www.itv.com/news/2016-01-13/cristiano-ronaldos-sister-says-vandals-deserve-to-live-in-syria/>
”. Aveiro said she was just trying to compare the war in Syria with “CR7 
haters” because both disputes “could be solved” if they just “sat down to 
talk”. “I never want anything bad for anyone.”

Stability news

Jan 2015: Charlton’s chief executive Katrien Meire rejects talk of instability 
after unveiling the club’s fourth manager in 12 months. “I want Guy Luzon to be 
the next Sir Alex Ferguson 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/sport/football/charlton-chief-executive-katrien-meire-fans-must-accept-how-we-run-club-9981096.html>
. Our recent actions have shown a sense of decisiveness.”Jan 2016: Charlton 
unveil their third coach in 12 months after three months with an interim - 
backtracking on appointing Serbian Nebojsa Vignjevic torehire José Riga instead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/14/charlton-reappoint-jose-riga-head-coach>
. Owner Roland Duchâtelet: “He will get us back on track 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/16/hull-charlton-championship-match-report>
.”

Also in control

Palermo president Maurizio Zamparini, making a tidy start to 2016. 21 Dec: 
Rules out re-hiring recently-sacked Beppe Iachini to replace Davide Ballardini. 
“Ballardini has my confidence.”10 Jan: Stays cool after Ballardini clashes with 
players: “I will not sack Ballardini for now, even though I could.”11 Jan: 
Sacks Ballardini for “committing career suicide”, reveals he pulled out of 
re-hiring Iachini after the coach “lost his humility”, andhires Guillermo 
Barros Schelotto instead 
<http://www.football-italia.net/78274/zamparini-palermo-chaos>. Zamparini: “I’m 
the victim in all this.”

José Mourinho left in managerial no man’s land with no clear way out | Daniel 
Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/16/jose-mourinho-manchester-united-daniel-taylor>
Also making moves: 
• Bristol City owner Steve Lansdown, 21 Dec: 
<http://www.bristolpost.co.uk/BRISTOL-CITY/story-28396798-detail/story.html> 
“Steve Cotterill is the man at the helm taking us forward. I’m not discussing 
his position. Steve has done a great job… his record speaks for itself.”14 Jan: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/14/bristol-city-sack-manager-steve-cotterill>
 Sacks him.

• Italy, Sep: Roma president James Pallotta says he’s “delighted” to back 
coach Rudi García, and sets out the fundamental problem with fans. 
“Unfortunately, from time to time the fans look for a scapegoat - and this time 
it’s Rudi.”Dec: Looks for a scapegoat 
<http://www.fourfourtwo.com/news/pallotta-apologises-roma-fans-after-spezia-shock#:XKDWwPRwVKpw3A>
.Jan: Finds one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/13/roma-sack-coach-rudi-garcia-serie-a>
.

Best sales strategy

Nigerian club Kano Pillars, rethinking their language a day after 
transfer-listing 10 players for being “aged and unproductive”. The new line: 
“We are grateful for their contributions. They are good, but surplus to 
requirements at this time.”

Plus: most sharing

Argentina: Diego Maradona’s former partner Veronica Ojeda, asked by TV show 
Infamato score him out of 10 for intimacy: “How many points would I give to 
Diego? One thousand, of course. It’s one of the things I valued most – we 
showed a lot of skin.”

• Diego’s previous best review: 2009 – Uruguayan model Natalia Rosas, 
reminiscing while posing for a photoshoot with the letter “M” sprayed on a 
buttock. “He said he was nervous, so I clasped his hands to my chest and we 
embraced. This time he stole a kiss. It left me with a taste of onions, but no 
matter. This continued, then suddenly I heard a loud noise. I thought it was 
the chair creaking. But no. Diego had broken wind. He became yet more nervous, 
but never begged my pardon… It didn’t matter though. He is a romantic, a deep 
thinker. Oh, what a night!”
 