
Quote of the week

 Brazil FA head Marco Polo Del Nero – telling Chapecoense 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/30/chapecoense-soccer-team-chapeco-brazil-fans>
 to fulfil their final league game. Acting club president Ivan Tozzo: “I told 
him we don’t have 11 players left. He said: ‘Yes you do, reserves, injured 
players. Use them, make up the rest with kids.’”

Bodies of Chapecoense players killed in plane crash returned to Brazil
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/03/bodies-chapecoense-football-team-killed-plane-crash-returned-brazil>
• Del Nero’s vision for the game against Atlético-MG, according to Tozzo: “He 
said we need ‘a big party’ to honour the dead.” Chapecoense officialVictor Hugo 
Nascimento 
<http://esportes.estadao.com.br/noticias/futebol,chapecoense-avisa-que-nao-enfrentara-o-atletico-mg-e-critica-festa-da-cbf,10000091973>
: “The fixture won’t be happening. Del Nero even used the word ‘party’. Party? 
What sort of party is this?”

• Also keen to move on: Internacional vice-president Fernando Carvalho – 
unhappy with the final round of fixtures being delayed by a week. “We send 
solidarity, but this hurts us. We have our own tragedy to deal with here: 
escaping relegation.”Carvalho later apologised 
<http://torcedores.com/noticias/2016/11/fernando-carvalho-admite-erro-ao-comparar-fuga-do-rebaixamento-do-inter-com-tragedia-vivida-pela-chapecoense>
 for “my unfortunate choice of word”.

Other news: strongest line

Chelsea – warning fans off “abhorrent” racist abuse. “Such behaviour has no 
place in our stadium or society. Chelsea is proud of our diversity and our 
vision embraces equality … If we receive evidence of discriminatory behaviour 
of any type we will take the strongest action, including criminal prosecution.”
2012: 
<http://www.skysports.com/football/news/11668/8175054/chelsea-take-disciplinary-action-on-john-terry-but-it-will-remain-confidential>
 “Chelsea appreciates, and supports, John’s full apology for the language used.”

Warmest embrace

Germany: Bayern Munich members reacting to ex-president Uli Hoeness finishing 
his jail term for“particularly grave” €28.5m tax fraud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/13/uli-hoeness-sentenced-three-and-a-half-years-prison-tax-evasion-germany>
 by voting him back in for a second term, with a 98.5% majority. Hoeness: “I 
made a mistake – but I’ve earned another chance.”

Also starting over

Bolivia’s FA: reshaped last year to deliver transparency after former 
president Carlos Chávez wasremanded on organised crime charges 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/news/bolivian-judge-remands-conmebol-treasurer-custody-224444846--sow.html>
. The new FA board’s progress since then: a) secretary Walter Torrico remanded 
on fraud charges; b) new president Rolando López put under house arrest for 
alleged forgery. All deny wrongdoing.

Best story arc

Fifa.com, 2005: 
<http://www.fifa.com/about-fifa/news/y=2006/m=1/news=ecuador-hoping-harness-finals-fever-102448.html>
 Ecuador’s FA headLuis Chiriboga hosts a Fifa “Com-Unity” seminar on how 
football’s resources can benefit society, featuring guests from Unicef and SOS 
Children’s Villages. “A sense of optimism was palpable as the curtain came down 
on the event.”2016: 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-soccer-fifa-ecuador-idUKKBN13E044> Chiriboga 
sentenced to 10 years for laundering $6.12m.

Most sincere

South Sudan FA president Chabur Goc, reacting online 
<http://www.supersport.com/football/africa/news/161202/Chabur_Goc_steps_down_from_football>
 to colleagues suspending him for alleged embezzlement, which he denies. 
“Thanks dear comrades for your decision. I thought we would finish the journey 
together, but it’s okay and it’s my pleasure to be killed by friends’ bullets 
rather than an enemy’s. I really thank you, from the bottom of my heart.”

And weighing it all up

Ghana: Club owner Isaac Tetteh, reflecting on the state of the football family 
<http://www.footballghana.com/latest-news/isaac-tetteh-claims-90-football-administrators-bound-miss-heaven/>
. “90% of football administrators will not go to heaven. But I don’t indulge 
myself in the scheming things that the others do, therefore I believe strongly 
that even if it happens that every football administrator misses out on heaven, 
I, Isaac Tetteh, will be passed fit to enter the holy land.’’

Elsewhere: still got it

Italy: Palermo president Maurizio Zamparini - facing down more press lies. 
28 Nov: “To stop these untrue reports I talked to our coach Mr De Zerbi and I 
will keep him. That is my decision.”30 Nov: Sacks him after a cup defeat. 
“Pitiful match, pitiful coach. I call it gross misconduct.”

• Next for Palermo – Eugenio Corini, Zamparini’s third coach this season. 
Corini: “I’m happy and excited. I still haven’t met the president, but I was 
delighted by his invitation.”Zamparini’s view 
<http://www.football-italia.net/95093/zamparini-%E2%80%98i-had-no-choice%E2%80%99>
: “Corini? There wasn’t much on the market.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fsaid-and-done-football-diary-marco-polo-del-nero%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F795532646c056cb8b93f49aa74e7d668a35da0f0%2F400_41_1264_758%2F1264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Said%20%26%20Done%3A%20%E2%80%98He%20used%20the%20word%20'party'.%20Party%3F%20What%20sort%20of%20party%20is%20this%3F%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fsaid-and-done-football-diary-marco-polo-del-nero%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Said%20%26%20Done%3A%20%E2%80%98He%20used%20the%20word%20%27party%27.%20Party%3F%20What%20sort%20of%20party%20is%20this%3F%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fsaid-and-done-football-diary-marco-polo-del-nero%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F795532646c056cb8b93f49aa74e7d668a35da0f0%2F400_41_1264_758%2F1264.jpg>
 Maurizio Zamparini: still got it. Photograph: Tullio M. Puglia/Getty Images 
Also moving on

a) Martin Allen, resigning at Barnet again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/01/martin-allen-barnet-eastleigh>
, four months afterextending his contract 
<http://www.barnetfc.com/news/article/2016-17/martin-allen-signs-a-new-deal-3213626.aspx>
: “Someone asked me how long this contract is for… I don’t even know! I think 
I’m here forever now, God bless.”

b) 30 Oct: Hearts manager Robbie Neilson on links with Villa. “It’s just paper 
talk. My sole focus is here at Hearts. I’ve still got a huge job to do: we’ve a 
long way to go and I want to be part of it.” 2 Dec: Joins MK Dons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/01/robbie-neilson-mk-dons-manager-terms-agreed-hearts>
.

c) 15 Nov, Brazil: São Paulo president Leco “guarantees” Ricardo Gomes will be 
the club’s coach in 2017: “Everything changes quickly in football, but not 
this.”23 Nov: Sacks him 
<https://twitter.com/dbatista31/status/801445753814192128>.

Said & Done: ‘I’m all for Trump, and I wish him all the best’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/13/said-and-done-donald-trump-ed-glazer-jack-warner-football-diary>
d) Paraguay, 19 Nov: Olimpia president Marco Trovato bars journalist John 
Walter Ferrari from all club premises for suggesting he plans to sack coach 
Fernando Jubero. “The media seek to destabilise us with lies! Olimpia is 
strong, we go forward together.”20 Nov: Jubero sacked after another defeat; 
Ferrari watches training bystanding on a pick-up truck to look over the wall 
<https://twitter.com/Elgroseroese/status/801029514977542144>.

Most got at

France: Toulouse coach Pascal Dupraz – upset by criticism of his reaction to a 
paper plane brushing his head <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ldg_DZLorkA> 
last month. “It hit me, it could have been anything. All these critics, they’re 
so brave.”

Best strategy

Malawi: Civo Service United vice secretary Richard Chiwaula, going public with 
their survival plan 
<https://malawi24.com/2016/12/01/mulowelerepo-ambuye-civo-seek-gods-intervention/>
. “We offered the players more perks and still they lose… So now we ask God to 
help. We’re seeking his intervention.” Manager Charles Manda: “I’m optimistic.”

Plus: worst bobble

Serbia: Lokomotiv’s Milan Djuricic, asked about going viral with an open-goal 
miss from 50cm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/nov/22/fk-lokomotiv-djuricic-serbian-open-goal-video>
. “It bobbled and I was excited, so I kicked it over. What a lesson for my 
life.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Ffk-lokomotiv-djuricic-serbian-open-goal-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Serbian%20player's%20extraordinary%20open-goal%20miss%20from%20two%20yards%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Ffk-lokomotiv-djuricic-serbian-open-goal-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Serbian%20player%27s%20extraordinary%20open-goal%20miss%20from%20two%20yards%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Ffk-lokomotiv-djuricic-serbian-open-goal-video&media=>
Serbian player’s extraordinary open-goal miss from two yards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/nov/22/fk-lokomotiv-djuricic-serbian-open-goal-video> 