
Line of the week

Sun columnist 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/1892976/greedy-sam-allardyce-only-has-himself-to-blame-after-throwing-away-the-job-of-his-dreams/>
Karren Brady on the game’s greed culture: “Allardyce lost his credibility… And 
for what? A greedy top-up and a help-yourself bonus that reveals a staggering 
sense of entitlement. I guess this is what they call chickens coming home to 
roost.” 

West Ham’s stadium move and ‘rebrand’ a success, insists Karren Brady
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/05/west-ham-karren-brady-stadium-move>
• Brady’s other priority last week: defending the stadium move that earned her 
areported £1m bonus 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sport/sportsnews/article-3539575/West-Ham-pay-2-5m-year-play-Olympic-Stadium-extra-1m-win-Champions-League.html>
 -telling an industry event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/05/west-ham-karren-brady-stadium-move>
 how West Ham fans were loving her work: “We’re offering fans a more dynamic 
product at an inferior price. It’s been so well received.” Also giving fans a 
lift: “We’re now ranked 15th in terms of brand values. We were 115th when I 
joined.”

Other news: best gesture

Arsenal majority owner Stan Kroenke – waiving his annual £3m “advice” fee 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sport/football/article-3822141/Arsenal-axe-3m-Stan-Kroenke-fee-outraged-supporters-question-legality.html>
. Chairman Sir Chips Keswickset out last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/15/arsenal-chairman-agm-fans-demand-answers-payment>
 what advice the club had got for its £6m so far: “Good advice. Good advice is 
where you can get it and how you get it and if you get good advice then you 
succeed. You cannot codify how many times we have taken advice or how we have 
taken it. I will make no attempt to do so.”

Swings and roundabouts

£5m: Amount Wayne Rooney aims to raise for Alder Hey hospital and other UK 
charities in his testimonial year. “It’s very important I use my status to help 
others,and it’s an honour to do so 
<http://www.officialwaynerooney.com/news/wayne-rooney-testimonial-q-and-a/>.” 
£12.5m:Amount he reportedly sheltered in a suspected tax avoidance scheme 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/rooney-faces-3-5m-bill-through-tax-avoidance-gnfzl7v8t?shareToken=90d06256314f14b701481c2811334937>
 being investigated by HMRC. Rooney’s spokesman: “Wayne’s tax affairs have 
always been conducted in full compliance with the law.”

Politics latest

Last week’s football family headlines:
a) Uefa rejecting allegations 
<http://www.espnfc.com/blog/uefa/258/post/2966692/fifa-president-gianni-infantino-may-face-new-ethics-committee-investigation>
 that a €4m loan they gave Slovenia’s FA in 2015 breached their ethics code. 
Uefa say the loan – paid when Gianni Infantino ran Uefa and his successor, 
Aleksander Ceferin, ran Slovenia’s FA - was “fully legitimate”. All parties 
deny wrongdoing.

2) Ghana FA head Kwesi Nyantakyi winning a seat 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/football/37494592> on Fifa’s new executive council 
to help drive change, having passed ethics checks.In August 
<http://starrfmonline.com/1.9754597> he told those who keep accusing him of 
corruption to back off. “It’s all envy, pettiness and what have you. I haven’t 
done any wrong, so if you accuse me then the old man upstairs will judge you. 
Those who pursue falsehood, one day will pay. You will see it.”

Meanwhile: kicking it out

Russia 2018 head Alexei Sorokin, reacting to negative press after a banana was 
thrown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/29/russia-banana-throwing-racism-football-champions-league>
 on to the pitch at FC Rostov. The incident came three weeks after Rostov’s
latest Uefa racism sanction 
<http://www.espnfc.co.uk/uefa-champions-league/story/2946288/uefa-deals-partial-stadium-ban-to-rostov-for-fan-racism>
 and two years after club coach Igor Gamulatold reporters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/12/rostov-coach-five-game-ban-racism>
: “We’ve got enough black players, we’ve got six of the things and you want me 
to sign a seventh?” Sorokin said the banana was a “one-off”.

Plus: how racism works

Ecuador FA disciplinary committee head Álex de la Torre 
<http://www.elcomercio.com/deportes/futbol-fef-alexdelatorre-sancion-damiandiaz.html>
, setting out why midfielder Damián Díaz wasn’t given an extended racism ban 
for calling an official “a black twat”: “It can’t be considered racism, because 
this official is indeed black. Listen, understand it like this: if a white 
person is called a ‘white twat’ is that racist? No. So if a person of the black 
persuasion is described by the colour of his skin, why is that racist? When I 
say to my coloured friend, ‘black this, black that’, he doesn’t mind. Likewise, 
this official shouldn’t be offended. It’s a fact: his race is black.”

Manager news

Derby County part company with manager Nigel Pearson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/08/derby-county-part-company-nigel-pearson>
This month’s moves so far:
• Italy: Giuseppe Iachini, sacked for the third time in less than a year 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-soccer-italy-udi-idUKKCN1220W0> – leaving 
Udinese after eight games, having been sacked twice last season by Palermo 
either side of a reinstatement. Udinese director Franco Collavino: “We do not 
believe in wasting time.”

• 27 Sept: Villa owner @Dr_TonyXia 
<https://twitter.com/dr_tonyxia/status/780761174237261825> reacts to press 
reports that Roberto Di Matteo has two games to save his job: “As always, the 
media knew something I would do that even I myself don’t know.”Two games later: 
“It was difficult … butrather sooner than later 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/03/aston-villa-roberto-di-matteo-sacked>
.”

• 23 Sept: Cardiff manager Paul Trollope: “The people upstairs have been very 
supportive through the week <http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/football/37451122>, the 
chairman and the board … and that’s appreciated because I think in the modern 
game that’s not always the case.”4 Oct: They sack him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/04/cardiff-city-sack-manager-paul-trollope-poor-start-championship>
.

• Italy, 28 Sept: Vicenza director Antonio Tesoro on coach Franco Lerda: “His 
future isn’t even up for discussion. Let’s get some joy back in this place, 
let’s show some patience.”3 Oct: “We thank Lerda for his work 
<http://www.vicenzacalcio.com/comunicato-ufficiale-franco-lerda/>.”

Employer of the week

France: Montpellier owner Louis “Loulou” Nicollin, 73, conducting a staff 
appraisal of his player recruitment team: “Incompetent clowns, big idiots. I’m 
sorry to speak like that, but there it is. I’ve been telling them to get a 
defender for three years. They can’t find one. They have to be sacked, and I’ll 
do it. Oh yes, I’ll do it.”


One to watch

Diego Maradona – set to take part in this week’s Papal “Match for Peace” in 
Rome. His previous Match for Peace highlight: 2015, telling fans before 
kick-off in Colombia: “I pray to God for peace, I want peace with all my heart, 
an end to violence”. His post-match message: an apology for assaulting a 
14-year-old boy during an on-pitch brawl. “Forgive me, man 
<http://colombia.as.com/colombia/2015/04/14/futbol/1429040154_308142.html>. I 
never slap kids.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkNaJwPiYOnY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkNaJwPiYOnY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkNaJwPiYOnY&media=>
Ruse of the week

Chile: Top tier Colo-Colo, looking to fix their form with reported “basic 
witchcraft <http://redgol.cl/2016/9/pablo-guede-esparcio-vinagre-y-planto-ocho/>
” – planting “eight superstitious bushes” and having staff “smear eight litres 
of vinegar over the locker room with rags”. Coach Pablo Guede: “It’s not my 
idea, but it’s normal.”

• Local spiritualist Yolanda Sultana <http://yolandasultana.cl/> told 
reporters the club had made mistakes: “They needed garlic too … flowers, 
vinegar, herbs and rice. I’m the godmother of Colo-Colo, I’m surprised they 
didn’t ask.”

Plus: most relieved

Brazilian side Grêmio, cleared of wrongdoing by the FA after a pitch invasion 
by Miss Bumbum model Danny Morais 
<https://twitter.com/SNewsGremio/status/775156522229825536> last month. Morais: 
“I feel so relieved. I’m sad that I have to attend the police station during 
games now, but at least Grêmio are absolved. What a relief for my heart.”
 