
Quote of the week

Uefa – reviewing “misleading” press treatment of the Panama Papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers>, 24 hours before police 
raided its offices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/06/uefa-offices-raided-swiss-police-panama-papers-gianni-infantino>
 on suspicion of “criminal mismanagement and misappropriation”: “This is a sad 
day for journalism 
<http://www.uefa.org/about-uefa/news/newsid=2349557.html#uefa+statement+cross+trading+contract>
.”

Mossack Fonseca: inside the firm that helps the super-rich hide their money
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/08/mossack-fonseca-law-firm-hide-money-panama-papers>
• Also not buying last week’s media work: 
a) Ex-Fifa general secretary Jérôme Valcke – dismissing controversy around his 
use of Mossack Fonseca to create and then be installed as hidden owner of a
legal offshore company <http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/football/35954640> used to 
buy a€2.8m 104ft yacht 
<https://twitter.com/richard_conway/status/716706366891679744> as: “a joke ... 
a non‑story <http://fusion.net/story/287172/fifa-dirty-money-yacht/>”; and b) 
Fifa ethics judgeJuan Pedro Damiani – resigning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/06/fifa-ethics-committee-member-juan-pedro-damiani-resigns-panama-papers>
 after the documents pointed to business links with an indicted Fifa money 
launderer – but denying the “baseless media allegations” against him. “My good 
name has been sullied.”

• Damiani’s previous biggest media setback: 2014 – issuing a clarification 
after he tried to end a Uruguayan live radio phone-in interview early,failed to 
hang up properly 
<http://www.espectador.com/deportes/304004/damiani-sobre-sonsol-este-es-un-judio-de-mierda>
 and was heard calling the host “a dirty Jew”. Damiani: “This unfortunate 
phrase reflects neither my thoughts, nor my values.”

Other news: racism latest

Also fighting sad journalism last week – Israel’s Beitar Jerusalem (favourite 
chants: “Death to Arabs” and “Here we are, the most racist club in the country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/video/2015/nov/24/beitar-jerusalem-most-racist-football-team-israel-video>
”)banning newspaper Haaretz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/08/israels-beitar-jerusalem-bans-haaretz-reporters-racism-row>
for calling them racist. Club spokesman Oshri Dudai: “Haaretz won’t let facts 
get in their way.”

Setback of the week

Nigeria FA head Amaju Pinnick: sacked by the federal high court  
<http://pulse.ng/sports/football/amaju-pinnick-court-sack-nff-boss-giwa-now-president-id4896780.html>
in a row over his 2014 FA election win – a result ratified by Fifa despite 
claims the vote was “violent and abusive”. Pinnick’s 2014 message to critics: 
“My election was ordained by God … and football is the winner.”

PR news

Managing crises last week:
a) Aston Villa – reacting to fans staging protests 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/sport/football/news/aston-villa-fans-protest-during-7675910>
 against the club’s “out of touch” US ownership byrebranding their badge 
<http://www.avfc.co.uk/page/NewsDetail/0,,10265~5475744,00.html>; and b) Leeds 
– taking no action over owner Massimo Cellino’s son Edoardo calling a fan a
“spastic” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/06/fa-charge-leeds-edoardo-cellino-offensive-comment-fan>
 on Facebook. (Leeds’online customer charter [pdf] 
<http://www.leedsunited.com/i/leeds/siteDocs/201516-Customer-Charter.pdf>: “The 
club takes the issue of language causing offence seriously … our aim is an 
enjoyable and positive atmosphere.”)

Money news: best negotiator

Agent Dimitri Seluk 
<https://twitter.com/ManCityTurkiye/status/694473463134842880> and client Yaya 
Touré – the story so far:

• Nov 2009: Seluk sends Manchester City a message 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/sport/football/premier-league/barcelonas-tour-hints-at-united-or-chelsea-move-1821782.html>
: “Yaya is not happy at Barcelona … but he would not go to Manchester City. 
He’s only considering really big teams.”Jul 2010: City offer a five-year, 
£185,000-a-week deal.Yaya signs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/jul/02/yaya-toure-manchester-city>.

• May 2012: Seluk: “Touré has now done all he can at Manchester City and needs 
new motivations. He would like a new challenge.” Touré receives assurances.

• Mar 2013: Seluk: “We have been discussing a new deal since last September. 
These people keep negotiating and negotiating, it’s not normal.Yaya feels it is 
disrespectful 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/sport/football/4850280/Yaya-Toure-heading-for-Man-City-exit-on-principle.html>
. He does not feel the respect of the staff and wants to leave. City pay big 
money, but don’t understand that human relations mean more than anything. This 
is not about money.”Apr 2013: City offer a £220,000-a-week four-year extension 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/football/22032500.app>. Touré: “City is where I 
want to be. I will never forget how I have been treated here by the fans, the 
club and the owners.”

• May 2014: Seluk: “There is a big possibility Yaya will leave. He is very 
upset. What happened at his birthday means the club don’t care about him. It 
was proof. They can say whatever they want, ‘Oh we like him but we forgot’. 
Forgot? About Yaya? City make him feel like nobody. He’s very upset and he 
started thinking about leaving. We’re not doing this for more money.”

• Feb 2015: “I want City to give Yaya a new contract, just to show him they 
want him. It is not about money.”

• Apr 2016: “We have waited too long. City fail to show they appreciate him … 
He will leave in the summer,I can calmly confirm this 
<http://www.eurosport.co.uk/football/serie-a/2011-2012/yaya-toure-definitely-leaving-manchester-city-says-agent_sto5421810/story.shtml>
. Various offers have arrived for Yaya. Will the economic aspect make the 
difference? Absolutely not. We don’t put money first.”
BlueMoonRisingTV (@BMRisingTV) 
If you ever wondered why Yaya does what he does, well here's your answer. 
Dimitri Seluk, ladies and gents.pic.twitter.com/5TcBlHVTVe 
<https://t.co/5TcBlHVTVe>
 <https://twitter.com/BMRisingTV/status/716942971007053824> April 4, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/BMRisingTV/status/716942971007053824> 
Most respectful

Brazil: Minas Gerais club Tricordiano 
<https://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clube_Atl%C3%A9tico_Tricordiano> – given a 
stadium ban after president Gustavo Vinagre told a referee: “You’re a thief, 
I’m a bandit, I’ll fill your car with bullets”. Officials also recorded abuse 
and threats from other staff “including ballboys”; the league called it “a 
matter of deep regret”.

Best rethink

Romania: Botosani owner Valeriu Iftime – rehiring Leo Grozavu, seven months 
after sacking the coach for pledging to “beat” and “kill” his “cretin … devil’s 
butthead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/12/said-and-done-aliens-jeans-cristiano-ronaldo>
” players mid-match. Iftime: “Leo returns. I believe in his ability to 
motivate.”

Making changes

Germany: 16 Feb, Hannover 96 owner Martin Kind: “I completely rule out any 
changes. We stand by Thomas Schaaf until the end. Schaaf’s job is not to be 
questioned.”2 Apr: Questions it. 3 Apr: Sacks him 
<http://www.dw.com/en/bundesliga-hannover-sack-hapless-head-coach-thomas-schaaf/a-19161454>
.

Plus: love news

Argentina: Racing Club’s Carlos “Discoteca” Núñez, revealing he “so regrets” 
dating a high-profile model behind the back of his pregnant 16-year-old 
fiancee. “It was just a blip. I had a clouded mind … it’s something that can 
happen to us football players. I put family first.”
 