
Football family: best newcomer

Phillip Chiyangwa – Zimbabwe’s multimillionaire bible-quoting self-styled “
King of Selfies 
<http://www.radiovop.com/index.php/national-news/12823-i%E2%80%99m-a-victim-of-my-wealth,-good-looks%3A-phillip-chiyangwa.html>
”,YouTube star <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LtqyNrMJIOU> and nephew of 
Robert Mugabe - elected FA president on a landslide. Chiyangwa, 56 – aformer 
Mugabe regime MP <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H8QHxxMVG5Q> nicknamed 
“Captain Fiasco” –denies vote-buying 
<http://sportbrief.co.zw/2015/10/28/i-dont-compete-with-small-kids-im-the-zifa-president-chiyanywa/>
: “Let’s get football back where it belongs.”

• Weighing up Chiyangwa’s election success: Fifa’s interim president Issa 
Hayatou– offering “warmest congratulations 
<http://www.newzimbabwe.com/sports-26490-Africa+soccer+boss+lauds+Chiyangwa/sports.aspx>
 ... Your experience, knowhow and leadership will benefit football.” 
Chiyangwa’s first act:taking three weeks off 
<http://www.newzimbabwe.com/news-26501-New+Zifa+boss+starts+with+Xmas+holiday/news.aspx>
. “I am going on leave forthwith. I’ll be back towards the end of December.”

Meanwhile: also starting over

Concacaf’s executive committee – reacting to the arrest of their last three 
presidents bydeciding not to pick a fourth 
<http://www.concacaf.com/article/concacaf-announces-interim-leadership-structure>
. Concacaf says the vote will be delayed to next year to secure “transparency”, 
with an interim team of seven executives taking over instead – including 
Jamaica’s Captain Horace Burrell, who served asix-month bribery ban in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/oct/14/fifa-bans-caribbean-officials-corruption>
. Burrell: “This leadership structure will allow the continued implementation 
of strong reforms.”

Staying relaxed

Peru’s indicted FA head Manuel Burga: “I’m calm, I knew the police were 
coming, I waited calmly. There’s nothing to hide.”Burga’s arrest 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/0/football/35016476> comes five years after he 
attacked six Peru players who hired prostitutes at a casino for “lacking morals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/oct/31/said-and-done-fifa-corruption>
 ... It’s deeply painful to me. There’s so much hypocrisy from these players. 
The saying is true: a tree born crooked will never grow straight.”

Saddest exit

Russia’s head of world chess Kirsan Ilyumzhinov, stepping out of public life, 
three months afterlinking himself with the Fifa job 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/news/president-chess-federation-could-run-fifa-president-140249663--sow.html>
. Ilyumzhinov, a millionaire mystic who was abducted by aliens in 1997 (“They 
wore yellow spacesuits. It’s all perfectly normal”), had his US assets frozen 
last week overalleged links to Syrian president Bashar al-Assad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/07/leader-of-world-chess-body-kirsan-ilyumzhinov-steps-down-over-alleged-syria-links>
. He denies wrongdoing.

One to watch

2009: Sepp poses for photos 
<http://www.fifa.com/about-fifa/news/y=2009/m=9/news=president-mubarak-opens-the-show-1107036.html>
 with Egypt’s then-president Hosni Mubarak at an under-20s game. Sepp: “I am 
extremely honoured by the presence of President Mubarak here today. Egypt can 
be proud.”2015: Fifa goes head to head with Mubarak in the Transparency 
International vote for the world’s top 15 worst cases of alleged “grand 
corruption”.Voting closes in February 
<https://unmaskthecorrupt.org/#/section-contest>.

And rising above it all

Fifa.com 
<http://www.fifa.com/worldcup/news/y=2015/m=12/news=russia-2018-mascot-panel-selected-2742570.html>
, looking to move the news agenda on: “2018 FIFA World Cup Russia™ organisers 
have named a panel of judges to select the official mascot. Once all stages 
have been completed, the winning character will have invoked the most public 
participation of any brand asset in FIFA World Cup™ history.”

Other news: best timing

The Premier League – easing Nike’s tough week of bad press over allegations 
relating toFifa corruption 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-12-04/nike-cooperating-in-u-s-fifa-investigation-of-brazil-claims>
 andthe IAAF 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/09/french-authorities-iaaf-eugene-world-championships>
 – signing a new extendedOfficial Ball deal 
<http://www.premierleague.com/en-gb/news/news/2015-16/dec/091215-premier-league-and-nike-extend-official-ball-partnership.html>
 to 2019. “As the leading global sports brand, Nike are an excellent fit.”

Best vision

Bolton chairman Phil Gartside, May 2001 
<http://www.theboltonnews.co.uk/news/6031668.Chairman_on_the_spot/>: “One of 
our directors, Eddie Davies, has loaned the club £2m and given us tremendous 
support. Eddie is a Farnworth lad and has put more money into Bolton than any 
other person in the history of the club. But we can’t constantly rely on that 
sort of generosity.We have to run the business properly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/10/bolton-winding-up-petition-hmrc-unpaid-tax>
.”

Most got at

Spain: Luis Suárez: not taking criticism of his stamp on Valencia’s Aymen 
Abdennour <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4gbMD-s1B7U> – “I stood on him by 
accident. These things happen” – a year after he faced down more press lies 
abouthis clash with Giorgio Chiellini 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S0kJlCjgQ4g>: “In no way was it a bite or 
intent to bite. I lost my balance, fell over, and hit my face on the player. It 
left a small bruise on my cheek, and a strong pain in my teeth.”

Row of the week
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DD5RFFNoe-Mo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DD5RFFNoe-Mo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DD5RFFNoe-Mo&media=>
Kuwaiti club al-Jahra suspended indefinitely after a director invaded the 
pitch to beat the referee <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D5RFFNoe-Mo>, 
prompting “mass violence”. The director resigned quoting the Qur’an: “This is a 
work of Satan; for he is an enemy that misleads”; an FA statement condemned “
this rude attack on match referees 
<http://www.kfa.org.kw/NewsDetailsEn.aspx?Id=640>”.

Manager news

South Africa, July: Chippa United owner Chippa Mpengesi rehires coach Roger 
Sikhakhane for a fourth spell, having sacked him three times since 2011. “He 
always does well for me, I like him. He is our Alex Ferguson. This time it will 
work.”Dec: It doesn’t 
<http://www.goal.com/en-za/news/4667/sa-psl/2015/12/08/18115632/coach-roger-sikhakhane-confirms-suspension-at-chippa>
.

• Sikhakhane’s agent’s view 
<http://www.soccerladuma.co.za/news/articles/categories/south-africa/sikhakhane-likely-to-take-legal-action-against-chippa/222893>
 on his client being placed on “special leave” by Mpengesi for “allegedly 
smelling of alcohol”: “We will take legal action … We aren’t saying Chippa 
shouldn’t change the coach – it’s like when a woman doesn’t want you any more, 
you can’t force her to love you. But these are unfounded allegations we’re 
dealing with here. We will challenge this nonsense.”

Model news

Italy: Sara Tommasi, moving on from links with Mario Balotelli, Ronaldinho and 
Silvio Berlusconi to become director of lower league club Marruvium. In2011 
Tommasi revealed how Berlusconi had made his move –Sun headline: “Balotelli’s 
busty beauty badgered by Berlusconi atbunga bonkathon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/10/silvio-berlusconis-bunga-bunga-aquittal-upheld-by-high-court>
”. Tommasi: “He said I had beauty and wit. He said I should get into politics.”

Plus: moving on

Model Carol Muniz, 29, listing the upsides of her 2014 affair with newly 
indicted 74-year-old Brazil FA head Marco Polo Del Nero 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/04/fbi-corruption-charges-brazil-reform>
: 63,000 Instagram followers and aSexy Magazine covershoot. “Soon I will become 
an actress too. I’d say I am made for it.”

• Last year Muniz attacked press questions over what first attracted her to 
the millionaire Del Nero 
<https://esportes.yahoo.com/blogs/redacao/novo-amor-de-del-nero-se-defende-de-cr%C3%ADticas-na-web-003550638.html>
. “Let them talk; this love is pure. You know, the Dalai Lama once spoke of 
truth and authenticity. That’s how I live my life.”
 