
Quote of the week

 Bayern president and paroled €27.2m tax evasion convict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/13/uli-hoeness-sentenced-three-and-a-half-years-prison-tax-evasion-germany>
Uli Hoeness– upset by China’s top clubs taking an unfair financial advantage. “
It’s sick 
<http://www.sky.de/sky-sport-news/bundesliga/uli-hoeness-im-exklusiv-interview-124954>
, it’s just sick. I just hope it doesn’t turn out as bad as it looks at the 
moment.”

Chinese Super League’s spending celebrates materialism and extravagance | Ed 
Aarons
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/08/chinese-super-league-spending-materialism-extravagance>
• Helping China’s long-term model while their clubs pay Oscar £400k a week, 
Axel Witsel£85m over five years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/08/chinese-super-league-spending-materialism-extravagance>
 and Carlos Tevez£1 a second 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/29/carlos-tevez-shanghai-shenhua-chinese-super-league>
:George Osborne’s 2015 deal to invest £3m of UK public money into Chinese 
grassroots football 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/george-osborne-blows-3million-taxpayers-6502207>
. Osborne: “This is just one example of the ways we can work together with 
China to benefit both our nations – I look forward to seeing the results.”

Best new year message

Gianni Infantino on Fifa “regaining credibility 
<http://www.insideworldfootball.com/2016/12/23/infantinos-christmas-address-fifa-regained-credibility/>
”: “This is a new Fifa, a new era, a transparent organisation. From now on you 
will know where the money comes from, and where the money goes to.” (£1.15m: 
amount that goes to Infantino, excluding bonuses, cars, housing, private jet 
use and £1,542 monthly allowance.)

Meanwhile: also working on new eras

1) Nigeria FA head Amaju Pinnick, facing down disputed government claims of 
$802,000 unaccounted for 
<http://www.signalng.com/dalung-orders-independent-audit-nff-accounts-missing-802000/>
 in his FA finances. FA officials say ministers are “misinformed about FA 
activities”;Pinnick 
<http://www.vanguardngr.com/2017/01/need-supportive-sports-ministry-pinnick/>: 
“There’s nothing fishy about it.”

2) Zimbabwe FA head Phillip Chiyangwa – multimillionaire Youtuber 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LtqyNrMJIOU> AKA Captain Fiasco – on how he 
won the Council of Southern Africa FAs presidency last month. “I had to apply 
my master’s technique 
<https://www.newsday.co.zw/2016/12/19/chiyangwa-targets-caf/>. President Mugabe 
taught me that if you apply the scorched earth approach, you won’t go wrong. I 
used tactics I was taught by the grandmaster Mugabe, and here I am.”

• Chiyangwa’s next ambition: “I’m now the boss of the region. Very soon I will 
be the boss of the continent. Don’t be surprised when that happens. And I won’t 
stop there. You knowFifa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa> hasn’t 
been run by a black person? I have set myself that target.”

• Also on Chiyangwa’s to-do list last week: stopping Zimbabwe’s players 
striking before the Africa Cup of Nations in arow over money, hotels and 
facilities 
<https://www.newsday.co.zw/2017/01/05/litigation-cases-skyrocket-2016/> after 
his FA failed to pay a $60 pitch rental fee. “Everything is in order. 
Everything is better than before.”

Football clubs suffering as owners experiment with chaos theory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/07/football-club-owners-chaos-theory-morecambe>
Plus: best seeds

2006: Honduras FA head Rafael Callejas launches his grassroots “Sowing Seeds 
for the Future 
<http://www.fifa.com/about-fifa/news/y=2006/m=10/news=com-unity-seminars-helping-central-america-106928.html>
” project to redistribute football’s wealth.2017: Banned for life for 
racketeering 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-soccer-fifa-honduras-bans-idUKKBN1481N7>. 

Manager news: latest moves

• 8 Dec: Swansea chairman Huw Jenkins 
<http://www.southwales-eveningpost.co.uk/swansea-city-s-huw-jenkins-a-change-of-manager-is-the-last-thing-we-need-now/story-29969377-detail/story.html>
 backs manager Bob Bradley: “The last thing we need at this moment of time is a 
continual change in manager. We have to make sure, first and foremost, that we 
have stability.”27 Dec: Sacks him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/27/bob-bradley-sacked-swansea-city-11-games>
.

• Spain, 8 Nov: Osasuna president Luis Sabalza hires new coach Joaquin 
Caparrós “to bring us stability”.5 Jan: Sacks him 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-soccer-spain-osa-caparros-idUKKBN14P1ML> 
because “the time felt right”.

• Spain, 2 Jan: Sacked Castellón coach Frank Castelló gives his farewell press 
conference in a bar 
<http://www.elmundo.es/comunidad-valenciana/castellon/2017/01/02/586a9bf6e2704e75538b4623.html>
 after president David Cruz had security escort him out. “Where’s the dignity? 
He is, and I say this with no hesitation, the worst president I ever had.”

Saddest exit

South Africa coach Ephraim “Shakes” Mashaba - sacked after an inquiry ruled 
that last year’s “on-camera tirade 
<https://twitter.com/DiskiStyle/status/798053109146628096?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>” 
at FA officials and the press was “in violation of communications policy”. In 
2015 Mashaba pledged to rise above his critics, just like “Jesus Christ 
himself. He also went through pains, but he carried on.”

Transfer window January 2017: every deal in England, Spain, Germany, France 
and Italy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/dec/21/transfer-window-january-2017-all-the-latest-moves-and-news-interactive>
Best marching on

Sept 2016: Southampton’s José Fonte, reacting to reports 
<http://www.espnfc.co.uk/english-premier-league/story/2944005/jose-fonte-committed-to-southampton-despite-manchester-united-interest>
 about him chasing a move. “To make it perfectly clear to everyone that might 
have some difficulty understanding: I am a Southampton player, and proudly have 
been since 2010; understand that once I step on the pitch with the Saints shirt 
and armband I give my blood, sweat and tears for the club and always will no 
matter what you read or think. My professionalism means everything to me, and 
no one can point a finger about it … I am fully committed.#wemarchon.” Jan: 
Requests transfer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/southampton-jose-fonte-submits-transfer-request>
.

Most festive

Uruguay: Referee Raúl Mariño, drunk in charge of the Boca v Conventos regional 
final <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oWSCOqqymWc>. Mariño, who denied he 
slapped a player, said his subsequent arrest was unjust. “I confirm I did not 
have a grip on my faculties … but I hit no one. It’s over for me, though: I say 
goodbye to this noble activity.” The game ended 1-1; the replay, without 
Mariño, was abandoned after12 red cards 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VlGCI0GDuN0>.

Cracking down

Rwanda’s FA, reacting to footage of Rayon striker Moussa Camara “performing 
witchcraft” moments before scoring <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UMPYNOPngbw>
 by imposing new bans based on referees’ suspicions. “Since there is no 
scientific way to prove witchcraft, anything that is deemed to incite 
witchcraft will be put under consideration.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUMPYNOPngbw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUMPYNOPngbw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUMPYNOPngbw&media=>
Most unsettled

Italy: Naples’ opera scene – uneasy with Diego Maradona appearing in a 
one-night-only show 
<http://www.ansa.it/english/news/lifestyle/arts/2017/01/04/naples-abuzz-as-maradona-set-to-appear_7d92846e-41bc-43ae-b30c-c50ba2aaaf35.html>
 at the San Carlo opera house with rapper Clementino, with seats costing up to 
€330. Critics say the show “debases and defiles” the historic venue; organisers 
say sceptics should lay off. “Diego will offer up his testimony of love and 
freedom. Expect guests and surprises.”

Most downtrodden

Portugal: Porto’s Danilo – shown a second yellow after referee Luis Godinho 
jogged backwards and stood on him <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7m2xgvMbOGQ>
. “I’ve replayed this a hundred times. I honestly cannot understand how this 
gentleman made such a decision.”

Plus: most got at 

Twitter’s @TheRealMikeDean 
<https://twitter.com/therealmikedean/status/816018717389664256> – US hip hop 
producer and Kanye West collaborator – facing down his haters: “i’m not a 
reff”; “wrong mike dean”; “soccer is wack”; and “I AM NOT A SOCCER REFF U LIMEY 
F***. DO YOUR RESEARCH.”
MIKE DEAN! #MWA (@therealmikedean) 
Wrong mike dean https://t.co/DfbOA4p9LU <https://t.co/DfbOA4p9LU>
 <https://twitter.com/therealmikedean/status/816018717389664256> January 2, 
2017 <https://twitter.com/therealmikedean/status/816018717389664256>  