
Fifa’s fresh start: best newcomer

Brazil’s new Fifa executive Fernando Sarney – joining the Zurich transparency 
revolution, six years after he won an injunction barringO Estado de São Paulo 
covering hisindictment on corruption charges 
<https://globalfreedomofexpression.columbia.edu/cases/sarney-v-o-estado-de-sao-paulo/>
. The case collapsed in 2011 when acourt annulled evidence 
<http://veja.abril.com.br/noticia/brasil/stj-anula-provas-da-pf-sobre-filho-de-sarney>
 obtained via police wiretaps; Sarney denies wrongdoing.

• Making way for Sarney at Fifa: Brazil FA president Marco Polo Del Nero – 
resigning to “focus on domestic matters” 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/11/26/us-soccer-fifa-brazil-idUSKBN0TF27Z20151126#M6hA5iqh24pEWRdI.97>
. Del Nero, who flew out of Zurich hours after May’s FBI raids, and has avoided 
all foreign travel since, denies wrongdoing.

Other news: big society

£8m: 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/chancellor-opens-200-million-manchester-city-football-academy>
Amount George Osborne pledged for new 3G pitches in 2014. “I’m a strong 
believer in improving sporting facilities for young people as part of 
government’s responsibility to support a healthier, more active society.”£18bn: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/25/local-government-councils-funding-gap-critical-budget-cuts-social-care-spending-review>
Value of the grant to local councils he axed last week.

Rough week for

Ex-Rangers chief executive Charles Green – losing his legal bid 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-glasgow-west-34932541> to make the club 
fund his defence against fraud charges. In 2013 Green tried to move on from 
Rangers, tellingOuest France why spending part of his £933,000 pay deal on an 
18th-century Normandy château 
<http://www.heraldscotland.com/news/13125629.Charles_Green__my_Normandy_Castle_and_my_passion_for_horses/>
made sense. “This is where I start my new life. It’s as if the castle said: 
‘Buy me.’”

Can’t get the staff

Qatar – pledging action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/26/qatar-and-saudi-arabia-hit-by-floods-shutting-schools-and-blocking-roads>
 after heavy rains exposed poor construction standards ofinfrastructure 
projects for the 2022 World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/25/revealed-qatars-world-cup-slaves>
. “Parties responsible for dereliction or negligence, whether governmental or 
private, will be held accountable.”

Statement of the week

Evo-Stik Northern club Colwyn Bay – signing striker Shaun Tuck, two years after
he was jailed 
<http://www.liverpoolecho.co.uk/news/liverpool-news/semi-professional-footballer-shaun-tuck-jailed-4925951>
 for tweeting that UK mosques should be “gassed out or bombed” and Muslim 
children beheaded; and a year after heposted online threats 
<http://www.liverpoolecho.co.uk/news/liverpool-news/liverpool-footballer-shaun-tuck-given-7332469>
 calling a black man an “orangutan” and a “monkey”, adding: “I hope his 
families banana boat sinks” and: “If he has got kids there getting acid in 
there face.”Club statement: 
<http://www.colwynbayfc.co.uk/2015/11/club-statement-2/> “Shaun’s actions were 
out of character.”

• Also from colwynbayfc.co.uk 
<http://www.colwynbayfc.co.uk/2015/10/fortnight-of-action-wales-15/>: coverage 
of last month’s Show Racism the Red Card day. Club ambassador Robbie Booth: 
“There’s no place in football for any form of racism – it’s as simple as that.”

Manager news: moving on

Italy, 23 November: Livorno president Aldo Spinelli – 25 coaches in 16 years, 
seven in the last two years, averaging three months each – on coach Christian 
Panucci: “I’m relaxed. At this time, the coach is not at risk.”25 November: 
Times change. 
<http://www.football-italia.net/76266/serie-b-livorno-sack-panucci>

• Spinelli’s previous best rethink: January 2014: Sacks coach Davide Nicola 
after calling his side “flat and gutless”;April 2014: Sacks his replacement, 
rehires Nicola. “We needed something new.”

Marks for trying

Romania: Metalul Resita – still adjusting after owner Catalin Rufa dropped the 
whole first team for staging an in-match “Stop Slavery” protest over unpaid 
wages. Rufa ordered the youth team to play Brasov instead; they lost 11-2. 
Coach Carol Gurgu: “My brave boys. We need help.”

Most upbeat

Portugal, 16 November: Vitória Setúbal president Fernando Oliveira celebrates 
the club’s 105th anniversary 
<http://setubalnarede.pt/diario-da-regiao/entrevista-ao-presidente-fernando-oliveira-11134/>
. “My message to fans is one of hope, vitality and gusto.”20 November: Oliveira 
given athree-year suspended sentence 
<http://www.cmjornal.xl.pt/cm_ao_minuto/detalhe/presidente_do_vitoria_de_setubal_condenado_a_tres_anos_de_prisao_com_pena_suspensa.html>
 for tax evasion; Vitória fined €7,000.

Discipline news

Spain: Celtic de Pulianas player Rubén Gómez Bustamante 
<http://www.abc.es/deportes/futbol/abci-agresor-pene-defiende-mujer-saque-nada-201511180824_noticia.html>
 – sacked last week for “trying to strike a linesman with his penis” – now 
banned for a year and fined €468. Officials acted due to the “impact and social 
significance of the gesture”; Bustamante denied wrongdoing.

Best gesture

Argentina: Independiente’s Jesús Méndez, celebrating a Pre-Libertadores 
play-off semi-final win by throwing his shirt to a fan after the final whistle. 
Referee Silvio Truccoshowed him a second yellow 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CpBOTFnB3DQ>, putting him out of the final. 
Club official Noray Nakis: “We will fight this with passion.”
#FechadoComASeleção (@BrazilStats) 
David Luiz and Kaká invited pastor Guilherme Batista to join Brazil NT and 
make prayers during international break.pic.twitter.com/fnS9uq0zYY 
<http://t.co/fnS9uq0zYY>
 <https://twitter.com/BrazilStats/status/643438541507194880> September 14, 2015
 <https://twitter.com/BrazilStats/status/643438541507194880> 
Biggest breach 

Brazil: FA officials sacking their head of security, two months after a pastor 
gained unauthorised access to the team hotel andconverted three players 
<https://www.facebook.com/PrGuilhermeBatista/videos/vb.628395077183290/951561711533290/?type=2&theater>
. Pastor Guilherme Batista said the meeting in September, set up by Kaká and 
David Luiz, was empowering: “I delivered the word of God and the heavens 
rejoiced as three new lives surrendered themselves to Christ.” Coach Dunga: “He 
had no right.”

Also with God

Brazil: Model Madelayne Cavalcanti, promising cash plus a “sexy show for 
single players” after her sideSanta Cruz won promotion 
<http://www.folhageral.com/entretenimento/famosos/2015/11/musa-do-santa-cruz-provoca-vamos-ocupar-a-vaga-do-vasco-na-serie-a/#axzz3sj1m0wGb>
. “I’m as pleased as punch. I know the financial difficulties we face and I 
will fulfil every promise, God will see to that. Santa Cruz deserve my 
sacrifice.”

Best adviser

Argentina: Claudio Caniggia’s wife Mariana Nannis – backing model Wanda Nara’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/apr/14/maxi-lopez-sampdoria-wanda-derby-inter>
 heavy spending since she married Inter’s Mauro Icardi: “I love her! Let her 
buy everything!” In 2011 Nannis advised Nara to “neuter” previous husband, Maxi 
López, to prevent alleged infidelity. “She should castrate him like a cat. No 
more balls. That’s what I’d do.”

Plus: love news

Brazil: Singer Dixie Pratt, 19, ending her 11-month relationship with Romário, 
49. “I finished with him three weeks ago. He talked about living together, 
about marriage – but the truth is, this is a man born to be single. As a 
boyfriend, he makes an excellent footballer.”
 