
Fifa man of the week: Jeffrey Webb

• 2012: Takes the Concacaf presidency 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/soccer-fifa-concacaf-idUKL4E8GN6PE20120523> with 
a dig at “improper 
<http://www.goal.com/en-us/news/1616/concacaf/2012/05/23/3122991/concacaf-elects-jeffrey-webb-as-president-looks-to-oust>
” shamed predecessor Jack Warner. “Our past will never be repeated. I am here, 
we are here, because of our love for football. It is a new day for Concacaf, a 
new chapter. We have a great confederation that represents 540m people who rely 
on you and me to provide hope. We must move the clouds, and let the sunshine 
in.”• 2015: Pleads guilty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/03/fifa-arrests-ricardo-teixeira-loretta-lynch>
 to racketeering, fraud and money laundering; forfeits $6.7m.

Runner-up

Webb’s Concacaf successor Alfredo Hawit – who took the job in May after Webb’s 
arrest 
<http://www.concacaf.com/article/concacaf-announces-actions-taken-by-executive-committee>
, with a dig at his ethics. “We are profoundly disappointed that again Concacaf 
has been the victim of fraud. We’ve taken steps to maintain our operations, and 
to deliver on our commitments to our fans.” Hawit –charged last week with 
racketeering and bribery <http://www.justice.gov/opa/file/796966/download> – 
denies wrongdoing.

Meanwhile

Also picked up in Zurich: Conmebol president Juan Ángel Napout, who denies all 
charges. Napout – dubbed “an embezzling filthy rat bastard” in 2012 byMarcelo 
Recanate <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CS_FBtXcXQw&feature=youtu.be&t=2m20s>
, president of Paraguay’s Olimpia – marked his election victory in March with an
off-the-cuff address 
<http://www.conmebol.com/en/03042015-1626/juan-angel-napout-it-happiest-day-my-life>
: “I was going to prepare a speech, but my wife always says it’s worth more 
when it comes from the heart.” Napout paid tribute to former leaderNicolás Leoz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/03/interpol-red-notices-fifa-jack-warner-nicolas-leoz>
– also now fighting extradition – and to Argentina’s former Fifa vice-president
Julio Grondona– who died in 2014, three years after comparing himself to Al 
Capone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/dec/03/said-and-done-julio-grondona>
. Napout: “It was an honour to work with and learn from them. This is my 
happiest day.”

And the rest

Among the 16 others charged by the US Department of Justice last week:

• Peru FA head Manuel Burga, who survived a 2006 government attempt to depose 
him 
<http://www.mediotiempo.com/futbol/seleccion-mexicana/noticias/2006/12/12/investigan-la-fifa-relacion-de-la-fpf-y-el-gobierno>
 after Sepp intervened to block it. Fifa: “We cannot allow governments to 
interfere in football.” Burga’s career highlight: giving his 2011 re-election 
victory speech while a colleague’s phone played the theme fromThe Godfather in 
the background. He denies wrongdoing.

• Guatemala’s Brayan Jiménez – a serving member of the Fifa committee for Fair 
Play and Social Responsibility 
<http://www.fifa.com/about-fifa/committees/committee=1903155/index.html>. 
Jiménez welcomed Fifa’s transparency shake-up in June as a chance for “a breath 
of fresh air 
<http://www.soy502.com/articulo/brayan-jimenez-fifa-futbol-necesitamos-nuevos-aires>
”. He denies all charges.

• Bolivia’s Carlos Chávez – still running his FA from prison while denying 
organised crime charges 
<http://www.ibtimes.com/bolivia-soccer-federation-president-carlos-chavez-jailed-executive-secretary-under-2019205>
. In October Chávez sent a letter from his cell to FA colleagues warning them 
to respect his authority: “Only I can sign contracts and cheques.”

• And Brazil’s Ricardo Teixeira, who previously called British press interest 
in his ethics record “shit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/aug/21/said-done-ricardo-teixeira-brazil>
”; denied multiple fraud allegations; resigned for “health reasons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/mar/12/fifa-ricardo-teixeira-resigns>
” in 2012; and failed in a 2013residency application to Andorra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/07/said-and-done-brazil-world-cup>
, a tax haven with no extradition treaty.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsaid-and-done-fifa-concacaf-arrests-jeffrey-webb%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf90c9dd7be02298d110180f9638c5375e3b65aa%2F540_297_930_1394%2F930.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Said%20%26%20Done%3A%20How%20Concacaf%20moved%20the%20clouds%2C%20and%20let%20the%20sunshine%20in&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsaid-and-done-fifa-concacaf-arrests-jeffrey-webb%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Said%20%26%20Done%3A%20How%20Concacaf%20moved%20the%20clouds%2C%20and%20let%20the%20sunshine%20in&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsaid-and-done-fifa-concacaf-arrests-jeffrey-webb%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf90c9dd7be02298d110180f9638c5375e3b65aa%2F540_297_930_1394%2F930.jpg>
 Jack Warner: impoverished 
Plus: spare a thought for

Jack Warner, still fighting his extradition to the US, now citing 
impoverishment 
<http://www.insideworldfootball.com/world-football/football-americas/18419-warner-pleads-poverty-saying-legal-process-is-pushing-his-finances-to-the-brink>
. Warner, who denies embezzling millions,including £500,000 of Haiti earthquake 
relief aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/09/fifa-jack-warner-accused-funds-haiti-earthquake-victims>
, told a court in Trinidad: “I am concerned that the amount of money it will 
take to defend myself will drain all of my resources, leaving me in a parlous 
financial state during my last years, when I am found not guilty.”

Other news last week: keeping it tight

£129.9m: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/30/liverpool-agents-premier-league>
Amount Premier League clubs paid agents in 2015, up £15m on 2014.1: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/26/premier-league-living-wage-campaign>
Number of Premier League clubs paying all staff the living wage in the same 
period.

Best clarification

Germany: Fortuna Dusseldorf player Kerem Demirbay, clarifying why he reacted 
to being sent off 
<http://www.itv.com/news/2015-12-04/midfielder-kerem-demirbay-faces-five-match-ban-for-allegedly-making-sexist-comments-towards-female-official/>
 by female official Bibiana Steinhaus by saying: “Women have no place in men’s 
football.” Demirbay: “That comment does not reflect my opinion of women.”

Manager news: latest moves

• Italy, November: Hellas Verona coach Andrea Mandorlini: “I have a clear and 
frank relationship with the president. We confront our difficulties together, 
and we solve them together.” President Maurizio Setti: “He has our utmost 
confidence. He can feel relaxed.”December: Sacks him 
<http://www.football-italia.net/76489/official-verona-sack-mandorlini>.

• France, November: Troyes president Daniel Masoni handles press questions 
about his coach. “Leave us alone, there’s no tension between us, close your 
mouths. Jean-Marc Furlan is my coach today, tomorrow, and after tomorrow.”
December:But not after that 
<http://www.skysports.com/football/news/11823/10087541/jean-marc-furlan-leaves-bottom-club-troyes>
.

• 30 November: Burton manager Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink weighs up “irrelevant” 
press links to QPR 
<http://www.london24.com/sport/football/clubs/qpr/it_s_not_relevent_chelsea_legend_shrugs_off_qpr_managerial_rumours_1_4330013>
. “Yesterday I cooked Sunday dinner for my family. We had chicken, lamb and 
rice. It was very nice. [The QPR story] is something that I have no dealings 
with. It’s just speculation. I’m determined to make Burton Albion a force.”4 
December:Joins QPR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/04/qpr-jimmy-floyd-hasselbaink-new-manager>
.

Most jubilant

Romania: Astra manager Marius Sumudica, reacting after his side beat Steaua. 
“This was totally gangster. I chose to fight, and we fought. I worked this 
whole thing out in my head. Do you think Sumudica ever sleeps? Do you think 
Sumudica snores?”

Steadiest progress

Brazil, October: Ronaldinho’s agent and brother says his client is still a 
credible top-level player, focused on football not money. “Will he retire? Are 
you crazy?”December: Ronaldinho launches his new gold limited-edition 
Ronaldinho hoverboard 
<https://twitter.com/10Ronaldinho/status/671667452082839552?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
, $699 plus shipping from ronaldinhoscooters.com.

Plus: tough week for

Brazil: Model Tatiane Cravinho, ex-partner of newly indicted Ricardo Teixeira 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/03/fifa-arrests-ricardo-teixeira-loretta-lynch>
. In May Cravinho, 36, admitted her decision to pose forPlayboy in the Maracanã 
had left Teixeira, 67, upset “because he’s such a gentleman … But he still 
sends me an allowance. It makes no odds to him … he’s a very rich man.”
 