
Man of the week

Villa club captain Gabby Agbonlahor – dropped over shisha-pipe champagne party 
claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/01/gabriel-agbonlahor-aston-villa-squad-investigation>
, after telling fans in February to think big: “We’re going to keep fighting 
till the end. That’s all the club expects from us. Take it game by game. 
There’s no reason we can’t escape.”

• Also rallying Villa fans in February: a) Joleon Lescott, calling for more 
faith <http://www.avfc.co.uk/page/NewsDetail/0,,10265~5331509,00.html> in the 
squad’s “desire and attitude … We’ve got a great fighting spirit. Experience 
counts for a lot and Gabby is certainly an example of that. We’ll make a fight 
of it”; and b)Agbonlahor again, rejecting press reports that he lacks 
commitment and wants out: “The papers like to chat a load of shit.”

New Fifa news

Making an early impact: Gianni Infantino, starting life at Fifa with a new 
ethos 
<http://www.goal.com/en-gb/news/14172/fifa/2016/03/30/21831572/infantino-commercial-transparency-key-for-fifa>
 - “We have to earn trust with concrete acts, honest, open and transparent” – 
and a new sponsor, China’s Wanda Group, withWanda’s new head of sports business 
<http://europe.chinadaily.com.cn/business/2015-11/27/content_22524245.htm>, 
Sepp’s nephew Philippe Blatter, at the unveiling. Infantino said the deal 
signals “a real wind of change”.

Old Fifa news

Staying strong last month, despite legal efforts to recover embezzled cash: 
Jack Warner 
<http://www.sport24.co.za/Soccer/International/warner-says-fifa-owes-him-money-20160319>
 (“I don’t owe Fifa one nickel. Fifa owes me”), and Brazil’sRicardo Teixeira, 
being chased for $3,514,025: “They throw this figure in the air. I will sue 
them for moral damages.”

• And back in the game: former Asian confederation general secretary Dato’ 
Alex Soosay – rehired as a consultant, a year after he resigned 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-soccer-asia-soosay-idUKKBN0NY12C20150513> 
accused of trying to “hide or destroy” corruption evidence. AFC say Soosay, who 
denies wrongdoing, brings “unrivalled expertise and experience … a tremendous 
benefit to Asian football”.


Migrant workers suffer 'appalling treatment' in Qatar World Cup stadiums, says 
Amnesty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/31/migrant-workers-suffer-appalling-treatment-in-qatar-world-cup-stadiums-says-amnesty>
Plus: best rebuttal

Fifa’s PR team: reacting to last week’s new Qatar slave state evidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/31/migrant-workers-suffer-appalling-treatment-in-qatar-world-cup-stadiums-says-amnesty>
 with anote of reassurance 
<http://www.fifa.com/worldcup/news/y=2016/m=3/news=fifa-statement-on-latest-amnesty-international-report-on-qatar-2773473.html>
: “Since 2011, Fifa has met with key stakeholders. This is an ongoing process.” 
The key meeting of the process so far: Sepp’s 2013 Doha trip to uncover the 
truth behind the “racist” British press coverage. “My grandmother always said a 
clock rings ding and dong, not ding-ding-ding. You have to listen to ding and 
to dong, and for now I only hear ding. So I go there, and listen to the dong.” 
He reported back after meeting the Emir: “Qatar will be wonderful hosts.”

Elsewhere: irony news

QPR reporting a new £45.7m loss 
<http://www.insideworldfootball.com/2016/03/31/qpr-stay-tune-ffp-rules-post-45m-loss/>
 and an “ongoing” legal challenge to Financial Fair Play, three years after 
co-chair Tony Fernandestook a lead 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/sport/football/news/qpr-owner-tony-fernandes-admits-1868061>
: “It’s ironic for me that I’m being hammered for wages, because I’m one of the 
guys who wants Financial Fair Play. I am pushing for it. It’s the right thing 
to do.”

Best new ethos

21 Jan: New Villa chairman Steve Hollis 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-soccer-england-avl-hollis-idUKKCN0UZ328>, 
reassuring Rémi Garde: “One of the reasons this club has not done well over the 
last five seasons is that it has not had any stability. So the last thing I’ll 
do as incoming chairman is look to apportion blame.”18 Mar:  
<http://www.birminghammail.co.uk/sport/football/football-news/aston-villas-steve-hollis-speaks-11063761>
“If you look at the successful clubs there are a few key ingredients. No1 is 
stability and clarity around what the strategy is. Having five managers in five 
seasons is not delivering stability.”30 Mar: Sacks him.


Also moving on: • 10 Jan: Notts County chairman Ray Trew hires Jamie Fullarton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/10/notts-county-appoint-jamie-fullarton-new-manager-moniz-sacking>
. “His meticulous attention to detail and his mix of self-awareness and 
self-assurance shines through.”20 Mar: Sacks him after 69 days. “What we need 
now, as a club, is stability.”

•23 Feb: Valencia president Layhoon Chan 
<http://www.football-espana.net/56923/%E2%80%98valencia-players-believe-neville%E2%80%99>
: “Changing the coach is maybe something that is ingrained in Spanish culture, 
but we understand that changing the coach a lot is often a disaster … We 
believe in what we are doing and we know when a direction is correct. And we’re 
going well with Gary.”30 Mar: “We thank Gary for his work.”

Paul Gascoigne needs help not glib judgments in battle with his demons | 
Daniel Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/apr/02/paul-gascoigne-addicts-support-daniel-taylor>
Ambassador of the week

Nigeria: FC Ifeanyiubah owner Dr Patrick Ifeanyi Ubah – banned for 10 games for
pitch invading with his bodyguards to slap Heartland FC’s keeper 
<https://youtu.be/f1rMJHumkQI?t=1m17s>. Heartland condemned the “barbaric owner 
and his urchins”; league officials ordered Ubah to “be a good ambassador in 
future”.

Best clarification

Ghana coach Avram Grant, clarifying his position after his agent accused 
Ghana’s press of “dishing out bullshit 
<https://twitter.com/saifpr/status/713053445461291008>” and he accused Ghana 
fans ofobsessing about “bullshit” 
<http://www.ghanaweb.com/GhanaHomePage/NewsArchive/Alhaji-Grunsah-fires-grant-over-bull-t-comments-426898>
. “I withdraw this word bullshit. The thing I would like to say is I love 
Ghana. I respect Ghanaians.”

Pundit news

Italy: Giovanni Trapattoni, assessing criticism of his “constant profanity” 
during a live TV co-commentary. “Blah blah … I do not give a damn about their 
opinions. Opinions are like balls: each has his own.” Trapatonni set out his TV 
career vision in 2013: “I am not an idiot. Television is easy.”

Most moving lyrics

Germany: Rapper Felix “Ghost St” Aubameyang releasing his new track 
<http://www.espnfc.com/blog/the-toe-poke/65/post/2838998/marco-reus-and-pierre-emerick-aubameyang-in-rap-video>
 praising brother Pierre-Emerick’s work-life balance at Borussia Dortmund: 
“Versace, Versace, Versace, Borussia Dortmund … We arrive in the club. Golden 
watch, golden chain, golden ball. Everything’s golden, brother… Hit the top 
corner, Aubame-bang-bang.”

Plus: biggest honour

Portugal: Katia Aveiro, sister of Cristiano Ronaldo, picked to sing Portugal’s 
anthem 
<http://www.insidethegames.biz/articles/1035976/cristiano-ronaldos-sister-to-sing-at-opening-ceremony-of-ipc-swimming-european-open-championships>
 at the 2016 swimming championships. Media previews of her 2013 debut track 
“Nonstop Boom” said her live performances “will not leave anyone indifferent”.
 