
Lead of the week

Italy’s FA - backing a two-game homophobia ban for Napoli’s Maurizio Sarri 
over histouchline “faggot” rant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/19/internazionale-napoli-roberto-mancini-maurizio-sarri>
 - two months after FA president Carlo Tavecchio wasrecorded saying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/02/italian-football-federation-president-carlo-tavecchio>
: “I’ve nothing against gays, just keep them away from me.” Tavecchio,banned 
for racism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/05/fifa-italian-fa-president-carlo-tavecchio-banana-eaters>
 in 2014, denied prejudice: “I respect everyone’s choices.”

• Among the early verdicts on Sarri’s case – Bologna director Pantaleo Corvino
: “The press reaction is too extreme. Sarri didn’t kill anyone, he just used a 
colourful expression. Clearly he meant no offence.”

Also misunderstood 

• Portugal: Sporting president Bruno de Carvalho - denying homophobia after 
criticising a referee 
<http://www.noticiasaominuto.com/desporto/522780/opus-gay-acusa-bruno-de-carvalho-de-homofobia-encapotada-e-grosseira>
 with lines including: “I would have kicked him in the butt, but looking at him 
I was afraid he’d enjoy it.” Carvalho: “It was taken out of context.”

• And new from Spain’s war on sexism: Sporting de Huelva player Elena Pavel 
alleging referee Santiago Quijada Alconasked her out 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/sport/football/news/spanish-referee-embroiled-sexism-storm-7211476>
 during a game – two weeks after another male referee wasbanned for booking an 
Albacete B player 
<http://www.marca.com/futbol/futbol-femenino/2016/01/07/568e551e268e3ee6488b458a.html>
 by telling her: “Give us a twirl, gorgeous, so I can see your number.” He 
apologised “for any offence”.

Zero tolerance latest

2016: Chelsea sack a steward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/22/chelsea-steward-cesc-fabregas-snake>
 for calling Cesc Fàbregasa “snake” 
<https://twitter.com/ArsenalMoh8/status/690323071761256450>. 2012: Chelsea 
don’t sack John Terry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/oct/18/john-terry-still-chelsea-captain>
 for calling Anton Ferdinand a “black cunt”. “Chelsea appreciates, and 
supports, John’s full apology for the language he used.”

Plus: coming soon

Last week’s top stories on Sunderland’s website: 1) Sunderland celebrate the 
20th anniversary of Show Racism the Red Card 
<http://www.safc.com/news/club-news/2016/january/srtrc-20th-anniversary>; 2) 
Sunderland to host a special evening with Roy “Chubby” Brown 
<http://www.safc.com/news/club-news/2016/january/british-comic-set-to-share-his-secrets-at-the-stadium-of-light>
: “The 70-year-old will discuss how his sarcastic blue humour continues to 
amuse audiences across the UK.”

Other news: best fresh start

Uefa head Gianni Infantino, declaring €500,000 in financial backing from Uefa 
<http://www.insideworldfootball.com/world-football/europe/18718-uefa-stumps-up-500k-as-infantino-jets-worldwide-in-bid-for-fifa-top-job>
 for his Fifa presidential campaign. Infantino said the sum, signed off by Uefa 
executives three months ago, “covers the cost of my travels around the world”.

Coolest reception

Ghana FA head Kwesi Nyantakyi, weighing up an approach for support from one of 
Infantino’s Fifa rivals,Tokyo Sexwale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/31/meet-the-new-boss-fifa-seven-candidates>
. “Sleeping in the same prison room with Nelson Mandela is not enough to win 
the Fifa presidency. All his campaign messages were just that; I was the rugby 
secretary at Robben Island, I was the chairman of the football team at Robben 
Island, I slept in the same room at the Robben Island and so on. Even I’m more 
experienced and competent than him.”

Family man of the week

Nigeria FA head Amaju Pinnick: calling rival Chris Giwa “a bastard” during a 
mediation session, with security stepping in to “prevent bloodshed 
<http://www.thewhistler.ng/story/drama-as-pinnick-giwa-exchange-blows>”. 
Pinnick’s vision for the job in 2014 when Fifa ratified his election win 
despite allegations the vote was “illegal, violent and abusive”: “There is no 
victor, no vanquished. Ours is just one big, marvellous family and here, 
football is the winner.”

Tribute of the week
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fsaid-and-done-maurizio-sarri-chelsea-snake-sunderland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51c4a85bd7e15ecc8a2cf6b6a1dec99489ee2de5%2F935_74_2325_3486%2F2325.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Said%20%26%20Done%3A%20Maurizio%20Sarri%3B%20Chelsea%E2%80%99s%20snake%3B%20and%20one%20big%2C%20marvellous%20family&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fsaid-and-done-maurizio-sarri-chelsea-snake-sunderland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Said%20%26%20Done%3A%20Maurizio%20Sarri%3B%20Chelsea%E2%80%99s%20snake%3B%20and%20one%20big%2C%20marvellous%20family&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fsaid-and-done-maurizio-sarri-chelsea-snake-sunderland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51c4a85bd7e15ecc8a2cf6b6a1dec99489ee2de5%2F935_74_2325_3486%2F2325.jpg>
 Louis Nicollin 
France: Montpellier president Louis Nicollin, asked how he felt when coach 
Rolland Courbisresigned last month 
<https://uk.news.yahoo.com/montpellier-coach-rolland-courbis-resigns-190628029.html>
 before he could sack him: “I just say it’s not normal. A captain never 
abandons ship. What was that Costa Concordia guy called? He’s the same guy.”

Ominous news

France, 12 Jan: Rennes president René Ruello hires free agent Courbis as 
“presidential adviser”, and denies it represents ominous news for 
under-pressure coach Philippe Montanier: “Courbis will just add some wise 
counsel as we perfect our imperfections. He does not replace Philippe.”20 Jan: 
He does 
<http://www.espnfc.co.uk/stade-rennes/story/2790516/rennes-sack-philippe-montanier-and-bring-in-rolland-courbis>
.

Most unlucky

Romania: Rapid Bucharest owner Valerii Moraru, revealing why his players have 
gone unpaid for another month: “I tried to transfer some money to the club that 
a supermarket chain owed me, but Chinese hackers got in and hacked it. That’s 
why.” Unnamed player: “This man believes he can fool us forever.”

Most wired

Italy: Messina president Natale Stracuzzi, backtracking a day after sacking 
his goalkeeper during anearly-hours Facebook rant 
<http://www.gazzettadelsud.it/news/messina/179851/Messina--il-presidente-Stracuzzi-licenzia.html>
 - “It’s 4am and I cannot sleep. We were humiliated … Berardi never plays 
again.” Deputy Pietro Gugliotta: “Natale just had a bit of an outburst. He was 
really tired.”

Move of the week

China: Brazilian striker Elkeson, revealing what first attracted him to an 
€18m move 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/21/chinese-champions-guangzhou-sell-top-scorer-rivals-national-glory>
 to Sven-Goran Eriksson’s Shanghai SIPG on a lucrative deal. “It’s for the 
challenge. I’ve been searching for this type of challenge. I hope for more 
success.”

Plus: most reflective

Italy: Sampdoria’s Antonio Cassano, 33, asked to reflect on whether he has 
wasted his talent 
<http://www.football-italia.net/78622/cassano-career-my-own-fault>: “I am lazy. 
But in life you have to be happy, and I am.” Making him happy in 2008, as set 
out in his book: “I’ve only had four girlfriends in 11 years - that’s very few. 
But I’ve also done it with 600-700 women. In Madrid it was easy because I lived 
in a hotel and the bellboy was my good friend: it was his job to bring me three 
pastries after sex. He would hand me the pastries, I would hand him the girl. 
Sex plus pastries - could it be any better?”
 