
Message of the week

February: Manchester United launch a drive 
<http://www.mufoundation.org/en/News/Archive/2016/02/Manchester-United-Kicks-Discrimination-Out-of-Football.aspx>
 to “engage multi-ethnic young women in sports” and extend the club’s core 
“respect and inclusion” message to fans.November: Vice-chair Ed Glazer named as 
a Trump campaign backer 
<http://www.cbssports.com/college-football/news/these-59-sports-figures-donated-money-to-hillary-clinton-or-donald-trump/>
, with a £44,000 donation.

Lawyers ask for Trump University trial to be delayed until next year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/trump-university-lawsuit-trial-delay-president-elect>
• High on Trump’s agenda this month: delaying the class-action fraud lawsuit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/trump-university-lawsuit-trial-delay-president-elect>
 against his defunctTrump University scheme. Claimants say promises Trump made 
in a2005 infomercial <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BvaaeHP9xtQ> filmed in 
his Trump Tower neighbour Chuck Blazer’s flat were false; Trump – who gave the 
disgraced Fifa executive a$5,000 rent rebate 
<http://blogs.reuters.com/talesfromthetrail/2016/06/02/in-infomercial-trump-university-and-soccer-corruption-collide/>
 for the shoot – denies wrongdoing.

Among football’s reactions to last week’s win:

a) Fifa’s Jack Warner, still fighting extradition to the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/30/jack-warner-hires-myra-hindley-lawyer>
 on racketeering charges, reminiscing in theTrinidad Guardian 
<https://www.guardian.co.tt/news/2016-11-11/rowley-ready-re-affirm-us-ties>: 
“Immediately on the morning he won I sent him a congratulatory email on his 
stunning victory … From 1990 to 2010 my apartment was on the 52nd floor of 
Trump Tower, opposite his, and we were accustomed to greeting each other. I 
would also often go to his casino in Atlantic City, so I’m all for him, and I 
wish him all the best.”

b) Steaua Bucharest owner Gigi Becali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/mar/07/gigi-becali-steaua-bucharest-owner>
 – out on parole from his corruption sentence – calling Trump “heaven sent” and 
describing their similarities. “Nine years ago he wanted to build offices on 
some of my land [in Bucharest]. The deal was good and profitable for both 
parties, but I wanted to call it the Becali-Trump building, and he the reverse. 
We could not proceed.”

• Becali’s conclusion from last week’s result: politics isn’t for women - “How 
could a woman be the most powerful man in the world?” - but a glass ceiling has 
been broken: “Maybe soon, in a few years, we’ll see Romania’s Trump. Maybe 
you’ll see the Becali Trump. Just maybe Trump is the model that proves you 
don’t need to be educated to be a great leader.”

Elsewhere: Midas update

April 2013: 
<http://www.fifa.com/about-fifa/news/y=2013/m=4/news=symbolic-act-from-fifa-president-joseph-blatter-launches-fifa-museum-pro-2063900.html>
Sepp Blatter lays the first brick at his new £114m Fifa museum: “You see a very 
happy president standing before you today. This is a great day, for me 
personally, and for Fifa.”Nov 2016: 
<http://www.thelocal.ch/20161110/fifa-museum-struggles-under-30-million-franc-debt>
Museum officials project a £24.5m first-year loss.

• Also last week from Sepp’s era:
a) Former Venezuela FA head Rafael Esquivel pleading guilty to seven fraud 
counts andforfeiting $16m of his takings 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-soccer-fifa-court-idUKKBN1332PR>.
b) Former Concacaf head Alfredo Hawit facing a life ban 
<http://www.espnfc.com/blog/fifa/243/post/2994280/ex-fifa-vice-president-alfredo-hawit-faces-life-ban-for-bribery>
 for racketeering, 17 months after he took over from disgraced racketeer 
Jeffrey Webb with aclean-up pledge 
<http://www.concacaf.com/article/concacaf-announces-actions-taken-by-executive-committee>
: “We will deliver on our commitments to our fans”.
c) Former Zambia FA head Kalusha Bwalya winning the FA’s endorsement 
<http://www.insideworldfootball.com/2016/11/07/zambias-bwalya-aims-fifa-council-despite-accusations-taking-bribes/>
 to run for Fifa Council next year, despite being investigated over an alleged 
$50,000 bribe. He denies wrongdoing.

Meanwhile: sharpest reflex

New Fifa Secretary General Fatma Samoura, asked in a Doha press conference 
<http://dohanews.co/fifa-to-announce-qatar-world-cup-venues-decision-next-year/>
 about Qatar’s slave-state problem: “I don’t waste my time answering these… 
everywhere you go, there are human rights issues. Qatar and Russia are no 
exceptions.”

Plus: making Fifa great again

Fifa 2.0 head Gianni Infantino, upset by coverage of his private jet habit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/12/gianni-infantino-migrant-worker-fifa-world-cup-2022-qatar>
. “I have also flown Easyjet. I will fly whatever is more convenient.” His 
wider message: “We need to show a Fifa which is more normal, more humble. We 
are normal people. We are football people.”

Two-thirds of Checkatrade Trophy games fail to attract crowds above 1,000
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/08/checkatrade-trophy-crowds-fail-attract-1000>
Other news: best optimism

July, Football League chief executive Shaun Harvey plays down criticism of the 
new Checkatrade Trophy format. “The next stage is getting the group stage under 
way and the draw has thrown up some exciting prospects. I’m looking forward to 
seeing how the competition develops and the reaction it gets from the crowd.”
November, after Middlesbrough’s game against Shrewsbury attracts a crowd of 308 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/08/checkatrade-trophy-crowds-fail-attract-1000>
. “Let’s see how things progress. All cup football takes on a different guise 
when it becomes a knock-out competition.”

Manager news: moving on

• 1 Oct, QPR owner Tony Fernandes posts a selfie with Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink 
<https://twitter.com/tonyfernandes/status/782227575095619584>. “Could not be 
happier for this man. A decent man who works his socks off for QPR. Loyalty is 
a strange word in football but we are family and we are QPR and we stand by our 
family.”5 Nov: Sacks him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/05/jimmy-floyd-hasselbaink-sacked-qpr-after-draw>
.

• Italy, 28 Oct, Inter’s board confirm “100% backing for Frank de Boer”; chief 
sports officer Piero Ausilio tells the press: “A lot of people are offering 
themselves for his job, but it’s not happening. The bench belongs to Frank.”1 
Nov,Inter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/01/inter-sack-head-coach-frank-de-boer-europa-league>
: “We wish Frank the best for the future.”

• Brazil: 31 Oct: Fluminense president Peter Siemsen holds clear-the-air talks 
with coach Levir Culpi. “My objective was to listen, to hear Levir’s passion 
and belief - and I liked what I heard. It’s clear: soon the errors will stop, 
the wins will come, and we will turn the page.”7 Nov: Sacks him 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-soccer-brazil-culpi-idUKKBN13209G>.

Happiest guy of the week

Brazil: Guarani defender Ferreira, upset by “harsh” coverage of him flooring a 
referee <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_pfSezsmsuw> after being sent off. “I 
read stuff that says I freaked out. That wasn’t a freak out. I was sent off 
wrongly so I just did what I did. I’m a good guy, a happy guy. I always do my 
best.”

Best outlook

Romania: Former Gloria Buzau 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FC_Gloria_Buz%C4%83u> coach Viorel Ion – given a 
long-term match-fixing ban in May along with assistant Romeo Bunică and 14 
players – on their new life: “Football’s a joke, a circus, so now we’re into 
farming. I work the tractor, Bunica drives the plough, the players assist. We 
embrace hard work.”

Said & Done: West Ham’s brand; racism; and a tree born crooked
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/30/said-and-done-west-ham-rebrand-uefa-football-diary>
Most engaged

Lyon owner Jean-Michel Aulas, 67, handling “deplorable” Lyon fans 
<http://sport24.lefigaro.fr/le-scan-sport/2016/10/30/27001-20161030ARTFIG00142-jean-michel-aulas-se-dispute-avec-des-supporteurs-lyonnais-sur-twitter.php>
 on Twitter – asking one: “With your nine followers, who do you think you are?” 
In 2014 he told another persistent critic to “go to bed”; the boy, aged eight, 
hit back: “You’re not my father, you don’t set my bedtime.”

Plus: setback of the week

Ghana’s FA – calling off a plan to use reggae star Shatta Wale to boost 
dwindling crowds after he quoted£16,000 per half-time show 
<http://www.ghanaweb.com/GhanaHomePage/NewsArchive/I-will-take-GHC-80-000-from-the-GFA-Shatta-Wale-483933>
. FA head Kwesi Nyantkyi’s previous best plan:2015’s effort 
<http://www.ghanaweb.com/GhanaHomePage/soccer/Sexy-girls-can-boost-Ghana-League-attendance-380111>
 to deploy “sexy ladies” in “nice jeans”. “We do that, and men will jump to the 
stadia, purposely to see the ladies.” OfficialTakyi Arhin 
<http://www.todaygh.com/on-sexy-ladies-suggestion-takyi-arhin-agrees-with-nyantakyi/>
: “I agree. For wherever you see flowers, there are bees.”
 