
Man of the week

Fifa’s Jérôme Valcke – banned for 12 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/12/jerome-valcke-banned-12-years-fifa-world-cup-tickets>
 for alleged expenses abuse, suspect deals, ticket racket collusion and 
“deleting several files and folders” of evidence – 15 months after heset the 
bar high 
<http://www.insideworldfootball.com/fifa/15914-valcke-says-fifa-image-needs-rebuilding-but-not-solely-for-sponsor-reasons>
: “The image of Fifa has reached a level which we will definitely not go lower 
than.”

• Valcke’s best transparency messages since Sepp rehired him in 2007 after his 
previous sacking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/31/fifa-rampant-systemic-deep-rooted-corruption-sepp-blatter>
:a) 2010’s advice to Nigeria’s FA 
<http://www.pmnewsnigeria.com/2010/07/08/fifa-backs-probe-of-nigeria%E2%80%99s-soccer-topshots/>
 executives: “It’s very important for officials to give account of themselves, 
of how their funds are spent. Fifa does not give room for, and will not 
condone, any corrupt official in its fold”;b) 2013’s disdain 
<http://www.espnfc.co.uk/story/1355075/jerome-valcke-fifa-needs-proof-to-act-on-corruption>
 for the idea he would cover up evidence: “How can one imagine that we could 
take the risk that, if there were the slightest piece of information about 
corruption, we would not disclose it? If we knew about corruption at Fifa – 
whether it be the president, the general secretary, or any other person – do 
you think we would have stayed quiet?”; andc) 2015’s personal statement over 
$10m bribery allegations linked to South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/03/fbi-investigating-fifa-2018-2022-world-cup>
: “I don’t have to justify myself... I’m beyond reproach. I certainly don’t 
feel guilty.”

Meanwhile: also transitioning last week

• Extradited former Fifa vice-president Eugenio Figueredo, 83, doing a deal to 
cut his jail time in half 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-soccer-fifa-uruguay-idUKKCN0VE2K3>. 
Prosecutor Juan Gómez: “It includes handing over 12 or 13 properties.”


• Former Fifa audit and compliance officer Canover Watson, jailed for seven 
years <http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-soccer-fifa-cayman-watson-idUKKCN0VF0LT>
 in the Cayman Islands for “shameless” fraud. The court rejected Watson’s 
defence that incriminating spreadsheets were “just doodles 
<https://caymannewsservice.com/2016/01/accounts-doodling-incriminates-watson/>”.

Fifa’s five presidential runners hit Miami and try to keep a lid on the vice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/11/fifa-five-presidential-candidates-miami-concacaf>
Staying upbeat

Former Fifa vice-president Jeffrey Webb: hosting a Harlem Renaissance-themed 
party <https://www.caymancompass.com/2016/02/09/webb-parties-amid-fifa-fallout/>
 featuring “champagne and blackjack” at the Georgia mansion he allegedly bought 
with fraud money. Webb, under house arrest, will be sentenced in June.

Plus: fresh start update

New last week from the Fifa campaign trail: a) Bahraini royal Sheikh Salman 
calling on his four rivals to drop out due tothe harsh nature of democracy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/11/fifa-five-presidential-candidates-miami-concacaf>
: “If we go to election there will be losers and maybe sometimes you need to 
avoid that.” Andb) Jérôme Champagne, visiting voters at Concacaf 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-soccer-fifa-concacaf-idUKKCN0VL0GL>, whose 
last three presidents have all been arrested: “The media treats your region 
unfairly.”

Other news: best timing

The Premier League: smoothing the row about clubs exploiting fans through 
ticket prices bylaunching its new brand identity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/09/the-fiver-premier-league-logo>
 with avideo montage 
<http://www.premierleague.com/en-gb/news/news/2015-16/feb/090216-new-look-for-premier-league-for-2016-2017.html>
: “We all have a part to play. Every fan, every player, everyone. We all make 
it.”

• The league’s official line on fan exploitation: Feb 2015 - Richard Scudamore 
rejecting a BBC question 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/11/richard-scudamore-premier-league-responsibility-living-wage>
 over whether clubs should cut ticket prices due to being “staggeringly 
wealthy” organisations: “Staggeringly wealthy in what sense? Not all of them 
make profits.”

Most important

1 Jan: Hartlepool chairman Gary Coxall’s new year message 
<http://www.hartlepoolunited.co.uk/news/article/hartlepool-chairman-gary-coxall-new-year-message-2016-2879352.aspx>
: “I want to make it clear that we give our 100% backing to Ronnie Moore. I 
think it’s very important we move away from the reputation of being a club 
which makes multiple managerial changes.”10 Feb: Sacks him 
<http://www.hartlepoolmail.co.uk/sport/football/hartlepool-utd/sacked-boss-ronnie-moore-gutted-after-absolutely-unbelievable-time-at-pools-1-7726758>
.

• Also making changes: Derby chairman Mel Morris, rethinking November’s pledge 
that “we won’t be getting rid of Paul Clement. Period 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/feb/09/derby-county-paul-clement-gamble-sacked>
”; and Palermo president Maurizio Zamparini, reflecting on hiring his sixth 
coach of the season after finding that his fifth, Guillermo Barros Schelotto, 
didn’t have his badges. “We’re having an unfortunate season 
<http://www.football-italia.net/79698/zamparini-%E2%80%98we-didn%E2%80%99t-examine-rules%E2%80%99>
.”

Best advice

Croatia: Zdravko Mamic – resigning as Dinamo Zagreb’s executive director to 
fightnew organised crime allegations 
<https://www.total-croatia-news.com/sport/2407-new-investigation-launched-against-dinamo-executive-chairman-zdravko-mamic>
 against him, which he denies. “I’m jailed every now and then without any 
concrete evidence.” Mamic says he’ll “take up an advisory role instead”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fsaid-and-done-jerome-valcke-beyond-reproach%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac42302e30c2d947bf38ec7329d067b386dd27ae%2F74_58_4013_2409%2F4013.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Said%20%26%20Done%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20beyond%20reproach.%20I%20certainly%20don%E2%80%99t%20feel%20guilty%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fsaid-and-done-jerome-valcke-beyond-reproach%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Said%20%26%20Done%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20beyond%20reproach.%20I%20certainly%20don%E2%80%99t%20feel%20guilty%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fsaid-and-done-jerome-valcke-beyond-reproach%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac42302e30c2d947bf38ec7329d067b386dd27ae%2F74_58_4013_2409%2F4013.jpg>
 Zdravko Mamic: jailed every now and then. Photograph: Antonio Bat/EPA 
Best moral ideas

Germany: Hannover 96 director Martin Bader, suspending three youth teamers for 
trying to rob a casino 
<http://www.bild.de/sport/fussball/hannover-96/bubis-wollten-casino-ausrauben-44477104.bild.html>
 using balaclavas and a starter pistol. The plot failed when police found the 
players’ getaway car parked in a no-waiting zone with fake plates. Bader: “Such 
things do not comply with our values or moral ideas.”

Worst editing

Nigeria coach Sunday Oliseh – saying sorry after being fined $30,000 for an 
eight-minute video attack 
<https://www.informationng.com/2016/02/nff-fine-sunday-oliseh-30000-over-insane-video-rant.html>
 on his “insane” critics and their “constant insanity”. “I would never dare 
refer to my beloved country men as insane! Please forgive the error of editing! 
God bless you all.”

Magic news

Egypt: Zamalek chairman Mortada Mansour, denying claims from sacked coach Mido 
that he hired “impostors pretending to be sorcerers” to try and turn the side’s 
form: “He insults us, I won’t stand silent 
<http://english.ahram.org.eg/NewsContent/6/51/187457/Sports/Egyptian-Football/Zamaleks-chairman-denies-magic-claims,-harangues-s.aspx>
.” Mido, sacked live on TV, claimed Mansour paid the men £600 a match for 
“sorcery” advice, and ousted three players for being “bewitched”: “I have the 
photos to prove it.”

Best rule checker

Brazil: Guarani de Palhoça coach Sérgio Ramirez – using a traffic cone to 
shout tactics at his players 
<https://twitter.com/NSenseFootball/status/697784880609042432?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
 after being sent to the stands against Figueirense. Ramirez, who lost the cone 
after it rolled off the gantry, told TV: “I broke no rules.”
Non Sense Football (@NSenseFootball) 
SEGURA O CONE! pic.twitter.com/0tRnHaTcn1 <https://t.co/0tRnHaTcn1>
 <https://twitter.com/NSenseFootball/status/697784880609042432> February 11, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/NSenseFootball/status/697784880609042432> 
Plus: not wavering

Brazil: Model Suzy Cortez: standing by last month’s resolution (“In 2016 I 
will have no bad sex with footballers; that’s not who I am”) – promising São 
Paulo’s squad a fresh set of themed photos for every Copa Libertadores win. 
“After every victory, come hot surprises.”
 