
Move of the week

Joe Hart – joining Torino for their “humility… I like that. That’s how I want 
to be”, two months after his new Nike Pro Genius Self-Talk ft Joe Hart 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JOr62kSK2K0> 
ad debuted at full-time of England 1 Iceland 2. His message in the ad: “I can 
stop anything, I will dominate my area. The only person who can beat me is me.”

Other window highlights

1) Valencia’s Paco Alcácer, July: “A few years ago I never dreamed I’d be at 
Valencia, let alone be captain. Now I want trophies for this club, that would 
be the bomb. When I put this shirt on I feel the tingle, the pride.”August: 
Joins Barça <http://as.com/videos/2016/08/30/en/1472566221_519627.html>.

2) Aug 2015: Islam Slimani signs a new Sporting Lisbon five-year deal. “It’s 
the best decision I ever made. When I hear thousands of Sporting fans call my 
name I feel it, for me, and for my family. This is the club that made me.”Aug 
2016: Requests transfer, joins Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/31/leicester-confirm-30m-signing-of-islam-slimani-from-sporting-lisbon>
.

3) Napoli striker Gonzalo Higuaín, May: “I just feel so loved at Napoli. I 
feel it more than at any other club.”July: Joins Juve.

Premier League 2016 summer transfer window: club-by-club verdicts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/31/premier-league-2016-summer-transfer-window-club-by-club-verdicts>
• Also following his heart – Moussa Sissoko, 2013: 
<http://www.goal.com/en-gb/news/2896/premier-league/2013/02/12/3746419/newcastle-new-boy-sissoko-reveals-admiration-for-arsenal>
“When I was a kid Arsenal made me dream.”2014:  
<http://en.espn.co.uk/football/sport/story/382597.html>“Arsenal were always my 
favourites. I always loved that club, I still love that club. There are a lot 
of rumours, but I have an agent who takes care of such matters.”June 2016:  
<http://www.skysports.com/football/news/11678/10306443/moussa-sissoko-wants-to-leave-newcastle-and-join-arsenal>
“As I often said, when I was young Arsenal was the club of my heart. The 
beautiful Arsenal. We will see.”August: Joins Spurs 
<https://twitter.com/SpursOfficial/status/771115275399946241>.

• Most subtle plea: Leicester’s Riyad Mahrez, 16 August, committing his 
future. Although: “Now, there are two or three clubs in the world, that if they 
come for me, it definitely makes you think, if you understand what I am trying 
to say...”

• Plus: best timing - A Football Foundation press release, issued with seven 
hours left on deadline day as spending passed £1bn, revealing£28.3m went to 
grassroots in the last six months. “Premier League clubs are investing in the 
heart of local communities.”

Other news: reformer of the week

Gianni Infantino – calling his new Fifa pay deal proof of his emerging 
anti-greed culture. Infantino said his reduced £1.15m basic plus bonuses, car, 
house and £1,542 a month expenses “reflects more than any word can reflect my 
strong will to end the behaviour that has, in the recent past, led to abuses”.

• Also last month: Infantino says thanks to “all those who cooperated with the 
investigation to ensure truth prevailed” afterFifa’s ethics committee cleared 
him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/05/gianni-infantino-cleared-ethics-violations-fifa>
 over alleged misuse of private jets and expenses. Fifa said two employees 
alleged to have been whistleblowers in the case “have now left us, due to 
restructuring”.

Manager news: tough week for

Bulgaria: New Botev Plovdiv coach Nikolay Mitov, resigning two hours into the 
job after 30 fans abused him at the training ground. Botev owner Rumen 
Chandarov: “Generally in life I respect the views of others, even the greatest 
morons. But I cannot respect this.”

Most flighty

Italy, 1 Aug: Gennaro Gattuso resigns as Pisa manager due to “serious and 
relentless issues. This decision is irrevocable.”1 Sep: Revokes it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/02/gennaro-gattuso-rejoins-pisa-a-month-after-resigning-over-working-conditions>
.

(Gattuso’s previous best rethink: Sept 2014 at an OFI Crete press conference, 
shouting at Greek journalists in English 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7clSlIXxBZo>: “No leave. Leave what? Leave 
what? It’s too easy for me leave. No, me stay here.”26 Oct: Leaves. 27 Oct: 
Comes back. “I’m loved here. How can I leave?”30 Dec: Leaves again.)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7clSlIXxBZo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7clSlIXxBZo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7clSlIXxBZo&media=>
 Gennaro Gattuso: ‘No leave’ 
Best newcomer

New Villa owner @Dr_TonyXia’s top two pre‑season messages: 1) 
<https://twitter.com/dr_tonyxia/status/759631227426963456> “It was because of 
impatience that they were expelled from Paradise; it is because of indolence 
that they do not return – Kafka.” And2) 
<https://twitter.com/dr_tonyxia/status/768954556449423360> a pledge to listen 
to fans: “Quotation from Mao: We must have faith in the masses.”

Best metaphor

Romania: Botosani manager Leo Grozavu, bringing a jar of pickles to a press 
conference last month to make a point. “Look at my pickles 
<http://www.monitorulexpres.ro/arhiva_foto/2016/mari/Grozavu_muraturi_20160818081513.jpg>
. This is how I describe the state of Romanian football. We are smaller 
pickles, others are bigger pickles. It’s time to be realistic.”

Most contrite

Universidad de Chile coach Sebastián Beccacece – facing a ban for kicking over 
a pitch-side fridge <https://twitter.com/Mati_navarro/status/769640710333235201>
 during a tantrum. Officials condemned “an explosive act against an electronic 
device”. Beccacece: “I want to apologise for this massive error on my part. 
I’ve been really bad.”
Matias Navarro (@Mati_navarro) 
Sebastián Beccacece se enojó con la derrota de la U de Chile en el clásico y 
se descargó a las patadaspic.twitter.com/oStaMmHpyW <https://t.co/oStaMmHpyW>
 <https://twitter.com/Mati_navarro/status/769640710333235201> August 27, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Mati_navarro/status/769640710333235201> 
Most graphic

Brazil: Corinthians director Eduardo Ferreira, asked why the club cleared out 
20 squad players in eight months. “Consider it like this. When one has a belly 
ache, often the answer is rapid diarrhoea, high volume, rather than letting it 
linger for days, for weeks, for years. We feel better for it.”

Feeling content

Sweden: Third-tier Norrby IF defender Medi Dresevic, reflecting on being shown 
a second yellow for celebrating his hat-trick bytaking a seat in the stands and 
applauding himself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/aug/31/hat-trick-scoring-defender-medi-dresevic-sent-off-after-playful-celebration-video>
. “It’s been positive all in all. The coach was dissatisfied and fined me, but 
I knew I’d go viral.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fhat-trick-scoring-defender-medi-dresevic-sent-off-after-playful-celebration-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hat-trick%20scoring%20defender%20Medi%20Dresevic%20sent%20off%20after%20playful%20celebration%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fhat-trick-scoring-defender-medi-dresevic-sent-off-after-playful-celebration-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hat-trick%20scoring%20defender%20Medi%20Dresevic%20sent%20off%20after%20playful%20celebration%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fhat-trick-scoring-defender-medi-dresevic-sent-off-after-playful-celebration-video&media=>
Medi Dresevic, going viral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/aug/31/hat-trick-scoring-defender-medi-dresevic-sent-off-after-playful-celebration-video>
And: most misunderstood

Brazil: Miss Bumbum 2015 winner Suzy Cortez – appealing to Lionel Messi to 
unblock her on Instagram after she reportedly “inundated him with selfies”. “I 
think blocking me was just his wife exaggerating these things. What an 
over-reaction.”
 