
Brand managers of the week

Uefa – acting against fans disrespecting its jingle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/oct/22/uefa-booing-anthem-manchester-city>
, matching 2014’s response after Legia Warsaw fans displayed a banner featuring 
a pig, the Uefa badge and the slogan: “Football Doesn’t Matter, Money Does.”
Uefa fined Legia 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/news/legia-warsaw-fined-103k-anti-191858079--sow.html> 
£63,000 for displaying a sentiment “not fit for a sports event”.

Meanwhile: busy week for

Spain’s FA head Ángel María Villar Llona – promoted to Fifa’s emergency 
committee;named interim head 
<http://www.fifa.com/about-fifa/news/y=2015/m=10/news=fifa-exco-confirms-february-election-approves-more-transparency-for-et-2719441.html>
 of its 2018 World Cup committee; and, 24 hours later,named as a suspect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/21/fifa-ethics-investigations-beckenbauer-villar-llona>
 in the ethics committee’s 2018 World Cup inquiry. He denies wrongdoing.

• Standing by at Uefa if they have to suspend both Michel Platini and deputy 
Villar Llona:third-in-line 
<http://www.uefa.org/about-uefa/executive-committee/index.html> Marios 
Lefkaritis– who was named in May 
<http://cyprus-mail.com/2015/05/27/lefkaritis-wanted-for-questioning-in-separate-fifa-probe/>
 on the Swiss Attorney General’s list of officials to be questioned over 
alleged “criminal mismanagement”. He denies wrongdoing.

And elsewhere last week

• Best leadership: “We will do whatever it takes to restore credibility … to 
send a strong message <http://www.fifa.com/about-fifa/the-fifa-weekly/> that 
those who govern football must be worthy of the task” - Acting Fifa president 
Issa Hayatou,censured for taking kickbacks in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/dec/08/lamine-diack-issa-hayatou-ioc>.

• Most credible: “Fifa has no credibility … this is a challenge I would 
proudly accept, yet the first priority should be delaying the election and 
bringing sanity to the process” -Paddy Power’s David Ginola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jan/16/david-ginola-fifa-pr-campaign>
.

• Most got at: Nigeria’s Amos Adamu, facing a new ethics inquiry, two years 
after returning from his three-year bribery ban. Adamutold the press in 2013 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/0/football/24610279>: “I am free again to 
contribute to football in Nigeria, Africa and the world. This is the new Amos 
Adamu.”

• And one to watch: Jack Warner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/21/jack-warner-fifa-extradition-us-step-closer>
, revealing plans to write a book of personal career reflections, titled: “In 
the Belly of the Beast”.

Other news: grandeur latest

May 2015: Nike and PSG unveil the club’s new kit 
<http://news.nike.com/news/grandeur-respect-passion-paris-saint-germain-home-kit-for-2015-16-epitomizes-club-s-core-values>
, designed to celebrate “the club’s core values of grandeur, respect and 
passion”.Oct 2015: Nike and PSG fined €5.5m by a French court 
<http://www.afp.com/en/news/psg-nike-fined-55-mn-euros-undeclared-player-payments>
 for failing to declare salary top-ups for players, to avoid tax.

Best laid plan

May 2015: Leeds owner Massimo Cellino 
<http://www.yorkshireeveningpost.co.uk/sport/leeds-united/latest-lufc-news/video-leeds-united-same-old-routine-as-cellino-takes-up-the-reins-at-elland-road-once-again-1-7261759>
: “The fans can tell me I’m a dick. But I look after my club. The fans, they 
don’t understand. They will.”

• 27: Average days between a Cellino Leeds vote of confidence and a sacking – 
including 20 days for Uwe Rösler (“the best person for me and the team 
<http://www.yorkshirepost.co.uk/sport/football/leeds-utd/leeds-united-rosler-welcomes-cellino-s-vote-of-confidence-1-7494407>
”) and Dave Hockaday’s 2014 exit,four days after this 
<http://www.yorkshirepost.co.uk/sport/football/leeds-utd/blame-me-says-cellino-as-under-pressure-hockaday-is-given-reprieve-1-6803329>
: “It’s too simple to sack him. If I fire anyone, I should fire myself, or else 
I’m a coward. I have to control my ego.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F24%2Fsaid-and-done-uefa-fans-booing-anthem-legia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F24%2F1445723647051%2F3376c8f6-f846-4f1a-b4d7-c6f31169417f-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Said%20%26%20Done%3A%20Uefa%E2%80%99s%20brand%3B%20Steve%20Evans%3B%20and%20the%20belly%20of%20the%20beast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F24%2Fsaid-and-done-uefa-fans-booing-anthem-legia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Said%20%26%20Done%3A%20Uefa%E2%80%99s%20brand%3B%20Steve%20Evans%3B%20and%20the%20belly%20of%20the%20beast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F24%2Fsaid-and-done-uefa-fans-booing-anthem-legia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F24%2F1445723647051%2F3376c8f6-f846-4f1a-b4d7-c6f31169417f-1360x2040.jpeg>
• Meanwhile: Steve Evans’s week one press conference highlights. Evans on 
morale: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/21/fulham-leeds-united-championship-match-report>
“I think the players saw a corner turned when Steve Evans walked in”;On his 
work ethic: <https://twitter.com/PhilHayYEP/status/657501063138910208> “When 
Steve Evans asks players to be brave, I want them on the ball”;On his vision: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/20/steve-evans-leeds-united-manager-massimo-cellino>
“I’m a realist. Steve Evans doesn’t lie in bed and dream”;And on a fake Steve 
Evans quote circulating on Twitter: <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p0360sxq> 
“What a scandalous, horrible thing to attribute to Steve Evans.”

Best assessment

Romania: Astra coach Marius Sumudica – whose side face a points deduction over 
debts after jailed billionaire owner Ioan Niculae cut off funding for wages and 
food – advising club officials to try harder to solve the crisis. “If they 
can’t solve it they must quit. If they fail, everyone at this club is a cretin, 
a retard. Everyone.”

Best moral stand

Romania: Steaua owner Gigi Becali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/mar/07/gigi-becali-steaua-bucharest-owner>
 – given a suspended sentence for kidnapping in 2013 – upset after one of his 
players was alleged to have hit an ex-girlfriend: “He’s a vagabond! A thug! The 
boy is talented, but how could he hit the girl? Impossible! A vagabond! That’s 
my opinion!”

Most exasperated

Costa Rica: Alajuelense coach Hernán Torres, asked about footage showing him 
making “vulgar gestures behind his back <https://vine.co/v/eVK0jTTZLw1>” at 
fans: “Oh, just let it go. I just put my hands behind my back, then nothing 
happened. Ave Maria! If you see vulgar gestures, that’s your problem.”

Best celebrity watchers

Costa Rica: 25 government agents suspended pending criminal charges 
<http://www.elmundo.es/deportes/2015/10/22/5629124dca4741616c8b4674.html> for 
using a restricted database to spy on national keeper Keylor Navas while he was 
starring in the 2014 World Cup. The inquiry found the “fanboy” espionage – 
which included one agent making multiple attempts to “check out” the 
goalkeeper’s two sisters - had “no possible justification”.

Clarification of the week

Brazil: Fluminense president Peter Siemsen addressing the press after referee 
Leandro Vuaden reported him for shouting “crook, thief, robber, son of a bitch, 
you whistle for the rich”. Siemsen: “Yes I was aggressive, verbally aggressive. 
But let me say this: he deserved it.”

Plus: model of the week

Brazil: Referee Guilherme Ceretta 
<http://globoesporte.globo.com/sp/sorocaba/futebol/noticia/2015/10/arbitro-que-deixou-quadro-da-cbf-diz-sofrer-perseguicao-por-ser-modelo.html>
, accusing Brazil’s FA of forcing him out for being “too beautiful”. Ceretta 
said his modelling work made board members “uneasy … but why? Why must we have 
just ugly referees?” FA officials deny prejudice: “Ceretta was just 
substandard.”
 