
Big week for

West Ham’s rebrand – delivered this summer as part of “the most successful 
stadium migration in history 
<http://www.whufc.com/News/Articles/2016/July/25-July/A-message-from-the-Vice-Chairman>
”. Karren Brady told an industry event on 5 October how theimage values upgrade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/05/west-ham-karren-brady-stadium-move>
 “has really had a dynamic impact on the things we can do”.

West Ham at the London Stadium: a troubled start at the Olympic Park
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/27/west-ham-london-stadium-troubled-start>
• Her measure of success: “We’re ranked 15th in terms of brand values. We were 
115th when I joined.”Another measure: E20 Stadium officials confirming they’re 
“actively in the market for a naming rights partner” afterMahindra Group 
withdrew 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/football/2016/10/27/west-ham-left-counting-cost-of-hooliganism-after-naming-rights-s/>
.

Plus: due an edit

West Ham’s film of the move, as trailed by Brady at the same industry event. 
“We’re making a movie called Iron Men. It’s about the transition of the values 
and the history of West Ham supporters from the Boleyn to the London Stadium.”

Most upbeat

Uefa’s internal inquiry team – investigating the €4m loan Uefa gave Slovenia’s 
FA in 2015 to invest in a betting firm.Their findings 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/wires/ap/article-3873984/UEFA-broke-no-rules-granting-4-4-million-Slovenian-loan.html>
: “The loan was entirely in accordance with standard Uefa procedures.” President
Aleksander Ceferin – in charge of Slovenia’s FA at the time – says allegations 
around the loan were “mosquito bites” put about to hurt him. “The loan was as 
clean as possible.”

Also last week from the football family

1) Spain’s FA resisting claims 
<http://www.elmundo.es/deportes/2016/10/28/58127b41ca4741b95a8b4620.html> that 
they spent public money intended for 2010 Haiti earthquake aid on FA expenses 
instead. Government officials allege €176,000 of the €219,500 grant for a 
football school was “diverted”; sports minister Miguel Cardenal: “We have asked 
them to return it. The federation does not want to.”


2) Former Peru FA head Manuel Burga facing extradition to the US this week on 
racketeering charges, which he denies. Among his best moments:2011 – giving his 
re-election victory speech while a colleague’s phone playedThe Godfather 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PPskYVBqdNw> theme in the background; and 2010 
- laying into six Peru players who hired prostitutes at a casino after a 
defeat: “There’s so much hypocrisy from these players.The saying is true 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/oct/31/said-and-done-fifa-corruption>
: a tree born crooked will never grow straight.”

And 3) Bolivia FA secretary Walter Torrico resigning 
<http://www.erbol.com.bo/noticia/deportes/28102016/walter_torrico_renuncia_como_secretario_general_de_la_fbf>
 after being placed under house arrest for “pretending to be a lawyer”. 
Officials say Torrico posed as an attorney “without any qualifications”; 
Torrico – also accused of “laundering illicit profits” – denies wrongdoing.

• Torrico set out his vision for a clean-up last year after seeing FA president
Carlos Chavez remanded in custody 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/18/fifa-scandal-us-securities-commission-investigates-company-dealings-report>
 on organised crime charges, which he denies. “Our game is in ashes, so it’s 
time to set a new course, standing up for the common good.”

Long, sorry decline of Coventry City leaves fans in a state of despair
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/12/coventry-city-decline-despair-league-one>
Other news: best timing

Coventry City - still deflecting fan protests 
<http://www.coventrytelegraph.net/news/coventry-news/hundreds-sky-blues-fans-turnout-12064482>
 against owners Sisu, and backing the League’s “Enjoy the Match” campaign with
this message 
<http://www.ccfc.co.uk/news/article/2016-17/enjoy-the-match-coventry-city-efl-26102016-3384105.aspx>
: “Here at Coventry City we want our fans to have the best possible experience 
on a matchday, and leave smiling, no matter the result.”

Kicking it out

Spain: Castilla-La Mancha’s FA 
<http://www.mundodeportivo.com/futbol/20161024/411270973339/puto-mono-de-mierda-no-es-un-insulto-racista.html>
, assessing whether a player who called a black CD Bargas opponent a “shit 
monkey” was being racist: “The phrase is, in the literal sense, unrelated to 
racism or xenophobia … Therefore it cannot be classed as intended to disparage 
or demean a particular ethnic group.” Bargas – who allege the insult came with 
“accompanying monkey gestures” - plan to appeal.

Best UKIP moment

Argentina: Velez Sarsfield president Raúl Gamez denying he punched FA 
vice-president Jorge Medin in a row over TV cash while shouting “I’ll break 
your head, you don’t fuck with Velez”: “Yes I barged into his office, I was 
emotional - but it was just a debate. Let’s move on.”

Manager news: last week’s movers

• 9 Oct: Grimsby’s Paul Hurst shrugs off links with Shrewsbury 
<http://www.shropshirestar.com/sport/shrewsbury-town-fc/2016/10/10/paul-hurst-rules-himself-out-of-shrewsbury-town-manager-chase/>
: “I know nothing about those links. I’m manager of Grimsby Town, trying to do 
the best I can here. I can assure you, I’m not thinking of anything other than 
Grimsby Town.”24 Oct: Joins Shrewsbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/24/paul-hurst-leaves-grimsby-new-manager-shrewsbury>
.

• 11 Oct: MK Dons manager Karl Robinson reflects on talks 
<http://www.onemk.co.uk/mk-dons-karl-robinson-confident-he-has-chairman-s-support-after-latest-home-defeat/story-29797388-detail/story.html>
 with owner Pete Winkleman, 12 days beforebeing sacked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/23/league-one-karl-robinson-leaves-mk-dons-by-mutual-consent>
. “We had a meeting yesterday about what we’re going to do in January and how 
exciting that can be moving forward. The chairman was fantastic... he knows the 
results will turn.”

• 29 Sept: Wolves director Jeff Shi on coach Walter Zenga: “Walter is very 
passionate. Walter shows the passion to the fans and they love him. They also 
write a song for him! In this area he did something out of my expectation.”25 
Oct: Sacks him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/25/wolverhampton-wanderers-sack-walter-zenga-championship>
.

• And a non-mover – 12 Oct: Egypt’s Zamalek SC coach Moamen Soliman previews 
the Caf Champions League final: “If we lose this I’ll resign. And I’ll do it by 
phone in order not to embarrass anyone.”23 Oct: Loses it 3-1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/24/mortada-mansour-blames-sorcery-zamalek-african-champions-league-defeat>
. “Now we fight for the title.”

Said & Done: Fifa 2.0; peddling migrant lies; and dive of the week
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/23/said-and-done-football-diary-fifa-migrant-lies-dive-of-the-week>
Most relaxed

Roma coach Luciano Spalletti, headbutting his press conference desk four times 
<https://twitter.com/GoalItalia/status/790537625149042688> after being asked 
about the atmosphere. “Who sent you? Tell me who sent you. Why are you here? 
What do you mean? You want to ask the same old stuff? Mamma mia. Incredible 
scenes.”

Faster fingers

@halesowentownfc’s 
<https://twitter.com/halesowentownfc/status/791005388837715968?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
live coverage midweek: “54mins 0-0 Delaney shoots wife after Anderson feeds him 
the ball #HALvTAM.”

Plus: most maligned

Argentina: Atlético Patronato defender Jonathan Ferrari, upset over claims 
<http://www.ambito.com/859880-escandalo-sexual-denuncian-a-defensor-de-patronato-por-organizar-una-orgia>
 he hosted an “excessive orgy” for team-mates on his balcony, with police 
breaking it up at 6am. “It’s lies. People look at my past and think I’m still 
the same. Sure, the police shouted at us - but they didn’t come in.”
 