
Long-term economic plan of the week

George Osborne’s 30% local authority cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/19/labour-andy-burnham-cuts-sports-funding>
 – coming this week, two months after he handed China £3m toboost their 
grassroots football 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/major-uk-funding-boost-for-grassroots-football-in-china>
: “Grassroots football plays an instrumental role in UK life. It is brilliant 
to be able to spread that.”

• £215m: amount already cut from councils’ annual spending on grassroots sport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/05/olympic-legacy-failure-sports-centres-council-cuts>
 since 2010. (David Cameron’s 2011 FA Cup final programme notes: “From local 
parks and schools to clubs across the land, the dream of the Cup final has 
helped inspire a fantastic legacy of grassroots football in this country … 
Through football we can re-engage young people who are going through hard 
times. It offers them the hope, and the confidence, they need.”)

Fifa’s week: tidiest journey

2014: Nepal FA president Ganesh Thapa meets Sepp in Zurich 
<http://the-anfa.com/newspage-139-anfa+prez+fifa+prez+talk+about+football+development+in+nepal>
 to discuss how best to use his Fifa development money.2015: Thapa banned for 
10 years for corruption,with an embezzlement inquiry ongoing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/16/fifa-nepal-ganesh-thapa-10-years>
. He denies wrongdoing.

• Still making it on to Thapa’s official online FA profile list of career 
landmarks <http://the-anfa.com/article-PresidentCV>: “Chairman, AFC Fair play 
Committee”; “Member, Fifa Disciplinary Committee”; “The National Youth welfare 
award”; and “Gorkha Dakshin Bahu III (Most Prestigious Award), presented by 
Late King His Majesty Birendra Bir Bikram Shah Dev”. Not making the cut: his 
ban and £13,000 fine.

• Thapa’s perspective on the sanctions, after a month which also featured five 
Nepal playersdenying treason charges 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-34763303> over alleged match-fixing and 
hisU16s disqualified from the AFC Championship 
<http://thehimalayantimes.com/sports/national-sports-council-seeks-clarification-from-anfa/>
 for fielding over-age players: “I spent 35 years for Nepali football. I’m very 
disappointed.”

Also signing off

Laos FA president Viphet Sihachakr. 2011: Visits Zurich to award Sepp a Laos 
Friendship Medal 
<http://www.fifa.com/about-fifa/news/y=2011/m=9/news=fifa-president-honoured-laos-1513484.html>
. Sepp: “I am very honoured and touched … What is more precious than 
friendship?”2015: Banned for two years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/16/fifa-nepal-ganesh-thapa-10-years>
 for bribe-taking.

Stat of the week

168: Number of the 209 Fifa member associations who fail to make their annual 
financial reports public. 87, including Qatar, scored zero in theTransparency 
International research rankings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/19/transparency-international-fifa-secretive>
; one in five have no website.

Twist of the week

12 Nov: Chile’s FA president Sergio Jadue takes a 30-day leave of absence 
<http://www.anfp.cl/noticia/25134/presidente-de-la-anfp-pidio-al-directorio-ausentarse-30-dias-por-motivos-de-salud>
 “for health reasons”.18 Nov: Flies to the US to help the FBI with their 
inquiries 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/11/18/us-soccer-fifa-chile-idUSKCN0T71TU20151118>
.

Plus: award of the week

Trinidad: Jack Warner, 72, still fighting extradition, awarded a Masters in 
business administration at agraduation ceremony at the Hilton Trinidad 
<https://twitter.com/EWilliamstv6/status/663184959801335812>, Port-of-Spain. He 
told Trinidad’s Newsday: “The day one stops learning, one dies. I do not 
consider myself to be an average person.”
Elizabeth Williams (@EWilliamstv6) 
Jack Warner graduates with MBA. pic.twitter.com/4ZpObJFoEn 
<https://t.co/4ZpObJFoEn>
 <https://twitter.com/EWilliamstv6/status/663184959801335812> November 8, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/EWilliamstv6/status/663184959801335812> 
Other news: best example

Italy: Juventus “actively collaborating with police” after an alleged “racist 
brawl” among parents at an Under-10s gameleft two adults in hospital 
<http://www.gazzetta.it/Calcio/Serie-A/Torino/17-11-2015/rissa-genitori-pulcini-razzismo-derby-torino-juventus-borgomanero-racconto-madre-aggredita-130958514753.shtml>
. Regional official Gianfranco Porqueddu says banning parents from games “is 
the way to handle such idiots. I remain of the view that the best athletes are 
orphans”.

Biggest setback

Croatia: Dinamo Zagreb owner Zdravko Mamic – re-arrested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/18/dinamo-zagreb-mamic-arrested> 
over alleged tax evasion, bribery and organised crime, which he denies. Mamic’s 
previous denials –2010: telling a journalist 
<https://youtu.be/HKzwdpVi1XA?t=2m37s>: “Lies! You lie and can’t stop lying. 
You dirty monster, you never wash. Bastard, bastard, miserable bastard”; and
2011:assessing hecklers at a press conference: “I’ll maul you, one by one. You 
donkeys better pray to God that I stay in here, because when I leave I’ll beat 
you like cats.”

Task of the week

Steve Clarke: looking to ease Reading fans’ “angst and anger” after he spent 
the week in talks with Fulham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/20/steve-clarke-insists-decision-stay-reading-manager-not-about-money-fulham>
. Clarke’sday-one message 
<http://www.readingfc.co.uk/news/article/steve-clarke-interview-reading-manager-2149006.aspx>
 when he joined Reading last December: “It may be your CV that gets you into a 
club, but it’s what you do when you get there that counts.”

Last week’s other manager news:

• 13 Nov: Halifax chairman David Bosomworth 
<http://www.halifaxcourier.co.uk/sport/fc-halifax-town/fc-halifax-town-news/fc-halifax-town-we-have-to-start-getting-results-says-town-chairman-1-7564973>
 says manager Darren Kelly needs time and financial backing. “We will do our 
best to support Darren in the best way we can.”17 Nov: Sacks him 
<http://www.halifaxcourier.co.uk/sport/fc-halifax-town/fc-halifax-town-news/fc-halifax-town-manager-kelly-sacked-by-shaymen-1-7576100>
.

• Qatar, 19 Nov: Al Gharafa coach Péricles Chamusca says he’s relaxed about 
criticism of his first eight games. “You just have to stay focused. After that 
you can be sure: God will give you what you deserve.”20 Nov: God sacks him 
<http://www.hurriyetdailynews.com/galatasaray-in-search-of-new-coach-after-sacking-hamza-hamzaoglu.aspx?pageID=238&nID=91380&NewsCatID=361>
.

• Turkey, 11 Nov: Galatasaray president Dursun Ozbek plays down talk around 
coach Hamza Hamzaoglu’s future: “I respect criticism, but not when it’s as 
irrational as this. To be clear, as long as I am at this club, Hamzaoglu stays.”
18 Nov:Hamzaoglu goes; Ozbek stays 
<http://www.gulf-times.com/sport/192/details/463482/-al-gharafa-coach-pericles-chamusca-leaves-club-by-mutual-consent>
.

Pledge of the week

Spain: Celtic de Pulianas player Rubén Gómez Bustamante 
<http://www.abc.es/deportes/futbol/abci-agresor-pene-defiende-mujer-saque-nada-201511180824_noticia.html>
, sacked after referee Jesús Lorenzo Rodríguez accused him of “attempting to 
strike my assistant with his penis, having taken it out in advance”. 
Bustamante: “At no point did it leave my pants. I’ll fight this.”

Most unmoved

Romania: Metalul Resita players staging an in-match sit-down protest with a 
“Stop Slavery” banner after going unpaid for up to 10 months. Owner Catalin 
Rufa. “That’s life, they can sit if they want, we’ll play the kids instead. I’m 
done with so-called footballers.”

Plus: making it right

Venezuela: Diego Maradona, undergoing gastric surgery 
<http://www.espnfc.com/argentina/story/2714968/diego-maradona-has-second-gastric-bypass-surgery-again>
 to slim down for his wedding to Rocío Oliva, 25 – a year after he falsely 
accused her of theft. His previous best gesture of reconciliation:having a 
tattoo tribute to Oliva 
<https://twitter.com/tattoo_skull/status/548493320323104768> – the word “bitch” 
– inked on his chest. Reports said Oliva was “very moved by his token of love”.
 