
Quote of the week

Bayern Munich: weighing up pressure from fans, politicians and human rights 
groups 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-soccer-germany-bayern-qatar-idUKKBN0UK2CZ20160106>
 not to travel to Qatar for another warm-PR winter training break - then 
arriving in Doha with an answer: “A training camp is not a political statement.”

• Last year’s winter break highlight: a €2m stopover in Saudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/20/bayern-munich-human-rights-saudi-arabia>
 while their hostsflogged and jailed blogger Raif Badawi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/08/raif-badawi-supporters-to-give-petition-to-saudi-embassy-in-london>
. Bayern issued a statement days later: “Everyone, ourselves included, bears 
responsibility for compliance with human rights … Human rights are an integral 
value … [But] we are a football club, not political policy-makers.”

Best democrat 

“My primary objective is to make Fifa an organisation of the highest moral, 
ethical standards. I shall always listen to and learn from all voices; I shall 
welcome constructive criticism” - Fifa candidate andBahraini royal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/16/sheikh-salman-al-khalifa-fifa-president-bahrain-human-rights>
 Sheikh Salman Bin Ebrahim Al Khalifa.

Also last week from Fifa

• Michel Platini keeping his dignity: “I’m withdrawing from the race for Fifa 
presidency. The timing is not good for me. I have not been given the chance to 
play the game. Bye bye Fifa, bye byeFifa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa> presidency.”

• And Brazil’s FA, cooling speculation about why indicted president Marco Polo 
del Nero 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/03/fifa-arrests-ricardo-teixeira-loretta-lynch>
 plans to start 2016 with a 150-day leave of absence. “It is for personal 
reasons. He will take leave, voluntarily, from 8 January.”

Meanwhile: breaking cover

Adidas CEO Herbert Hainer – relaxed last year about brand damage from the 
firm’s proximity to the Fifa crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/03/sepp-blatter-respite-fifa-sponsors>
 and from disputed links tocorruption allegations around Germany 2006 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-soccer-fifa-adidas-idUSKCN0SU1I520151105> 
(“The image for our products has never been better”) – but uneasy this year 
aboutthe impact of Manchester United’s negative 4-2-3-1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/04/manchester-united-louis-van-gaal-criticised-adidas-herbert-hainer>
. “The current playing style is not exactly what we want to see.”

Best insight

Charlton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/01/roland-duchtelet-charlton-the-valley-addicks-nick-miller>
 chief executiveKatrien Meire, opening up at an industry conference last month 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GGCeoxawIwE&feature=youtu.be> about “weird” 
fans who fail to “see themselves as customers … When I get ‘friendly’ emails 
from fans they say get out of ‘our’ club. Not the shareholders’ club. It’s 
quite funny … when they go to restaurants and the cinema and are not satisfied 
with the product do they scream to the people in charge of it? No they don’t, 
but they do it with the football club and that’s very weird. They feel this 
sense of ownership.”

Spare a thought for

Brazil: Ex-Flamengo keeper Bruno, serving 22 years for having his girlfriend 
killed and fed to dogs to avoid paying child support 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/10565346>, eyeing a playing comeback via early 
release 
<https://esportes.yahoo.com/blogs/redacao/goleiro-bruno-revela-ter-perdido-todo-o-dinheiro-e-n%C3%A3o-v%C3%AA-jogos-da-sele%C3%A7%C3%A3o-175600887.html>
. “I lost everything, man, I’m broke. But I believe in a better future for me, 
and for my family.”

• Among his options: Montes Claros, who bought Bruno’s registration in 2014 in 
a failed bid to sign him on day release. Club president Ville Mocellin: “We 
want to give an opportunity to this man Bruno. He lost his head – but people 
make mistakes. He deserves this chance.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Fsaid-and-done-bayern-munich-qatar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F422011146a7e6dfd21369b1d976543a096c9fa19%2F1072_76_1493_2240%2F1493.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Said%20%26%20Done%3A%20Florentino%20P%C3%A9rez%3B%20Bayern%20in%20Qatar%3B%20and%20fans%20being%20weird&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Fsaid-and-done-bayern-munich-qatar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Said%20%26%20Done%3A%20Florentino%20P%C3%A9rez%3B%20Bayern%20in%20Qatar%3B%20and%20fans%20being%20weird&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Fsaid-and-done-bayern-munich-qatar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F422011146a7e6dfd21369b1d976543a096c9fa19%2F1072_76_1493_2240%2F1493.jpg>
 Photograph: Juan Medina/Reuters 
Read my lips

Spain, 23 Nov: Real Madrid president Florentino Pérez: “No one here has said 
anything against Rafael Benítez. All this media stuff is just done to 
destabilise us. It’s terrible and it’s daily and there will be some naive 
people who believe it. Some people’s raison d’être is just to destabilise us, 
and I will not allow it. Benítez must be given the time and space to work, then 
success will surely follow. Rafa has all our support, all of our confidence – 
he has just started his work here, so let him get on with his work. Do I have a 
solution to our problems? Yes – it’s called Rafa Benítez.”4 Jan: Sacks him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/04/real-madrid-sack-rafael-benitez-surprise-so-long-sid-lowe>
.

• Pérez’s previous best media put-down: March 2015, three months before 
sacking Carlo Ancelotti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/25/carlo-ancelotti-real-madrid-la-liga>
. “Whatever happens, Carlo Ancelotti stays. He has all of our confidence … Some 
of the media’s raison d’etre is to have a go at me … What your paper says every 
day is false. It’s a campaign, with an agenda, and the fans know that … Let 
Ancelotti do his work.”

Other manager news

• Turkey: Genclerbirligi president Ilhan Cavcav, 80, sacking his fifth coach 
this season <http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/0/football/35194944>, his 51st since 
1981, after one match in charge. Cavcav said Yilmaz Vural “had to go … He 
wanted too many new players, and the ones we have didn’t like him.”

• Portugal – 28 Dec: Porto president Jorge Nuno Pinto da Costa pledges to 
defend coach Julen Lopetegui against abuse from “newspapers and pundits … I 
will fight all our enemies who try to destabilise this club.”8 Jan: Sacks him 
<http://www.skysports.com/football/news/11095/10122557/julen-lopetegui-sacked-by-porto-after-sporting-lisbon-defeat>
.

• France – 23 Dec: Montpellier coach Rolland Courbis resigns 
<http://www.espnfc.com/montpellier/story/2768424/rolland-courbis-resigns-as-montpellier-manager>
, a month after owner Louis Nicollin gave him “100% backing”.Nicollin said in 
November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/15/said-and-done-english-football-league-rebrand>
: “I’m keeping him. However, there’s an 80% chance I sack him next season.”

Thought for the week

Ghana: Former manager Ibrahim Sunday, 71, on the importance of being open to 
ideas 
<http://www.ghanaweb.com/GhanaHomePage/SportsArchive/I-was-once-advised-by-a-madman-Sunday-Ibrahim-402717>
: “I am a good listener. I remember I was once advised by a mad man in Ivory 
Coast, and I listened attentively. The mad man spoke about a game we played 
days earlier. I think I took something from it.”

Plus: shakiest start

Brazil: Model Suzy Cortez: a) setting out her new year’s resolution: “In 2016 
I will have no bad sex with footballers – that’s not who I am”; andb) 
celebrating São Paulo signing defender Diego Lugano by tweeting a nude photo at 
him. “Welcome #Lugano … #missbumbum2015.”
 