
Rebrand of the week


The English Football League: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/12/goodbye-football-league-hello-english-football-league-rebranding-announced>
 football’s most “comprehensive corporate rebrand” since 2008, when the 
football pools hired brand experts to “rejuvenate the core business” with a 
“transfer of brand values”. Their new name: The New Football Pools.

Best timing

New from Qatar last week: a) allegations of officials bussing in migrant 
workers from labour camps tofill empty seats at football matches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/13/qatar-migrant-workers-paid-stadiums-football-world-cup-xavi>
; andb) the launch of a new cultural facility at a £3.6bn Doha development – a 
modern slavery museum 
<http://english.alarabiya.net/en/life-style/art-and-culture/2015/11/08/Qatar-set-to-open-slavery-museum-.html>
 with exhibits covering “migrant labour issues”, “recruitment and exploitation”.

Moral lead of the week

Rangers: 
<http://rangers.co.uk/news/headlines/rangers-international-football-club-statement-2/>
shutting down talk that the club should be stripped of five titles after a 
court ruled the oldco broke tax rules from 2001 to 2010: “It is time for 
everyone to move on and work together for the greater good of the game. 
Scottish football has suffered enough.”

• Leading the debate for both sides: Rangers chairman Dave King – speaking 
last week <http://rangers.co.uk/news/headlines/dave-king-statement-5/>: “The 
football team had no advantage from any tax savings”;and speaking in 2012 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sport/football/article-2161850/Rangers-crisis-Dave-King-apologises.html>
, then as a former club director. “We owe the Scottish footballing public an 
apology. I follow the logic of the argument that if we lose the tax case then 
we probably gained some competitive advantage. We should apologise for that.”

Election news: most radical

Uefa’s Fifa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa> presidential candidate 
Gianni Infantino– pledging to deliver radical change and a clean break from the 
past, “not only for Europe, but for world football”. Although: “If Michel 
Platini [is cleared] to stand, I will withdraw. It’s a simple principle of 
loyalty.”

And putting dignity first

Rising above the ongoing Fifa back-biting: Jack Warner 
<http://www.bild.de/sport/fussball/jack-warner/loc-germany-2006-floss-wm-geld-auf-konto-43352240.bild.html>
– cancelling his plan to unleash a“tsunami” of allegations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/may/28/jack-warner-fifa-elections> 
against former football family friends. “In the dusk of my life I just want to 
enjoy seeing the sun rise, listen to the chirping birds and admire nature. I 
refuse to be part of the crowd.”

Manager news: swings and roundabouts

• Italy, 28 Sep: Carpi club statement: “Fabrizio Castori has been dismissed. 
New coach Giuseppe Sannino will conduct training this afternoon.”3 Nov: 
“Giuseppe Sannino has been relieved of his duties. Fabrizio Castori will 
conduct training this afternoon.”

• Italy, 2 Nov: Palermo coach Beppe Iachini, asked about president Maurizio 
Zamparini publicly floating a plan to sack him. “The president was making a 
joke. For me, it’s just jokes, I’m serene. If he wasn’t happy, I wouldn’t still 
be here.”10 Nov: He isn’t 
<http://www.fourfourtwo.com/news/palermo-sack-iachini-and-appoint-ballardini-zamparini-strikes-again#:zRIowl1YlWK5KA>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fsaid-and-done-english-football-league-rebrand%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51c4a85bd7e15ecc8a2cf6b6a1dec99489ee2de5%2F864_107_2570_3855%2F2570.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Said%20%26%20Done%3A%20Rangers%2C%20rebrands%2C%20and%20Jack's%20chirping%20birds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fsaid-and-done-english-football-league-rebrand%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Said%20%26%20Done%3A%20Rangers%2C%20rebrands%2C%20and%20Jack%27s%20chirping%20birds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fsaid-and-done-english-football-league-rebrand%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51c4a85bd7e15ecc8a2cf6b6a1dec99489ee2de5%2F864_107_2570_3855%2F2570.jpg>
• Plus, one to watch: France – Montpellier owner Louis “Loulou” Nicollin 
(pictured), giving coach Rolland Courbis his full backing. “I’m keeping him. 
However, some of his signings are total losers. There’s an 80% chance I sack 
him next season.”

Steve Evans of the week

Steve Evans – on why Leeds should respect his authority 
<http://www.yorkshireeveningpost.co.uk/sport/leeds-united/latest-lufc-news/leeds-united-takeover-talk-having-no-impact-on-steve-evans-1-7565002>
: “I’ve got complete say on the team. The minute that changes, Steve Evans 
won’t be the manager of Leeds United”;on his squad 
<http://www.yorkshirepost.co.uk/sport/football/leeds-united-evans-blasts-squad-ahead-of-cardiff-encounter-1-7549436>
: “The fans know there’s not a player in the dressing room who Steve Evans has 
signed”;on being fair <https://twitter.com/PhilHayYEP/status/661678272875483136>
: “Steve Evans doesn’t have favourites”; and onhedging his bets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/04/massimo-cellino-leeds-fans-utd>: 
“Whoever owns the club, Steve Evans would be very honoured to be their manager”

Most upbeat

Romania: 29-year-old FC Brasov player Razvan Avram, setting up home in the 
changing rooms 
<http://www.gsp.ro/fotbal/liga-b/situatie-disperata-la-o-echipa-de-traditie-din-romania-un-fotbalist-doarme-pe-masa-de-masaj-din-vestiar-462617.html>
 after the club could only afford a hostel place for him. “I couldn’t take it, 
so now I live in the changing rooms. There is heat and I sleep on the massage 
table. It’s better this way.”

Clarification of the week

Romania: Farul Constanta’s PA announcer calling a pre-match minute’s silence 
<http://mediav1.rtv.net/image/201511/w620/farul_75524400.jpg>, “in memory of 
former Farul bus driver Jean Podaru, who will be buried today.” Half-time: 
“Earlier I said Jean Podaru died. It appears this was a regrettable error.” 
Podaru: “I’m feeling fine.”

Ref of the week

Argentina: Atlético Tucumán midfielder Guillermo Acosta, subbed late on in a 
5-0 win which secured promotion, celebrating by handing his shirt to his wife 
behind the dugout. Referee Ramiro Lópezstopped play and showed him a second 
yellow <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p8P5-Feznn0>; Acosta misses the first 
game of next season. La Opinión: “This was both unusual, and ridiculous.”

Theme of the week


Peru: 1) Rácing Club v Deportivo Independiente Miraflores “degenerating” after 
ballboysinvaded the pitch to fight a goalkeeper 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x1N8BDjw2Uk&feature=youtu.be&t=22s>. 2) 
Universidad San Martín v UTC ending in “embarrassing scenes” afterballboys 
joined a mass brawl <https://youtu.be/B-DgqBZl_ZU?t=1m4s>. The FA banned nine 
players.

Most sensitive

Costa Rica: Coto Brus v Barrio México held up after a linesman heard pitchside 
STV commentator Henry de Jesús Díaz call the referee “terrible”. Referee Jimmy 
Torresordered Díaz to leave the ground 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rvnGEHks3tM>; Díaz refused until Torres 
threatened to call the game off. Díaz: “So crazy. I am just the commentator. So 
crazy.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrvnGEHks3tM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrvnGEHks3tM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrvnGEHks3tM&media=>
Plus: tough week for

Brazil FA head and reported FBI target Marco Polo Del Nero, 74 – facing claims 
he hid £180k in hismodel ex-girlfriend Carol Galan’s 
<http://esporte.uol.com.br/futebol/album/2014/11/14/veja-as-conquistas-amorosas-de-marco-polo-del-nero.htm#fotoNav=6>
 bank account. Senator Randolfe Rodrigues: “The documents we have amount to 
more than lipstick in his underwear: they’re sexually explicit. He couldn’t be 
more implicated.” Both deny wrongdoing.

• Among the four models Del Nero dated before facing multiple corruption claims
 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-11-13/brazil-soccer-head-pleads-for-protection-amid-corruption-inquiry>
:Sexy Magazine’s Carol Muniz 
<https://esportes.yahoo.com/blogs/redacao/novo-amor-de-del-nero-se-defende-de-cr%C3%ADticas-na-web-003550638.html>
, 28 – who told local press last year their love was real. “It’s all very 
natural. He’s wonderful, relaxed, easy going and great in bed. People can call 
me a gold digger, but that’s just their ignorant prejudice. I ignore it. Even 
Jesus had his critics, huh?”
 