
Man of the season

Setting the bar for next season’s club captains: Gabby Agbonlahor – relegated 
on ashisha-pipe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/01/gabriel-agbonlahor-aston-villa-squad-investigation>
,nitrous oxide 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/sport/football/7085727/Gabby-Agbonlahor-pictured-on-laughing-gas-and-drinking-in-London-hotel-on-night-Aston-Villa-were-relegated.html>
 legal high. He told fans in February: “We’re going to fight to the end. That’s 
all the club expects from us. Take it game by game.”


• Helping rally the doubters in February: Joleon Lescott, calling for more 
faith <http://www.avfc.co.uk/page/NewsDetail/0,,10265~5331509,00.html> in the 
Villa squad’s “desire, attitude and great fighting spirit. Gabby’s an example 
of that”.

Premier League 2015-16 review: your end-of-season awards
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/19/premier-league-2015-16-review-season-awards>
Speech of the season

Gianni Infantino: settling in at Fifa with a five-star congress in Mexico, 
with delegateshanded $1,000 spending money each 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-soccer-fifa-lifestyle-idUSKCN0Y5021>. “This 
is a new era, a new Fifa, a Fifa which stands for reform. Together we can make 
a difference in the world.”

• 2015-16’s Fifa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa> highlights: 


1) Best overall performer: ex-Concacaf head Jeffrey Webb, hosting a Harlem 
Renaissance-themed champagne and blackjack party 
<https://www.caymancompass.com/2016/02/09/webb-parties-amid-fifa-fallout/> in 
February at the Georgia mansion he bought with fraud money, three months after 
pleading guilty.


2) Best election tactic: Bahraini royal Sheikh Salman, suggesting that his 
four rivals for the presidency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/21/change-we-can-believe-in-fifa-presidential-candidates>
 might want to drop out to avoid the distress that democracy can bring: “If we 
go to election there will be losers. Sometimes you need to avoid that.”


3) Best newcomer: Zimbabwe’s Phillip Chiyangwa – millionaire YouTube star 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LtqyNrMJIOU>, nephew of Robert Mugabe 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H8QHxxMVG5Q>, nicknamed “Captain Fiasco” – 
elected FA presidenton a landslide 
<http://sportbrief.co.zw/2015/10/28/i-dont-compete-with-small-kids-im-the-zifa-president-chiyanywa/>
 in December. His first act: taking three weeks off. “I am going on leave 
forthwith.”


4) And the best recovery: Sepp – still upset in April, but bouncing back with 
his new bookMission and Passion Football 
<http://www.weberverlag.ch/b%C3%BCcher/r%C3%BCckblicke-erfahrungen/sepp-blatter-mission-passion-fussball/>
. Sepp says it’s the story of “how I suffered, just like The Passion of Christ”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Fsaid-done-2015-16-awards-fighting-spirit-jesus-and-captain-fiasco%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F952ab7b85f9251c4d8ade8696d31c401424361c8%2F220_443_3203_1921%2F3203.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Said%20%26%20Done%202015-16%20awards%3A%20Fighting%20spirit%2C%20Jesus%20and%20Captain%20Fiasco&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Fsaid-done-2015-16-awards-fighting-spirit-jesus-and-captain-fiasco%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Said%20%26%20Done%202015-16%20awards%3A%20Fighting%20spirit%2C%20Jesus%20and%20Captain%20Fiasco&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Fsaid-done-2015-16-awards-fighting-spirit-jesus-and-captain-fiasco%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F952ab7b85f9251c4d8ade8696d31c401424361c8%2F220_443_3203_1921%2F3203.jpg>
Also fighting back

Uefa: reacting to the Panama Papers leak 
<http://www.uefa.org/about-uefa/news/newsid=2349557.html#uefa+statement+cross+trading+contract>
 in April – 24 hours beforepolice raided its offices  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/06/uefa-offices-raided-swiss-police-panama-papers-gianni-infantino>
on suspicion of criminal conduct: “This is a sad day for journalism.”


Elsewhere: most versatile

April: Karren Brady, defending West Ham’s public-funded stadium rental deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/16/west-ham-olympic-stadium-karren-brady-taxpayers-celebrate>
, six months after voting in the Lords to cut tax credits. Brady said state aid 
encouraged claimants “to be a burden on society 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/07/karren-brady-interview-no-desire-to-become-an-mp>
”.


Also drawing a line

January 2016: Chelsea sack a steward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/22/chelsea-steward-cesc-fabregas-snake>
 for calling Cesc Fàbregas a “snake”.October 2012: Chelsea don’t sack John Terry
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/oct/18/john-terry-still-chelsea-captain>
 for calling Anton Ferdinand a “black cunt”. “Chelsea appreciates, and 
supports, John’s full apology for the language he used.”


Best new brand

November: “The English Football League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/12/goodbye-football-league-hello-english-football-league-rebranding-announced>
” - football’s biggest corporate rebrand since 2008, when the football pools 
hired brand experts to “rejuvenate” their business. Their new name: The New 
Football Pools.

Web awards

Last season’s online highlights: 

a) Manutd.com – publishing accounts in September showing £2.5m in dividends 
going annually to each of Malcolm Glazer’s six children,on a page headlined 
<http://ir.manutd.com/financial-information/annual-reports/2015.aspx>: 
“Greatness is more than a word. It’s a way of being, it’s about going further, 
respect, honour. Never settling for the ordinary – Sir Matt Busby.”


b) Sunderland’s official newsfeed, putting out two stories together in 
January: Sunderland celebrate the 20th anniversary of Show Racism the Red Card, 
and Sunderland to host an evening with Roy Chubby Brown.


c) Blackpool, distancing themselves from an official club Twitter account in 
August which called fans “typical arsehole wankers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/17/blackpool-twitter-account-abuse-supporter>
”, a year afterchairman Karl Oyston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/19/karl-oyston-abusive-text-messages-fa-report>
 called a fan “a retard”, “special needs” “fuctard”: “We do not condone the 
views expressed.”

And d) Liverpool’s owners Fenway Sports Group, responding in February to a 
week of difficult PR over their planned £77 ticket prices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/04/liverpool-fans-plan-first-walkout-protest-over-ticket-prices>
 by tweaking their online mission statement.Before:  
<http://web.archive.org/web/20150623192413/http://www.fenwaysportsmanagement.com/portfolio>
“Transforming fans into customers”.After: 
<http://www.fenwaysportsmanagement.com/portfolio/> “Transforming consumers into 
fans”.


Premier League 2015-16 review: the big quiz of the season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/17/premier-league-season-review-2015-16-quiz>
Best manager moves

Most emotional: September, Rotherham manager Steve Evans: “Myself and the 
chairman hugged and embraced and there were tears on both sides. It was a very 
emotional moment for Steve Evans to watch his chairman shed lots of tears and 
be very emotional knowing we were going to formally part. But Steve Evans had 
to make a decision for Steve Evans.”

Most reflective: October, Steve Evans on his early impact at Leeds: “I think 
the players saw a corner turned when Steve Evans walked in”; On his work ethic: 
“When Steve Evans asks players to be brave, I want them on the ball”; On his 
vision: “I’m a realist. Steve Evans doesn’t lie in bed and dream”; And on a 
fake Steve Evans quote circulating on Twitter: “What a scandalous, horrible 
thing to attribute to Steve Evans.”


Best unveiling: April, Romania: Timisoara mayor Nicolae Robu, helping 
introduce new ACS Poli coach Daniel Stanciu to the press. “He wasn’t the first 
choice, to be honest. We couldn’t get the one we wanted. No offence.”

Best lawyer

August, Croatia: Dinamo Zagreb president Zdravko Mamic, addressing the 
prosecutor during his bail hearing pending trial for fraud and bribery: “I’ll 
butcher you.” Local media said Mamic’s lawyer “intervened to clarify that his 
client ‘was not making threats’”.

Most on message

September, Czech Republic: Viktoria Plzen’s David Limbersky – back in the team 
days after threatening police who arrested him for crashing his Bentley while 
drunk – scoring and celebrating with a“drunk driving” steering wheel routine 
<https://gfycat.com/CooperativeHugeAss>. Team-mate Jan Kopic. “That’s just 
Limba.”


Sticklers of the season

October, Italy’s referees’ association: acting after a referee abandoned an 
U14 game on humanitarian grounds with the score 31-0 after 60 minutes. The 
official was suspended for “an incorrect application of the laws”. Regional 
head Antonio Aureliano: “He needs to pause and reflect.”


Did you predict this unpredictable Premier League season? Probably not
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/20/premier-league-season-predictions-leicester-city>
Most committed 

September, Germany: Uerdingen mascot Grotifant the elephant 
<https://twitter.com/BILD/status/646051392008777728> – censured for attacking a 
fan who pulled his trunk until his head came off. Local media pointed to a 
“worrying trend”, after Austria Vienna mascot Super Leo frightened children by 
being “too drunk to stand <http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x2pbwf0>”. 

Best sincerity

July, Egypt: Al Ahly teenager Ramadan Sobhi saying sorry to Zamalek for 
“disrespectful” showboating –standing on the ball with both feet 
<http://english.ahram.org.eg/NewsContent/6/0/135905/Sports/0/Ahlys-Sobhi-apologises-to-Zamalek-for-perceived-sh.aspx>
 – which provoked a melee. “Zamalek are a great club and I respect them.”
October:Does the same thing again, also against Zamalek, prompting a 22-man 
plus coaches brawl <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PsvViEAGdTE>.

Biggest setback 

August, Russia: Premier League head Sergei Cheban, reflecting on difficult 
press after the league’s official “Miss Charming” wasouted as a Neo-Nazi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/22/russian-football-miss-charming-contest-winner-neo-nazi-row>
. “It was unlucky for Olga, she really is a charming girl.”


Plus: best resolution 

January, Brazil: Model Suzy Cortez: a) setting out her new year’s resolution: 
“In 2016 I will have no bad sex with footballers – that’s not who I am”; andb) 
celebrating São Paulo signing defender Diego Lugano by tweeting a nude photo at 
him. “Welcome #Lugano  #missbumbum2015.”
 