
This Tuesday sees the return of one of three finely wrought dramas set in the 
north of England that have emerged over the last five years from the busy 
keyboard of the writer Sally Wainwright. The second series ofHappy Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/dec/23/best-tv-of-2014-no-1-happy-valley>
 arrives after three series of the Bafta-winning septuagenarian love storyLast 
Tango in Halifax and four series of the female cop show Scott & Bailey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2011/jul/01/itv1-scott-and-bailey>
.

Together, they form a peak period body of work, at once funny, poignant, 
realistic and quietly profound. None of them is flashy star fodder and all of 
them have become word-of-mouth hits. Indeed, bothLast Tango and Scott & Bailey 
were initially turned down by the BBC and ITV.

Finally, the word has got out about Wainwright. More than 25 years into a 
career founded on uncompromisingly earthy values, she finds herself 
surprisingly in fashion.

The first series of Happy Valley, starring Sarah Lancashire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/may/15/sarah-lancashire-actor-coronation-street>
 as a tough-minded police sergeant in West Yorkshire, won a Bafta for best 
drama series and Wainwright picked up another Bafta for best writer. It told 
the tale of Sergeant Cawood, a woman struggling to come to terms with her 
daughter’s suicide and the release from prison of the suspected rapist she 
blamed for the death.

It was gritty, powerful stuff, full of tense domestic scenes, pulsating drama 
and Wainwright’s particular speciality: pitch-perfect, punchy dialogue. Few 
writers can make their characters speak with the kind of bristling naturalism 
that litters a Wainwright script. People talk as they do in real life, only 
with the boring bits cut out.

Wainwright acknowledges that her greatest strength is her acute ear for 
speech. “I think I’ve always had a compulsion to write dialogue rather than 
prose or poetry,” she said recently. “When I was seven, I started writing down 
the things people said – it was something I just had to do. I think I was born 
with it. It’s like being able to draw or paint.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQrFBNcLuSgY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQrFBNcLuSgY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQrFBNcLuSgY&media=>
 Watch the trailer for the second series of Happy Valley. 
Although she started out writing for The Archers, she really cut her teeth on 
Coronation Street, that writers’ training ground that also produced Paul Abbott 
and Jimmy McGovern.Coronation Street taught her the discipline of storytelling, 
an aspect of writing that, unlike character and dialogue, she really had to 
work at. Intimidated by the high quality of writers in the room, she didn’t 
speak in script conferences for three years, but her scripts were better than 
anyone else’s.

She worked on the soap for five years and was particularly influenced during 
her time at Granada by her mentor figure, the actor and writerKay Mellor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/aug/03/kay-mellor-steven-spielberg-in-the-club-bbc>
, for whose women’s football dramaPlaying the Field she wrote several scripts. 
As Wainwright said: “Kay taught me loads about technique and structure. But 
most importantly, she taught me to stand up for myself as a writer and not take 
shit from people.”

One senses that Wainwright didn’t require much teaching when it came to 
sticking up for herself. She walked out ofThe Archers because she thought the 
characters were too nice and middle class and she was sacked fromEmmerdale 
after six episodes when she told this newspaper that the show’s writers weren’t 
given any creative freedom. As she told an interviewer in 2000: “If I get into 
a situation I don’t want to be in, I just leave. I don’t sit and suffer if it’s 
something I’m not excited about.”

But it would be wrong to see Wainwright as some kind of high-maintenance 
artiste. At their best, soaps find drama in the everyday and the mark of 
Wainwright’s work is that, however dramatic, there is a respect for the 
drudgery and humdrum nature of much of life. InScott & Bailey, for example, a 
good deal of the police work is mundane and the characters are bedevilled by 
the kinds of real-life domestic troubles that normally receive little more than 
lip service in police procedure.

Wainwright grew up between Huddersfield and Brontë country in Yorkshire. She 
says that her home was not a particularly happy household. “I don’t think my 
parents ever got on. I suppose I grew up in a house with quite a tense 
atmosphere. It makes you quite screwed-up and quiet and shy, with not much to 
say. But it’s also, I suppose, why I am a writer, so I can’t be too critical of 
it. If I’d grown up in a more normal household, maybe I wouldn’t have wanted to 
be one.”

Although she moved to London after studying English at York University (she 
now lives in the Cotswolds), Yorkshire is an area she frequently returns to in 
her television writing. “I did a talk in Halifax last year,” she told an 
interviewer recently, “and this woman stood up and said how I made a lot of 
money writing about Yorkshire but I don’t actually live there. She reminded me 
of why I moved away.”

It’s a characteristically bittersweet comment that, like Happy Valley’s title, 
betrays Wainwright’s appreciation of irony. She doesn’t romanticise Yorkshire, 
showing its rough beauty alongside its even rougher underbelly. But what she’s 
most interested in is affording the north of England an authentic vision that 
owes nothing to transplanted images of America.

“A lot of British television now is trying to be cool,” she has complained, 
“and what a lot of people feel is cool is American.” She says that one director 
at the beginning of shootingHappy Valley wanted it to look like Nevada. 
Happily, it ended up looking very much like Yorkshire – majestic countryside 
surrounding towns in the long shadow of industrial decline.

What she’s most interested in is affording the north of England an authentic 
vision that owes nothing to America

Her first original drama was also set in Yorkshire – suburban Leeds. At Home 
With the Braithwaites, which ran for 26 episodes between 2000 and 2003, 
followed the plight of a family that won £38m on the lottery. The lead 
character, played by Amanda Redman, initially keeps her newfound wealth secret 
from the rest of the family.

It exemplified two themes that would recur in Wainwright’s work: the 
extraordinary in the ordinary and the foregrounding of strong female 
characters. The second tendency has led her to being branded a feminist writer, 
and certainly there’s an argument that a show such asScott & Bailey is a sparky 
feminist rejoinder to so much of the macho posturing that passes for police 
drama. One of its finest pleasures was the way it shed a revealing light on the 
camaraderie of female friendship, so often depicted as a passive-aggressive 
exchange of bitchiness.

But really, all she has done is give women the kind of parts – complex, 
conflicted, funny and flawed – that are usually reserved for men.

She is, she says, not anti-men, rejecting the notion that her male characters 
are weak. “I don’t think so. I just don’t focus on them. I resent it because 
there’s this perception that I consciously write men as twats. I don’t.”

If she’s been involved in a form of dramatic rebalancing, then perhaps her 
most striking success has been Last Tango in Halifax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/nov/23/last-tango-halifax-doctors-notebook-gogglebox>
, which focused on one of television’s most neglected sectors of society: the 
retired.

A critical and ratings success that took everyone, not least its 
commissioners, by surprise, it was inspired by Wainwright’s widowed mother who 
fell in love, at the age of 75, with a man she originally met in junior school. 
In a lesser writer’s hands, it could have been a fanfare of mawkishness but, 
instead, Derek Jacobi and Anne Reid were rewarded with a script that was by 
turns enormously touching and mischievously tart.

Most of all, it plugged in, like all of Wainwright’s best work, to the 
irrepressible nature of the human spirit. For while she’s never afraid to 
venture to the darker corners of everyday life, she doesn’t do grimness for the 
sake of being grim.

Nonetheless, Happy Valley was accused of exactly that sin, as a lot of white 
noise was manufactured about unnecessary violence, particularly the episode 
when Wainwright made her debut as a director. It featured a scene in which 
Lancashire’s character was severely beaten by the suspected rapist, played by 
James Norton. “Did the BBC’s brutalHappy Valley go too far?” asked the 
ever-concernedDaily Mail.

But there was nothing gratuitous about the episode. Wainwright showed violence 
for what it is: violent. In real fights, people get injured, often badly 
injured. And just as she seeks to show people how they are at their best – when 
they’re being funny with friends or brave when they’re scared – she doesn’t shy 
away from what happens when they’re at their worst.

In Wainwright’s world, there are happy valleys and sad peaks, but the pinnacle 
her writing occupies at the present is one of British television’s most 
uplifting sights.

THE WAINWRIGHT FILE

Born Sally Wainwright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/sally-wainwright> in 1963 in 
Huddersfield and brought up in Sowerby Bridge, Yorkshire. She is married with 
two children and lives in the Cotswolds.

Best of times Winning two Baftas for Last Tango in Halifax in 2013, although 
it made her wonder why it had taken so long. “You do think, ‘Why haven’t I been 
noticed before?’”

Worst of times Working on Emmerdale, though perhaps her most challenging time 
was working as bus driver in London while writing at night.

What she says Of her frustration at having been overlooked for much of her 
career: “It’s the opposite of confidence. It’s having a chip on your shoulder. 
I think it’s very northern. And it is a class thing.”

“I think human beings essentially are funny… however dark things get we tend 
to respond with humour.”

What others say “Sally Wainwright is the greatest writer at the moment. She 
manages to balance character and plot beautifully – usually one is sacrificed 
for the other, but Sally somehow manages to maintain both.” Actor James Norton
 