
Leaving aside those who make difficult interviewees because they are difficult 
people, Sally Wainwright is probably the most difficult interviewee ever. Her 
greatest acclaim as a screenwriter has come recently, forLast Tango in Halifax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/dec/29/last-tango-in-halifax-homeland-review>
 and, even more strikingly,Happy Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/happy-valley>, but she has dipped her 
pen into most of the defining soaps and kitchen-sink dramas of the British 
psyche, fromThe Archers <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-archers> 
toCoronation Street <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/coronation-street>
. At the end of this month, she’ll receive the Outstanding Achievement award at 
the Edinburgh television festival, but when I bring it up, she looks so 
flustered and embarrassed that I momentarily panic that it was a surprise and I 
wasn’t supposed to say anything. But the modesty isn’t the problem, it’s the 
listening. She’s a study in active listening: keen, subtle, thoughtful, with 
this dangerously encouraging smile. And the main feature of people who listen 
is that they don’t talk very much. Nobody panic – she didn’t walk out, as she 
did the last time she was interviewed. But she’s not what you’d call an 
egomaniac.

Happy Valley showcases the rich lives of ‘older women’ | Penny Anderson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/17/happy-valley-rich-lives-older-women>
Wainwright started to be known as the person who writes “strong female 
characters” after Unforgiven, an award-winning 2009 three-parter about a woman 
emerging from prison after serving a sentence for a murder she committed in her 
teens. “It’s the only version of snobbery I’ve become aware of, more recently,” 
she says, from a study full of 80s furniture and pieces of paper. She lives in 
the Cotswolds, but doesn’t have a chocolate-box sensibility in anything, 
really. “When people talk about my work, and talk about me writing for women, 
or strong female characters – it’s made me realise how badly women have been 
served in the past. I just invented characters I wanted to read about, 
blissfully unaware that I was doing a feminist thing. But so many female 
characters are these Airfix kits – little bits put together to make something 
that’s meant to resemble a woman. And it is quite striking, when you look into 
the history of telly, that predominantly women have been written by men, and 
represented through the prism of men’s eyes. Even Corrie, which was famous for 
its big female characters, was written by Tony [Warren]. For years and years, 
the only woman writing on it was Adele Rose. Kay Mellor wrote one episode, and 
walked. Fay Weldon wrote one or two, and walked.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fsally-wainwright-interview-happy-valley-last-tango-in-halifax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F768f944eb6f3df762ad04015d1c4da6610170248%2F0_313_3849_2310%2F3849.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sally%20Wainwright%3A%20'I%20don%E2%80%99t%20set%20out%20to%20instruct%20people.%20I%20want%20to%20entertain'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fsally-wainwright-interview-happy-valley-last-tango-in-halifax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sally%20Wainwright%3A%20%27I%20don%E2%80%99t%20set%20out%20to%20instruct%20people.%20I%20want%20to%20entertain%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fsally-wainwright-interview-happy-valley-last-tango-in-halifax%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F768f944eb6f3df762ad04015d1c4da6610170248%2F0_313_3849_2310%2F3849.jpg>
 Anne Reid and Derek Jacobi (centre) in Last Tango In Halifax, written by Sally 
Wainwright. Photograph: Ben Blackall/BBC/Anthony and Cleopatra Series/Ben 
Blackall 
Wainwright has said in the past that she started off a post-feminist, and 
steadily became a feminist as she realised its business wasn’t done. It’s a 
journey many of us would recognise. “When I was a student at York, I genuinely 
thought that men and women were equal, and it didn’t occur to me that they 
weren’t. On a personal level, I never felt discriminated against. When I was at 
school [in the 70s; she was born in 1963], apart from the obvious things – like 
you had to do domestic science – I never remember feeling like I’d had my nose 
pushed out of joint. When you’re young, you don’t see things.”

In fairness, if you’re talking about large cultural forces, like all the 
female elements of the culture being confected by men, they are quite difficult 
to make out; it’s hard to see even the basic outlines of a picture when you’re 
living in it. Also, of course, things have changed: “When I think back to the 
programmes that influenced me when I was a teenager, I was constantly hoping 
for exciting women, and the programme that I really loved wasRock Follies 
<http://www.therockfollies.co.uk/home.html>. Two of the three women were 
exciting, they swore and smoked and they had boyfriends, but they were sort of 
peripheral, they weren’t the be-all and end-all.”

In the intervening decades – that was 1977 – it has often felt like the only 
way to be a woman with agency, on screen, is to be a detective. Certainly 
Wainwright’s CV is not blind to the appeal of the female crime-cracker:Scott 
and Bailey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/sep/11/scott-and-bailey-review-top-notch-british-telly>
, starring Suranne Jones from Unforgiven and Lesley Sharp as a modern, 
Mancunian Cagney and Lacey, left both critics and viewers gutted when it ended 
this year after five seasons. “Crime dramas,” she says, with a nonchalant 
shrug, “are just what people want.” She says how much she lovedJuliet Bravo 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c2FhucKlaho> and we both disappear into a 
feminist nostalgia reverie.

Her working life started as a bus-driver, and she says – as per her habit of 
giving every question and topic perhaps a bit more respect that it deserves – 
“probably the most famous route I worked on was the 37”. Even in the middle of 
a smirk at the thought that a bus route could be famous, I realised I know the 
37 like the back of my hand. It goes from Hounslow to Peckham, via nowhere 
interesting; I don’t know why it’s famous, it just is.

From the buses, she got into scriptwriting via a series of leaps that she 
makes sound effortless. As a student, she had taken a play to Edinburgh. “I’d 
invited a load of people and none of them came,” but one – the agent Meg Davis 
– asked to see a copy of the play nonetheless, and put her up for a trial 
script for The Archers. I ask if she still listens to the show, and get the 
most comically tactless answer: “No, I don’t. I think I’ve just outgrown it. Is 
that a bit patronising? No, I do listen, but not through choice. Does that 
sound worse?” Yes. “I tend to catch it in the car and then switch it off. But 
recently, I’ve found myself not turning it off … so fast.”

She was headhunted to write for Emmerdale, which was “all homogenous crap 
rewritten by script editors. It was the opposite of Coronation Street; you 
could tell who had written an episode of Corrie because it was so writer-led. I 
remember me and my mum used to guess who’d written them. But Emmerdale was run 
by a set of joyless freaks.” So she left, or was sacked (she can’t remember – 
secret of a happy life, right there, being unable to remember whether you left 
or were sacked) and went back to The Archers – which she had had to leave 
because of their quaint “no other agriculturally storylined soap” rule. 
(Emmerdale was the only other agricultural soap; it was like a manure grudge 
between the pair. The Archers probably felt superior, but I wouldn’t want to 
speculate.) Finally, she was invited to write for Coronation Street.

For all the shows that made her into a household name – beginning with At Home 
With the Braithwaites, greenlit in 1999 – it was writing for Corrie, from 1994, 
that made her feel “I’d been noticed by the industry. Because it was a big 
event when they took a new writer on.” The distinction of Coronation Street was 
not just that it was writer-led; it was led by writers who weren’t just peering 
into the world of which they wrote. “It was written by working-class people. A 
couple of the older writers who were there when I started had been journalists, 
but they’d certainly come from very ordinary backgrounds.”

I remember, in this same period, when EastEnders had got really florid and was 
garnering a lot of attention, doing some interviews with their writing team, 
who were very middle-class. One did an impression of his mum, saying, “What is 
EastEnders? Isn’t it just a lot of horrible people shouting at each other?” 
This difference – the importance not just of women written by women, but of 
people writing what they know – is urgently meaningful to Wainwright, and she 
says some hilarious stuff about something that’s crap because it was written by 
a millionaire before we settle on what she will say in public:Boys from the 
Blackstuff <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DWhHz8Im9-8> was a masterpiece. 
Because Alan Bleasdale was Alan Bleasdale.

This honesty, this determination to get as close to the truth of a character 
as you can, and never ventriloquise, is there too in the plot lines. Last Tango 
in Halifax was based on her mother’s late-life romance, and the closest she 
comes to recognising her own achievements – rather than ruefully accepting that 
they have been recognised – is when she talks about the letters she had, after 
Last Tango, from older women, from middle-aged women, saying they never 
normally saw themselves represented as characters at all.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fsally-wainwright-interview-happy-valley-last-tango-in-halifax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff334dbcb3d9a4a9fe8968c63bd93fe6155f0e8a4%2F0_262_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sally%20Wainwright%3A%20'I%20don%E2%80%99t%20set%20out%20to%20instruct%20people.%20I%20want%20to%20entertain'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fsally-wainwright-interview-happy-valley-last-tango-in-halifax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sally%20Wainwright%3A%20%27I%20don%E2%80%99t%20set%20out%20to%20instruct%20people.%20I%20want%20to%20entertain%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fsally-wainwright-interview-happy-valley-last-tango-in-halifax%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff334dbcb3d9a4a9fe8968c63bd93fe6155f0e8a4%2F0_262_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
 Sarah Lancashire in Happy Valley. Photograph: Ben Blackall/BBC/PA 
Happy Valley was the series that brought Wainwright the respect she had been 
due for ages. It starts with an ineffectual guy staging the kidnap of his 
boss’s daughter – if it reminds you ofFargo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/fargo>, that’s because the premise is 
the same, but the handling quite different. It was grittier and more elegant, 
and also extremely violent, but, she says trenchantly, to a purpose: “I think 
we handled it very differently to a lot of TV violence. To begin with, it was 
the main character. It wasn’t just a naked, dead female who we don’t know. The 
other big difference was that I dramatised how serious it was when she got 
beaten up. She was in hospital for five weeks afterwards. The repercussions for 
her family, as well as for her – she was seriously depressed afterwards. It was 
a realistic response to what violence is really like. A lot of violence is to 
make men look tough. The good tough man beats up the nasty tough man. What we 
showed wasn’t to make Tommy look tough, it was to make Tommy look like the 
nasty psychopath that he was.”

The series is deeply political, or socio-political – it would be impossible to 
make meaningful drama out of a place where the only market was black and the 
only economy was drugs, and not make deeper connections between the self and 
society. But she won’t talk about her politics, really, besides saying that 
she’s disappointed about Brexit, and insists that she hasn’t set out to make a 
political drama sinceThe Amazing Mrs Pritchard 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0807980/>, a Jane Horrocks vehicle in which a 
supermarket manager sets up a political party. It bombed so hard that the DVDs 
are only available in Swedish. “I’m nervous about politics. I think you can put 
across your worldview through your characters. I don’t set out to instruct 
people, I suppose. I think I want to entertain, that’s what I want to do most,” 
she says, with a defiant anti-Reithianism. You can’tinform and entertain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jul/01/bbc-inform-educate-entertain-order>
; choose one.

Sally Wainwright: the titan of genuine reality television | Observer profile
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/07/sally-wainwright-writer-happy-valley-second-series>
She only came to directing when her sons were nearing the end of school – 
they’re now 17 and 20. Happy Valley was her debut, andTo Walk Invisible 
<http://gb.imdb.com/title/tt5594080/> is her forthcoming single drama about the 
Brontë siblings, with whom she has become so intimately connected that she 
talks about them as though they’re annoying members of her own family. 
“Everything we know about the Brontës was through Charlotte’s eyes, because she 
outlived her siblings. She really tries to make out that Anne was naive, and 
did something similar with Emily. Really, I think she was jealous that they 
were so close. And one of the things I’ve come to realise is that Branwell was 
very talented and he was very clever. He could have been one of the Brontë 
sisters, in terms of his intellect and his talent. But I don’t think he could 
put the hours in. To write a novel is actually physically hard work as well as 
mentally.”

The most Wainwright will admit, of her Outstanding Achievement, is the rather 
diffident observation that she has reached a point where people seem to want to 
know what she’s doing next. “You never know when it’s going to stop. You always 
think, ‘This’ll be it.’” Really, though? A handbrake turn: “No, I don’t 
actually. Now I just think it’s about whether it becomes the new thing that 
people want to see next, that they didn’t realise they wanted to see next.”
 