
Samantha Bee <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/samantha-bee> has 
criticized Donald Trump’s first confirmed cabinet choices and rumored 
candidates as a “parade of misfits, deplorables, zealots and extremists”.

On the latest episode of Full Frontal with Samantha Bee, the comedian joked 
that “Donald Trump is assembling a White House staff after Barack Obama has 
told him that’s a thing presidents have to do.”

John Oliver on Trump: 'A Klan-backed misogynist internet troll' is president
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/14/john-oliver-trump-wins-election-last-week-tonight>
She spoke about the reality TV star’s controversial choice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/steve-bannon-white-house-racism-fear>
 to hire “white nationalist” Steve Bannon as his top adviser, referring to him 
as “the milkshake that brings all the deplorables to the yard”.

Bee went on to criticize Paul Ryan for refusing to denounce Bannon, after he 
claimed he couldn’t speak on his extreme views because he didn’t know him.

“I guess Paul Ryan’s vigorous vetting process for determining whether someone 
is bad consists of two questions: have I met them and do they have a private 
email server?” she said.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdbKT22idntg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdbKT22idntg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdbKT22idntg&media=>
She spoke about the mixture of career politicians and unlikely choices, 
wondering if this combination would appeal to his voters. “Trump’s so 
unpredictable, he’s just as likely to elect a rabid possum in hopes that it 
would bite Katy Tur,” she said. “Sure, the possum’s got zero qualifications but 
she’s loyal and that’s what matters when you’re staffing your Sopranos pork 
store on Pennsylvania Avenue.”

She also brought up the decision to place many people in positions where they 
have little direct experience.

“This cabinet list isn’t just a liberal’s nightmare – a liberal’s nightmare is 
running out of almond milk at a brunch party. This is a nightmare for anyone 
who thinks job candidates should have relevant experience and education beyond 
the qualification of being named Steve,” she said.

There was also time to call out the retired brain surgeon Ben Carson, who is 
rumored for a high-ranking role in the government.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dyve_oz-D5nI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dyve_oz-D5nI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dyve_oz-D5nI&media=>
“Good news, rocket scientists: Americans will no longer use brain surgeon as a 
cliche for smart,” she said. “From now on, when we call someone a real brain 
surgeon, it means semi-conscious political mouth-breather who’s only in the 
public eye because Republicans think liberals care only about identity politics 
and will be happy with any rapture-awaiting zombie who kind of looks like them.”

She ended with the warning of a “parade of misfits, deplorables, zealots and 
extremists who, come January, could be packing their bags for the White House”.
 