
Welcome back to the gripping, high tension of the Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague>. The sands were slipping 
away at the end of a match of frantic chances, it was heading towards a draw, 
well into stoppage time, when Southampton’s José Fonte grappled with Olivier 
Giroud in the penalty area. Frankly, the pair had been at each other ever since 
the Frenchman had come on to the pitch. Penalty.

It was obvious what was at stake for Arsenal. As Arsène Wenger admitted: “When 
you lose your first home game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/14/arsenal-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 you cannot afford to drop points in the second home game as it creates 
anxiety. That is not what you want.”

Santi Cazorla took the ball. Just to add to the nerve-shredding pressure of 
the moment, Laurent Koscielny had taken a kick to the face and required several 
minutes of treatment. The wait went on. Was there a winner in this game? Could
Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> ensure they did not 
start the season by frittering away five points out of a possible six at home? 
Might Fraser Forster scupper them again?

Cazorla had sparkled all game, fighting for the right to dictate the game with 
imagination. He waited and waited. Then he waited for Forster to start his dive 
before planting his penalty down the middle for a valuable Arsenal victory.

Tottenham steamroller lacklustre Stoke with Son Heung-min double
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/10/stoke-city-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
It was a tough blow for Southampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton> to absorb. They lamented the 
penalty decision, and the fact the referee had not stopped play in the buildup 
with Koscielny down injured close to the incident. “I’m angry for my players,” 
said Claude Puel. “I don’t like to speak about decisions but we can see in the 
first four games three penalties given. It is a big frustration because we 
played really well.”

Indeed, they might have grabbed more from their efforts. Not only did they 
look like getting a draw, they squandered moments of their own to win it in the 
second half. Shane Long fluffed a couple of outstanding chances.

It was a challenging introduction for Arsenal’s new signings, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/30/arsenal-lucas-perez-deportivo-signs>
 Lucas Pérez and Shkodran Mustafi, who were thrust straight into the thick of 
it. There was adventurous football from both teams, but the search for 
ruthlessness led to a knife-edge atmosphere.

After only a handful of training sessions getting to know their new 
team-mates, and with barely any football under their belts this season (Mustafi 
had only played one game and Pérez one half in La Liga before joining), both 
will clearly benefit from some time to adjust.

“Both lack a bit of competition,” said Wenger. “They were a bit surprised by 
the pace and commitment of the Premier League. They will adapt to that.”

In the meantime it was up to the experienced men, notably Cazorla and 
Koscielny, to lead by example. That quality was dearly needed after Southampton 
opened the scoring in the 18th minute. They began with a scampering energy that 
unsettled Arsenal and a sharp move was interrupted when Nathan Redmond was 
clipped by Nacho Monreal.

The free-kick was positioned centrally in the D, and Dusan Tadic struck with 
expert dip. Petr Cech finger-tipped the ball on to the crossbar and it bounced 
down then ricocheted off the goalkeeper’s back and in for a bizarre own goal. 
Arsenal’s home discomfort hung in the air. Having lost their opening game here
in a turbulent 4-3 defeat by Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/14/arsenal-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
, there was a keen awareness that it was imperative to step it up in terms of 
both effort and cohesion. What to do? How about a spectacular bicycle kick from 
a centre-half?

That did the trick in style as Cazorla’s corner was bundled on by Francis 
Coquelin and Pérez, falling for Koscielny to audaciously finish in the manner 
of the kind of world-class centre-forward Arsenal have supposedly been short of 
for years. It was a birthday goal to remember for the captain.

Manchester City’s derby delight as De Bruyne inspires win over United
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/10/manchester-united-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
Puel introduced Long, who caused nightmares for Arsenal when they played last 
Christmas, at half-time to try to inject some fresh momentum. He certainly had 
the chances to do some damage again but his finishing was off-key.

Arsenal probed and dominated possession. Héctor Bellerín fizzed a shot across 
goal on the hour and perhaps the fact the most dangerous moment for the 15 
minutes of the second half came from a full-back was the sign for change.

On came Giroud and the sprightly Sánchez, a double substitution which came 
unusually early according to the Wenger substitutions manual. Both senior 
attackers had opportunities, but it was Cazorla who finished off his 
master-class with the decisive goal.
 