
Lloyds Banking Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lloyds-banking-group> and Santander have 
put savers on notice that they face cuts to interest rates as the two high 
street banks attempt to shore up profits in the wake of the Bank of England’s 
post-Brexit-vote stimulus package.

Spanish-owned Santander is slashing the rate of interest on its highly popular 
123 current account by half, in a move that will hit more than 500,000 
customers.


From 1 November account holders will receive just 1.5% interest, compared with 
3% previously, in a cut that is six times the recent 0.25% reduction inBank of 
England base rate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-interest-rates-stimulus-inflation-report-business-live>
.

Lloyds, 9% owned by taxpayers and the largest savings institution in the UK, 
also warned customers they faced reductions in savings rates - but did not 
disclose how deep the cuts would be nor give any assurance that they would be 
limited to Threadneedle Street’s quarter-point reduction.

As Santander raises its fees, check that 123 still adds up
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/16/santander-raises-fees-rivals-best-alternatives>
Santander said it was forced to make the reduction “due to the market 
expectation of interest rates staying lower for longer, compounded by increased 
costs brought about by changes in the banking industry”.

Until now, the account has paid 3% interest on balances of up to £20,000, 
making it one of the best deals on the high street. Its cashback offer on 
household bills will remain the same.

But the reduction in returns for savers is huge. Under the old terms, someone 
with the full £20,000 saved would have earned £600 a year in interest, but this 
falls to £300 under the new rate – with a further £5 a month account fee also 
deducted.

It is the second major blow to 123 account holders, who were told last January 
theaccount fee was rising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/08/santander-raises-monthly-charge-popular-account-123>
 from £2 to £5 a month.

MoneySavingExpert’s Martin Lewis said the move was “depressing news for 
savers”, with most experts predicting a cut to 2% rather than 1.5%. “The bank 
account that has topped savings tables for over four years will take a hammer 
to the interest it pays from 1 November. It’s a huge blow to many people’s 
savings income. Santander 123 has been the one refuge for those with a decent 
amount of cash.”

The strange case of Santander and suspicious withdrawals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/aug/22/santander-withdrawals-fraud> 
Lewis added that while many account holders “will be furious and want to ditch 
it to punish Santander”, it may make sense for some to hold on, despite the cut.

Andrew Hagger of MoneyComms.co.uk said the only surprise is that this move 
didn’t happen at least 12 months ago. “There will undoubtedly be plenty of 
anger and frustration from customers who now will be faced with scratching 
around for a 1% return, if they’re lucky, from an instant access savings 
account, or 1.5% for a one-year bond with no access to their balance.”

For customers of Lloyds, which also owns Halifax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/weather/halifax>, there was little indication of 
the scale of the saving cuts that are being planned. The bank, known for its 
black horse logo, indicated a decision would not be made until 1 October - the 
date when holders of its standard variable rate mortgages would receive the 
full quarter-point cut.

These one million customers – about a third of its mortgage holders – had been 
waiting to find out how Lloyds would react for 10 days sinceMark Carney told 
lenders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/lenders-svr-urged-pass-on-interest-rate-cut-bank-of-england>
 they had no excuses not to pass on the reduction. Becoming the last major 
lender to announce how it would respond to the Bank of England governor, Lloyds 
said the SVR would fall to 3.74%.

The announcement was less specific for savers, who receive rates varying from 
4% for Club Lloyds customers and 0.3% for Halifax Everyday Saver accounts. “We 
can confirm that over the coming weeks we will make reductions to our savings 
rates across Lloyds Bank, Halifax and Bank of Scotland,” Lloyds said.

“We will not make any changes to our savings rates for existing customers 
until we have reduced our mortgage reversionary rates (Halifax Homeowner 
Variable Rate, Halifax Standard Variable Rate and Lloyds Bank Homeowner 
Variable Rate) with effect from 1 October 2016,” Lloyds added.
 