
Millions of people holding Santander’s hugely popular 123 current account will 
see their interest rate halved on Tuesday.

The Spanish-owned bank is the first in a line of institutions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/15/santander-slashes-123-interest-rate-savers>
 to implement rate cuts, with some experts predicting this could put the brakes 
on current-account-switching activity, as consumers conclude that the rewards 
on offer mean that moving bank is no longer worth the hassle.

The 123 account is held by about 3.6 million people, who from Tuesday will 
receive a flat 1.5% interest on balances up to £20,000. Previously the account 
paid 1% on balances of £1,000 or more, 2% on balances of £2,000-plus, and 3% 
from £3,000 up to a maximum of £20,000.

Santander claimed in August that it was forced to make the reduction “to 
balance the economics of the product with the value offered to customers”. It 
added the cut reflected the fact that the money markets were now expecting 
interest rates to stay lower for longer.

Savers suffer as banks withdraw more than 100 savings accounts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/17/savers-suffer-banks-withdraw-more-than-100-savings-accounts>
The 3% interest rate made the account one of the best deals on the high 
street, resulting in it becoming the home for billions of pounds of savers’ 
cash. It is estimated that the average amount held in the account is close to 
£12,000.

Under the old terms, someone with the full £20,000 saved would have earned 
£600 a year in interest, but this falls to £300 under the new rate.

It is the second major blow to 123 account holders: in January this year their 
monthly account fee rose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/08/santander-raises-monthly-charge-popular-account-123>
 from £2 to £5.

The latest change does, however, mean that customers will now earn interest on 
balances below £1,000, which was previously not the case, while those with 
between £1,000 and £2,000 will receive more interest than before.

Santander is the first of a number of banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/13/tsb-lloyds-slash-interest-rates-current-accounts-santander>
 to cut in-credit interest rates for customers. From 4 January 2017, TSB’s 
Classic Plus account will no longer offer a generous 5% on balances up to 
£2,000. Instead it will pay 3% up to £1,500.

A few days later, on 8 January 2017, Lloyds will scrap the current tiered 
interest rates on its Club Lloyds account and bring in a single interest rate 
of 2% on balances between £1 and £5,000. At the moment this account pays 1% on 
£1 to £1,999, 2% on £2,000 to £3,999, and 4% on between £4,000 and £5,000.

Those holding the Halifax Reward current account will also receive less from 
early next year, with the monthly reward payment falling from £5 net (£6.25 
gross) to £3 net (£3.75 gross) from 1 February 2017.

Andrew Hagger of financial website MoneyComms has said that the spate of rate 
cuts “could really put the brakes on current-account-switching activity”.

He added: “It may well be that Nationwide building society sees a significant 
inflow of new customers – but only if it doesn’t follow the market trend and 
maintains its current 5% in-credit deal for year one.”

Nationwide’s FlexDirect current account pays 5% on balances up to £2,500, with 
that rate fixed for the first 12 months, provided a customer pays in £1,000 
each month.

Hagger said: “It’s been a struggle to convince people to move banks, and the 
reduction of benefits and credit interest could see activity levels stagnate, 
as the difference between accounts narrows and the financial benefit is no 
longer a driver to look elsewhere for a more favourable deal.”

 