
Pity the new parents, whose lives have been hijacked by preschool television. 
It isn’t their fault that they keep humming the Justin’s House theme tune in 
public, or that they’ve put so much thought into decoding the opening sequence 
of In the Night Garden that they’re now convinced the entire show takes place 
in a Lost-style purgatory.

This is what preschool TV does to adults. It is so simplistic and 
brightly-coloured and repetitive that it crawls inside your brain and takes you 
hostage. These shows are all I ever hear or think about now. At any point in 
time, my mind is such a clanging din of concurrent Cbeebies jingles that, if 
you were to listen in on it, you’d be immediately convinced I was a serial 
killer. This is the hell I have to live with. I’ve made peace with that now.

So please don’t discount the possibility of Stockholm syndrome when I tell you 
that Sarah & Duck is one of the greatest programmes currently on British TV.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fsarah-duck-cbeebies-the-best-show-on-tv-call-it-stockholm-syndrome-if-you-will%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F186d3c0356511cbe5680583e61a8d0b7de9d5e06%2F92_16_747_448%2F747.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sarah%20%26%20Duck%20has%20kidnapped%20my%20heart%20%E2%80%93%20call%20it%20Stockholm%20syndrome%20if%20you%20will&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fsarah-duck-cbeebies-the-best-show-on-tv-call-it-stockholm-syndrome-if-you-will%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sarah%20%26%20Duck%20has%20kidnapped%20my%20heart%20%E2%80%93%20call%20it%20Stockholm%20syndrome%20if%20you%20will&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fsarah-duck-cbeebies-the-best-show-on-tv-call-it-stockholm-syndrome-if-you-will%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F186d3c0356511cbe5680583e61a8d0b7de9d5e06%2F92_16_747_448%2F747.jpg>
 I could watch Sarah & Duck forever. Some nights, when my son wakes up and we 
have no choice but to draft in iPlayer as a third parent, it feels like I have. 
Photograph: BBC 
A new series of Sarah & Duck starts on Cbeebies today and, hand on heart, I’ve 
been more excited about it than anything else in the autumn schedules. 
Westworld? Not enough lemon water. The Young Pope? Too few complaints about dry 
mouth. Black Mirror? Come and wake me when one of the characters is a sentient 
moon.

My God, I love Sarah & Duck. It’s a tiny, perfect, handmade gem of a show. The 
whole thing aches from all the care that’s gone into making it. A seven-minute 
respite from the shrieking and boinging that constitutes most preschool 
programming, it’s a gentle, slow-moving story of an inquisitive little girl and 
her duck friend. And that’s it.

The clean, green and slightly bonkers world of CBeebies | Sophie Elmhirst
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/05/cbeebies-the-clean-green-slightly-bonkers-world>
Well, clearly that’s not it. The world of Sarah & Duck is ever so slightly 
off-beam, just enough to prevent you from questioning its internal logic. You 
never question the relationship between Sarah’s dotty old neighbour and her 
long-suffering bag. You never wonder if Tortoise was born with windows in his 
shell, or whether he had them installed as an adult. You never ask why a little 
girl like Sarah lives alone in a giant house, or what must have happened to 
Umbrella to make him so terrified of rain. These are just things that happen.

Sarah & Duck is dusted with such a thin layer of whimsy, such a slight hint of 
slowly-unfolding psychedelia, that you can trace a direct line back to anything 
made by Oliver Postgate. The incidental music is so charming that I’d happily 
buy it and soundtrack my day with it. The narration, soft and paternal and 
gently chiding, might genuinely count as the best thing Roger Allam has ever 
done.

I could watch Sarah & Duck forever. Some nights, when my son wakes up and 
stays up and we have no choice but to draft in iPlayer as a third parent, it 
feels like I have. One episode, the one where Sarah tries to find a new home 
for an annoying cake, managed to sustain us through an entire five-hour train 
journey recently. By the end, I knew the whole episode off by heart, and I 
still wasn’t sick of it. You have no idea what a rare accomplishment that is. 
We once tried something similar with an episode of Abney & Teal, and now there 
isn’t a day that goes by where I don’t want to drown those clothy dipsticks in 
a bathtub.

So welcome back Sarah & Duck. Please, never leave us again. You’re my only 
hope of getting through this alive.

 