
SAS forces have been deployed in Libya since the beginning of the year, 
according to a confidential briefing given to US congressional leaders by the 
king ofJordan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/jordan>.

A leaked memo indicates the US lawmakers were personally briefed by King 
Abdullah <https://www.theguardian.com/world/king-abdullah> in January about 
plans for Jordan’s special forces to operate in the country alongside the 
British.

According to the notes of the meeting in the week of 11 January, seen by the 
Guardian,King Abdullah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/04/jordan-king-abdullah-war-isis-pilot>
 confirmed his country’s own special forces “will be imbedded [sic] with 
British SAS” in Libya.

 According to the memo, the monarch met with US congressional leaders – 
including John McCain, the chairman of the Senate armed services committee, and 
Bob Corker, the chairman of the Senate foreign relations committee. Also 
present was the House of Representatives speaker,Paul Ryan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/mar/23/paul-ryan-presidential-election-political-discourse-video>
.

King Abdullah said UK special forces needed his soldiers’ assistance when 
operating on the ground in northAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, explaining “Jordanian slang is 
similar to Libyan slang”.


The king also highlighted that British forces had helped in building up a 
mechanised battalion in southern Syria, headed by a local commander and made up 
of tribal fighters, to combat Bashar al-Assad’s army, and that his troops were 
ready with Britain and Kenya to go “over the border” to attackal-Shabaab in 
Somalia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/08/al-shabaab-us-airstrike-training-camp-somalia-eyewitness>
.


When contacted, the Ministry of Defence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ministry-of-defence> said it did not comment on 
special forces’ operations. None of the high-ranking US senators contacted by 
the Guardian responded to a request for interview.

However, one senate source confirmed US lawmakers met with the king in a 
private meeting in early January but refused to confirm “what may or may not 
have been discussed”.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fsas-deployed-libya-start-year-leaked-memo-king-abdullah%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F499faa9ae8d5229206d2fceabeee1f62464a8b93%2F0_68_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=SAS%20deployed%20in%20Libya%20since%20start%20of%20year%2C%20says%20leaked%20memo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fsas-deployed-libya-start-year-leaked-memo-king-abdullah%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=SAS%20deployed%20in%20Libya%20since%20start%20of%20year%2C%20says%20leaked%20memo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fsas-deployed-libya-start-year-leaked-memo-king-abdullah%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F499faa9ae8d5229206d2fceabeee1f62464a8b93%2F0_68_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 Libyan soldiers at a military outpost west of the city of Sirte, Isis’s 
stronghold in the country. Photograph: Ismail Zetouni/Reuters 
The full passage of the briefing notes says: “On Libya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> His Majesty said he expects a spike 
in a couple of weeks and Jordanians will be imbedded [sic] with British SAS, as 
Jordanian slang is similar to Libyan slang.”


The monarch’s apparent openness with the US lawmakers is an indication of just 
how important an ally Jordan is to the US in the region. Since the 1950s 
Washington has provided it with more than $15bn (£10.5bn) in economic and 
military aid.


However, the Jordanians had become frustrated over perceived US inaction over 
the Middle East in recent months. Five years of fighting in Syria have 
dramatically impacted on Jordan, which has absorbed more than 630,000 Syrian 
refugees, and the king has repeatedly called for decisive action to end the 
conflict.


Syrian refugees in Jordan: 'If they cut the coupons, we will probably die'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/03/syrian-refugees-jordan-london-conference>
He told those present: “The problem is bigger than Isil [Islamic State], this 
is a third world war, this is Christians, Jews working with Muslims against 
outlaws.”

The memo indicates that Abdullah also told US lawmakers:

• The Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, “believes in a radical Islamic 
solution to the problems in the region” and the “fact that terrorists are going 
to Europe is part of Turkish policy, and Turkey keeps getting a slap on the 
hand, but they get off the hook”.


• Intelligence agencies want to keep terrorist websites 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/nov/27/ministers-order-isps-block-terrorist-websites>
 “open so they can use them to track extremists” and Google had told the 
Jordanian monarch “they have 500 people working on this”.

• Israel “looks the other way” at the al-Qaida affiliate Jabhat al-Nusra on 
its border with Syria because “they regard them as an opposition to Hezbollah”.

The king raised particular concerns over al-Shabaab, the Islamist militant 
group in Somalia that has links with both Isis and al-Qaida.


“Jordan is looking at al-Shabaab because no one was really looking at the 
issue, and we cannot separate this issue, and the need to look at all the 
hotspots in the map,” he said, adding: “We have a rapid deployment force that 
will stand with the British and Kenya and is ready to go over the border [into 
Somalia].”


Abdullah said “we started with al-Shabaab, as they feed into Libya”, which has 
descended into chaos since the overthrow of Muammar Gaddafi by Nato forces.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fsas-deployed-libya-start-year-leaked-memo-king-abdullah%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71b6d8db6e5101d9f8548536c19ca43fbf815336%2F0_0_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=SAS%20deployed%20in%20Libya%20since%20start%20of%20year%2C%20says%20leaked%20memo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fsas-deployed-libya-start-year-leaked-memo-king-abdullah%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=SAS%20deployed%20in%20Libya%20since%20start%20of%20year%2C%20says%20leaked%20memo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fsas-deployed-libya-start-year-leaked-memo-king-abdullah%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71b6d8db6e5101d9f8548536c19ca43fbf815336%2F0_0_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
 King Abdullah said his troops were ready with Britain and Kenya to go ‘over 
the border’ to fight al-Shabaab, seen here on parade in Mogadishu, Somalia. 
Photograph: Feisal Omar/Reuters 
In Britain, it is the Jordanian monarch’s confirmation of the SAS operating 
with his forces in north Africa that will raise eyebrows.


The issue of the oversight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/defence-and-security-blog/2014/sep/22/sas-iraq-syria>
 of the operations of British special forces has become a vexed matter in 
parliament. Earlier this week, David Cameron rejected a call from Angus 
Robertson, the Scottish National party’s Westminster leader, for the SAS to be 
subject to parliamentary oversight, saying they were already “subject to 
international law as everyone else is in our country but I do not propose to 
change the arrangements under which these incredibly brave men work”.


Crispin Blunt, the foreign affairs select committee chair, who has been 
concerned that parliament has been left in the dark about British involvement 
in Libya, told the Guardian he had known King Abdullah since they both served 
in the 13th/18th Royal Hussars.


“King Abdullah gives a level of insight that we don’t get from our own 
governments,” said Blunt. “He has given presentations to parliamentarians 
behind closed doors in the past. We don’t get that from our own ministers. When 
[the foreign office minister] Tobias Ellwood told us about RAF flights over 
Libya these were plainly in support of special forces missions. But when we 
asked for details we were told the government doesn’t comment on special forces.


“There is a tendency for the British establishment to work out everything very 
carefully and then present it to parliament as ‘a take it or leave it’ choice. 
And then ministers wonder why they have difficulties in parliament.”


In March, intelligence analysts at Stratfor <https://www.stratfor.com/> said 
UK special forces were already in Libya and “escorting MI6 teams to meet with 
Libyan officials about supplying weapons and training to the Syrian army and to 
militias against the Islamic State. The British air force bases Sentinel 
aircraft in Cyprus for surveillance missions around [the Isis Libyan 
stronghold] Sirte as well.”

Obama did not mean to criticise Cameron over Libya, says White House
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/11/obama-did-not-mean-to-criticise-cameron-over-libya-says-white-house>
Accusations that Cameron’s lax attitude to Libya contributed to the country’s 
disastrous collapse resurfaced after Barack Obama suggested in aninterview with 
Atlantic magazine 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2016/04/the-obama-doctrine/471525/>
 this month that the chaos in north Africa was caused in part because the 
British prime minister was too distracted to oversee a smooth transformation to 
a new stable regime.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Fobama-disappointed-in-europe-over-libya-says-former-aide-audio&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F3%2F11%2F1457697997329%2FKP_1834014_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20%E2%80%98disappointed%E2%80%99%20in%20Europe%20over%20Libya%2C%20says%20former%20aide%20%E2%80%93%20audio&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Fobama-disappointed-in-europe-over-libya-says-former-aide-audio>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%20%E2%80%98disappointed%E2%80%99%20in%20Europe%20over%20Libya%2C%20says%20former%20aide%20%E2%80%93%20audio&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Fobama-disappointed-in-europe-over-libya-says-former-aide-audio&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F3%2F11%2F1457697997329%2FKP_1834014_crop_640x360.jpg>
Obama ‘disappointed’ in Europe over Libya, says former aide – audio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/mar/11/obama-disappointed-in-europe-over-libya-says-former-aide-audio>
However, in recent weeks there has been a flurry of international activity to 
stabilise Libya, with British officials prominently pushing a peace process. 
Under a plan disclosed late last year, the UK will offer the new Libyan 
government 1,000 troops as part of an internationally coordinated effort.


Blunt says he has called on Cameron to give evidence to his committee, writing 
to Downing St to say that “given the prime minister’s key role in the 
development of international policy before, during and afterthe 2011 
intervention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/aug/25/libya-military-intervention>
 – a role which is continuing now with the formation of the government of 
national accord – the committee believes it is only appropriate to extend this 
invitation to you in a spirit of courtesy, fairness and genuine inquiry”.


When contacted, Downing Street did not respond to questions about whether the 
prime minister would give evidence to MPs.


Jordanian embassies in London and Washington did not comment on the leaks.
 