
David Bowie: The Last Five Years

9pm, BBC2

A year ago this week David Bowie <https://www.theguardian.com/music/davidbowie>
 died, and the world immediately seemed to come undone. In this intimate look 
back, friends and collaborators such as Tony Visconti, Gail Ann Dorsey and 
Michael C Hall explore his final flowering, through albums The Next Day and 
Blackstar, and the musical Lazarus. It’s followed on Friday on BBC4 by Bowie At 
The BBC, a beautiful, funny, charming collage of interviews and performances.
Ali Catterall

Let It Shine 

7pm, BBC1

A quick recap: Gary Barlow used to be a judge on ITV’s The X Factor back in 
those pre-Honey G halcyon days. Now, ITV has poached The Voice from the BBC, 
and The X Factor is on ice. And so, Gaz is going head to head with the first 
ITV-hosted series of The Voice with his new BBC show, Let It Shine – which is a 
bit like those old Andrew Lloyd Webber competitions – as he aims to find five 
young chaps to star in a musical featuring the music of Take That. Clear? Good. 
The search begins tonight.Ben Arnold


Britain’s Favourite TV Detectives

7.30pm, Channel 4

We all love a good crime-cracker, but who are the most beloved nemeses of 
ne’er-do-wells? From the cosy confines of Dock Green to the gritty likes of 
Luther, this case file contains many contenders, so it’s time to assemble the 
prime suspects and pick out the greatest gumshoes of all. Contributors 
including Dennis Waterman, David Soul and Anthony Horowitz examine our 
favourites and nominate their own.Mark Gibbings-Jones

The Voice UK 

8pm, ITV 

A switch of channels and a change of coaching lineup sees The Voice warble its 
way on to ITV. Tom Jones is back, along with Will.i.am, and they’re now joined 
by American Idol winner/all-round ball of fabulousness Jennifer Hudson and the 
ex-Mr Gwen Stefani Gavin Rossdale (official job title: “Bush rocker”). Emma 
Willis is in charge as the blind auditions kick off, so expect spinning chairs 
and a period of settling in as the new coaches try to make their mark.Hannah 
Verdier

Taboo 

9.15pm, BBC1

Tom Hardy reunites with Peaky Blinders writer Steven Knight for a febrile 
period romp. London, 1814: shamanic bounty hunter James Delaney returns from 
Africa (where his enemies hoped he’d perished) to claim his inheritance. By 
refusing to sell land to the omnipotent East India Company, he casts his die in 
a deadly game. Hardy’s Daniel Day-Lewis-ish character immersion powers an 
opening episode in which Delaney tells everyone to do one, in increasingly 
florid ways.Jack Seale

Discovering: Ingrid Bergman

5pm, Sky Arts

A winner of three Oscars, Ingrid Bergman began her career in Sweden but was 
adored in the US, where she was a classic Hollywood heroine. However, her 
career highs were shadowed by a pragmatic association with Nazi Germany and the 
moralistic outcry that greeted her affair with the director Roberto Rossellini. 
A repeat airing of a story that reminds you that becoming an icon isn’t 
something that simply happens.John Robinson

Wallander 

9pm, Drama 

These Henning Mankell adaptations were influential in Britain’s ongoing 
infatuation with chilly Scandi crime drama. This iteration stars Kenneth 
Branagh as the melancholy titular detective; recently estranged from his wife 
and investigating three apparently motiveless murders. Sublimely downbeat fare 
and well worth revisiting, this story boasts an extra layer of intrigue in the 
shape of an understated, pre-stardom Tom Hiddleston.Phil Harrison 

Film choice
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fsaturdays-best-tv-david-bowie-the-last-five-years-taboo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F094939ef88573ea9d148d8e7475acca0aed93b62%2F0_150_2368_1421%2F2368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Saturday's%20best%20TV%3A%20David%20Bowie%20%E2%80%93%20the%20Last%20Five%20Years%3B%20Taboo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fsaturdays-best-tv-david-bowie-the-last-five-years-taboo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Saturday%27s%20best%20TV%3A%20David%20Bowie%20%E2%80%93%20the%20Last%20Five%20Years%3B%20Taboo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fsaturdays-best-tv-david-bowie-the-last-five-years-taboo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F094939ef88573ea9d148d8e7475acca0aed93b62%2F0_150_2368_1421%2F2368.jpg>
 An eerie rites-of-passage story … Walkabout. Photograph: 
Everett/REX/Shutterstock 
The Pledge
(Sean Penn, 2001), 9pm, TCM
On the day of his retirement, detective Jerry Black (Jack Nicholson) promises 
the parents of a little girl murdered in a snow-covered and remote area of 
Nevada that he will find her killer. His quest becomes an obsession that 
overshadows his life, and his newfound love for Lori (Robin Wright Penn). This 
is a crime thriller based on one of Friedrich Dürrenmatt’s hefty tales that 
becomes a haunting portrait of a soul in torment, and Nicholson has rarely been 
better.Paul Howlettt

Sex Tape
(Jake Kasdan, 2014), 10pm, Channel 5
Annie (Cameron Diaz) and Jay (Jason Segel) are happily married, but a little 
bit bored in the bedroom department, so they make a sex film on their iPad. And 
guess what? It accidentally gets shared with their friends and colleagues, 
leaving them scurrying around one panicky night trying to destroy the evidence. 
A sweet-natured romcom, but it’s all too coy, given the subject matter.Paul 
Howlett

Walkabout
(Nicolas Roeg, 1971), 12.45am, BBC2
A brother and sister are abandoned in the outback in Roeg’s eerie 
rites-of-passage story when their father kills himself, and on the long, hot 
walk back to civilisation they encounter the mystic aboriginal world. Jenny 
Agutter is the very English rose who takes the Aussie sun in her stride; Lucien 
John her brother. It lacks the ley-lined menace of Peter Weir’s Picnic At 
Hanging Rock, but is vividly photographed by Roeg.Paul Howlett

Live sport

Tennis: Shenzhen Open 6am, BT Sport 1 Coverage of the final, as the hard-court 
tournament concludes.

FA Cup Football: Manchester United v Reading 12noon, BT Sport 2 Enter the big 
boys, with a third-round clash from Old Trafford.

Athletics: Great Edinburgh Cross Country 1.15pm, BBC1 Gabby Logan presents 
coverage from Holyrood Park, with Mo Farah scheduled to compete.
 