
Savers were given some cheer last week amidst an otherwise bleak savings 
landscape, as challenger banks continue to battle for their cash.

The Bank of England has indicated that interest rates are likely to remain at 
a record low until 2017, with savers shouldering the pain of dismal returns for 
another few years.

However, there has been a flurry of activity from challenger banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/15/challenger-banks-how-they-compare>
, which may have a relatively small presence but are offering some of the best 
deals.

Andrew Hagger from MoneyComms says: “There’s been an intense battle among 
‘challenger brands’ in the fixed-rate savings market for months now, but the 
competition level has just been ratcheted up another notch with impressive new 
rates unveiled by Metro Bank.”

Internet peer-to-peer lenders offer savings rates that are peerless
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/blog/2015/oct/10/ratesetter-funding-circle-zopa-interest-peer-p2p-lenders>
Metro, which launched in 2010, is offering an 18-month bond paying 2.4%, 
placing it at the top of the best-buy tables ahead of rivals Charter Savings 
and Shawbrook banks. Alternatively, there is a rate of 2.7% for savers willing 
to lock their cash away for three years, or 2.1% over a year. Elsewhere, Charter
Savings <https://www.theguardian.com/money/savings> Bank offers a one-year bond 
paying 2.07%, while Aldermore has a two-year bond paying 2.35%.

For the first time Metro Bank is allowing online applications, which is good 
news for savers who don’t live near the branches, which are mostly in the 
south-east. The accounts all require a minimum deposit of £500.

Sue Hannums, a director at Savingschampion.co.uk, says: “Savers may have 
suffered one of the worst periods in living memory in recent years, but things 
would have been a lot worse without the challengers.

“Over recent months some rates for new savings accounts have hit a two-year 
high driven by challenger banks, while rates for existing savers continue to 
plummet. Better known savings providers are showing little to no interest in 
savers’ deposits, while most of the high street banks seem firmly focused on 
current account customers only.”

The key players in the challenger bank market are Charter Savings, Shawbrook, 
Paragon, Secure Trust, Aldermore and Metro, Hagger says. More than 25,000 
people have signed up for Charter Savings’ bank accounts since it opened for 
business in March, with total savings balances of more than £1bn.

“All challenger banks offer the same Financial Services Compensation Scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2010/dec/17/fscs-savings-safety-net-raised> 
protection as the big high street players, so savers shouldn’t fear for the 
safety of their nest egg,” Hagger adds.
 