
More than 100 savings accounts have been withdrawn from the market since the 
Bank of England cut interest rates in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>
, and the choice available to savers has hit a new low, figures show.

Banks and building societies <https://www.theguardian.com/money/banks> have 
responded to the fall in interest rates by pulling accounts rather than 
reducing rates, financial information provider Moneyfacts said.

Related: As cash Isas leave savers despairing, it could be worth taking a 
chance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/05/cash-isas-savers-despair-alternatives-for-your-money>

The number of products available to savers has fallen by 127 since August, and 
is at its lowest level since at least 2007, its data showed. Savers can now 
choose from 1,445 accounts – well below the 2,093 available when the market 
peaked in April 2012.

Savers were already suffering ahead of the base rate cut, with 147 products 
withdrawn in the first half of the year against a backdrop of falling rates.

Returns for savers have fallen for several years following previous cuts and 
the government’sfunding for lending scheme, which removed the need for banks 
and building societies to attract deposits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2012/oct/26/funding-for-lending-hurting-savers>
 from consumers.

In July, the Bank said the average rate on an instant access account had 
fallen to 0.34%, whilethe city regulator named and shamed several big banks 
with accounts paying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/23/bank-accounts-savings-interest-cash>
 close to no interest.


The Bank’s data shows that average rates have fallen further since then, with 
instant access accounts offering just 0.28%, including bonuses, at the end of 
September.

Charlotte Nelson, finance expert at Moneyfacts, said: “Two months on from the 
base rate cut, you would hope that the dust had settled by now. Unfortunately, 
providers are still withdrawing products at an alarming rate.”


Nelson said the continuing downward spiral in rates meant that some small 
building societies had found themselves creeping up the best-buy tables.

“Savers sensing a good deal immediately flock to these new best-buy rates. 
Since these smaller providers are unable to cope with the influx in demand, 
they have no choice but to withdraw the product from the market,” she said.

When the Bank cut the base rate to a record low of 0.25%, it introduced a 
funding scheme for banks to enable them to pass on the reduction to borrowers 
without damaging their margins.

Related: Interest rate cut: what now for savers and borrowers? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/13/interest-rate-cut-savings-rates-mortgages-borrowers>

Nelson said the introduction of this “term lending scheme” was likely to 
exacerbate problems for savers. “This is evidenced by the fact that when the 
funding for lending scheme was introduced, not only did rates drop but products 
were removed from the market altogether.”

Recent low interest rates have made high-paying current accounts attractive to 
those with money to hold on deposit, but banks have begun to cut returns 
following the base rate cut.

From 1 November, customers with a Santander 123 account will see their 
interest halved to 1.5% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/15/santander-slashes-123-interest-rate-savers>
, andLloyds and TSB recently announced similar cuts to their top-paying current 
accounts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/13/tsb-lloyds-slash-interest-rates-current-accounts-santander>
.

Meanwhile, the Financial Conduct Authority has published details of accounts 
with low rates to encourage people to switch, but Nelson said there was a 
danger that savers would not bother to move.

“At a time when the FCA is implementing policies designed to get savers 
switching, this reduction in product numbers is concerning,” she said. “Not 
only will savers have a reduction in choice, but with rates in a constant 
freefall it is starting to become a pick of a bad bunch.”
 