
Savers with maturing five-year accounts are in for a nasty shock, as rates 
have plummeted even for those willing to lock away their money for longer 
periods, figures show.

Financial firm Moneyfacts said the average rate available on a five-year 
fixed-rate bond had fallen to just 1.65%, down from 2.65% a year ago and less 
than half of the 4.04% being paid in October 2011 when such savers would’ve 
opened their now-maturing accounts.

Related: Savers suffer as banks withdraw more than 100 savings accounts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/17/savers-suffer-banks-withdraw-more-than-100-savings-accounts>

The highest rate available to savers taking out a five-year bond has also 
fallen steeply. While five years ago savers who shopped around could earn as 
much as 4.92% on their cash, the best-paying account now offers 2.01%. Even in 
October 2015 a rate of 3.35% was available.

Savers have been hit by the falling base rate and a reduction of competition 
in the marketplace, Moneyfacts said. Recently it found that across the market, 
the number ofsavings accounts available to customers had dropped to its lowest 
level since 2007 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/17/savers-suffer-banks-withdraw-more-than-100-savings-accounts>
.

There have been more than 100 cuts to five-year fixed-rate savings bonds since 
January, the firm said, and the number of accounts available has fallen.


Charlotte Nelson from Moneyfacts said: “Customers seeking such deals are now 
facing not only lower rates, but poor choice as well. Five years ago, savers 
would have been able to get a rate close to 5%. Those savers who opted for a 
fixed rate back then will be severely shocked to find scarce choice today, as 
there are only two deals offering 2% or more over a five-year fixed term.”

She added that providers “simply do not want to be caught out by paying higher 
rates than may be necessary in the future”, and that savers should be wary 
about locking their funds away for any significant amount of time.

“However, the fact still remains that long-term fixed rates offer savers some 
of the relatively better rates,” she said.

Related: Interest rate cut: what now for savers and borrowers? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/13/interest-rate-cut-savings-rates-mortgages-borrowers>

The current best five-year fixed rate, a 2.01% deal from Secure Trust, can be 
opened with a deposit of £1,000. It is followed by a 1.95% account from Vanquis 
with the same minimum balance.

Anna Bowes of website SavingsChampion said the number of accounts available 
had started to falleven before the Bank of England cut the base rate to 0.25% 
in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>
, and that there were no high-street names among the best-paying providers. 
“They are all accounts from providers savers may not have heard of, but they 
are all covered by the Financial Services Compensation Scheme, so you don’t 
need to worry about putting your money in them.”

Bowes said that rates in the Isa market were even worse, with the best 
five-year deal paying 1.45%.

However, five-year rates remained the best outside high-paying current 
accounts, she said. “If you think rates may go up and you have enough money you 
could put some in a five-year deal and some in a shorter-term account - that 
way if rates go up you can move that money, but if they go down you will still 
have some locked away.”
 