
Help-to-buy Isas have been opened at a rate of one every 30 seconds since the 
initiative launched on 1 December,George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> has announced.

The scheme, unveiled in the budget last March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/mar/18/budget-2015-how-the-help-to-buy-isa-will-work>
, gives those saving for their first home £50 for every £200 they put in the 
tax-free account to save for a deposit. Aspiring homebuyers can save up to 
£12,000 in the new Isas, entitling them to up to £3,000 of government money 
towards their deposit.

The Treasury said 250,000 people had opened a help-to-buy Isa account since 
the launch, equating to roughly 3,000 a day or one every 30 seconds. Data 
provided by a sample of banks offering the accounts suggest that 75% of the new 
savers are aged 30 and under.

Critics say the scheme could fuel demand for homes without increasing supply, 
and that the £2bn cost to taxpayers over the next five years could have been 
used to pay for thousands ofaffordable homes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/02/housing-bill-kill-source-land-affordable-homes>
.

Speaking on a visit to a help-to-buy housing development in Sandbach, 
Cheshire, on Thursday, Osborne denied that the scheme was treating a symptom 
rather than a cause of falling home ownership.

Fancy a new-build home? You get more protection buying a tin of baked beans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/nov/15/new-build-home-affordable-housing-industry-compromising-quality>
“The best thing the government can do is to make sure that homes are being 
built for families in the right places and we have the right infrastructure,” 
he said. “The fact that so many people are making use of the help-to-buy Isa 
says to me that there’s a lot of pent-up aspiration there, there are a lot of 
families who want to get on the housing ladder.”

Dan Wilson Craw, policy manager at the campaign group Generation Rent, said: 
“It’s not a big surprise that free money from the government is proving so 
popular. The danger for first-time buyers is that their extra purchasing power 
will simply result in estate agents putting their asking prices up.”

Campbell Robb, the chief executive of Shelter, said: “The fact is, with house 
prices soaring by almost £20,000 in the last year alone this is nothing more 
than a drop in the ocean. In many parts of the country even the maximum amount 
you could save with government help won’t be enough for a deposit and, with 
half of renters’ incomes swallowed up by housing costs, for millions, saving 
anything at all is impossible.

“This money would be far better spent on building homes that people on 
ordinary incomes can actually afford to rent or buy in the first place.”

The new treasury figures came as Labour announced the launch of an independent 
review 
<http://press.labour.org.uk/post/130128119199/john-healey-launches-independent-review-into-home>
 into the decline of home ownership, headed by Peter Redfern, the chief 
executive of the UK’s third-biggest housebuilderTaylor Wimpey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/taylorwimpey>.

John Healey, the shadow minister for housing and planning, said increasing 
home ownership was Labour’s housing priority.

“A million more households became homeowners under Labour, but home ownership 
is now in freefall,” he said. “Young people aspiring to own a home have been 
the hardest hit. What used to be a natural part of growing up is becoming a 
luxury for those on the highest salaries, or whose parents have the deepest 
pockets.”


Research by the House of Commons library, commissioned by Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/feb/04/young-working-class-home-owners-down-20-under-cameron>
, showed that 280,000 fewer households headed by under-35s owned their home in 
2015 compared with 2010.

The biggest drop has been among young people in professional jobs: 150,000 
fewer such households own a home, 16% lower than five years ago.

The number of young people in working class jobs who own their home is down 
20%, or 68,000 households. Just one in five young working class households own 
a home.
 