
Martin Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/18/martin-lewis-mental-illness-money-saving-expert>
, the man most trusted by the British to inform them about their personal 
finances, is shocked byBrexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/homes-holidays-jobs-what-does-brexit-mean-for-you>
 but calm about the consequences. After all, on his own assessment he was only 
ever 55% in and 45% out.

“I don’t see any reason why financial products, apart from mortgages and 
savings, should change that much now. I don’t believe this is a Lehman moment.
Mark Carney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/24/bank-of-england-mark-carney-says-brexit-contingency-plans-under-way>
 has stepped in to stop that. There are much better capital requirements for 
the banks;Basel III <http://www.bis.org/bcbs/basel3.htm> has done its job. 
There is a much better system in place.”

His consumer website, MoneySavingExpert.com, with 15 million users a month, is 
a barometer of the financial concerns of Britain’s low- and middle-income 
workers. On Brexit day the site’s forums were alive with speculation – and the
safety of the financial system was at the forefront 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/jun/24/global-markets-ftse-pound-uk-leave-eu-brexit-live-updates?page=with:block-576ce567e4b030d83eb4a1ce>
.

‘I’ve had my dark days.’ Why Martin Lewis knows mental illness and money don’t 
mix
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/18/martin-lewis-mental-illness-money-saving-expert>
Lewis says: “We are being asked a lot about the £75,000 safety net for 
savings. Is it going to take a hit from leaving the EU? It is true that the 
limit is set by the EU, but it’s run by the British Financial Services 
Compensation Scheme. It’s not about to disappear.”

As the FTSE fell, at one stage by nearly 500 points, Lewis said that the 
“initial shock can be overcome”. Later in the day on Friday it recovered to a 
fall of just under 200 points, with sterling off 5% against the euro but by 
more against the dollar.

The longer-term impact of EU withdrawal worries Lewis most. “In 2018-19, when 
we leave the EU, what will our trading situation be like?”

More immediately, he thinks that savers could be hit because interest rates 
are more likely to fall than rise. Intense pressure on sterling would normally 
force the Bank of England into raising interest rates, says Lewis, but with 
sentiment so battered by Brexit the next move could be down.

In a message to his site users 
<http://www.moneysavingexpert.com/news/family/2016/06/martins-reaction-to-brexit>
 issued soon after the result, Lewis said: “Overall, my suspicion (and this is 
pure guesswork) is that interest rates will remain roughly similar to as they 
are now, or perhaps be cut a touch if things go wrong.”

In the wake of the vote, the Bank of England said it was prepared to inject an 
additional £250bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/24/bank-of-england-mark-carney-says-brexit-contingency-plans-under-way>
 into money markets to ensure that financial institutions did not run short of 
cash. Bond yields fell, which may translate through to more sub-2% fixed-rate 
mortgages appearing in the coming days, but Lewis is not so sure. “Though 
there’s a chance things could get even cheaper, the safer option is to bag a 
cheap deal right now, rather than playing the markets.”

Flooding the money markets with cash also spells problems for savers, warns 
Lewis, as banks will be less bothered about attracting deposits by offering 
good cash Isa deals.

Mark Carney says Brexit contingency plans under way
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/24/bank-of-england-mark-carney-says-brexit-contingency-plans-under-way>
When it comes to the question uppermost in the minds of many young adults – 
should I still go ahead and buy a home, given the concerns about house price 
falls – Lewis says: “A number of people have been asking if they should 
complete on the house they’re in the process of buying. If it’s the house 
that’s right for you, it’s within your budget and you’ve got a decent mortgage 
that you can afford, then I think the best human decision, if not financial, is 
to carry on and go for it.”

One positive from Brexit could be the end of the EU mortgage credit directive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/jun/07/eu-mortgage-rules-confusion>, 
which Lewis has been campaigning against because, he says, it results in “
ludicrous lending decisions 
<http://blog.moneysavingexpert.com/2015/04/30/im-taking-on-the-eu-mortgage-credit-directive-its-going-to-create-many-mortgage-prisoners/?_ga=1.51560937.1567560760.1447952584>
”.

The directive has forced affordability criteria on borrowers who are 
remortgaging that make little sense, says Lewis. But while he welcomes the 
prospect of the UK no longer being bound by the directive, he wonders if the 
problem was the Financial Conduct Authority’s interpretation of the rules as 
much as anything else.

Before the referendum, a YouGov poll found that Martin Lewis was trusted 
equally by both sides of the Brexit debate, and well ahead of any politician or 
celebrity.

Some of his more fervent supporters now want him to replace George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> as chancellor, or even 
stand for prime minister. “After David Cameron said he was standing down, there 
were lots ofpeople on Twitter asking me to stand 
<https://mobile.twitter.com/martinslewis?lang=en-gb>. I would rather have my 
nipples attached to electrodes, and not in a good way. I never want to engage 
in party politics.”

Despite being so much in the public eye, Lewis says he was burnt by the 
response to hispersonal assessment 55/45 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2016/02/24/martin-lewis-eu-referendum-expert_n_9306736.html>
 in favour of remaining. “I had people attacking me as a traitor to my country, 
and some were even mooting violence. It was horrible.”

The lesson for politicians from the referendum result is that they have lost 
their connections with the people, says Lewis, who reveals that he is now 
starting on a big project to help.

“High on my list is how to get politicians reconnected with people. 
MoneySavingExpert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/05/martin-lewis-moneysavingexpert-jason-mills>
 connects with people, and we need to be able to find ways that politicians can 
better connect as well.”
 