
Savings rates <https://www.theguardian.com/money/savings-rates> have hit a 
record low, according to data published on Monday, just as thousands of people 
are expected to start looking for a new home for their nest-egg cash when the 
first pensioner bonds mature on Friday.

The National Savings & Investments pensioner bonds, known officially as 65+ 
guaranteed growth bonds 
<http://www.nsandi.com/65-guaranteed-growth-bonds?ccd=NAMOAA>, went on sale in 
January 2015 and were a huge success, with 470,000 people signing up for the 
one-year version of the account paying 2.8% interest.


But when the bonds mature 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/dec/19/savers-pensionsers-lose-out-rates-slashed-nsi-banks>
, from 15 January onwards, those savers who do not find a new home for their 
cash will be automatically moved into another one-year NS&I savings account 
paying a much lower 1.45%.


Those looking for a decent-paying account to move to may struggle. Financial 
data websiteMoneyfacts <http://moneyfacts.co.uk> said savings rates, as 
measured by the average easy-access cash Isa rate, “have hit another record 
low”.


It said the typical Isa rate had fallen steadily from 1.52% in January 2013 to 
1.25% a year later, then down again to 1.13% in January 2015 and to 1.06% this 
month.


“Back in 2013, the top-paying easy-access Isa paid 2.75% yearly, but the best 
rate today is only 1.5% – a significant 1.25% less,” said Charlotte Nelson, a 
spokeswoman for the website. “Standard easy-access savings accounts don’t fare 
any better, with the top rate falling by 0.68% from 2013 to just 1.65% today.”

From April 2016 all basic rate taxpayers will be able to earn up to £1,000 a 
year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/mar/21/savings-revolution-tax-deposits-isas>
 in interest on their savings completely tax-free, while higher rate taxpayers 
will be able to take the first £500 in interest tax-free. Nelson said Isas were 
likely to lose some of their attraction as a result, meaning low rates were 
likely to become more prevalent.


There was one piece of good news for savers, however. The Nottingham building 
society has launched a savings account paying 5%. The Savvy Saver account aims 
to help people save for Christmas 2016, has a fixed end date of 12 December and 
allows customers to save up to £100 a month. It is exclusively available 
through the society’s branch network and can be opened with a minimum of £10.


The society, which operates in 56 locations across nine counties, said that if 
someone saved £100 a month for 12 months without making any withdrawals, they 
could earn up to £32.50 gross interest by the anniversary of the first deposit, 
based on the current 5% variable rate.

 