
Sayeeda Warsi, the former chair of the Conservative party, has blasted the Sun 
for runninga column criticising Channel 4 News for using a Muslim presenter to 
report news of the Nice truck attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/18/sun-tweet-channel-4-news-nice-truck-attack-kelvin-mackenzie-fatima-manji>
.

Warsi wrote to Sun editor Tony Gallagher on Monday criticising his decision to 
run Kelvin MacKenzie’s column, which she described as “divisive” and “an 
attempt to ‘other’ the Muslim community”.


She also linked the comment piece, which was headlined “Why did Channel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> have a presenter in a hijab 
fronting coverage of Muslim terror in Nice?” to rising levels of hate crime 
since the UK vote to leave the EU.

Sun deletes tweet criticising Channel 4 News coverage of Nice truck attack
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/18/sun-tweet-channel-4-news-nice-truck-attack-kelvin-mackenzie-fatima-manji>
Sayeeda Warsi (@SayeedaWarsi) 
My letter to @tonygallagher <https://twitter.com/tonygallagher> Respectable 
racism and editorial responsibility!pic.twitter.com/yUrQeB7ctI 
<https://t.co/yUrQeB7ctI>
 <https://twitter.com/SayeedaWarsi/status/755025355484823552> July 18, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/SayeedaWarsi/status/755025355484823552> 
“Just as politicians should carry the responsibility for xenophobic and toxic 
campaigning that divides communities so journalists should be held accountable 
for ‘shock jock’ writing which simply perpetuates stereotypes, demonises and 
attempts to hold a whole community accountable for the actions of an 
individual,” wrote Warsi, who made the letter public in a Twitter post.


“It’s this kind of ‘respectable’ racism which feeds the far right and 
legitimises the fallout we have all too sadly seen on out streets in recent 
weeks.”

The Sun attempted to distance itself from MacKenzie’s column by hastily 
deleting a tweet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/18/sun-tweet-channel-4-news-nice-truck-attack-kelvin-mackenzie-fatima-manji>
 it had posted promoting the article from Monday’s paper.

kadhim (@kadhimshubber) 
They've deleted this tweet now pic.twitter.com/1W7FCmGyvx 
<https://t.co/1W7FCmGyvx>
 <https://twitter.com/kadhimshubber/status/754955864612700160> July 18, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/kadhimshubber/status/754955864612700160> 
However Warsi, who quit the leave campaign over its “hateful, xenophobic” 
tactics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/20/sayeeda-warsi-quits-leave-campaign-over-hateful-xenophobic-tactics>
, called on Gallagher to take responsibility for the content of the tabloid.


“This column is the latest in a series of stories and headlines in the Sun, 
some subsequently retracted, which act as a drip drip poisoning of community 
relations in the United Kingdom,” wrote Warsi.


“I’m sure you will agree that your readers deserve better value for money than 
ignorant reporting and pieces that perpetuate hate. I urge you to exercise your 
role as an editor with responsibility.”

The National Union of Journalists joined in the condemnation of the column on 
Monday.

The NUJ’s general secretary Michelle Stanistreet said: “To suggest that a 
journalist is incapable of reporting on a terrorist outrage because of the 
colour of her skin, her religion or the clothes that she wears says all you 
need to know about the contemptible views of Kelvin MacKenzie.

“His feigned moral outrage is the language of racial hatred and bigotry, and 
sadly just the latest incoherent ramblings of a pundit who should have been put 
out to pasture a long time ago. Journalism in the UK needs more diversity, not 
less.”


The Sun <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sun> declined to comment. 

 