
Sitting beneath a set of decorative plates, an Elvis mug of tea in my hand, I 
look at the white-haired woman opposite and wonder, why would anyone get 
married at 70? Carolyn’s face breaks into a huge smile, her gravelly laugh rips 
through the kitchen and she answers, simply, “We want to grow old together, so 
why waste the time we’ve got left?”

Carolyn and Derek are just one of the couples to feature in new documentary I 
Do at 92, which follows the lives, loves and mobility vehicles of six people 
who chose to marry in their 70s, 80s and, in one case, 90s. As an unmarried 
daughter of twice-divorced parents, I often question why people ever marry, 
especially when their contemporaries are relaxing into a world of elasticated 
waistbands and bingo. So I took a tour to find out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fi-do-at-92-the-couples-grabbing-life-and-love-while-they-still-can%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4a8cfd6e1b95d7e4babb3dd626dd733d72bd4b6%2F0_210_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Saying%20'I%20do'%20at%2092%3A%20the%20couples%20grabbing%20life%20and%20love%20while%20they%20still%20can&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fi-do-at-92-the-couples-grabbing-life-and-love-while-they-still-can%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Saying%20%27I%20do%27%20at%2092%3A%20the%20couples%20grabbing%20life%20and%20love%20while%20they%20still%20can&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fi-do-at-92-the-couples-grabbing-life-and-love-while-they-still-can%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4a8cfd6e1b95d7e4babb3dd626dd733d72bd4b6%2F0_210_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Bingo brought them together … Derek was the caller and Carolyn the checker. 
Now, gloriously, they call bingo together. Photograph: Channel 4 
The first port of call is a retirement home in Surrey, where Georgina and Ray 
met last year. “I’m 25,” says Ray, sitting back on his maroon armchair, in 
slippers and a smart grey jumper. “And I’m 21,” replies Georgina, a shelf of 
crossword dictionaries to her left. In fact, Ray and Georgina are 86 and 94 
respectively and coming up to their first wedding anniversary. “I don’t think 
age comes into it,” Ray tells me, as I nestle back on the sofa into a pile of 
cushions decorated with dogs. “It’s just nice to have another chance.”

“He wasn’t going to be like an old-fashioned husband and keep me – it was a 
partnership,” says Georgina, who worked as a Lance Corporal in the second world 
war and enjoyed some notoriety in her youth as a singer with the Salvation 
Army. “I wasn’t given away, either … I was escorted down the aisle, because I’m 
my own lady.” Sitting in their cosy room I realise that, in many ways, Ray and 
Georgina’s relationship feels far more familiar to me than my own 
grandparents’: they’ve both had other partners, they both had their own money, 
they’ve known heartbreak and lived alone before they met. Do they feel very 
modern? “Oh yes, we’re leading the way!” laughs Georgina.

“We were attracted straight away,” says Ray, who lost his wife some years ago. 
“He’d just started his chemo when we met, so I was able to be sympathetic,” 
adds Georgina. “Then, after a while, we’d start to meet every evening for a 
snack and a chat.” Although Ray has pancreatic cancer, he was still able to 
entertain his guest, making her bacon sandwiches and staying up late to talk 
about politics, the war, the fate of the Labour Party and their families. 
Listening to them, I feel a sudden wave of joy at the thought that our lives 
can be made up of so many unexpected chapters.

“One day I came into his room and he told me to sit down,” says Georgina, 
pointing to a spot on the sofa beside me. “He stood in front of me and either 
said ‘I want you to marry me,’ or ‘Will you marry me’, I can’t quite remember 
which. He was very serious. I was surprised, but I answered very quickly,” she 
glances over at Ray then adds, quietly, “I admire him so much for doing that.”

One of the most moving parts of the documentary comes from Ray and Georgina’s 
wedding, as the two make their way back down the aisle after the ceremony in 
their own mobility vehicles, smiling with that dewy-eyed look of love. “I was a 
soppy bride,” laughs Georgina. Has being married changed their relationship? 
I’m rather expecting an answer about changing names or wearing rings. “Well, we 
slept together for the first time,” says Georgina. Seeing a look of something 
like surprise flash across my face, she starts to laugh. “He moved in here with 
me and now we share a bed.” I’m unsure how far to push back the duvet on this, 
but Ray and Georgina seem unperturbed. “If I don’t feel well, I’ll move to the 
other side of the bed, then she understands I want space,” says Ray. “Oh yes, 
men need space,” says Georgina, twinkling at me from across the room. “You 
mustn’t tire them too much.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fi-do-at-92-the-couples-grabbing-life-and-love-while-they-still-can%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F128c04f0035a2d1af84328685d9c139627b4df31%2F0_0_3000_1688%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Saying%20'I%20do'%20at%2092%3A%20the%20couples%20grabbing%20life%20and%20love%20while%20they%20still%20can&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fi-do-at-92-the-couples-grabbing-life-and-love-while-they-still-can%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Saying%20%27I%20do%27%20at%2092%3A%20the%20couples%20grabbing%20life%20and%20love%20while%20they%20still%20can&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fi-do-at-92-the-couples-grabbing-life-and-love-while-they-still-can%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F128c04f0035a2d1af84328685d9c139627b4df31%2F0_0_3000_1688%2F3000.jpg>
 ‘It’s like I’ve been reborn’ … Derek on his big day. Photograph: Channel 4 
Unlike Ray and Georgina’s whirlwind romance, Derek and Carolyn had known each 
other nearly two decades by the time they got together. “We’d been friends for 
18 years, through bingo,” says Carolyn, as we sit in their kitchen, flicking 
through their wedding album. Derek was the caller and Carolyn the checker. Now, 
gloriously, they call bingo together. “To tell you the truth, it’s like I’ve 
been reborn,” says Derek, a mug of tea on his knee. After the death of his 
daughter, Derek suffered a period of depression, leading to an attempted 
suicide, which he talked about to Carolyn for the first time during the making 
of the film. Watching it, I was amazed at the calm, caring, but notably 
undramatic way Carolyn took the news. “If anybody’s miserable around me, I just 
tell them to go home,” she says, another incredible, rasping laugh echoing 
round the room.

Was there any gossip from their hen and stag parties? “Oh yes,” says Derek. 
“Although we don’t talk about it.” This, of course, is like a red rag to a bull 
and, after a bit of prodding, Derek regales me with a tale of three pubs, a 
punch and someone he simply describes as “the littl’un with the long hair”. 
Carolyn’s hen do was no less raucous. They both screech with laughter as she 
talks me through the boozy bus trip around town replete with vodka jelly, 
amateur pole dancing, ciggies and at least one empty water bottle full of 
Bacardi. “When I got married last time I didn’t have a hen do and I got married 
in a suit,” says Carolyn. “So I thought this time, I’m going to have it. I 
don’t care.”

Has it been easy bringing their families together? “I suppose there could have 
been friction,” says Carolyn, “but we’ve had nothing like that.” Derek’s 
children call Carolyn mum, while her grandchildren call Derek granddad. 
Watching the two together, it’s clear to see how they could have slipped so 
easily into married life; they have that way of talking where one sets up an 
anecdote and the other delivers the punchline. She calls him Del; he calls her 
Caz or babe. And, unlike most married couples, because they’re no longer 
working, they get to spend almost all their time together. “But I told her – I 
won’t stop her being with her friends,” says Derek. “She can go away whenever 
she likes. If she wants to go abroad with them, by all means. I trust her and 
she trusts me.”

Do they ever get jealous? Do they, like me, ever suffer that very particular 
pain of knowing that the one you love once loved someone else? Carolyn smiles 
kindly at me. “The past is the past and it’s gone,” she says. “It can’t come 
back.” There’s a tiny pause as this soaks in before Derek jumps in: “I hope 
not!” he laughs. It may sound simple, but I find this statement strangely 
reassuring. While the past may make us who we are today it is also gone. 
Irrelevant. Finished, forever. You might as well keep looking forward.

As I bundle into my coat and scarf, ready to head back to the train station, 
Derek and Carolyn stand at the door, waving me off. You both look so happy, I 
say. “Well you’re a long time dead,” says Derek, “so you might as well smile 
now.”

 * I Do at 92 is on Channel 4 on Tuesday 13 December at 10pm.
 