
Fiona MacKeown has demanded a new investigation into the death of her daughter,
Scarlett Keeling <https://www.theguardian.com/world/scarlett-keeling>, whose 
bruised and half-naked body was found on a beach in Goa in 2008.

MacKeown has written to the Indian prime minister, Narendra Modi, asking for 
the reinvestigation after two menwere cleared of raping and killing the 
15-year-old British schoolgirl last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/23/scarlett-keeling-goa-judge-clears-men-of-beach-death>
.

She told ITV1’s Good Morning Britain: “We’ve written to the prime minister – 
he seems like a courageous man, he’s making some big changes inIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>. Ideally, I’d like a reinvestigation, 
I’d like the police investigated that lied to me and told the other younger 
policeman to treat it as an accident and not a murder.


“I’d like the ministers who delayed the handing over to the CBI [the Central 
Bureau of Investigation, India’s elite national police agency] investigated and 
then maybe we might get to the bottom of it. That’s my biggest wish, a new 
investigation.”

A first postmortem examination ruled that Keeling died from accidental 
drowning, before a second, carried out under pressure from her mother, prompted 
a fresh investigation to be launched.

The teenager had been visiting the country on a family holiday and attended a 
Valentine’s Day beach party while the rest of her relatives went travelling.

MacKeown alleged that the investigative process was initially hindered by a 
reluctance in the Indian criminal justice system to admit a tourist had been 
murdered.

“It wouldn’t be very good for their tourism and the drug trade over there is 
huge, it goes right up to some of the ministers and some of the police are 
involved in it – a huge loss of money,” she said. “The guys directly trying to 
cover up the murder are involved in the drug trade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/aug/02/scarlett-keeling-mother-accuses-minister>
.”

MacKeown also spoke of how she would “regret for the rest of my life” the 
decision to let her daughter go to the party alone.
 