
Remember that time you were crowd surfing at an Arctic Monkeys gig and thought 
you were just having a drunken laugh? Rubbish! You were, in fact, being 
"collaborative in a unique social space, expressing super-intimacy with 
strangers and rejecting the self-aggrandising that comes with stage-diving". Oh 
yes you were. And that time you were standing at the bar and thought you were 
just, well, thirsty? Not at all: you were probably just "proving your 
credentials as an industry professional" or "communicating to others a 
disinterest in the act".

These are the theories of professor Wendy Fonarow, anthropologist at UCLA in 
California and the author of Empire Of Dirt: The Aesthetics And Rituals Of 
British Indie Music. Now available in the UK, it peers into indie culture from 
a strictly anthropological perspective and is packed with ideas about religious 
narratives (indie is the new Puritanism, apparently), guest list behaviour 
(which relate to sociologist Erving Goffman's theories about saving face) and 
the sexual politics of where to stick your AAA pass. So next time you're 
moshing, drinking or puking at a gig be warned: professor Wendy may up on the 
balcony viewing you like you're a lab rat.

"If something interesting happens at a gig I do turn on that anthropologist 
perception," she laughs. "People often think I'm on to some amazing scam to be 
able to do this, a real rock'n'roll swindle, but I've put the hours in stood by 
the door, collecting data about gender ratios!" So, here's Wendy's 
anthropological take on the history of rock'n'roll...

The guitar

"People think the guitar is a phallic symbol but it's patently not. The head 
and the shaft are phallic, but the body is the hourglass shape that we use to 
symbolise femininity. So the guitar is actually a symbol of copulation, 
combining the two symbols in front of an open whole where you use your fingers. 
The guitar can be arousing to women but also men as well."

Rock'n'roll is born

"There are interesting theories as to why rock'n'roll happened when it did. 
There's evidence to suggest Christianity, which exists as a missionising 
religion, had run out of 'exotic others' to missionise after the fall of 
colonialism. Therefore it was in their interests to get adolescents to act like 
heathens, so they had a supply of unconverted people to convert. So what we did 
was produce a heathen in our own midst to act out all the same things we'd 
accused other societies of doing. And have a period of time where eventually 
they reject what they're doing."

Elvis gyrates

"Elvis was taboo because he had both masculine and feminine components and he 
was combining another major western divide, between the European music 
traditions and those that came from descendents from the west African slaves. 
So that's black and white, male and female, brought together. The music also 
shows you an idea you'd find in west Africa - that the mind and body aren't 
separated and that the body can be a means to knowledge and expression. 
European culture often separates the two, which is a false dichotomy."

Screaming fans

"In anthropology, you're always suspicious of the narratives. So I was less 
interested in why a lot of female fans were screaming - which did happen - and 
more interested in why people wanted to tell that story. There were so many men 
who loved the Beatles, too, and if you look at the actual documentation they'll 
do close-ups of the women and only show men in the long-shots. The cameraman 
has made a conscious choice of what to shoot; it's the same as at festivals 
today, when two thirds are usually male but you see more girls. Why? Because 
rock audiences are usually shown to be 'out of control' and by individualising 
females it implies they're sexually out of control and therefore sexually 
available."

Groupies

"Most shows involve guys squashed in with other guys watching different guys 
onstage. Someone needs to take the brunt for all that sexual desire, which is 
basically what the groupie is. I call them 'sin eaters', which is a western 
European tradition where someone in a village would be paid to take the sin off 
dead people, hence ensuring they go to heaven. I think the groupie is used to 
take the sin of all that sexual desire off the men."

Mods Vs Rockers

"One of my ex-students once said 'music is my ethnicity'. People want to find 
other people who are like-minded so instead of finding their ethnic identity 
through birth they find it through aesthetic preferences and that becomes their 
identity. For each one of those music movements, there are modes of display. 
Desmond Morris talked about how different earrings can signify where you are in 
the age grade of certain tribes in central Africa. To outsiders these displays 
are subtle or hard to notice at all."

Woodstock

"Again it's hard to know what really happened among the narratives of free 
love. I can't imagine what people say is what actually transpired, I think a 
lot of that has to do with the narcissism of the postwar 60s generation and 
them wanting to think they went through this utopian moment. I guess youth are 
portrayed as those who've lost their way and are under sway of pusher men in 
the music industry. And the idea is that, when you eventually cut your ties 
with that community, you realise those ideals are worthless and go back to 
worshipping the true deity, which in a capitalist society is money. It's 
another religious narrative."

Punk anarchy

"One of the things going on in music performance compared to theatre is you 
want people to play themselves. The reason surrounds authenticity. This is a 
really weird thing because if music is art, then music is artifice - it's made 
up. But people are always looking for truth in performance and they want this 
because if the performer is experiencing something true then so is what you're 
experiencing. There's a long past of people hurting themselves on stage - Sid 
Vicious, Iggy Pop. It's seen as being more 'real' but, if you read the 
performers' accounts, the reason they often do these things is because they 
think the show's going badly and feel frustrated."

Indie culture

"Religious narratives show up in all expressive forms, from politics to music. 
I see a lot of the religious narrative of Puritanism in the indie music scene; 
the idea that, to have the pure divine experience, it has to be direct and 
unmediated. So the smaller and more intimate a show is, the 'truer' fans 
believe their experience was, compared to someone who saw them later on in a 
bigger venue. That's why so many people claim to have seen the Sex Pistols at 
the 100 Club. You can also find the aesthetic of Puritanism in the way indie 
people present themselves, such as childlike clothing, this idea of returning 
to the golden age of childhood or the musical past."

Madonna shakes up girl pop

"Male performers tend to be more feminised, whereas with females, although 
some are masculinised, most tend to be hyper-feminised. Madonna is one example, 
but Kylie and Gwen Stefani support this as well. It's interesting because if 
you look at Mardi Gras or European traditions of masquerade, you find this 
overall feminisation there as well. It presents femininity as masquerade and 
that idea of 'gender performance'. It gives off the idea that being female is a 
sham, all make-up and props."

Hip-hop MC battles

"This is similar to the way certain Inuit tribes deal with conflict, which is 
through song duels. So, say your wife left you for another man: you might feel 
wronged and you would sing about this, then the other man will make his 
argument through traditional song. It's a little bit like a competition for the 
mic as you'd see in hip-hop. And when the crowd get behind one of the singers, 
that's the way the dispute is resolved. You might still be mad afterwards but 
it's been decided and the point is that the conflict has been resolved."

Glastonbury mudbath

"There's an emotional sensation from shared suffering, a feeling of 
togetherness. It's ritualised in societies all over the world. In Papua New 
Guinea, coming of age rituals in the highland involve getting hit with stinging 
nettles. In the Venezuelan rainforest there's a ritual where, to be a man, you 
have to put your hand in a glove with bullet ants for 10 minutes. You 
experience pain with a cohort of men you will work with as warriors. So the 
highs and lows of a muddy Glasto can in fact be the best ones."

Myspace

"People who film gigs on their phone aren't just doing it for the memories - 
they're doing it to present an image of themselves in cyberspace, where your 
personality is basically an enumeration of your tastes. You didn't just go to 
Glastonbury, you're 'the type of person who goes to Glastonbury'. To have a 
great cyber identity you have to record events and put them on your page. So 
your life in the real world is a way of gathering material for your online 
persona. In a way you're not really present at all."

Â· Empire Of Dirt: The Aesthetics And Rituals Of British Indie Music is out now
 