
Scotland’s rail network faces mounting problems as performance targets are 
missed and overspending grows on upgrade work, the rail regulator has warned.

In more bad news for Humza Yousaf, the Scottish transport minister, the Office 
of Rail and Road (ORR) has predicted even worse problems on the network if 
there is bad weather this winter. DespiteNetwork Rail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/network-rail> cutting a key performance 
target to make improvements more achievable, a bad winter could further derail 
its plans because it has no margin left for mistakes or problems.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fscotland-rail-network-vulnerable-as-problems-mount-regulator-warns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f6aeb077fe352eface6903b88e070fe222e5b83%2F1258_83_1071_1339%2F1071.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scotland's%20rail%20network%20vulnerable%20as%20problems%20mount%2C%20regulator%20warns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fscotland-rail-network-vulnerable-as-problems-mount-regulator-warns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scotland%27s%20rail%20network%20vulnerable%20as%20problems%20mount%2C%20regulator%20warns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fscotland-rail-network-vulnerable-as-problems-mount-regulator-warns%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f6aeb077fe352eface6903b88e070fe222e5b83%2F1258_83_1071_1339%2F1071.jpg>
 Humza Yousaf, Scottish transport minister. Photograph: Danny Lawson/PA 
Yousaf has faced calls to resign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/scotlands-transport-minister-apologises-to-rail-travellers>
 after a series of breakdowns on ScotRail services closed rail lines, increased 
delays and cancellations, and worsened industrial action.

Nicola Sturgeon, the first minister, was repeatedly challenged about the 
crisis at first minister’s questions on Thursday, as Labour called on the 
Scottish government to freeze fares next year in light of the poor performance.


Sturgeon deflected complaints by insisting ministers were pressing hard for 
rail improvements, adding that those included 20,000 extra seats a day and 200 
new services.

She wrong-footed the leader of the Scottish Conservatives by disclosing in an 
answer to Ruth Davidson that ScotRail, which runs the vast majority of 
Scotland’s trains, was due to publish its 246-point improvement plan within 
days.

But the Tories hit back by publishing several angry tweets sent out by Yousaf 
in 2010 and 2011 about the rail services, before and after he became an MSP. In 
one, sent in late 2011 while he was a parliamentary aide to then first minister 
Alex Salmond, he branded ScotRail as “#Scotfail” and called for fare cuts.
Humza Yousaf (@HumzaYousaf) 
Only 3carriages on peak morning train - completely overcrowded. Everytime 
there is a#scotfail <https://twitter.com/hashtag/scotfail?src=hash> can we 
reduce fares by 1%?@scotrail <https://twitter.com/ScotRail>
 <https://twitter.com/HumzaYousaf/status/149405782415376386> December 21, 2011 
<https://twitter.com/HumzaYousaf/status/149405782415376386> 
In its half-yearly report 
<http://orr.gov.uk/publications/reports/network-rail-monitor> on Network Rail’s 
performance – which is influenced heavily by Scottish government investment 
plans – the ORR disclosed that the network has already missed its average 
punctuality target by 2.5%, forcing it to cut its year-end regulatory goal from 
92% to 91% to make it more achievable.

In order to meet that aim, the ORR has said Network Rail must meet its targets 
for the next four months and hope this winter’s weather is no worse than normal.

“We have carried out a detailed review of the plan and have concluded that it 
is robust and that the 91% target is therefore stretching but achievable 
(assuming an average autumn and winter),” the ORR said.

Shedding further light on delays that have beset parts of the network, the ORR 
said signalling performance “has deteriorated markedly since the beginning of 
the year, reversing the gains made during the last two years”.

A modern rail network in Scotland is long overdue
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/nov/21/modern-rail-network-scotland-long-overdue>
It warned that Network Rail faced the prospect of running out of money, partly 
because the UK Department forTransport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> had cut its Scottish borrowing limit 
to £3.5bn, but also because of project cost overruns. The ORR forecast a £43m 
budget overspend this year, partly because the Edinburgh-Glasgow improvement 
project was costing £51m more than expected.

The regulator added that Network Rail was delivering the overall rail and 
electrical line renewal plan ahead of target but was going to again miss an 
interim target for the electrification of Scotland’s busiest rail line between 
Edinburgh and Glasgow and its enhancements programme was lagging behind 
performance in England and Wales.

The ORR revealed Network Rail’s difficulties were to blame for 54% of 
ScotRail’s “delay minutes” and 53% of those for the overnight Caledonian 
Sleeper services.

Sturgeon’s spokesman said the improvement plan was aimed at tackling problems 
facing passengers and the network. “Clearly the service to the travelling 
public hasn’t been as good as we would like it to be,” he said. “In overall 
terms, the rail service inScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> 
still compares favourably to other networks across the UK, [but] the mere fact 
we have an improvement programme is an acknowledgement things need to get 
better.”
 