
At 6.25am, on 25 December 2015, UKTV channel Yesterday’s Christmas offering 
started, as it meant to go on, with episode one of the famously cheerless 
documentary serial, The World At War. Around 10am, as the breakfast champagne 
sparkled, the Dunkirk evacuation was under way. Things were rounded off at 10pm 
with a documentary on the Nuremberg trials. All of which is perfectly fine. 
After all, not everyone wants their post-Christmas dinner comedown accompanied 
by a Call The Midwife special. In the festive TV landscape, there’s surely room 
for a drop of bile in the eggnog.

So what are your options this year, if you can’t let go of your 2016 angst for 
even one day? Inexplicably, no one seems to be showing Threads on a loop. But 
still, help is at hand. Pulp thrillerQuarry isn’t actually airing on Christmas 
Day but the entire series is available online shortly after the first episode’s 
broadcast. Quarry has what you need. You miserable swine.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUgISvffeT-8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUgISvffeT-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUgISvffeT-8&media=>
As we meet Mac Conway, he’s knee-deep in filthy water. His bedraggled 
moustache/mullet combo gives him the look of a forlorn otter in a nature doc, 
about to face a nest of hungry cubs after a failed hunting expedition. Mac’s 
own hunting expedition hasn’t failed, though. He finishes off his human prey 
with a slug to the head, drags the stiff into the water and slings him into the 
deep. But the corpse has snagged on a branch so Mac must wade out again, 
hoisting the body into oblivion once and for all. Finally, he’s done. All in a 
day’s work.

Never mind the baubles: why the best Christmas films are darker than December
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/12/christmas-film-special-2016-peter-bradshaw>
How did Mac get here? Quarry is set in 1972 and based on a series of novels by 
Max Allan Collins <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Max_Allan_Collins>. Mac 
(balefully portrayed by Logan Marshall-Green) has a look redolent of an era 
when lavish facial hair meant Vietnam and bad acid rather than London Fields 
and a moderately successful career as a freelance graphic designer. Mac is back 
in Memphis from the war. While in ’Nam he was allegedly involved in some 
unspeakable atrocity. He does his best to reintegrate into domesticity but, 
soon, he’s harshing his wife Joni’s buzz with his brooding, his flying off the 
handle and his tendency to have flashbacks involving dead Viet Cong whenever he 
and Joni frolic in the pool that the less-troubled Mac built with his own hands 
in happier times.

Still, his new skill set has opened up one opportunity. Mac is visited by The 
Broker, played by the fearsomePeter Mullan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/10/peter-mullan-every-scots-got-a-story-about-how-corrupt-labour-got-in-scotland>
, a man whose career has been conspicuously devoid of appearances in Christmas 
specials. Can Mac be persuaded to pay a few late-night visits to a few guys who 
won’t be missed? Of course he can.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fquarry-sky-atlantic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d2166b3f98edec4b80edbb15eb2f8ef41b3e3c7%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Season%20of%20bad%20will%3A%20why%20Quarry%20is%20the%20perfect%20antidote%20to%20Christmas%20TV&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fquarry-sky-atlantic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Season%20of%20bad%20will%3A%20why%20Quarry%20is%20the%20perfect%20antidote%20to%20Christmas%20TV&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fquarry-sky-atlantic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d2166b3f98edec4b80edbb15eb2f8ef41b3e3c7%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Welcome home… Quarry 
It’s currently tempting to filter every depiction of beaten-up small-town 
America through the grotesque prism of Donald Trump. And that narrative of 
betrayal, nihilism and self-destructiveness is present in Quarry if you want 
it. But, actually, Quarry is nothing more nor less than smart, hardboiled crime 
drama in the tradition of Rectify or True Detective, with a hint of Breaking 
Bad’s morality play on weakness under duress. And, as with True Detective’s 
Rust Cohle, it’s amazing what unknowable psychedelic horror can languish behind 
a straggly moustache and a pair of dead eyes.

So, unknowable psychedelic horror. Sometimes at Christmas it’s all you’ve got. 
Somewhere in the house, your in-laws are putting on sweatshirts decorated with 
reindeer. The Queen is about to address the nation. Sneak off and give Quarry a 
try. You know you want to.

Quarry airs Wednesday, Sky Atlantic, 9pm; the full series is available on 
demand from Wednesday
 