
SeaWorld <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/seaworld> announced an 
aggressive cost-cutting strategy on Tuesday as the controversial aquatic theme 
park company reported a further 33% decline in profits.

We forced SeaWorld into the orca U-turn. What shall we do next? | Patrick 
Barkham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/21/seaworld-orca-captive-breeding-programme>
The company, which has been struggling to win back customers since the 2013 
documentary Blackfish <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8OEjYquyjcg> detailed 
claims of mistreatment of orca whales and other animals,reported 
<http://s1.q4cdn.com/392447382/files/doc_financials/Quarterly/2016/Q3/2016-Q3-SEAS-Earnings-Release-FINAL.PDF>
 that its third quarter income had fallen from $98m to $66m.

Chief executive Joe Manby warned investors to expect annual profits to come in 
at between $310-340m. It is the third time the company has cut its earnings 
before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA) target this 
year. In 2013 –beforecelebrities including Harry Styles and Matt Damon sparked 
a Blackfish-inspired SeaWorld boycott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/aug/27/seaworld-harry-styles-negative-online-comments>
 – the company made EBITDA of $439m.

In order to placate investors, angry at the company for suspending future 
dividend payments last month 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-09-19/seaworld-shares-dive-after-company-suspends-quarterly-dividend>
, Manby said he would aggressively cut $65m of fresh costs in order to try and 
shore up profits. Revenue in the quarter fell 2.3% to $485m and attendance was 
down 0.4% to 8.3m.

Manby said SeaWorld had begun “executing a comprehensive cost optimization 
program” on top an already announced cost-cutting drive. He said the company 
was “delivering tangible results” on the “fundamental repositioning of our 
brand from animal entertainment to experiences that matter”.

Last year, Manby bowed to pressure and vowed to phase out the “theatrical 
killer whale experience” at its San Diego park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/09/seaworld-end-orca-whale-shows-san-diego>
, which has been worst hit by the public boycott, by the end of 2016. The 
Californian Shamu show – in which whales dive, jump and splash guests to the 
demands of their trainers – is being replaced with “an all new orca experience 
focused on the natural environment”.

“We are listening to our guests, evolving as a company, we are always 
changing,” Manby said as he unveiled the new corporate strategy in November. 
“In 2017 we will launch an all-new orca experience focused on natural 
environment [of whales]. 2016 will be the last year of our theatrical killer 
whale experience in San Diego.”

The company went further in its efforts to win public opinion by ending the 
captive breeding of orca whales, after years of pressure from animal rights 
activists. “By making this the last generation of orcas in our care and 
reimagining how guests will experience these beautiful animals, we are 
fulfilling our mission of providing visitors to our parks with experiences that 
matter,” Manby said in March.

However, the company still has almost 30 killer whales, including one who is 
pregnant. The whales can live for up to 60 years.

Peta, the main animal rights charity campaigning against SeaWorld, said the 
company was “fighting a losing battle to keep its orca prisons in business”.

“Instead of making real changes, SeaWorld is adding meaningless cosmetic 
decorations to its stadiums, continuing to force orcas to jump and splash for a 
reward of dead fish, and painfully inseminating dolphin mothers,” Tracy Reiman, 
Peta’s executive vice-president, said. “SeaWorld could turn things around by 
sending these animals to sea sanctuaries – something that crowds everywhere 
would cheer.”

SeaWorld’s shares, which hit an all time low of $12 last month, rose 3.5% to 
$14.70 on Tuesday as investors welcomed the cost-cutting drive. The shares were 
worth as much as $39 in 2013.
 