
A girl who was left fighting for her life after a “hit-and-run” which killed 
her 12-year-old cousin has now also died.

Zaneta Krokova, 11, was run over with her cousin Helina Kotlarova, 12, as they 
crossed the road holding hands on New Year’s Eve.

The 11-year-old had been in a critical condition in hospital since the crash 
in Oldham, which killed Helina at the scene.

Police said Zaneta died in hospital on Monday morning from the injuries she 
suffered.

Sgt Lee Westhead from Greater Manchester police’s serious collision 
investigation unit said: “This is a heartbreaking incident which has now taken 
the lives of two young girls and all of our thoughts remain with their 
families, who are understandably devastated.

“We have made significant progress with our investigation since the collision 
happened and I would like to thank everyone who has contacted police with 
information so far.

“The community are clearly as committed as we are to establishing exactly what 
happened to Helina and Zaneta and the support they have provided has been vital 
to the investigation.”

Detectives also released pictures of a blue Peugeot 807 estate car they said 
was involved in the collision, having initially believed a black VW Golf was 
responsible.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fappeal-launched-for-family-of-girl-killed-in-oldham-hit-and-run%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38e015be4fcfb04f32b7f8b6da8e7a2fedbc79ff%2F13_0_1167_700%2F1167.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Second%20girl%20dies%20after%20New%20Year's%20Eve%20'hit-and-run'%20in%20Oldham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fappeal-launched-for-family-of-girl-killed-in-oldham-hit-and-run%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Second%20girl%20dies%20after%20New%20Year%27s%20Eve%20%27hit-and-run%27%20in%20Oldham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fappeal-launched-for-family-of-girl-killed-in-oldham-hit-and-run%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38e015be4fcfb04f32b7f8b6da8e7a2fedbc79ff%2F13_0_1167_700%2F1167.jpg>
 Picture of Peugeot 807 released by police. Photograph: Greater Manchester 
police 
Four men – aged 59, 48, 38 and 18 – were arrested on suspicion of causing 
death by dangerous driving and were in custody for questioning. A fifth man, 
aged 23, initially arrested for the same offence was de-arrested and was 
assisting police with their inquiries.

Police were also trying to trace the driver of a white Citroën Dispatch, which 
was in the area at the time of the collision on Ashton Road, as they believed 
he could hold key information.

Westhead added: “As the investigation has progressed we have identified that 
the vehicle that struck the girls was a Blue Peugeot 807. We have recovered 
this vehicle abandoned on Honeywell Lane.
Oldham car locator map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2017/01/oldham_hit_and_run-zip/giv-3902C2H2ber6UCN7/>
“The Peugeot is very distinctive and I am releasing pictures of the vehicle in 
an attempt to establish its movements on the 31 December in the hours prior to 
the collision.

“As you can see in the images, the vehicle is dark blue, people carrier-shaped 
and is in poor physical condition and notably has pre-existing damage to its 
rear window.

“Did you see this vehicle on Saturday 31 December in the hours before or after 
the collision?

“Finally, I am also keen to speak to the occupants of a white Citroën Dispatch 
van that I am also releasing an image of. This vehicle did not collide with 
anyone but was in the immediate vicinity of the collision and may have key 
information.

“Again if you saw this vehicle or have any information about its occupants or 
why it was in the area at the time of the collision, please contact us.”

Earlier on Monday fellow Oldham residents appealed to raise £3,000 
<https://www.justgiving.com/crowdfunding/sallie-lou> to help pay for Helina’s 
funeral.

Sallie Lou, who set up the JustGiving page 
<https://www.justgiving.com/crowdfunding/sallie-lou> with the approval of 
Helina’s family, said: “This is a page to help the family of Helina, who sadly 
lost her life following a collision in Oldham on New Year’s Eve.

“This is to help lay Helina to rest, and whatever the family might need. Rest 
In Peace angel, fly high x.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fthere-was-nothing-to-be-done-sister-of-hit-and-run-victim-recounts-crash-aftermath-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98There%20was%20nothing%20to%20be%20done%E2%80%99%3A%20Sister%20of%20hit%20and%20run%20victim%20recounts%20crash%20aftermath%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fthere-was-nothing-to-be-done-sister-of-hit-and-run-victim-recounts-crash-aftermath-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98There%20was%20nothing%20to%20be%20done%E2%80%99%3A%20Sister%20of%20hit%20and%20run%20victim%20recounts%20crash%20aftermath%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fthere-was-nothing-to-be-done-sister-of-hit-and-run-victim-recounts-crash-aftermath-video&media=>
‘There was nothing to be done’: Sister of hit and run victim recounts crash 
aftermath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2017/jan/02/there-was-nothing-to-be-done-sister-of-hit-and-run-victim-recounts-crash-aftermath-video>
Helina’s parents, Sylva and Robert, raced to the scene, 100 metres from their 
home, moments after the girls were hit.

Helina’s sister Sylva Kotlarova, 19, described how her mother held the fatally 
injured 12-year-old and stroked her hair before she was pronounced dead by 
paramedics.

“Her face was all bloody,” she said. “She did not breathe. Mum was touching 
her hair.”

Helina, who has seven sisters and one brother, came to England from the Czech 
Republic eight years ago, her family told reporters. She attended the 
Collective Spirit free school in Oldham.

Her sister said the girls were with a larger group of family and friends who 
had already crossed the road, one of the main routes in and out of Oldham town 
centre, and the larger group was waiting on the opposite pavement. The two 
cousins then started to cross the road outside the shop.

Sylva Kotlarova said: “But as they came to the other side of the road, the car 
ran them over. They were holding hands.”

Seconds later, friends ran to Helina’s home to alert her family. Sylva 
Kotlarova said: “We ran there. I went to her. She did not breathe. Then the 
ambulance came.”

Bilal Ahmed, who witnessed the aftermath of the collision and dialled 999, 
told Sky News he had seen the girls outside some shops moments before the 
crash. “About five minutes later I came back and saw that had happened already 
on the road,” he said. “One girl was on the right side of the road and the 
other on the left.”

Anyone with any information is asked to call Greater Manchester police’s 
serious collision investigation unit on0161 856 4741 <> quoting incident number 
1691 of 31 December 2016.
 