
More election security experts have joined Jill Stein’s campaign to review the 
presidential vote in battleground states won by Donald Trump, as she sues
Wisconsin <https://www.theguardian.com/world/wisconsin> to secure a full 
recount by hand of all its 3m ballots.

Half a dozen academics and other specialists on Monday submitted new testimony 
supporting a lawsuit from Stein against Wisconsin authorities, in which she 
asked a court to prevent county officials from carrying out their recounts by 
machine.


US election recount: how it began – and what effect it could have
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/28/election-recount-jill-stein-hillary-clinton-donald-trump>
Stein argued that Wisconsin’s plan to allow automatic recounting “risks 
tainting the recount process” because the electronic scanning equipment 
involved may incorrectly tally the results and could have been attacked by 
foreign hackers.


“There is a substantial possibility that recounting the ballots by hand will 
produce a more correct result and change the outcome of the election,” Stein 
argued in the lawsuit in Dane County circuit court. A copy wasobtained by the 
Guardian 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/documentcloud/index.html?docid=3227350-Wisconsin-Summons-and-Complaint-11-28-16>
.
Affadavit 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/documentcloud/index.html?docid=3227350-Wisconsin-Summons-and-Complaint-11-28-16>
Stein, the Green party’s presidential election candidate, is working to secure 
full recounts in the states of Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin, where 
Trump surprised pollsters by narrowly beating Clinton on his way to a national 
victory in the electoral college.

A petition from Stein requesting a recount was accepted by Wisconsin last 
Friday. Her efforts to obtain a recount in Pennsylvaniamet serious difficulties 
on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/28/recount-defense-fund-rnc-donald-trump>
 as it became clear she needed three voters in each of the state’s 9,163 voting 
precincts to request a recount on her behalf, and that deadlines to do so had 
passed in many precincts.

Wisconsin also told Stein on Monday that the recount, which was previously 
estimated to cost $1m, would actually cost $3.5m and that the funds must be 
produced by the end of Tuesday. Stein has raised more than $6m for the 
three-state recount effort using online crowdfunding.

The election took place amid warnings from the US government that Russian 
hackers had been detected in the voter registration systems of some states and 
were responsible for the theft of emails from the Democratic National Committee 
and from John Podesta, the chairman of Clinton’s presidential campaign.
Chart 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/nov/2016-11-25T12:35:47/embed.html>
Stein’s effort to have votes recounted, which she is spearheading on behalf of 
a loose coalition of experts and activists, has been sharply criticized by 
Trump and his allies, as well as people from across the political spectrum. 
Late on Monday, however, a new group of academics came out in her support.

Professor Poorvi Vora of George Washington University said in an affidavit 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/documentcloud/index.html?docid=3227385-Wisconsin-Vora-Affidavit-With-Exhibits-11-28-16>
 that hackers could have infected vote-scanning machinery in Wisconsin with 
malware designed to skew automatic recounts as well as the original vote count.

“It is not possible to determine with certainty the absence of malicious 
software hiding within what might appear to be many thousands of lines of 
legitimate software code,” said Vora, who added that the only way to ensure the 
integrity of the count was a recount by hand.

Wisconsin officials have said the recount must be completed by 8pm on 12 
December in order for the results to be finally certified by the following day 
in time for a federal deadline. Fearful that hand recounts would take too long, 
the state’s election commission has told counties they may decide how they 
recount their ballots, prompting the lawsuit from Stein.

Arguing that a manual count of paper ballots was the only way to ensure there 
had been no outside interference,Professor Ronald Rivest of the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/documentcloud/index.html?docid=3227391-Wisconsin-Rivest-Affidavit-11-28-16>
 quoted the Russian proverb made famous by president Ronald Reagan: “Trust, but 
verify.”

“We have learned the hard way that almost any computer system can be broken 
into by a sufficiently determined, skillful, and persistent adversary,” said 
Rivest.

Professor Dan Wallach of Rice University 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/documentcloud/index.html?docid=3227390-Wisconsin-Wallach-Affidavit-11-28-16>
 said it was “entirely reasonable” to suspect that a foreign adversary was 
capable of a sophisticated and targeted attack on the American electoral 
process. “They know about battleground states,” he said.

Wallach cited the US-Israeli hacking of Iran’s nuclear program to argue 
against skeptics who insist that voter machines cannot have been hacked because 
they were not connected to the internet.

US elections 2016 live results: track who is winning, county by county
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/nov/08/us-election-2016-results-live-clinton-trump>
“The Stuxnet malware for example was engineered specifically to damage nuclear 
centrifuges in Iran even though those centrifuges were never connected to the 
internet,” said Wallach.

Other experts pointed to more prosaic reasons for holding a full recount by 
hand.

Professor Philip Stark 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/documentcloud/index.html?docid=3227392-Wisconsin-Stark-Affidavit-11-28-16>
, director of statistical computing at the University of California, Berkeley, 
said that Trump’s winning margin in Wisconsin of about 22,000 could “easily be 
less” than the errors frequently made by the optical voting systems used in 
most counties, which scan paper ballots marked by voters.

“To determine whether the reported winner actually won requires verifying the 
results as accurately as possible, which in turn requires manually examining 
the underlying paper records,” said Stark, who wrote a newspaper op-ed with 
Rivest calling for a review of the election before Stein announced her recount 
efforts.

The group who filed affidavits in support of Stein on Monday also included 
Douglas Jones 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/documentcloud/index.html?docid=3227405-Wisconsin-Jones-Affidavit-11-28-16-00268398x9CCC2>
, an associate professor at University of Iowa, andHarri Hursti 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/documentcloud/index.html?docid=3227389-Wisconsin-Hursti-Affidavit-11-28-16>
, a Finnish expert on the hacking of electronic voter machines.
 