
A huge police presence is on the streets for London’s new year fireworks 
display as the UK prepares to usher in 2017.


People from almost 100 countries will flock to the Thames to view the 
pyrotechnics, which will begin as Big Ben strikes midnight.

About 12,000 fireworks producing 50,000 projectiles will transform the city 
skyline for 12 minutes to gasps from the 110,000 ticket holders at the mayor’s 
sold-out showcase event.

Trump sends New Year's Eve tweet to 'bad losers' as world sees in 2017 - live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/live/2016/dec/31/new-years-eve-around-the-world-2016-2017-live>
Thousands of police officers are providing a protective ring around the 
display, and tactics have been adjusted following this year’s terrorist attacks 
in Europe.

About 3,000 officers are on duty within and outside ticketed areas, and armed 
police will be a fixture on the tube as they travel between jobs in a move 
aimed at reassuring passengers.

Fears of a mass-casualty terror plot targeting one of the country’s new year 
events have heightened after the use of lorries in devastating attacks on 
crowded areas of Nice and Berlin.

British Transport police said they would be extending officers’ working hours 
on the night for a second year running.

Supt Andy Morgan said: “We developed and improved our security plan for last 
year’s New Year’s Eve event following the atrocities in Paris in the previous 
November and we, of course, have looked at good security, a thorough security 
boost following a different type of threat in Nice back in July.

“In general, we have a good eyeline on what could happen, we’ve got very, very 
good assets both covert and overt deployed out within the footprint and across 
London, almost joined at the hip with our colleagues from the Metropolitan 
police to make sure that we’re working together to provide that security 
blanket acrossLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fsecurity-tight-in-london-as-uk-prepares-for-new-years-eve-celebrations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F585a499029e3c10d1894f5ccefa2506510238581%2F0_0_4412_2648%2F4412.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Security%20tight%20in%20London%20as%20UK%20holds%20New%20Year's%20Eve%20celebrations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fsecurity-tight-in-london-as-uk-prepares-for-new-years-eve-celebrations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Security%20tight%20in%20London%20as%20UK%20holds%20New%20Year%27s%20Eve%20celebrations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fsecurity-tight-in-london-as-uk-prepares-for-new-years-eve-celebrations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F585a499029e3c10d1894f5ccefa2506510238581%2F0_0_4412_2648%2F4412.jpg>
 Police officers patrol with a sniffer dog ahead of London’s new year 
celebrations. Photograph: Neil Hall/Reuters 
For the first time, people without tickets will be able to view the fireworks 
from three locations through a 360-degree feed. The BBC’s live stream will 
start at 11.50pm.

This year’s countdown will last very slightly longer than usual as a so-called 
“leap second” is introduced to compensate for a slowdown in the Earth’s 
rotation.

Some of the stars the world lost in 2016 will be honoured. David Bowie, Prince 
and the Two Ronnies, which included Ronnie Corbett, will feature on the 
soundtrack.

In Edinburgh, 80,000 revellers will attend the Hogmanay street party in the 
city centre, where the Charlatans will perform. Paolo Nutini will front a 
concert in the gardens.

New year <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/new-year> enthusiasm is at 
risk of being dampened in northern England and Wales as rain is set to sweep 
across areas including Manchester, Leeds and possibly Cardiff at midnight, the 
Met Office said.

On the other side of the globe, countries have already begun celebrating the 
arrival of 2017, withspectacular fireworks illuminating Sydney harbour in 
Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/01/sydney-new-years-eve-celebrations-honour-bowie-prince-and-wilder>
.

The harbour bridge was doused in the light of an estimated seven tonnes of 
fireworks during two displays, including an earlier show in which the landmark 
glowed purple in a tribute to Prince.

Bowie was also honoured with space-themed fireworks as a nod to his hit Space 
Oddity.

The Pacific island nations of Samoa, Tonga and Kiribati were the first to 
welcome the new year at 1000 GMT.

The end of 2016 was then marked in the Chatham Islands and parts of New 
Zealand shortly afterwards, with fireworks launched from the top of Auckland’s 
Sky Tower before celebrations began in Sydney at 1300 GMT.
 