
There is a quiet power to Simon Norfolk’s black-and-white study of what looks 
like an ordinary staircase in a nondescript house. What strikes you first in 
this photograph – which features in a new exhibition called? The Image as 
Question <http://www.michaelhoppengallery.com/exhibitions/139/overview> – is 
how the light plays on each polished surface: the gleaming handrail and 
pristine skirting board, the gloss-painted wall. It is then you notice that the 
surface of each stair is not straight but gently curving, worn by the footsteps 
of those who have walked down them over the years.

The French thinker Roland Barthes identified what he called the punctum: the 
crucial, often accidental, detail of a photograph that reveals something 
deeper. The curve of the worn stairs is not an accidental detail in Norfolk’s 
photograph, but the crucial element in the composition that, as Barthes put it, 
“rises from the scene” with a force that makes it suddenly seem like a new 
photograph. Those who walked down these stairs, leaving the imprint of their 
vast numbers, were heading towards their deaths in the gas chambers at 
Auschwitz. It is a photograph that evokes horror in the most subtle and 
affecting way.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fphotography-and-meaning-in-the-digital-age-from-911-to-fake-crime-scenes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F461b7e9e69a93a48eaa2d1cc0172c98e61cf8d91%2F0_0_701_1050%2F701.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Seeing%20is%20believing%3A%20documentary%20photography%20from%20Francis%20Bacon%20to%209%2F11&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fphotography-and-meaning-in-the-digital-age-from-911-to-fake-crime-scenes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Seeing%20is%20believing%3A%20documentary%20photography%20from%20Francis%20Bacon%20to%209%2F11&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fphotography-and-meaning-in-the-digital-age-from-911-to-fake-crime-scenes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F461b7e9e69a93a48eaa2d1cc0172c98e61cf8d91%2F0_0_701_1050%2F701.jpg>
 September 11th, New York, NY 2001 by Melanie Einzig. Photograph: Melanie 
Einzig. Courtesy Michael Hoppen Gallery 
“Part of the fascination with all photography is that the medium is firmly 
grounded in the documentary tradition,” Michael Hoppen notes in his 
introduction to the show. “It has been used as a record of crime scenes, 
zoological specimens, lunar and space exploration, phrenology, fashion and 
importantly, art and science. It has been used as ‘proof’ of simple things such 
as family holidays and equally of atrocities taking place on the global stage. 
Any contemporary artist using photography has to accept the evidential language 
embedded in the medium.”

That last sentence perhaps provides the subtext to the exhibition, which 
concerns the threatened position of documentary photography in an age of 
digital profligacy. Photographs are now so ubiquitous and, when shared on 
social media, often so unmoored from their context as to seem drained of 
meaning. The images here, Hoppen insists, have “a shared gravitas, a 
weightiness that emanates from their documentary function”.

That is certainly true of Norfolk’s image of the stairs at Auschwitz, but its 
power also comes from its formal and compositional poetry: the fall of the 
light, the geometry of curves, horizontals and verticals, the perspective that, 
as Norfolk has noted, echoes that of an earlier image:Sea of Steps 
<http://www.christies.com/lotfinder/photographs/frederick-h-evans-a-sea-of-steps-5717415-details.aspx>
, a staircase in Wells Cathedral made to appear almost celestial by Frederick 
Evans in 1903. It is not so much a photograph as evidence, then, rather an 
evocation of the immeasurable human suffering that took place on this 
ordinary-looking site.

The exhibition roams far and wide, from photography as research material for 
painters to images made by microscopic and telescopic cameras to the inevitable 
grisly crime scene shots by accomplished ambulance chasers such asArthur 
“Weegee” Fellig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2015/mar/31/the-best-of-weegees-new-york-street-photography-in-pictures>
 and his Mexican counterpart,Enrique Metinides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/nov/21/enrique-metinides-photography-dead-mexico>
. It is an intriguing show enlivened by the fact that the stories behind the 
photographs – which all come from Hoppen’s extensive personal collection – are 
often as interesting as the images themselves.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fphotography-and-meaning-in-the-digital-age-from-911-to-fake-crime-scenes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f9db218738333b05600aeda566f64fec9bf1833%2F0_0_3678_3044%2F3678.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Seeing%20is%20believing%3A%20documentary%20photography%20from%20Francis%20Bacon%20to%209%2F11&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fphotography-and-meaning-in-the-digital-age-from-911-to-fake-crime-scenes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Seeing%20is%20believing%3A%20documentary%20photography%20from%20Francis%20Bacon%20to%209%2F11&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fphotography-and-meaning-in-the-digital-age-from-911-to-fake-crime-scenes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f9db218738333b05600aeda566f64fec9bf1833%2F0_0_3678_3044%2F3678.jpg>
 Enlarged contact sheet of two men wrestling, New York, from the studio of 
Francis Bacon, circa 1975. Photograph: Michael Hoppen Gallery 
A relatively understated, but characteristically voyeuristic, photograph by 
Metinides taken in Mexico City in 1958 shows a blood-splattered cluster of 
personal items – love letters and a golden purse. The caption reads: “After 
being stood up at the altar, a bride returns to the church in the Condesa 
neighbourhood and shoots herself in the head.” Here, evidence rubs up against a 
noir aesthetic learned from classic Hollywood B-movies.

In sharp contrast, Melanie Einzig’s September 11th, New York, NY 2001 is an 
arresting image of how daily life goes on even amid the most cataclysmic 
events. It shows a UPS deliveryman going about his business in Manhattan on 
9/11 while the twin towers of the World Trade Centre burn in the background.

An enlarged contact sheet of two men wrestling in swimming trunks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/feb/14/francis-bacon-contacts-michael-hoppen>
 and caps, originally taken by Francis Bacon in New York in 1975, nestled for 
years in a bin bag in the attic of aMr Robertson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2007/apr/25/artnews.art> from Surrey, who 
turned out to be the artist’s electrician. (Other bin bags given to him for 
safekeeping included personal diaries, cashed cheques, letters and holidays 
snaps.) The photographs highlighted in red were used by Bacon as models for 
painting particular body parts in motion. They echo another exhibit, a 17-frame 
series of a nude man walking by Etienne Jules-Marey, whose motion studies 
preceded those of the better-knownEadweard Muybridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/eadweard-muybridge>.

Likewise, a recent image by Takashi Arai composed of multiple daguerreotypes 
of a stopped wristwatch employs a printing process first used in 1839, but also 
refers toShomei Tomatu’s monochrome photograph of a watch face 
<https://1.cdn.lomography.com/29/9314dfec333e00d10e8ffb64d8481d65b56611/576x576x2.jpg?auth=868092039a9663bb415ce7d74feb437c84f93dc1>
 fractured in the instant the atomic bomb devastated Nagasaki. It seems to me 
the most postmodern moment here.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fphotography-and-meaning-in-the-digital-age-from-911-to-fake-crime-scenes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf0052fa69ce9b7edc2eed06fb3275b58e3b7c0f%2F0_0_2062_2794%2F2062.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Seeing%20is%20believing%3A%20documentary%20photography%20from%20Francis%20Bacon%20to%209%2F11&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fphotography-and-meaning-in-the-digital-age-from-911-to-fake-crime-scenes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Seeing%20is%20believing%3A%20documentary%20photography%20from%20Francis%20Bacon%20to%209%2F11&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fphotography-and-meaning-in-the-digital-age-from-911-to-fake-crime-scenes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf0052fa69ce9b7edc2eed06fb3275b58e3b7c0f%2F0_0_2062_2794%2F2062.jpg>
 A young woman with cheat notes on her thighs, in a photograph titled Cribs, 
taken at the faculty of journalism of Moscow State University, 1984. 
Photograph: Valery Khristoforov/Michael Hoppen Gallery 
Guy Bourdin’s crime scene photograph 
<http://static.highsnobiety.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/05154345/Guy-Bourdin-Biography-05.jpg>
 possesses all the forensic power of the real thing – bloodstains on the 
pavement, a chalk outline of a female victim beneath unforgiving street lights 
– but is a fabrication constructed for a 70s fashion advertising shoot for 
Charles Jourdan shoes. A more subtle subversion of a fashion editorial is 
Richard Avedon’s 10-page picture storyMike Nichols Suzy Parker Rock Europe 
<http://devorahmacdonald.blogspot.co.uk/2011/08/paparazzi-chase-1962.html>, 
published in Harpers Bazaar in September 1962, in collaboration with the 
magazine’s visionary art director, Marvin Israel. Here, using clothes from that 
season’s fashion collections, they created a fictional famous couple in a 
grainy narrative comprised of paparazzi-style photographs. The images are a 
pastiche of the snatched photographs of the romance between Elizabeth Taylor 
and Richard Burton, which then mesmerised the press and the public. So 
convincing was it that many readers mistook it for actual reportage.

The most mischievous single image here is Valerie Khristoforov’s portrait of 
an anonymous young girl on a street with her dress raised to reveal a condensed 
scrawl of notes that had been written on her thighs before she took the 
entrance exam to a journalism course in Moscow State University. Khristoforov 
happened upon the girl in a park as she was writing on her legs “seated under 
trees near the statue of Mikhail Lomonosov, the greatest Russian scientist, who 
gave the name to the University”. She agreed to have her legs photographed 
under two conditions: that he take the picture after the examination and that 
she remain anonymous. He agreed and waited for an hour and a half for her to 
return. She passed the exam and was never found out.

• ? The Image as Question 
<http://www.michaelhoppengallery.com/exhibitions/139/overview/> is at the 
Michael Hoppen Gallery, London, until 26 November.

• This article was amended on 28 September 2016 to correct the spelling of 
Etienne Jules-Marey’s name, from Jules-Marley as an earlier version said.
 