
The Senate has passed the Turnbull government’s registered organisations 
commission bill, one of the industrial relations bills that triggered the 
double dissolution.

It passed after a marathon session ending at 2.13am.


The fair work (registered organisations) amendment bill 2014 passed the Senate 
33-30 early Tuesday morning after being twice rejected by the former parliament.

The Coalition won the crucial support from the Nick Xenophon Team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/nick-xenophon-team> and senator 
Derryn Hinch by promising further whistleblower protections. One Nation also 
supported the bill.

ABCC must enshrine union members' rights, says One Nation senator
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/31/abcc-must-enshrine-union-members-rights-says-one-nation-senator>
Xenophon said on Monday night the reforms were “the most sweeping change to 
whistleblower laws that this country has ever seen”, and revealed the 
government had agreed to a process to extend them to the corporate and public 
sectors.

On Tuesday morning the employment minister, Michaelia Cash, celebrated the 
passage of bill, defending the decision to keep Senate sitting through the 
night.

“I’m delighted that this has been a massive win for the 2 million Australians 
who are members of registered organisations,” she told ABC radio.

She said she would now turn her attention to legislation restoring the 
Australian Building Construction Commission.

But Tony Burke, the shadow finance minister, said it was “extraordinary” how 
anything that passed through the Senate in the current parliament was called a 
victory. “We used to call this governing,” he told the ABC.

The government leader in the Senate, George Brandis, moved a motion that the 
upper house sit until it voted on the registered organisations bill, which would
increase penalties for misconduct in unions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/21/behind-the-industrial-relations-bills-that-could-trigger-a-double-dissolution-election>
 and increase reporting requirements.

Malcolm Roberts says Trump's election 'the beginning of the western spring' – 
as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/nov/21/turnbull-government-negotiations-parliament-coalition-high-court-politics-live>
The whistleblower protections include making it a criminal offence to take 
reprisals against a whistleblower and compensation for whistleblowers.

Although the amendments to the bill only apply to unions and employer 
associations, Xenophon revealed the government had agreed to an inquiry and the 
objective of implementing “the substance and detail” of the whistleblower 
protections in the corporate and public sectors in legislation by June 2018.

Cash confirmed the government had given that undertaking. She said “case 
example after case example” had shown the need to increase oversight to prevent 
officials using union funds as their “personal piggy banks”.

The government and crossbench also agreed on amendments to increase 
accountability for auditors of unions.

Labor had proposed a slew of other amendments, including lowering the 
threshold for declaration of political donations, exempting volunteers from 
increased penalties and giving the Australian Securities and Investments 
Commission oversight of unions, instead of a new registered organisations 
commission.


Hinch told the Senate the opposition’s amendment appeared intended to “water 
[the bill] down as much as possible, so that it’s closer to a gelding than a 
stallion”. In particular, Asic already had too great a volume of disputes to 
deal with and a specialist regulator was needed, he said.

Hinch said he did not regard supporting the bill as an attack on unions, but 
said it would strengthen the union movement if people were confident that 
officials were “all working for members not to personally benefit”.

Brandis accused Labor of “shamelessly” stymying the registered organisations 
commission because every Labor senator “owes their place in this chamber to the 
patronage of a trade union movement that has decided to everything it can to 
prevent reform”.

Before the extended debate, Labor’s employment spokesman, Brendan O’Connor, 
told Guardian Australia that Asic would be a more impartial regulator than a 
registered organisations commission, which Labor fears would have an anti-union 
culture.

O’Connor told Sky News he met the employment minister on Sunday but she had 
not agreed to all of Labor’s amendments.


The Coalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> was 
seeking to exempt only people who do not control unions’ financial affairs from 
new accountability measures, not all volunteers, he said.

How managers came to rule the workplace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/nov/21/how-managers-came-to-rule-the-workplace>
Labor’s effort to amend the bill appeared in danger when One Nation senator 
RodneyCulleton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/21/one-nation-senator-rodney-culleton-fails-in-bid-to-delay-high-court-hearing>
 told Sky News on Monday that he was concerned about Labor proposing Asic as 
the regulator for unions, saying it was a “toothless tiger”.

The second plank of the government’s industrial relations agenda, the 
Australian Building and Construction Commission bill, is also on the notice 
paper this week.

Culleton said he had made up his mind on both bills “to a certain degree” but 
refused to say how he would vote and added “there’s still a bit more polishing 
[to be done]”.

Culleton raised the issue of whether it was worth the budget impact of another 
commissioner, in reference to reinstituting the ABCC. Culleton has previously 
saidthe ABCC bill must enshrine union members’ rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/31/abcc-must-enshrine-union-members-rights-says-one-nation-senator>
, in contrast tothe rest of One Nation who are in favour of the bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/23/malcolm-roberts-reveals-one-nation-intends-to-support-coalitions-abcc-bill>
.

Asked if he would vote with his colleagues, Culleton would say only: “We’ll be 
ready to go on the day.”

The Liberal Democrat senator David Leyonhjelm supported all of Labor’s 
amendments but said he was “inclined to give [the registered organisations 
bill] a little more sympathy” than the ABCC bill, even if amendments are not 
made.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fone-nation-senator-shoots-down-labor-bid-to-amend-anti-union-bills%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe322f1d494dfe83edb1e0547711f5c5e3ebe196c%2F0_0_2172_1448%2F2172.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Senate%20passes%20union%20regulator%20bill%20after%20Coalition%20whistleblower%20concession&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fone-nation-senator-shoots-down-labor-bid-to-amend-anti-union-bills%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Senate%20passes%20union%20regulator%20bill%20after%20Coalition%20whistleblower%20concession&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fone-nation-senator-shoots-down-labor-bid-to-amend-anti-union-bills%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe322f1d494dfe83edb1e0547711f5c5e3ebe196c%2F0_0_2172_1448%2F2172.jpg>
 Senator James McGrath looks at the skylights during the marathon session. 
Photograph: Mike Bowers for the Guardian  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fone-nation-senator-shoots-down-labor-bid-to-amend-anti-union-bills%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbed199ef8efc00d9e131b54996d3431e40ffddd0%2F0_0_2578_1781%2F2578.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Senate%20passes%20union%20regulator%20bill%20after%20Coalition%20whistleblower%20concession&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fone-nation-senator-shoots-down-labor-bid-to-amend-anti-union-bills%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Senate%20passes%20union%20regulator%20bill%20after%20Coalition%20whistleblower%20concession&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fone-nation-senator-shoots-down-labor-bid-to-amend-anti-union-bills%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbed199ef8efc00d9e131b54996d3431e40ffddd0%2F0_0_2578_1781%2F2578.jpg>
 Senator Nick Xenophon talks with One Nation senators Pauline Hanson, Malcolm 
Roberts and Brian Burston. Photograph: Mike Bowers for the Guardian 
The government’s paid parental leave bill is not listed for debate this week.

The bill would prevent parents with employer schemes from accessing both 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/06/double-dipping-on-paid-parental-leave-wont-be-gone-by-july-says-minister>
 their employer and the government’s PPL scheme, or to limit government 
payments to a top-up of the employer’s scheme to the value of 18 weeks’ pay at 
the minimum wage.

After crossbench resistance to the changes, The Daily Telegraph 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/nsw/paid-parental-leave-half-of-working-women-will-be-better-off-and-secure-an-extra-1300-on-average/news-story/e2c64027b3b5378bbd3994bbedecfcc3>
 reported on Sunday the government had proposed increasing paid parental leave 
for new mothers to 20 weeks, up from 18, an increase worth about $1,300.

Responding to the report, the social services minister, Christian Porter, said 
the government was considering “one compromise model” that still “makes the 
system fairer by redistributing savings at the top end to make for more 
generous provisions for lower income families who may have less employer 
provided PPL”.

“If that option were agreed too it would substantially reduce the savings from 
PPL but would still produce a much fairer system than we presently have.”
 