
Last week, the second season of Serial ended with less of a bang and more of a 
shrug 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/31/serial-recap-season-two-episode-11-present-for-duty>
. The show’s first season, which investigated an underreported crime, was 
wildly popular. Itsmashed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/nov/18/serial-podcast-itunes-apple-downloads-streams>
 all previous podcasting records upon its release in 2014, and helped introduce 
a broad audience to the possibilities of the format. Serial’s team, led by 
Sarah Koenig, even wona Peabody Award 
<http://www.peabodyawards.com/award-profile/serial> for their work. 
Expectations were incredibly high for the show’s second season, so it’s no 
surprise that it failed to meet them.

Serial recap – season two, episode 11: Present for Duty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/31/serial-recap-season-two-episode-11-present-for-duty>
Season two swapped a relatively obscure murder mystery for a very high-profile 
desertion – the case ofBowe Bergdahl 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/14/us/details-on-bowe-bergdahl-soldier-freed-by-taliban-may-emerge-at-hearing.html>
. Even casual news readers had heard the story of the US soldier who walked off 
his base in Afghanistan, was taken prisoner by the Taliban, held for five 
years, and only released after the government released five Taliban leaders 
from Guantánamo Bay in exchange for Bergdahl’s freedom. The story had made 
headlines years before Serial decided to tackle it.

While Bergdahl’s story had been covered exhaustively, including reports that 
he had beenseparated from the coast guard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/31/serial-recap-season-two-episode-11-present-for-duty>
, diagnosed with a schizotypal personality disorder and may not have been fit 
for duty, Koenig and her team managed to add to the conversation. Not only did 
they let Bergdahl speak for himself, via a series of interviews with the 
film-maker Mark Boal, but they also asked and answered a question that no one – 
including the military or the US government – had seemingly bothered to 
investigate. Namely: did anyone die while searching for Bergdahl after he left 
base and was captured by the Taliban? It was an important question – and one on 
which Bergdahl’s reputation seemed to balance – but aside from anecdotal 
posturing, no one had actually tried to answer it before. Serial’s reporting 
showed that despite the strong beliefs of some of Bergdahl’s fellow soldiers 
and superiors, his poor decision cost no one their lives.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fserial-season-two-bowe-bergdahl-podcast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf93a7942c5a68640f234ef7dedad75bfa53c579%2F0_0_2100_1265%2F2100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Serial%20season%20two%3A%20why%20did%20the%20'must-listen%20show'%20suffer%20a%20sophomore%20slump%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fserial-season-two-bowe-bergdahl-podcast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Serial%20season%20two%3A%20why%20did%20the%20%27must-listen%20show%27%20suffer%20a%20sophomore%20slump%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fserial-season-two-bowe-bergdahl-podcast%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf93a7942c5a68640f234ef7dedad75bfa53c579%2F0_0_2100_1265%2F2100.jpg>
 Bowe Bergdahl. Photograph: US army/Handout/EPA 
 There’s little doubt that Bergdahl’s defense team will bring up this point 
during his court martial. It was a well-reported element of an important story, 
but for listeners hoping for a follow-up to Serial’s blockbuster first season, 
it came across as, well, boring.

The show’s central mystery – why Bergdahl walked off his post – took a back 
seat to a larger and more tenuous conversation about what it means when we, as 
a society, send young men to fight wars. Over the course of the season’s 11 
episodes, Serial worked to untangle complex questions about what it means to be 
honorable, loyal and just in wartime, and what and when sins can be forgiven. 
The overarching story was subtle and nuanced and will probably earn a spot in 
the curriculum of journalism schools. It may even winSerial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/serial> its next Peabody Award.

Guilty pleasure: how Making a Murderer tapped into our weakness for true crime
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/11/how-making-murderer-tapped-our-weakness-true-crime-steven-avery>
But it’s hard to make subtlety and nuance exciting enough to keep listeners’ 
attention for an entire season, especially for Serial fans hoping for at least 
some of the drama and intrigue of the show’s first season. This season had no 
cliffhangers. There was noNisha phone call 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/serialpodcast/comments/3pq7xw/jobless_jay_and_the_nisha_call/>
 orAsia McLean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jan/20/key-witness-adnan-syed-serial-asia-mcclain>
 orBest Buy phone booth 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/serialpodcast/comments/2no8r7/there_was_a_pay_phone_at_the_best_buy/>
. The show’s investigation into whether Bergdahl’s disappearance caused any 
deaths didn’t even come up until the last few episodes. Serial’s second season 
did not leave anyone (save Bergdahl’s defense team, perhaps) on the edge of 
their seat. When the show shifted fromweekly to biweekly 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/13/business/media/serial-podcast-needing-more-reporting-time-goes-biweekly.html>
 halfway through the season, it lost even more of its dramatic edge. In the 
end, it was like listening to a thinkpiece read aloud over the course of three 
months, riveting for some and dull as dry toast for others. It was also 
challenged by series such as Netflix’sMaking a Murderer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/11/how-making-murderer-tapped-our-weakness-true-crime-steven-avery>
, which offered those keen for true crime another grisly, barely believable 
show to sink their teeth into.

Serial was always meant to be experimental, starting with its serialized 
format, and it seems clear that season two was another attempt to try something 
new in podcasting – very, very long form reporting of a complicated case. 
Unfortunately, at some point season two ended up more as a podcast for 
journalists by journalists than a riveting tale for listeners. However, don’t 
give up on Serial just yet. There’s no doubt that Koenig and her team will 
apply the lessons learned from season two to future shows. Between their 
ability to find dramatic, underreported stories, as in season one, and their 
incredible reporting chops and ability to mine for subtle emotions, as 
evidenced by season two, Serial’s third season, whatever it holds in store, may 
be mandatory listening once again.
 