
ITV’s big autumn hit Victoria featured an impossibly pretty Queen Vic, a 
brooding Albert and plenty of gorgeous sets and costumes. But unlike most other 
depictions of royalty on screen – including Peter Morgan’s Elizabeth II 
spectacular The Crown, which launches on Netflix this week – below stairs in 
Victoria featured as heavily as the political machinations in the drawing room.

ITV's Victoria continues ratings reign over BBC's Poldark
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/03/itv-victoria-ratings-bbc-poldark-series-two>
Critics, most of whom lauded the show, raised eyebrows at the love-in between 
the monarch and her minions.One said 
<http://www.theartsdesk.com/tv/victoria-itv> it “felt more obligatory than it 
did organic”.

Daisy Goodwin <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm1449975/>, the creator of the show, 
insists the servants’ quarters were not added to keep focus groups or producers 
happy. “It was entirely my decision to add a below-stairs plot,” she says. “I 
keep hearing people say that the ITV executives forced me into it. Not at all. 
In fact, I had to slightly fight to keep the servants, because their storylines 
kept being cut back. I thought from the beginning that you need to have a 
counterpoint to what is going on upstairs.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fservant-tourism-how-tv-made-us-fetishise-below-stairs-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe55dddd09e20f14ff5847edb9c08460fe26cab00%2F0_133_5084_3050%2F5084.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Servant%20tourism%3A%20how%20TV%20made%20us%20fetishise%20'below%20stairs'%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fservant-tourism-how-tv-made-us-fetishise-below-stairs-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Servant%20tourism%3A%20how%20TV%20made%20us%20fetishise%20%27below%20stairs%27%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fservant-tourism-how-tv-made-us-fetishise-below-stairs-culture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe55dddd09e20f14ff5847edb9c08460fe26cab00%2F0_133_5084_3050%2F5084.jpg>
 Cliveden Hall in Maidenhead, Berkshire, made famous by Downtown Abbey. The 
focus, though, is not just on the building but who served there. Photograph: 
Alamy 
The accusations are understandable. Downton Abbey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/downton-abbey>, which gave as much 
weight to the butlers, footmen and maids as to the aristocrats they served, was 
one of this decade’s biggest hit, both in the UK andthe US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/07/downton-abbey-final-episode-why-did-america-fall-so-hard-for-the-show>
.

A bit of spice behind the green baize door, mixed with some gentle class 
tension, appears to be a foolproof formula for TV gold, and one that stretches 
back to the early 1970s with ITV’sUpstairs Downstairs 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0066722/>.

Yet the trend for fetishising servant culture has spread beyond the small 
screen; theNational Trust <https://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/> and English 
Heritage <http://www.english-heritage.org.uk/> – both of which reported record 
visitor numbers last year – are investing heavily in highlighting the servants’ 
quarters in many of their properties, while the gift shops increasingly reflect 
our fascination with domestic service over aristocratic lifestyles.

Downton Abbey: why did America fall so hard for the show?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/07/downton-abbey-final-episode-why-did-america-fall-so-hard-for-the-show>
Visit Blenheim Palace <http://www.blenheimpalace.com/>, Sir John Vanbrugh 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Vanbrugh>’s masterpiece in the Cotswolds, 
and you can pick up a wide selection from the Below Stairs product range 
<http://www.bostonstudio.co.uk/blenheim-palace-product>, including the butler’s 
scented candle with notes of cedarwood, frankincense and citrus. It has the 
aroma, the box explains, of “waxed wooden floors and a freshly laid fire in the 
butler’s pantry”. If that doesn’t take your fancy, there’s a House Maid’s 
lampshade brush, or perhaps the Valet’s clothes brush made from scented 
pearwood and is “suitable for cashmere”.

This autumn, our servant obsession appears to have moved up another gear. The 
Sir John Soane Museum in London openeda Below Stairs exhibition in September 
<http://www.soane.org/whats-on/exhibitions/below-stairs>, featuring artwork 
created by modern designers as a response to the museum’s recently restored 
Regency kitchens.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fservant-tourism-how-tv-made-us-fetishise-below-stairs-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d0052d0f2efeb7289d7fc997a2236e809f2c6f8%2F0_106_3189_1913%2F3189.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Servant%20tourism%3A%20how%20TV%20made%20us%20fetishise%20'below%20stairs'%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fservant-tourism-how-tv-made-us-fetishise-below-stairs-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Servant%20tourism%3A%20how%20TV%20made%20us%20fetishise%20%27below%20stairs%27%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fservant-tourism-how-tv-made-us-fetishise-below-stairs-culture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d0052d0f2efeb7289d7fc997a2236e809f2c6f8%2F0_106_3189_1913%2F3189.jpg>
 Top serving team: the butlers, footmen and maids of Downton Abbey have made it 
this decade’s biggest television hit, both in the UK and the US. Photograph: 
ITV Plc 
The Pig at Combe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/aug/20/the-pig-at-combe-honiton-devon-hotel-review>
, a new boutique hotel in Devon, has just opened a private dining room for 14 
people in the original Georgian kitchen, which features a range, cast-iron pans 
hanging from the wall and flagstones on the floor. The hotel pitches the room 
as a “below-stairs experience” featuringMrs Beeton 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Isabella_Beeton>’s recipes – though you would 
struggle to find quinoa, one of the ingredients on the menu, in herguide to 
household management 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mrs_Beeton%27s_Book_of_Household_Management>.

Daisy Goodwin says she is not surprised consumers want to explore life below 
stairs. “There’s a couple of things going on. There is a revisionist view of 
history; it’s political correctness, possibly,” she says. “But there is also 
people’s genuine interest. I am always obsessed with the smell of the past. 
Nothing takes you faster back to the 19th century than seeing how hard it was 
to do your laundry, or how women had to deal with their periods.”

There is another reason why the historical pendulum has swung from the drawing 
room to the scullery: consumers are statistically more likely to have domestic 
servants than great landlords in their ancestry. At a peak before the first 
world war, there were an estimated 1.5 million people in domestic service in 
Britain, compared with 560 members of the House of Lords – and we are more 
aware than ever, thanks to the glut of genealogy websites and historical 
records online, which category we fall into.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fservant-tourism-how-tv-made-us-fetishise-below-stairs-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70293d383512239f9e8766c552a67caece4d81e2%2F0_97_2957_1774%2F2957.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Servant%20tourism%3A%20how%20TV%20made%20us%20fetishise%20'below%20stairs'%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fservant-tourism-how-tv-made-us-fetishise-below-stairs-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Servant%20tourism%3A%20how%20TV%20made%20us%20fetishise%20%27below%20stairs%27%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fservant-tourism-how-tv-made-us-fetishise-below-stairs-culture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70293d383512239f9e8766c552a67caece4d81e2%2F0_97_2957_1774%2F2957.jpg>
 Adrian Schiller as Penge in ITV drama Victoria. Photograph: ITV/ITV Plc 
This is certainly true for the visitors at Audley End, a fabulous Jacobean 
property in Essex 
<http://www.english-heritage.org.uk/visit/places/audley-end-house-and-gardens/>
, owned and run by English Heritage. Here you can admire a Holbein, a Hilliard 
miniature or a Canaletto, as well as the Robert Adam library in the main house. 
But the bigger crowds can be found in the servants’ wing, which includes a 
laundry, where children are allowed to turn the mangle, and a kitchen, from 
where the smell of bread is emanating and on the day I visit “Mrs Crocombe” 
issuing orders and criticising “Sylvia”, the second kitchen maid, for her slow 
apple peeling. Of course, both are actors. There are five in the house, all 
playing servants from the year 1881 and refusing to come out of character.

Tess Askew, 80, is visiting as part of the group from the Swanton Morley WI in 
Norfolk and is trying to engage Mrs Crocombe in a discussion about a microwave. 
The cook, in turn, pretends to be baffled about this “modern appliance” – an 
act that tickles the tourists.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fservant-tourism-how-tv-made-us-fetishise-below-stairs-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99aee4802eefb2c28ec112f2cd9038d7706c9c51%2F0_7_3716_2230%2F3716.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Servant%20tourism%3A%20how%20TV%20made%20us%20fetishise%20'below%20stairs'%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fservant-tourism-how-tv-made-us-fetishise-below-stairs-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Servant%20tourism%3A%20how%20TV%20made%20us%20fetishise%20%27below%20stairs%27%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fservant-tourism-how-tv-made-us-fetishise-below-stairs-culture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99aee4802eefb2c28ec112f2cd9038d7706c9c51%2F0_7_3716_2230%2F3716.jpg>
 Jenna Coleman as Victoria. The hit ITV drama’s appeal lies not just in the 
regent’s life but also her ordinary servants. Photograph: ITV 
Askew says the appeal of touring the old laundry and kitchens is partly seeing 
the lovely shelves of copper pots and jelly moulds, and partly “being 
housewives – we’re interested in how they used to do it”.

“There is a retro-chic about housework,” says Lucy Lethbridge, the historian 
and author ofServants: A Downstairs View of 20th-Century Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/mar/29/servants-downstairs-view-lethbridge-review>
, “usually among people who don’t have to do it very much. If you really have 
to clean, you don’t have much sentimentality about using lemon juice on your 
windows, or making your own beeswax polish.”

Many of the visitors at Audley End have researched their own family histories. 
Don Crouch, 58, a retired civil servant from St Albans, who is visiting with 
his wife and a friend, says: “A lot of people look back at their ancestors and 
have more connection with downstairs than upstairs life. Even fairly wealthy 
middle-class people are not well heeled enough to relate to upstairs life.”

His wife, Judith, has researched her family back to the 1780s and discovered 
her ancestors were drovers, labourers and sawyers. “I do find the class thing 
very interesting. I come from working-class stock. Although I maybe have gone 
up a little bit in the world, this,” she says, pointing to Mrs Crocombe, “is 
more what I would have experienced if I had been around then.” She works for 
the V&A, but is admiring the fine porcelain pie dishes.

Some historians, however, worry that though the reconstructions of servants’ 
lives here and at other stately homes are well researched, they can mislead 
modern audiences.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fservant-tourism-how-tv-made-us-fetishise-below-stairs-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60a09a7d817eac38d2348ddd901b9164af405664%2F223_869_4966_2979%2F4966.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Servant%20tourism%3A%20how%20TV%20made%20us%20fetishise%20'below%20stairs'%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fservant-tourism-how-tv-made-us-fetishise-below-stairs-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Servant%20tourism%3A%20how%20TV%20made%20us%20fetishise%20%27below%20stairs%27%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fservant-tourism-how-tv-made-us-fetishise-below-stairs-culture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60a09a7d817eac38d2348ddd901b9164af405664%2F223_869_4966_2979%2F4966.jpg>
 Tom Hughes as Prince Albert in Victoria. Photograph: ITV 
Dr Lucy Delap <http://www.hist.cam.ac.uk/directory/dr-lucy-delap>, a Cambridge 
lecturer whose specialism is domestic service, says that in the great houses – 
be they the Buckingham Palace of ITV’s Victoria or the real-life Audley End – 
the servants “were quite well paid, and their conditions were quite easy when 
compared to the majority of servants working in one- and two-person households. 
They didn’t have a green baize door and time off in the afternoon, and didn’t 
have rustic-looking wheelbarrows to move apples around in.”

Delap is a fan of Audley End and other heritage days where you can pick up the 
dolly or iron and feel the weight of a pre-electric domestic appliance, but too 
often people fail to realise how back-breaking the work was. “Being a servant 
was all about getting up early, working until midnight and getting chilblains,” 
says Delap. “People don’t think of it in those terms, because of the likes of 
Downton and Victoria. These romantic depictions of domestic service really 
efface the idea that this is a site of precarious, exploitative labour.”

I ask Askew if, born a century earlier, she would prefer to have been a member 
of the domestic staff or one of theBraybrookes, the aristocratic family who 
owned Audley End <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Baron_Braybrooke>. “I’d like to 
think I’d be down here with what was really going on. I wouldn’t like to be up 
there with people curtseying to me. I like this kind of life,” she says.Some 
historians suggest below-stairs life is possibly back in fashion because it 
represents a golden era compared with today’s uncertainties. Lethbridge says: 
“It is an age, seen through rose-tinted spectacles, when we imagine the classes 
mixed in a paternalistic, co-dependent pyramid. The leisured class were at the 
top, supported by the labour of those at the bottom, who were in turn looked 
after. Maybe there is something in that highly regulated certainty that is 
attractive to us now.”

Most people do not, of course, connect the domestic servants of Victoria or 
Downton with today’s equivalent: the eastern European cleaner with no paid 
holidays, or the Deliveroo-rider handing over your evening meal. Or, for that 
matter, staff in large country houses – now often a hotel.

The most famous of these is  Cliveden House <http://www.clivedenhouse.co.uk/>, 
the Italianate pile owned by theAstor family 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Astor_family> and scene of legendary parties and 
theProfumo scandal <https://www.theguardian.com/international>. It is now owned 
by the National Trust but leased to one of Britain’s smartest hotels, which 
employs 150 staff to service the 48 rooms. If you bookThe Butler Did It break 
<http://www.clivedenhouse.co.uk/stay-over/offers/the-butler-did-it/> – which 
starts at £350 per night, per person – you can enjoy a private tour with the 
house butler, 53-year-old Michael Chaloner. Disappointingly, he stopped wearing 
tails a few years ago, but he is full of stories of famous guests, including
Charlie Chaplin <https://www.theguardian.com/film/charliechaplin> and Michael 
Jackson <https://www.theguardian.com/music/michaeljackson>, as he shows you 
around the bits of the house that are usually off limits. This includes the 
amazing view from the roof, the Lady Astor suite (yours for £1,200 a night) and 
the below-stairs area.

Here, the historic bells used to summon staff are mere decoration. Most of the 
service corridors and former servants’ sitting rooms are turned over to the 
operations of a fully functioning modern hotel, with waiters and chefs 
scurrying past the stacks of firewood used in the great hall, and unused 
foldaway beds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fservant-tourism-how-tv-made-us-fetishise-below-stairs-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e102100aca68462e8a2703a73423fd67434d910%2F0_57_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Servant%20tourism%3A%20how%20TV%20made%20us%20fetishise%20'below%20stairs'%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fservant-tourism-how-tv-made-us-fetishise-below-stairs-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Servant%20tourism%3A%20how%20TV%20made%20us%20fetishise%20%27below%20stairs%27%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fservant-tourism-how-tv-made-us-fetishise-below-stairs-culture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e102100aca68462e8a2703a73423fd67434d910%2F0_57_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
 Claire Foy as Queen Elizabeth II in the Crown, a Netflix drama. Photograph: 
Alex Bailey/Netflix 
“A lot of the Americans don’t like seeing this bit,” Chaloner says. “But a lot 
of Brits do.” Below stairs, as Lethbridge points out, is so often a reminder of 
class, something “rotted deeply into our national psyche and our sense of 
ourselves”.

Chaloner adds: “I think people care about the staff a little bit more 
nowadays. When I first came here in the early 90s, people came here for their 
£1,500 lunches, the fattest cigars, and the most expensive brandies. They 
didn’t care two hoots about the people serving them. But now people are 
interested in the people who work in the hotel. The staff are part of the deal.”

In the lobby of the hotel, there is a small selection of merchandise on sale, 
including the DVD ofScandal <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0098260/>, the film of 
the Profumo affair;The Lady’s Maid: My Life in Service 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Ladys-Maid-My-Life-Service/dp/0091943515> by Rosina 
Harrison, a former maid of Nancy Astor; and scented candles. I tell him I’m 
disappointed there isn’t a butler version.

“What would it smell of? Boiled cabbage, old socks and body odour?” he laughs. 
“I am under no illusions about how grim life was below stairs back then.”

Being a servant was all about getting up early, working until midnight and 
getting chilblains

• This article was amended on 1 November 2016. An earlier version said the 
original 1970s series of Upstairs Downstairs was broadcast by the BBC. It was 
made by LWT and shown on ITV.
 