
According to the American Academy of Pediatrics, children under two shouldn’t 
be exposed to TV or digital media, which makes me wonder how the paediatricians 
in question turn their backs on their kids in order to make dinner, or get 
their screaming toddlers into a pushchair when the only bribe to hand is the 
iPhone.

I say this by way of a plea for mitigation. My children are under two and both 
recognise the icon for YouTube. They know how to swipe, scroll and activate 
clips. The AAP guidelines were established in response to studies onthe impact 
of screen time on the brain development of young children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2009/oct/14/tv-children-harmful-effects>, 
but most parents who break them have a more visceral understanding of why 
screens are bad, even as they cave in and allow them. If you want to become 
acquainted with the creepiest corners of the internet, there is no quicker way 
than putting a phone into the hands of an 18-month-old and walking away.

Television – not in front of the children?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2009/oct/14/tv-children-harmful-effects> 
After two and a half minutes, like a kid following breadcrumbs into a wood, 
the child will somehow have navigated away from the Elmohomepage 
<http://www.sesamestreet.org/> and found their way to sites tagged as similar 
in interest but that are resolutely not suitable for children. It’s only when 
you register a change in the audio that you know to fly across the room to rip 
the thing from their hands.

A few examples from the last few days: adults dressed as superheroes popping 
water balloons <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ryU_56psvWk> in a bath while 
singing theFinger Family song <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3xqqj9o7TgA>. 
It’s hard to say what this is or why it’s so disturbing – everyone in the scene 
is fully clothed, albeit as Spider-Man and his ilk – but it is unbelievably 
creepy. There’s a video of a mother and her young daughter, both dressed as the 
Joker right up to the red-and-white face paint,doing a weird skit 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lYdN2iraFYs> in which they throw things and 
shriek and laugh at each other and that has, incomprehensibly, been viewed 30m 
times, which guarantees it comes up almost as often as Sesame Street.

There’s a video that, at a glance, looks like Peppa Pig but is actually a 
pirated version <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OeHqU-JkbKI> in which, after a 
few anodyne scenes, Peppa goes berserk and starts screaming like a hog in an 
abattoir.

Most of these videos are horrible only in the way that people straining to go 
viral are horrible, but that’s horrible enough. The lesson that life is an 
exercise in trying to win likes by acting crazy for strangers online is one 
that should come with a parental advisory, one that only expires when you’re 40 
and fully know who you are.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fsesame-street-twinned-with-creepsville-youtube%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26f470c16e41b3b78bb745a31c2e91fb2ca9bed9%2F0_118_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sesame%20Street%3A%20twinned%20on%20YouTube%20with%20Creepsville%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fsesame-street-twinned-with-creepsville-youtube%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sesame%20Street%3A%20twinned%20on%20YouTube%20with%20Creepsville%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fsesame-street-twinned-with-creepsville-youtube%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26f470c16e41b3b78bb745a31c2e91fb2ca9bed9%2F0_118_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Rockaway Beach in Queens, New York, awaits tropical storm Hermine. It never 
came. Photograph: Mark Kauzlarich/Reuters 
The storm that never came


The long bank-holiday weekend in New York was dominated by the threat of a 
storm that never came, bringing to mind fond memories ofMichael Fish’s finest 
hour <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-19923565> in 1987. As of Wednesday 
afternoon, tropical storm Hermine had barely lifted the leaves from the trees, 
and all the wooden stakes that went up appeared to be redundant. For those 
living in the flood zones of the Rockaways or coastal New Jersey, the relief 
must have been immense. For the rest of us, watching the sky and waiting for 
the rain, there was a somewhat shameful but unmistakable sense of anticlimax.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fsesame-street-twinned-with-creepsville-youtube%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd768920c51bd0f01fcf4ceca33ff7f5bd8a9e2c4%2F630_0_1470_1405%2F1470.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sesame%20Street%3A%20twinned%20on%20YouTube%20with%20Creepsville%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fsesame-street-twinned-with-creepsville-youtube%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sesame%20Street%3A%20twinned%20on%20YouTube%20with%20Creepsville%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fsesame-street-twinned-with-creepsville-youtube%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd768920c51bd0f01fcf4ceca33ff7f5bd8a9e2c4%2F630_0_1470_1405%2F1470.jpg>
 The film version of Cormac McCarthy’s novel, The Road.

… but better safe than sorry


In anticipation of the storm, I went through my emergency rucksack, assembled 
after watching too many episodes ofThe Walking Dead 
<http://www.amc.com/shows/the-walking-dead> and which I hadn’t touched for a 
year. It contained, in the manner of a time capsule, out-of-date infant 
formula, six nappies two sizes too small, two pacifiers and some pureed carrots 
in a jar that had gone brown. If civilisation collapsed, it would keep us going 
for roughly 40 minutes. I ditched the carrots and formula, put in two bottles 
of water and made a mental note to buy a spare battery for the iPhone. If 
things do goCormac McCarthy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/nov/04/featuresreviews.guardianreview4>
, we’re going to need something to distract the kids on the road.
 