
A new film version of the children’s TV show Sesame Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/sesame-st> is being developed by one 
of the producers of Arrival and Stranger Things.

How new money has ruined Sesame Street | Emma Brockes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/21/sesame-street-pbs-hbo> 
Shawn Levy told ScreenRant 
<http://screenrant.com/sesame-street-movie-warner-bros/> about his plans for 
the film, which recently moved from Fox to Warner Bros and does not yet have a 
title.

“Sesame Street is at Warner Bros and we are right now working on a treatment 
for what I think is going to be a really imaginative and entertaining take on 
that beloved and decades-old global brand,” Levy said.

“The trick there is to honour these characters that are beloved, but in a 
movie that feels entertaining for the kids who we might bring to the movie – 
and humorous for those parents who bring their kids. It’s early – we’re still 
at the treatment stage, but very bullish on that.”

Levy is known for his role as producer on films such as the newly released 
Arrival, as well as Date Night, This is Where I Leave You and the Night at the 
Museum trilogy. He was also an executive producer and episode director on 
Netflix’s Stranger Things TV series, and will return for its second series.

Experience: I am Big Bird
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/apr/24/experience-i-am-big-bird-sesame-street>
Sesame Street follows the adventures of a group of monsters, talking animals 
and humans who live on a street in an unidentified neighbourhood of New York. 
It has been running for 46 years on US TV, and is one of the country’s most 
popular children’s shows. It was broadcast on PBS until 2016,when it moved to 
HBO 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/aug/13/sesame-street-hbo-five-seasons>
.

There have been two previous film adaptations: 1985’s Follow That Bird, in 
which Big Bird attempts to return to Sesame Street after being sent to live 
with a family of dodos, and The Adventures of Elmo in Grouchland, in which the 
street’s residents have to rescue the red monster after he is teleported to a 
land filled with unpleasant Grouches.
 