
Seven al-Jazeera journalists convicted in absentia on spurious terror-related 
charges in Egypt have begun the process of requesting a formal pardon from 
Egyptian presidentAbdel Fatah al-Sisi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-fatah-al-sisi>.


The move comes just a week after two al-Jazeera colleagues, Mohamed Fahmy and 
Baher Mohamed,were pardoned by Sisi following 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/video/2015/sep/23/i-still-cant-believe-it-says-pardoned-al-jazeera-journalist-mohamed-fahmy-video>
 two years in prison. Their pardons now clear a legal pathway for the group of 
seven, which includes Australian reporter Peter Greste and two British 
correspondents, to see their convictions overturned.

At a press conference in New York on Tuesday, Greste said the remaining 
conviction had placed him under a “form of glorified house arrest” by limiting 
his ability to travel.

“Once I was released from prison, I thought I was going to be free. It turns 
out that I’m not. I still have this conviction and all of its consequences 
hanging over my head,” said Greste, speaking at the offices of the Committee to 
Protect Journalists.Egypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> has 
extraditions treaties with dozens of countries, including many countries in the 
African Union and the Middle East.

In June, al-Jazeera journalist Ahmed Mansour was detained in Germany following 
an extradition request from the Egyptian government. He was later released 
followinga review by the Berlin state prosecutor’s office 
<http://www.dw.com/en/germany-releases-al-jazeera-journalist-ahmed-mansour-in-egypt-extradition-case/a-18532105>
.

Peter Greste: Egypt's press lost its freedom when my al-Jazeera colleagues and 
I lost ours
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/07/peter-greste-egypts-press-lost-its-freedom-with-me-and-my-al-jazeera-colleagues>
Greste and 19 other al-Jazeera reporters were charged with false reporting, 
bringing Egypt into disrepute and conspiring with terrorists. He, along with 
Fahmy, a Canadian national, and local producer Mohamed, were arrested in a raid 
in Cairo in December 2013 and were held in solitary confinement for a month 
before being charged.

Greste spent over 400 days imprisoned in Egypt before he was deported in 
February only to be convicted in absentia during a retrial.

The Australian said on Tuesday that he had formally commenced pardon 
proceedings by submitting a letter to the president through the Egyptian 
courts. His case had already taken a positive turn after Australian foreign 
minister Julie Bishop met with her Egyptian counterpart, Sameh Shoukry at the 
UN general assemblyon Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/26/julie-bishop-raises-hopes-of-pardon-for-peter-greste-after-positive-meeting>
 and was informed the president was investigating the legal avenues available 
to grant a pardon.

The British foreign office is yet to make a public comment on the potential 
pardons for Sue Turton, a former al-Jazeera English foreign correspondentwho 
quit earlier in the year 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/comment/egypt-wasnt-able-to-imprison-me-along-with-three-of-my-al-jazeera-colleagues-but-it-has-forced-me-to-10402502.html>
 after claiming the travel restrictions imposed by the conviction made it 
impossible to work and senior producer Dominic Kane, who remains employed by 
the news agency.

Responding to a question from the Guardian on Tuesday, Turton said the pair 
were receiving assistance from the foreign office, but had not been given 
specific information on the nature of the lobbying conducted on their behalf.

“The foreign office tell us there is an awful lot going on behind the scenes, 
there have been various meetings at UNGA. I don’t know any details but they 
tell us that they are putting forward our case on a regular basis,” Turton said.

Both Turton and Kane said they were at the “very beginning stages” of the 
pardon process and had requested the foreign office act on their behalf.

“We are operating in a sort of fugitive limbo. Over the past, nearly two years 
now, we have been afraid perhaps of where we could go to, what countries we 
could report from, and it has had a serious impact on our careers,” Kane added.

The other four reporters involved in the case are all Egyptian: Mohamed Fawzy, 
a senior cameraman; Anas Abdel Wahab, a senior producer; Khalil Bahnacy, acting 
head of transmission at Al Jazeera documentary and Alaa Bayoumi, a senior 
producer. The latter three have been unable to return to Egypt following the 
court action.

At least 18 other journalists are currently imprisoned in Egypt, according to 
the Committee to Protect Journalists. 
<https://cpj.org/2015/09/world-leaders-unga-2015-cpj-press-freedom.php#more> 


 