
It’s almost a privilege to watch naked hypocrisy of the sort displayed by Cory 
Bernardi in the Senate yesterday. During debate on senator John Madigan’s bill, 
whichseeks to end Medicare funding for sex-selective abortion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/25/gender-selective-abortion-bill-could-restrict-overall-access-says-labor>
, Bernardi remarked:

That is the question before us today: are we prepared to uphold the rights of 
girls and women? Are we prepared to address the multiple manifestations of 
gender discrimination which are attributable to these sex-selection abortions?

Will you rise to this man’s challenge, Australia? He’d handle it by himself, 
except it really eats into his busy schedule ofblaming single mothers for crime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/06/cory-bernardi-decries-abortion-supporters-as-being-pro-death>
. Are we prepared to address gender discrimination arising from a practice that 
he admits probably doesn’t even happen in this country? After all, he said:

It is worth noting 
<http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;db=CHAMBER;id=chamber%2Fhansards%2Fac24fb2b-74f6-47ad-bf9f-61ebf6a29462%2F0009;query=Id%3A%22chamber%2Fhansards%2Fac24fb2b-74f6-47ad-bf9f-61ebf6a29462%2F0000%22>
 that there is very little evidence, or maybe no evidence, available to the 
government that suggests that termination of pregnancy for sex selection 
purposes is widespread...

Are we going to sit on our hands while a nonexistent tragedy doesn’t play out 
before our very eyes? Where are feminists on this issue? Probably helping women 
with problems that are actually happening, the radical harpies.

It’s obvious that sex-selective abortion isn’t the real issue here. Even if it 
were happening, how could the government do anything about it? Is there going 
to be a box on the Medicare claim form asking if termination is being sought 
because of the sex of the foetus? There’s not much the government can do if a 
woman ticks “no” dishonestly, except have another box that reads, “Really? 
REALLY REALLY? Tell us the truth, come on, please?”

Senator Madigan wants to make sure abortion restriction remains on the 
national agenda. As a right-wing Catholic with visions of society that 
illustrate a total lack of both compassion and imagination, he’s in constant 
danger of being ignored while the rest of us get on with stuff that actually 
matters. Like walking our dogs, for instance, or thinking about which type of 
sandwich we’re going to make for lunch. So he has to think up novel methods of 
attracting attention, like the kid up the back of the class screaming PENIS 
because he’s not smart enough to come up with a real answer to the teacher’s 
question.

The most pathetic part of the whole affair is that it illustrates just how 
little Madigan and Bernardi care about women’s health. Have they never heard of
backyard abortions 
<http://www.smh.com.au/news/opinion/harking-back-to-good-old-days-of-backyard-abortions-and-shotgunweddings/2007/01/12/1168105173349.html>
? Do they not care that all available evidence shows the inefficacy of a 
reactive, law enforcement-based approach to abortion reduction? Are they ready 
to take responsibility for unnecessary and gruesome deaths?

It’s difficult to imagine that the senators are unaware of this, which raises 
the upsetting possibility that they just don’t care.

If Madigan and Bernardi approached this issue with a reasonable measure of 
humanity, they might come up with ways of reducing abortion that don’t involve 
endangering women. Since they seem incapable of doing it themselves, here’s a 
suggestion from me, free of charge: work on ending domestic violence. According 
to areport 
<http://www.theage.com.au/national/report-reveals-abortion-reasons-20090118-7jz6.html>
 published in the Medical Journal of Australia, 16% of women seeking abortion 
at Melbourne’s Royal Women’s Hospital did so because of violence.

Of course this would involve conceptualising pregnant women as human beings 
rather than recalcitrant incubators, a mental hurdle I doubt either of the 
senators are capable of clearing. But the existence of options apart from 
criminalisation does illustrate that it’s possible to be against abortion 
without being a misogynist.

Would I, as someone who believes in unrestricted free abortion, be chiding 
Madigan and Bernardi for attempting to end domestic violence because it might 
reduce abortion? Probably not. That these men resort to such infantile 
political tactics, motivated by the enduring hope that one day they’ll have the 
leverage to punish women properly for their immoral sexual behaviour, says all 
that’s needed about their characters.

Attempts to disguise their bastardry with fake concern for female foetuses 
shows that they are also cowards, and these factors together should be reason 
enough to exclude their opinions from serious consideration. Remember this when 
they claim moral outrage, and remember it when they demand to be treated as the 
last remaining vestiges of a dying, virtuous culture.
 