
Amazon streams two new TV pilots – one that's great and one that's terrible
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/17/amazon-debuts-two-pilots-the-interestings-last-tycoon>
You can’t fault The Girlfriend Experience’s timing. With Game of Thrones, 
Silicon Valley and Veep over for the year,Orange is the New Black 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/24/orange-is-the-new-black-season-four-review-criminally-close-to-greatness>
 already binged to completion, and linear television still packed solid with 
nothing but football and misery, people are crying out for something smart, 
daring and new to watch. The Girlfriend Experience appeared on Amazon Prime 
this week, and not a minute too soon.


The series is superficially based on Steven Soderbergh’s 2009 film of the same 
name. But where that was gossamer thin – a wispy mediation on last decade’s 
banking crisis – this is a full-blown story with a clear sense of its own 
momentum and trajectory. “Watch a couple of episodes and see what you think,” 
my editor told me on Monday. I ended up watching all 13 in one go, and I have 
never been happier to be so far behind on my work.

Like the movie, The Girlfriend Experience is a story of prostitution. It 
follows a young law student – played in a genuinely star-making turn by Elvis 
Presley’s granddaughter Riley Keough – as she takes her first steps in the 
profession, while attempting to balance her studies and an internship at a 
brazenly corporate law firm. It was co-created and co-written by Amy Siemetz, 
director of the 2012 thriller Sun Don’t Shine and star of Shane Carruth’s
Upstream Color 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/23/carruth-upstream-colour>, and 
Carruth himself provided the cold, synthy score. The pedigree of the talent 
runs deep, and pays off in its refusal to be what you expect.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA2F4Drc15fM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA2F4Drc15fM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA2F4Drc15fM&media=>
The closest television analogue to The Girlfriend Experience, at least in the 
UK, is probably the dreadful Billie Piper vehicleSecret Diary of a Call Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2007/sep/28/lastnightstvthesecretdiar>
. But where that was one-dimensional and camp – a whoops-a-lummy wad of 
embarrassingly British Carry On fluff that started badly and went nowhere – 
this is steely and naturalistic, and loose enough to flow into all kinds of 
genres, sometimes several at once.

You will need to persevere a little because the first couple of episodes are 
easily the worst of the lot. They are a cookie-cutter, by the numbers origin 
story, telling the story of a nice girl experimenting with prostitution and 
staring off into the distance in a heavyhanded demonstration of personal 
disconnect. It is nothing you haven’t already seen a hundred times before.

But Siemetz and her co-creator Lodge Kerrigan are too restless to stay on 
course for long. Without giving too much away, the series jumps the rails after 
three or four episodes and becomes something much more complex. It is part 
suffocating horror story, part nail-biting legal thriller, part Breaking 
Bad-style transformation study. It is sexy – it aired on Starz in the US, so it 
actually borders on gratuitous – but the sex is by far the least interesting 
thing about it. The Girlfriend Experience is a story about greed, and the parts 
of yourself for ever lost in the rush for success.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fthe-girlfriend-experience-amazon-prime%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F950d6dbe239c0f05a178776abcd681865cd58cdd%2F0_60_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sex%2C%20lies%2C%20on%20videotape%3A%20The%20Girlfriend%20Experience%20is%20mindblowing%20TV&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fthe-girlfriend-experience-amazon-prime%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sex%2C%20lies%2C%20on%20videotape%3A%20The%20Girlfriend%20Experience%20is%20mindblowing%20TV&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fthe-girlfriend-experience-amazon-prime%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F950d6dbe239c0f05a178776abcd681865cd58cdd%2F0_60_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 ‘A story about greed, and the parts of yourself for ever lost in the rush for 
success’ … The Girlfriend Experience. Photograph: AP 
Even if you struggle with it at first, the series is worth persevering with 
solely for the final episode. Mostly comprised of one long scene that starts in 
the middle and unfolds outwards, it is both staggeringly confident and 
beautifully executed – like nothing else you will watch this year.

Siemetz and Kerrigan say they envisage The Girlfriend Experience as an 
anthology series – it may return, but with different characters and story. 
While that is sad in a way – a world has been very carefully constructed here, 
and now it is doomed for dismantlement – it does make sense in light of the 
finality, however ambiguous, of the very last scene. God, that last episode.

It is killing me that I can’t be any more specific. Look, just watch it, and 
then come back and we’ll talk about it then, OK?
 