
UN Women has come under fire from rights activists for launching an online 
consultation on its sex worker policy that will, they say, exclude the opinion 
of thousands of people in poorer countries.

The Global Network of Sex Work Projects <http://www.nswp.org/> (NSWP) said 
many of the sex workers who will be affected by any UN policy change live in 
developing countries whereaccess to the internet remains low 
<http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=51924#.V9rCUTaU3Aw>.

The NSWP also criticised the UN agency for the short timescale of the six-week 
consultation, which closes on 16 October, and for framing it in bureaucratic 
language that will be largely meaningless to people unfamiliar with UN 
agreements or terminology.

As sex workers we welcome Amnesty's policy – it will help empower us | Kay Thi 
Win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/18/sex-workers-welcome-amnesty-international-policy-help-empower-us>
UN Women said it is drawing up a number of policy positions in light of the 
sustainble development goals (SDGs) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
, which were adopted by the UN general assembly last September. Currently UN 
Women does not have a specific policy position on the issue of sex work.

Ruth Morgan Thomas, NSWP global coordinator, said the consultation should 
include national surveys and face-to-face interviews to gauge a true picture of 
life for sex workers.

Morgan Thomas said the network welcomed the fact that UN Women wanted to have 
a discussion about its sex worker policy, but “the reality is that the majority 
of sex workers in developing countries have limited access to the internet”.

She said the consultation was not available in many languages, further 
excluding workers in countries where literacy levels are low.

The process “addresses privileged women”, and was “not an accessible 
consultation process for a community that UN Women recognises are marginalised”.

“This, for me, is not an accountable, transparent way to connect with sex 
workers,” said Morgan Thomas.

Purna Sen, director of UN Women’s policy division, said that over the past few 
years, the agency had met many organisations and individuals to discuss the 
issue.

“This current period of consultation is one phase in that larger conversation. 
Other methods of communications with interested parties are under way – we seek 
wide participation.”

She said the consultation is being conducted in all official UN languages: 
Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish.

“It is in recognition of the contentious nature of the debate on this issue 
that we are consulting widely, hoping to ensure that those who wish to have a 
say can do so.

“Our call takes the SDGs and agenda 2030 as the frame. We are keen to see and 
hear contributions from the global south. Anyone who has knowledge or 
experience of this issue is welcome to contribute, no matter their position,” 
Sen added.

Feedback from the consultation will feed into a policy paper that is expected 
to be made public next year.

 In a concept note on sex work published in 2013 
<http://www.nswp.org/resource/un-womens-note-sex-work-sexual-exploitation-and-trafficking>
, UN Women said sex workers were “rights holders like all other women and men 
and should be recognised as such”.

It also said it supported the regulation of sex work to protect sex workers 
from abuse and, as a co-sponsor of UNAids – which supports the 
decriminalisation of sex work – it wanted to ensure sex workers have access to 
services, including HIV treatment.

Sex workers are among the most marginalised groups in the world, often facing 
human rights violations, including harassment, arrests and lack of access to 
basic health and social services.
 