
‘To say 2016 has been a big year for me is an understatement,” laughs Shannon 
Purser <https://twitter.com/shannonpurser>, 19-year-old breakout star of the 
year’s best TV drama. “It’s been madness. And totally unexpected. I didn’t even 
have a career beforeStranger Things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/15/stranger-things-review-a-shot-of-80s-nostalgia-right-to-your-heart-winona-ryder>
 – it was my first acting job, my first time on a professional set, and my 
character wasn’t even supposed to be a big deal – it all just exploded.”

Explode indeed it did. All eight episodes snuck on to streaming service 
Netflix in July to little fanfare. Other shows this year had more hype (seeGame 
of Thrones <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones>, The 
Grand Tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/18/the-grand-tour-review-jeremy-clarkson-james-may-richard-hammond-leave-the-bbc-in-their-dust>
). Other shows had bigger budgets (The Night Manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-night-manager>, The Crown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-crown>, Westworld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/westworld>). Other shows were more 
critically acclaimed (Fleabag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/05/fleabag-a-hilarious-sitcom-about-terrible-people-and-broken-lives>
,Planet Earth II 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/06/planet-earth-ii-review-david-attenboroughs-rollercoaster-tour-of-the-worlds-wildlife-returns>
). Yet no other show got a stronger, more sustained fan reaction and, to borrow 
that well-worn phrase, broke the internet likeStranger Things.

It wasn’t just Barb’s personality that struck a chord. It was her wardrobe too

The 1980s-influenced horror thriller, created by twin brothers Matt and Ross 
Duffer, seemed to come from nowhere to become the most talked-about TV event of 
the summer. This pleasingly under-the-radar success story was driven not by 
A-list names or ad campaigns but word of mouth and slow-building buzz.Stranger 
Things wasn’t just the TV show of the year. It was one of 2016’s biggest pop 
cultural phenomena full stop.

A big part of that was down to unknown actor Purser and her character: 
bespectacled high-school swot Barbara Holland. Or “Barb” to her friends. OK, 
friend singular. Before we get too deep into the cult of Barb, though, let’s 
recap where she fits into theStranger Things story.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fshannon-purser-interview-people-had-barbs-face-tattooed-on-their-bodies-stranger-things%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2300c6662ede64e8cf455efe058aeb0e5cfc97d%2F0_193_3600_2159%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shannon%20Purser%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20have%20actually%20had%20Barb%E2%80%99s%20face%20tattooed%20on%20their%20bodies%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fshannon-purser-interview-people-had-barbs-face-tattooed-on-their-bodies-stranger-things%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shannon%20Purser%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20have%20actually%20had%20Barb%E2%80%99s%20face%20tattooed%20on%20their%20bodies%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fshannon-purser-interview-people-had-barbs-face-tattooed-on-their-bodies-stranger-things%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2300c6662ede64e8cf455efe058aeb0e5cfc97d%2F0_193_3600_2159%2F3600.jpg>
 Shannon Purser as Barb in Stranger Things: ‘People related to her personally. 
It was sweet.’ Photograph: Netflix 
When 12-year-old Will (Noah Schnapp) mysteriously vanishes one night in 1983, 
his Dungeons & Dragons-playing, BMX-riding buddies – intrepid Mike (Finn 
Wolfhard), goofy Dustin (Gaten Matarazzo) and sceptical Lucas (Caleb 
McLaughlin) – team up with telekinetic fugitive Eleven (Millie Bobby Brown) to 
investigate their small Indiana town’s supernatural secrets. In the process, 
they stumble into a sinister government conspiracy involving a monster they dub 
the Demogorgon, which resides in a parallel dimension called the Upside Down.

In parallel to and eventually joining up with the gang’s adventure is a teen 
rites-of-passage plotline about Mike’s pretty-but-insecure older sister, Nancy 
(Natalia Dyer), and her long-suffering best mate, Barb: sarkily 
straight-talking, slightly dowdy, fiercely loyal and worried their friendship 
would be threatened by Nancy’s burgeoning romance with school stud Steve. “He 
just wants to get in your pants,” said Barb, to cheers from sofas worldwide. 
“Come on, Nance, you are not this stupid. And no, I don’t want to shotgun a 
beer.”

“Everyone really took to Barb,” says Purser down the phone from Toronto, where 
she’s filming teen horror flickWish Upon – part of the flurry of roles she has 
landed post-Stranger Things. Warm, witty and effusive, she conveys a 
combination of incredulous delight at her sudden success and steely 
determination to make the most of it while she can. “Barb was written to be a 
throwaway character but really resonated with people. I was barely on the show, 
just the opening three episodes, but viewers latched on to her. I guess 
everyone’s had an experience when they felt overlooked, ditched, hurt or taken 
for granted. Where they felt like the only one behaving with common sense but 
still got the short end of the stick. We all feel like the odd one out at some 
point.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXWxyRG_tckY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXWxyRG_tckY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXWxyRG_tckY&media=>
Watch the trailer for Stranger Things. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XWxyRG_tckY> 
For Purser, schoolyard politics and frustrations are still a fresh memory. 
Eighteen months ago she was at high school in Atlanta, Georgia, aspiring to an 
acting career while working evenings in her local cinema: “I was going for 
auditions but nothing clicked, so I figured if I can’t be in movies, I’m going 
to be as close to them as humanly possible.” Her parents are a Delta Airlines 
pilot and flight attendant who met in the air, and Purser is one of four 
daughters. She still lives at home when she’s not working, although she’s 
toying with the idea of moving to Los Angeles. And she’s now doing a psychology 
degree via online tutorials because, sinceStranger Things, she’s never in one 
place long enough to attend lectures.

It wasn’t just Barb’s personality that struck a chord with fans. Her wardrobe 
did too. Sporting Deirdre-from-Coronation Street specs, a sweep of red hair, 
normcore blouses and mom jeans, she became a stealth style icon. A geek girl 
hero in the lineage of Lisa Simpson, Enid fromGhost World, Velma from Scooby-Doo
 or30 Rock <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/30-rock>’s Liz Lemon. Fans 
began hailing Barb as their favourite character. Buzzfeed crowed her “Queen Barb
 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/matwhitehead/barbyonce?utm_term=.piX3Vd58vW#.urbEnerlNA>
”. US website The Ringer proclaimed “Everyone needs a friend like Barb 
<https://theringer.com/everyone-needs-a-friend-like-barb-a91b9937ba64#.99utqysm5>
”. Barbmania was born – but it was about to go to the next level.

In terms of music and movies, the 80s were revolutionary and wonderful. 
Viewers loved looking back on their childhood

When Nancy – wearing “a new bra”, as the ever-vigilant Barb noted (“I get 
teased about that line all the time,” says Purser, “but it was a really nice 
bra”) – went up to Steve’s bedroom, she told Barb to go home. The faithful 
friend instead decided to wait outside by the pool, sitting on the diving 
board, and… well, strange things happened. “I didn’t think anybody would care,” 
says Purser. “I mean, Barb was cool but then she died a horrible death and 
everybody moved on.”

Except they didn’t. Quite the contrary. Barb became an online craze célèbre as 
fans decided she’d been unfairly forgotten after being killed off. “There’s a 
cartoon on myTwitter profile <https://twitter.com/shannonpurser>,” Purser 
grins, “which says ‘None of my friends care that I’m dead but at least the 
internet likes me’. That pretty much sums up Barb, poor thing. I was blown away 
by the reaction. When the show premiered, I told myself: ‘Well, that’ll look 
good on my résumé.’ But within a week, I’d gathered thousands of followers on 
Twitter and Instagram. People all over the world were messaging me, asking: 
‘What happened to Barb?’ People related to her personally, so they got mad. It 
was sweet.”

#JusticeForBarb <https://twitter.com/hashtag/justiceForBarb?src=hash> trended 
on Twitter and tribute memes went viral.Stranger Things’ unsung heroine began 
inspiring graffiti murals, gifs and listicles saluting her strong look, loyal 
friendship and all-round aceness. Fans designed missing person flyers and 
posters demanding “Barb for President”. A Brooklyn pizzeria served Barb slices 
(choose from Barbeque, Barbohydrates or Barbroiled). Jimmy Fallon did a
Barb-themed sketch <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nrpWyh_oJwc>. Barb provided 
the punchline in a Charlie Brown parody (Purser “cried laughing at that”). Soon 
#justiceForBarb was joined by a new hashtag:#WeAreAllBarb 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/WeAreAllBarb?src=hash>. “People were dressing as 
her for Halloween and sending me their most Barb-like yearbook photos,” laughs 
Purser.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fshannon-purser-interview-people-had-barbs-face-tattooed-on-their-bodies-stranger-things%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb7c050fc9eea31a781c60aa568918471d05e767%2F0_0_4100_2303%2F4100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shannon%20Purser%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20have%20actually%20had%20Barb%E2%80%99s%20face%20tattooed%20on%20their%20bodies%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fshannon-purser-interview-people-had-barbs-face-tattooed-on-their-bodies-stranger-things%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shannon%20Purser%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20have%20actually%20had%20Barb%E2%80%99s%20face%20tattooed%20on%20their%20bodies%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fshannon-purser-interview-people-had-barbs-face-tattooed-on-their-bodies-stranger-things%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb7c050fc9eea31a781c60aa568918471d05e767%2F0_0_4100_2303%2F4100.jpg>
 The Stranger Things gang, left to right: Caleb McLaughlin, Finn Wolfhard, 
Millie Bobby Brown and Gaten Matarazzo in season 1. 
There was even an RIP Barb <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MrVxHd7LGgM> rap 
from hip-hop duo Dr Chorizo. “That rap was so funny,” says Purser. “I watched 
it assuming it was about the show in general but when it became apparent it was 
all about Barb, I was like, ‘Wait, what?’ It went: ‘I’m sorry Nance ditched you 
for that douchebag Steve/ Why didn’t you just get in your muthafuckin’ car and 
leave?’ But that’s just not what Barb would do, even if she ended up paying a 
heavy price for it.”

Other “Barbarians” went one louder. “I’ve been sent several pictures of Barb 
tattoos,” says Purser. “People have actually had my face tattooed on to their 
bodies, which is so odd. One person got a little tombstone with “Barb” written 
on it. I’m so thankful because as a movie nerd who’s gotten very attached to 
characters myself, to have people connect that deeply with yours is all any 
actor ever wants.”

Stranger Things isn’t just an excellent escapist drama in its own right. It’s 
also a loving, playfully postmodern homage to the Duffers’ youth. The plot has 
echoes of Stephen King novels and Steven Spielberg films. The Grammy-nominated 
soundtrack adopts the atmospheric synths of John Carpenter, Tangerine Dream and 
Vangelis. Scenes reference everything fromET 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DWU42c1ku-o>, Stand by Me 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=48-tAJGpRgY> and The Goonies 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5qA2s_Vh0uE> to video nasties.

If Barb had a funeral, that would be nice. If Winona Ryder cried, that would 
be even cooler!

“The Duffers tapped into this fond nostalgia,” says Purser. “The 80s weren’t 
perfect and people made some questionable fashion choices but in terms of music 
and movies, it was revolutionary and wonderful. A time before cellphones, the 
internet and everything at your fingertips, so you had to seek out 
entertainment for yourself. [It seems that] everything felt more personal and 
friendships were super-important. Viewers loved looking back on that, 
remembering their own childhood and old friends.”

For someone born in 1997, Purser sounds quite the 80s aficionado. “I wasn’t 
around unfortunately but wish I was,” she agrees. “I like to think I would’ve 
fitted in pretty well. I grew up with 80s music, it’s just what we listened to 
as a family. And all those John Hughes films were so iconic. I lovedSixteen 
Candles <https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2009/aug/10/john-hughes> and 
The Breakfast Club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/20/ive-become-the-greatest-fear-of-the-breakfast-clubs-teen-protagonists>
 is one of my all-time favourites.”

It wasn’t The Breakfast Club’s female characters, Molly Ringwald (“the 
princess”) or Ally Sheedy (“the basket case”), with whom Purser identified: 
“No, I was totally nerdy Brian (“the brain”, played by Anthony Michael Hall). I 
loved him. What’s so brilliant about that film is that they start off as 
stereotypes but you find out there’s much more to them.Stranger Things did that 
too. Nancy had this awesome character development. At the beginning, she wanted 
to be popular, needing that attention and validation. By the end, she was 
shooting monsters and didn’t need a man.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fshannon-purser-interview-people-had-barbs-face-tattooed-on-their-bodies-stranger-things%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe41fc23a919bc0699b5757997c516fcef1f7dfa2%2F0_0_4240_2805%2F4240.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shannon%20Purser%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20have%20actually%20had%20Barb%E2%80%99s%20face%20tattooed%20on%20their%20bodies%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fshannon-purser-interview-people-had-barbs-face-tattooed-on-their-bodies-stranger-things%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shannon%20Purser%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20have%20actually%20had%20Barb%E2%80%99s%20face%20tattooed%20on%20their%20bodies%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fshannon-purser-interview-people-had-barbs-face-tattooed-on-their-bodies-stranger-things%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe41fc23a919bc0699b5757997c516fcef1f7dfa2%2F0_0_4240_2805%2F4240.jpg>
 Winona Ryder in Stranger Things: ‘To see her work up close was a dream come 
true.’ Photograph: Netflix/Everett/Rex/Shutterstock 
Fittingly, Stranger Things helped revive the career of another 80s starlet. 
Winona Ryder staged a comeback as Will’s mother, Joyce. For Purser, landing a 
debut acting gig opposite one of her heroes was a thrill. “Oh my God, Winona 
was such a heroine of mine.Edward Scissorhands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/21/edward-scissorhands-burton-fantasy>
 is one of my favourite films and because I have three sisters, we watched
Little Women <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QMnT4WKKG2I> all the time too. At 
the first table-read, Winona was a few seats away and I couldn’t stop staring. 
To see her work up close was a dream come true.”

Purser’s not the only Stranger Things alumnus who has been catapulted to fame. 
The four kids who formed the show’s ragtag “Scooby Gang” have also seen their 
profiles soar, appearing on talkshows and performing at the Emmys. “I’m so 
happy for them,” says Purser. “They deserve it. We all follow each other on 
social media now and DM each other. They’re like my original work family. They 
were great fun on set – always joking around, pulling pranks and singing. So 
talented but man, they’re growing up fast. Gaten Matarazzo’s voice dropped so 
much by the time production ended, the sound team couldn’t use him to record 
additional dialogue. We catch up at comic-type conventions and I’m like: ‘Whoa, 
what happened? You look so much older.’ It’ll be fascinating to see how the 
Duffers deal with them growing up in season two.”

Mental health is an important issue with me. It's something I've struggled 
with personally

Stranger Things returns for a feverishly anticipated, nine-part series in 2017 
but Purser can’t confirm whether she’ll be involved. “I have no idea and that’s 
an honest answer. Of course, everybody wants to know. Trust me, I want to know 
too. But nobody’s gotten in touch yet.” Co-creator Matt Duffer has promised her 
character “won’t be forgotten – we’ll make sure there’s some justice for Barb”. 
“I have no idea what that means,” laughs Purser, “but I totally trust their 
judgment. If Barb had a funeral, that would be nice. If Winona Ryder cried, 
that would be even cooler!”

Purser has recently followed the lead of Adele, Lady Gaga and Cara Delevingne 
in candidly speaking out about mental health. Last month she used her newfound 
fame to open up about her former struggles with self-harm,tweeting a pic 
<https://mobile.twitter.com/shannonpurser/status/795661382553403392> of her 
holding a razor blade with the caption: “*TRIGGER WARNING* I haven’t 
self-harmed in years, but I kept this around, ‘just in case’. I forgot it was 
there & now it’s in the trash.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fshannon-purser-interview-people-had-barbs-face-tattooed-on-their-bodies-stranger-things%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4213b38959229cbe24fd72386f88ee0cd0e43986%2F0_0_3840_1920%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shannon%20Purser%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20have%20actually%20had%20Barb%E2%80%99s%20face%20tattooed%20on%20their%20bodies%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fshannon-purser-interview-people-had-barbs-face-tattooed-on-their-bodies-stranger-things%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shannon%20Purser%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20have%20actually%20had%20Barb%E2%80%99s%20face%20tattooed%20on%20their%20bodies%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fshannon-purser-interview-people-had-barbs-face-tattooed-on-their-bodies-stranger-things%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4213b38959229cbe24fd72386f88ee0cd0e43986%2F0_0_3840_1920%2F3840.jpg>
 Shannon Purser as Barb, far right, in Stranger Things Photograph: Netflix 
“Mental health is an important issue for me,” she says. “It’s something I’ve 
struggled with personally, and a lot of people close to me have dealt with it 
too. It’s not discussed enough, which keeps people in a state of isolation, 
feeling they should be embarrassed about it. I want to help in whatever way I 
can and I’m thankful to have this platform. It was a personal moment, and just 
felt like I should share how far I’d come in recovery. I know how vital it is 
to have somebody you can look up to, to feel like you’re not alone and find 
encouragement that you can make it out OK. The response I got, with people 
telling me their stories and struggles, was so beautiful and powerful.” She’s 
since been offering support by responding to fans’ tweets directly, urging 
fellow sufferers: “Please don’t give up on yourself.”

Next up for the newly in-demand Purser is another youth-driven TV series, 
titledRiverdale: “It’s a darker, moodier take on the Archie comics [strips 
about teenager Archie Andrews and his high-school pals, created in the 1940s 
and still going strong]. I play Ethel Muggs. She’s a bit more sassy than Barb – 
and she survives more than three episodes, fortunately.” Movie roles are 
rolling in too. This autumn, Purser shot sorority sister rompLife of the Party 
with Melissa McCarthy (“She’s like the queen of comedy right now and pretty 
much the coolest person ever”).

Stranger Things review – a spooky shot of 80s nostalgia straight to your heart
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/15/stranger-things-review-a-shot-of-80s-nostalgia-right-to-your-heart-winona-ryder>
Purser is looking forward to returning to relative normality when she finishes 
work on current filmWish Upon. “Luckily, we wrap a week before Christmas, so 
I’ll be able to get home and spend it with my family. We always watchElf 
together and go carolling at a local nursing home. Christmas Day itself is 
magical – my favourite of the year. And I’ll be reunited with my rescue dog 
Penny. She’s my pride and joy. I’m guaranteed to cry.”

And for new year? “That’s not such a big deal for me, mostly because I still 
can’t legally drink in the States. But we’ll get out the sparkling cider and 
stay up until midnight to watch the Times Square countdown.” Who knows what 
2017 will bring? Another TV hit. Big-screen stardom, perhaps. Along with, we 
hope, some overdue #JusticeForBarb.

Stranger Things series one is available now on Netflix 
<https://www.netflix.com/gb/title/80057281>

Other stars breaking through in the expanded TV landscape
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fshannon-purser-interview-people-had-barbs-face-tattooed-on-their-bodies-stranger-things%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb44042a1db35352c9364f0e7ee7f8ce9e49d92e2%2F175_104_2290_1324%2F2290.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shannon%20Purser%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20have%20actually%20had%20Barb%E2%80%99s%20face%20tattooed%20on%20their%20bodies%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fshannon-purser-interview-people-had-barbs-face-tattooed-on-their-bodies-stranger-things%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shannon%20Purser%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20have%20actually%20had%20Barb%E2%80%99s%20face%20tattooed%20on%20their%20bodies%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fshannon-purser-interview-people-had-barbs-face-tattooed-on-their-bodies-stranger-things%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb44042a1db35352c9364f0e7ee7f8ce9e49d92e2%2F175_104_2290_1324%2F2290.jpg>
 Shameik Moore: stole the Netflix show The Get Down. Photograph: 
Rex/Shutterstock 
Shameik Moore, 21

The Get Down (Netflix)


Modestly calling himself “King Sam”, the actor/dancer/rapper/all-round force 
of nature broke through this year with his scene-stealing turn as charismatic 
street kid Shaolin Fantastic in Netflix hitThe Get Down, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/17/the-get-down-an-almighty-let-down-baz-luhrmann-netflix>
 director Baz Luhrmann’s musical drama, set in the Bronx circa 1977. Six more 
episodes are due to land on the streaming service next year. A mate of A$AP 
Rocky and Pharrell Williams, Moore also starred in the Sundance 2015 hit film
Dopeand is releasing his debut album next year.

Career liftoff means he’s rarely at home in Atlanta these days but he isn’t 
missing out on his Jamaican mum’s cooking – she sends him oxtail, curry and 
jerk chicken via overnight mail in airtight containers. Aww.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fshannon-purser-interview-people-had-barbs-face-tattooed-on-their-bodies-stranger-things%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2555dbfda5db53942064a35727038c5f28e0bc78%2F1048_333_2571_1487%2F2571.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shannon%20Purser%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20have%20actually%20had%20Barb%E2%80%99s%20face%20tattooed%20on%20their%20bodies%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fshannon-purser-interview-people-had-barbs-face-tattooed-on-their-bodies-stranger-things%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shannon%20Purser%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20have%20actually%20had%20Barb%E2%80%99s%20face%20tattooed%20on%20their%20bodies%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fshannon-purser-interview-people-had-barbs-face-tattooed-on-their-bodies-stranger-things%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2555dbfda5db53942064a35727038c5f28e0bc78%2F1048_333_2571_1487%2F2571.jpg>
 Jessie Buckley: from War and Peace to Taboo. Photograph: 
Silverhub/Rex/Shutterstock 
Jessie Buckley, 26

War and Peace, Taboo (BBC/various)


Irish singer and actress Buckley’s television debut came on Andrew Lloyd 
Webber’s talent search showI’d Do Anything on the BBC, in which she finished 
runner-up to Jodie Prenger, narrowly missing out on the role of Nancy in a West 
End production ofOliver!. It proved a blessing in disguise, as Buckley has 
since graduated from Rada and is now carving out a growing stage and screen 
reputation, excelling as pious Princess Marya Bolkonskaya in the BBC’s handsome 
adaptation ofWar and Peace, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/war-and-peace> where she met her 
boyfriend, on-screen brother James Norton.

In January, Buckley will star opposite Tom Hardy in BBC1’s equally big-budget 
period thrillerTaboo, from the makers of Peaky Blinders and The Killing. It’s 
been described as “the anti-Poldark”, which makes Buckley a darker, devilish 
Demelza. Which sounds about right.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fshannon-purser-interview-people-had-barbs-face-tattooed-on-their-bodies-stranger-things%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16680e08555e7410ae089505928be6f471653577%2F0_1087_3280_2125%2F3280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shannon%20Purser%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20have%20actually%20had%20Barb%E2%80%99s%20face%20tattooed%20on%20their%20bodies%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fshannon-purser-interview-people-had-barbs-face-tattooed-on-their-bodies-stranger-things%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shannon%20Purser%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20have%20actually%20had%20Barb%E2%80%99s%20face%20tattooed%20on%20their%20bodies%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fshannon-purser-interview-people-had-barbs-face-tattooed-on-their-bodies-stranger-things%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16680e08555e7410ae089505928be6f471653577%2F0_1087_3280_2125%2F3280.jpg>
 Rachel Keller: set to star in Legion on FX. Photograph: 
Buckner/Variety/Rex/Shutterstock 
Rachel Keller, 23

Legion (FX/Fox), Fargo (FX/C4) 


In February, Minnesotan Keller will play female lead Sydney Barrett (the 
character’s parents were big Pink Floyd fans) in the first ever live-actionX-Men
TV show.Legion is a grown-up take on the comic books, following Professor X’s 
institutionalised son, David Haller (Downton Abbey alumnus Dan Stevens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/01/x-men-fx-tv-series-dan-stevens-downton-abbey>
), who meets fellow patient Syd in a psychiatric hospital, where they team up 
in superheroic style. The series is created by Noah Hawley, who discovered 
Keller on his previous project, the TV version of the Coen brothers filmFargo, 
casting her as Farrah Fawcett-haired femme fatale Simone Gerhardt. Expect 
Keller to kick baddie butt inLegion – she’s trained in the Brazilian martial 
art capoeira.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fshannon-purser-interview-people-had-barbs-face-tattooed-on-their-bodies-stranger-things%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F668bb76a59ed795e36e0b4a530dd91dd03adefaf%2F511_228_1453_929%2F1453.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shannon%20Purser%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20have%20actually%20had%20Barb%E2%80%99s%20face%20tattooed%20on%20their%20bodies%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fshannon-purser-interview-people-had-barbs-face-tattooed-on-their-bodies-stranger-things%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shannon%20Purser%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20have%20actually%20had%20Barb%E2%80%99s%20face%20tattooed%20on%20their%20bodies%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fshannon-purser-interview-people-had-barbs-face-tattooed-on-their-bodies-stranger-things%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F668bb76a59ed795e36e0b4a530dd91dd03adefaf%2F511_228_1453_929%2F1453.jpg>
 Isaac Hempstead Wright: a hit as Bran Stark in Game of Thrones. Photograph: 
Rex/Shutterstock 
Isaac Hempstead Wright, 17

Game of Thrones (HBO/Sky Atlantic)


“Winter is coming,” goes the Stark family motto in HBO’s fantasy epic Games of 
Thrones. Yet ironically, it was only in a bid to avoid chilly weather that 
Kent-born Hempstead Wright took up acting in the first place, aged 10. “I used 
to go to a football club on Saturday mornings,” he has said, “but it was just 
too cold and I hated it, so my mum said, ‘Oh, there’s a drama group that looks 
fun…’” Six months later, he landed the part of magical prince Bran Stark inGoT’s
debut season, which promptly saw Bran pushed from a Winterfell tower window and 
crippled, before eventually becoming a forest-dwelling prophet. Expect Bran to 
play a major part in the seventh series this summer. And he has a voice role in 
BBC1’s Boxing Day adaptation of Roald Dahl’sRevolting Rhymes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fshannon-purser-interview-people-had-barbs-face-tattooed-on-their-bodies-stranger-things%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44907167e812119109a15ed0bd4580c406215412%2F1340_89_2234_1237%2F2234.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shannon%20Purser%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20have%20actually%20had%20Barb%E2%80%99s%20face%20tattooed%20on%20their%20bodies%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fshannon-purser-interview-people-had-barbs-face-tattooed-on-their-bodies-stranger-things%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shannon%20Purser%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20have%20actually%20had%20Barb%E2%80%99s%20face%20tattooed%20on%20their%20bodies%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fshannon-purser-interview-people-had-barbs-face-tattooed-on-their-bodies-stranger-things%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44907167e812119109a15ed0bd4580c406215412%2F1340_89_2234_1237%2F2234.jpg>
 Emily Robinson: made a star by Amazon Prime. Photograph: Katie 
Jones/WWD/REX/Shutterstock 
Emily Robinson, 18

Transparent (Amazon Prime)


The New Yorker is a veritable showbiz veteran, having worked as a model and 
actress since the age of six. In Amazon’s groundbreaking, award-winning
transgender comedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/26/transparent-review-the-best-thing-on-tv-at-the-moment>
, Robinson plays two roles in flashback: the younger incarnation of Gaby 
Hoffman’s character, Ali, and the mother of heroine, Maura (Jeffrey Tambor), as 
a teenager. Robinson has already Kickstarter-funded, written, directed and 
starred in her first short,Virgin Territory, “about a teenage girl’s sexual 
awakening and experimentation”. On the menu for 2017 are the fourth season of
Transparent, three film roles and a creative writing degree at Columbia 
University.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fshannon-purser-interview-people-had-barbs-face-tattooed-on-their-bodies-stranger-things%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa449c19e0cdc594c0143177027ce2b1a9fbc5794%2F277_65_2380_1424%2F2380.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shannon%20Purser%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20have%20actually%20had%20Barb%E2%80%99s%20face%20tattooed%20on%20their%20bodies%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fshannon-purser-interview-people-had-barbs-face-tattooed-on-their-bodies-stranger-things%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shannon%20Purser%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20have%20actually%20had%20Barb%E2%80%99s%20face%20tattooed%20on%20their%20bodies%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fshannon-purser-interview-people-had-barbs-face-tattooed-on-their-bodies-stranger-things%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa449c19e0cdc594c0143177027ce2b1a9fbc5794%2F277_65_2380_1424%2F2380.jpg>
 Corey Hawkins: counter-terrorist superhero in 24: Legacy. Photograph: 
LaurentVu/SIPA/Rex/Shutterstock 
Corey Hawkins, 28

24: Legacy (Fox), The Walking Dead (AMC/Fox)


Kiefer Sutherland’s maverick agent Jack Bauer has hung up his 
counter-terrorist boots, so who’s going to save us now? Step forward Hawkins, 
taking over as the action hero in24: Legacy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/17/24-legacy-is-already-the-best-show-of-2017-thats-a-guarantee>
. The rebooted real-time thriller (tagline: “The clock is reset”) stars Hawkins 
as ex-army ranger Eric Carter, racing against time to stop a terror attack in 
Washington DC. The series debuts on Super Bowl night in the US – 5 February. 
Classically trained Juillard graduate Hawkins previously played supply-runner 
Heath inThe Walking Dead and Dr Dre in NWA biopic Straight Outta Compton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/straight-outta-compton>. Now he’s swapped 
zombies and gangsta rap for saving the free world – and at 6ft 3in, pity 
whoever gets in his way.
 