
Oil giant Royal Dutch Shell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royaldutchshell> has agreed a £47bn 
takeover of gas group BG in one of the biggest deals seen in the oil and gas 
sector in the last 20 years. It will create a company worth more than £200bn.

BG <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bggroup> confirmed on Wednesday that 
it was offering a cash and shares deal worth £13.50 a share – a 50% premium on 
BG’s market value on Tuesday night when news of the deal first leaked.

BG’s share price soared 42% to £13 on the news, while Shell shares fell 4% to 
£21.16. Shares in other energy stocks rose, with rival BP climbing 4.3% to 475p 
amid speculation that it could become the next target. BP is valued at around 
£83bn.


Richard Hunter, head of equities at Hargreaves Lansdown stockbrokers, said: 
“The deal could prompt other companies who have been running the slide rule 
over potential targets to make their move.”

Oil <https://www.theguardian.com/business/oil> executives have been predicting 
a round of consolidation among oil and gas companies as a result of the sharp 
slide in oil prices, as was witnessed in the 1990s, when BP and Exxon both 
snapped up rivals.

BG’s chairman Andrew Gould described Shell’s offer as “compelling”. The 
group’s new chief executive,Helge Lund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/09/new-bg-boss-helge-lund-clocks-in-early>
, who joined the company in February, is expected to leave once the deal goes 
through. Following therecent controversy over his £25m pay deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/apr/01/bg-concedes-mistake-over-helge-lund-25m-pay-deal>
, Lund now looks to be in line for a multi-million pound departure package 
after just two months with the group.

Ben van Beurden, chief executive of Shell, said: “Bold, strategic moves shape 
our industry. BG and Shell are a great fit. This transaction fits with our 
strategy and our read on the industry landscape around us.” He added: “BG has 
always been on the top of [our] list.”

Shell chairman, Jorma Ollila, said the deal was an important one for Shell: 
“The result will be a more competitive, stronger company for both sets of 
shareholders in today’s volatile oil price world.”

The transaction will be the biggest this year and the fourth largest oil and 
gas deal globally since 1996.


Van Beurden said the combined business will sell off $30bn (£20bn) of assets 
(from both portfolios) between 2016 and 2018, most of which will be returned to 
investors via a $25bn share buyback.

Shell said the deal would create pre-tax cost savings of about $2.5bn a year. 
It will add some 25% to the company’s proved oil and gas reserves and 20% to 
production, as well as strengthening its position in new oil and gas projects, 
particularly in Australia LNG and Brazil deep water. BG and Shell both have 
huge interests in the LNG market – liquefied natural gas that can be shipped 
around the world in tankers.

When the stockmarket closed on Tuesday, BG group – which has 5,200 employees 
and was once part of the nationalised British Gas business – was valued at some 
£31bn. It also has debt of around £8bn.

Like other companies operating in the oil and gas business, BG has been hit 
hard in recent months by falling prices. A glut of oil has seen the price fall 
nearly 50%, to around $59, since last summer. The company’s profits were down 
nearly 20%, to just over $900m, in the three months to the end of last year.

Shell has also been affected by falling oil prices. Only two weeks ago the 
vast Anglo-Dutch business unveiled250 job cuts in the North Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/26/shell-says-it-will-cut-at-least-250-north-sea-jobs-to-remain-sustainable>
 and changes to shift patterns for North Sea workers in a bid to cut costs. But 
van Beurden said the company was committed to the North Sea and would invest 
£4bn between 2016 and 2018.

Shell is a strong enough business to be in a position to buy assets in order 
to be well-placed to cash in when prices eventually rebound. Buying proven oil 
and gas assets when prices have fallen is far cheaper than exploring for new 
reserves.

BG has had a difficult couple of years. Once a stockmarket favourite, it fell 
out of favour as its performance faltered. Its shares are down around 30% on a 
year ago.

BG’s chief executive departed nearly a year ago and the group’s chairman 
Andrew Gould took over, saying it was key that BG “accelerate the creation and 
delivery of longer-term value for our shareholders”.

At that time there was widespread speculation that BG would become a takeover 
target, with many City oil experts predicting Exxon would make a move on the 
British business.

Last week Lund hired two former Statoil executives, including Katie Jackson as 
vice-president for global strategy and business development. Jackson had been 
responsible for merger and acquisition deals at Statoil under Lund’s leadership.
 