
Natural history museums are many things but they are not, as I was sometimes 
told, peopled exclusively with dry, dusty old white men, rooting around in dry, 
dusty old drawers, examining dry, dusty old dead things.


In fact, most natural history museums are modern research institutions filled 
with a vast diversity of items and people whose lives revolve around them. They 
are collections of almost anything you can name or imagine, from centuries-old 
specimens to more recently collected frozen tissues and digitised genomic data. 
These collections are essential catalogues to the sciences of taxonomy, 
phylogeny and biogeography, disciplines that provide a firm footing for 
evolution, natural history, ecology, behaviour, conservation and anthropology 
as well as insights into more recent processes like human-created climate 
change.

One of those museums is the American Museum of Natural History 
<http://www.amnh.org/> (AMNH) in New York City. Recently, the AMNH’s 
collections surpassed the 33 million mark, and they currently house and care 
for more than 33,430,000 specimens and artefacts. These items are precious, 
irreplaceable ... embodying a rich record of life on Earth, bearing silent 
witness to the passage of geologic time, and even providing tantalising clues 
from the rest of the universe.

To celebrate their collections and to educate the public about the critical 
work conducted by many museums, the AMNH is filming a series of short 
documentaries during the upcoming year. In this series,Shelf Life, you will 
open doors, pull out drawers, and remove lids from a few of the many 
incredible, rarely-seen items in the AMNH’s collections. This documentary 
series will explore topics like specimen preparation and will investigate why 
variety is important in natural history collections. Along the way, you will 
meet some of the many people who work in the Museum collections -- and trust 
me, you’ll see that notall of them are “dusty old white men”.

 . 
View the next video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/grrlscientist/2014/dec/21/shelf-life-turtles-and-taxonomy>
 in this series.

You are invited to visit the AMNH’s dedicated Shelf Life 
<http://www.amnh.org/shelf-life> site. AMNH can be found on twitter @AMNH 
<https://twitter.com/AMNH>.

.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..

GrrlScientist is very active on twitter @GrrlScientist 
<https://twitter.com/GrrlScientist> and sometimes lurks on social media: 
facebook <http://www.facebook.com/grrlscientist>, G+ 
<http://gplus.to/grrlscientist>, LinkedIn 
<http://www.linkedin.com/pub/grrl-scientist/15/324/b89>, and Pinterest 
<http://pinterest.com/grrlscientist/>.
 