
Spoiler alert: this recap contains spoilers to the Sherlock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/sherlock> episode The Final Problem, 
which aired on 15 January 2017.

Of all the things I was expecting from the final episode of Sherlock, a plot 
based largely on the format of Leslie Grantham-hosted 90s quiz show Fort Boyard 
wasn’t one of them. But that’s basically what we got: a series of puzzles 
solved in different rooms in a secure fort in the middle of the ocean, each one 
progressing to a final showdown, alas, without Melinda Messenger or a pack of 
tigers.

To my mind, there were two things going on in this episode. One was a subtle, 
beautifully crafted backstory about Sherlock’s childhood. The other was a fun 
if unfulfilling gameshow of wild hypotheticals, where everything was at stake 
yet it often felt as though very little was.

Let’s start with the first one.

“Help me please, I’m on a plane and everyone’s asleep.”

The episode starts with what appeared to be a girl, alone on a passenger 
plane, where everyone is unconscious apart from her. Her mum is there, but she 
won’t wake up. There’s no one. Yet even at the beginning, something felt 
unnatural about this situation. Why is this girl fine when everyone else is out 
cold, how can someone’s phone be ringing in the sky, and why is Moriarty, who 
we know to be dead, on the other end of the line?

Back in London, Sherlock, playing on his brother’s fear of clowns, has 
extracted some information about his long-forgotten sister Eurus from Mycroft. 
He finds out that she is institutionalised in Sherrinford, a secure facility 
for the most dangerous prisoners in the world. According to Mycroft, she is “an 
era-defining genius beyond Newton” yet he is terrified of her, and uses trigger 
words – “the east wind is coming” – to make sure Sherlock can’t remember who 
she is, “ a kindness” as he would have it.
 Sherlock plays on his brother’s fear of clowns to extract some information 
about his long-forgotten sister Eurus. Photograph: Laurence 
Cendrowicz/BBC/Hartswood Films 
But Sherlock starts to have childhood memories of his sister. He recalls that 
she hid his dog, the much-touted Redbeard, and said that to find him he had to 
listen to the lyrics of a song she sang, a song he could never decode. Later he 
realises Redbeard wasn’t a dog, but a boy – his best friend Victor Trevor.

As the episode progresses Sherlock starts to get phone calls from the little 
girl in the plane. Yet it must be clear to him that something doesn’t add up – 
she doesn’t know where she’s coming from or going, she seems relatively relaxed 
about the huge passages of time passing between their conversations. Surely 
he’d be able to deduce that she wasn’t really on a plane, yet he never appears 
to doubt the veracity of her call, perhaps realising that he has to go along 
with it, to make her feel safe anyway. When Eurus came to his flat, undercover, 
he had a fraternal instinct, taking her out for chips despite having not left 
his flat for weeks. Here too, he recognises that he should look after the girl, 
despite the fact that her story not quite makes sense.

Eurus isn’t your average psychopath. When she hid Victor in the well, she says 
it was out of jealousy – that she wanted to “play too”. She gave Sherlock the 
clues to find him so she could be involved. She wanted Sherlock to work it out, 
but he wasn’t clever enough and so Victor drowned.

This time round, John ends up in the well, but Sherlock, now a grown 
detective, is able to solve Eurus’s rhyme. The lyrics don’t lead him to John 
though, they lead to Eurus’s bedroom, where she is cowering and crying, 
managing to be both the girl on the plane and the evil genius. She is still 
looking for someone to play with, a friend who can understand her, because she 
is too clever, too emotionless to have mates. It is a brilliant way to humanise 
a monster, and it’s deftly written, left to the viewer to join up the dots, to 
realise that all Eurus wanted as a child was for Sherlock to come to her 
bedroom. It also explains Sherlock’s own lack of emotions: his only friend 
died, he couldn’t help his sister, he cut himself off. There was a lot in this 
episode I didn’t buy, but I really bought this.

“Heaven may be a fantasy for the credulous and the afraid, but I can give you 
a map reference for hell.”
 Sherlock and Watson decide to hurl themselves out the windows to get away 
from the grenade inside Baker Street. Serious injury, if not death, seems 
inevitable, yet nothing is made of it. Photograph: Todd Antony/BBC/Hartswood 
Films 
The other, Fort Boyard stuff, gets going when a “patience grenade” arrives via 
drone inside Baker Street. It will explode if anyone moves, so Sherlock and 
Watson decide to hurl themselves out the windows to get away from it. Serious 
injury, if not death, seems inevitable, yet nothing is made of it – all three 
appear unscathed in the next scene and we never find out how they survived the 
blast and the two-storey drop.

When they arrive at Sherrinford, it emerges that Eurus has been controlling 
the guards using the power of suggestion – we hear her on tape playing the role 
of a therapist, encouraging the prison governor to cry, and to help her. This 
feels like a cop-out: so she “reprogrammed” everyone in the prison by some kind 
of mind control? We deserve a bit more than that.

Anyway, Eurus runs the prison now, and has managed to fit it with some kind of 
control room with which she can create various puzzles for Sherlock, John and 
Mycroft to figure out. These are all quite trolley problem or prisoner’s 
dilemma in nature, meant to push Sherlock into a conflict between his rational 
brain and his emotional response.

Oh and Moriarty is sort of involved too. One Christmas, Mycroft allowed Eurus 
and him to have an unsupervised meeting (why?) and they planned everything that 
is now transpiring (how?) and now he pops up as a kind of sidekick, making 
weird noises but contributing almost nothing to the plot. It all feels rather 
disappointing for a posthumous return that has been trailed for three years, 
although of course, Andrew Scott blows everything else off the screen, the best 
villain we’re ever likely to see.

Moriarty’s role aside, the problem is that Eurus’s slapdash approach to 
morality rubs off on the viewer. We’re asked to be horrified by her lack of 
humanity and care about characters we’ve never met before, in an isolated, 
almost otherworldly setting off the coast of England. But none of it feels 
real, and it becomes more interesting to see things through Eurus’s zero-sum 
games than it does to care much about the people she’s manipulating or killing 
off.
 Inside Fort Boyard (minus Melinda Messenger and a pack of tigers) … Mycroft. 
Photograph: Robert Viglasky/BBC/Hartswood Films 
Why did the Joey spinoff from Friends never work? Why was Top Gear imminently 
watchable while The Grand Tour is imminently dire? Because just having a great 
character isn’t enough. You need to give them boundaries – try to make them 
work within a set of rules that rub up against them. It’s the mundanity of 
everyday life that makes Sherlock so fun: if you take him out of Baker Street 
and put him in this almost imaginary world, it just doesn’t work as well.

“It’s all about the legend, the stories.”

Then, as a final unnecessary coda, Mary sends another DVD (maybe her and 
Moriarty got some kind of 2-for-1 deal at the “closeup video of your own face 
for after you die” recording studio) with a weird, almost non-canonical ending 
in which she describes Sherlock and Watson as “my Baker Street boys”. They say 
in good writing you should show not tell, but this ending felt like someone 
grabbing a megaphone and shouting “we might not make another series for five 
years so get emotional now.”

Mysteries unsolved?

• When Eurus first meets Moriarty, it’s almost as if she’s calling him 
Redbeard, rather than telling him about him. Are we ruling out that the little 
boy could have grown up to be Moriarty? Seems a nice thing to leave open, 
should there be more episodes.

Notes and observations

• Even from beyond the grave, Moriarty outsmarts Eurus. He records a message 
about “Holmes killing Holmes” which she thinks is about Sherlock’s decision to 
shoot his brother over John – in fact Moriarty realises he would turn the gun 
on himself.

• After I criticised him for responding to reviews in rhyme, Mark Gatiss kindly
 <https://twitter.com/Markgatiss/status/818486764805427201> got in touch to 
point I’d spelt his name wrong in last week’s roundup - please accept my 
apologies in lieu of a series of poems.

That’s it! Lord knows if they’ll ever make more of these, but if I was a 
betting man I’d say we’ll be picking this up on New Year’s Day, 2020 – see you 
then, perhaps.
 