
BBC1's Sherlock <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/sherlock> was again 
the most-watched Sunday show, attracting 6.442 million viewers for its second 
outing last night, 1 August.

The 90-minute drama had a 25.6% audience share from 8.30pm. A further 210,000 
(1%) watched on BBC HD, with a later start time of 9.30pm.

Last Sunday's opener pulled in 7.054 million viewers (28.5%) on BBC1 and 
479,000 for the BBC HD simulcast.

Britain's European Athletics Championships gold rush provided a ratings boost 
for BBC2, with 3.467 million viewers (16.4%) watching the final night of live 
action on the network between 6pm and 9.30pm. Another 149,000 (0.7%) watched 
the BBC HD simulcast.

This gave BBC2 a 91% boost over its average audience share in the slot over 
the past three months.

Channel Five's talent show Don't Stop Believing was the worst performer by 
this comparison yesterday, down 51.5% on the network's average audience share 
in the 8pm-9.30pm slot.

The third episode of the six-part series attracted 587,000 viewers (2.4%) 
after being shifted back an hour to make way for Cricket on Five (595,000/2.9%).

Two weekends ago the first episode drew 1.458 million (6.8%) in an earlier 
7pm-8.30pm slot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jul/19/open-golf-tv-ratings>.

Top Gear followed the athletics on BBC2 from 9.30pm, with the final instalment 
of the current series attracting 4.717 million viewers (20.3%). Another 117,000 
(1.2%) watched on BBC HD at 11pm.

This was down from 6.437 million who watched last Sunday's edition featuring 
Tom Cruise and Cameron Diaz on BBC2 and BBC HD.

However, Top Gear was 162% up on BBC2's average audience share in the 9.30pm 
slot over the past three months – the best performance by this comparison 
yesterday.

Five main terrestrial analogue networks

BBC1, BBC2, ITV1, Channel 4, Channel Five (available in all UK homes with TV, 
except Five, which reaches about 95%)

BBC1

12.05pm: Formula One: the Hungarian Grand Prix - 4.464 million/39.6%

6pm: Antiques Roadshow - 3.795 million/21.8%

7pm: Last of the Summer Wine - 3.971 million/20.3%

7.30pm: Countryfile - 4.216 million/19.2%

BBC2

10.30pm: Frequently Asked Questions about Time Travel - 1.212 million/9.8%

ITV1

7pm: Alan Titchmarsh's Walks of Fame - 3.204 million/15.9%, ITV1 HD 86,000/0.4%

8pm: Heartbeat - 4.272 million/17.8%, ITV1 HD 80,000/0.3%

9pm: 3.839 million/15.2%, ITV1 HD 80,000/0.3%

Channel 4

7pm: Orchestra United - 410,000/2%, C4+1 35,000/0.2%

8pm: Amish: World's Squarest Teenagers - 1.962 million/8.2%, C4+1 299,000/1.2%

9pm: Big Brother - 1.911 million/7.6%, C4+1 490,000/2.7%

10pm: Alan Carr: Chatty Man - 1.189 million/6.2%, C4+1 261,000/2.5%

All ratings are unofficial overnight figures, including live and same day 
timeshifted (recorded) viewing, but excluding on demand, HD, +1 or other – 
unless otherwise stated

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 