
In career that’s now spanned seven decades, Shirley MacLaine has amassed one 
Oscar, five Oscar nominations, one Emmy, an American Film Institute lifetime 
achievement award, 14 books, an uncredited role as Tipsy Girl in the original 
Ocean’s Eleven,a previous life where she was the brother of a 35,000-year-old 
spirit called Ramtha 
<http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=tzEdpR4gizsC&pg=PA2&dq=shirley+maclaine+ramtha&hl=en&sa=X&ei=ZhbHUt-CLJfCoASo3IDgCQ&redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q=shirley%20maclaine%20ramtha&f=false>
 and now, the lead ina deeply underwhelming romantic comedy opposite 
Christopher Plummer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/30/elsa-and-fred-review-shirley-maclaine-christopher-plummer>
.

But while her latest film Elsa & Fred, out this weekend, is worth forgetting, 
her career is filled with performances that will be fondly remembered. Here are 
her finest:

Some Came Running
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dt0SaP_DKw1c&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dt0SaP_DKw1c>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dt0SaP_DKw1c&media=>
After a set of roles in Alfred Hitchcock’s The Trouble with Harry, Around the 
World in 80 Days and romantic comedy The Matchmaker, it took this adaptation of 
a James Jones novel to truly launch MacLaine in Hollywood. She received her 
first of many Oscar nominations for playing the unrefined and sympathetic 
Ginnie, who is continually mistreated by the apathetic ex-soldier Dave, played 
by a sullen Frank Sinatra. In this scene, we see their dynamic play out rather 
horribly.

The Apartment
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaKUcMTQgl5E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaKUcMTQgl5E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaKUcMTQgl5E&media=>
In Billy Wilder’s comedy, MacLaine played one of the first, and most defining, 
iterations of themanic pixie dream girl 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Manic_Pixie_Dream_Girl>. Alternating between cute 
quirk and quirky cuteness, it’s a testament to MacLaine’s innate charm that she 
makes the character so engaging and easy to fall for and Jack Lemmon’s 
predicament incredibly easy to empathise with. She deservedly picked up another 
Oscar nomination for her performance.

The Children’s Hour AKA The Loudest Whisper
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBySaTyRBvOI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBySaTyRBvOI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBySaTyRBvOI&media=>
An adaptation of the 1934 play of the same name (which was most recently 
performed with Keira Knightley and Elisabeth Moss in London), this underrated 
drama has MacLaine star alongside Audrey Hepburn as friends who run a boarding 
school for girls. The pair are accused of a lesbian relationship and in this 
brilliantly performed scene, MacLaine breaks down and confesses her true 
feelings for Hepburn.

Irma la Douce
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhUhzXgiyDw0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhUhzXgiyDw0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhUhzXgiyDw0&media=>
Showcasing her refusal to be typecast, MacLaine took on the role of a Parisian 
prostitute, without an accent, in this farcical, and often perverse, romantic 
comedy. Reuniting with Billy Wilder and Jack Lemmon, who plays a policeman who 
becomes her pimp who also dresses up as a British lord, it brought MacLaine yet 
another Oscar nomination. In this scene, we see her cope with Lemmon’s bizarre 
disguise.

Postcards from the Edge
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlkjQSpfW3iw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlkjQSpfW3iw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlkjQSpfW3iw&media=>
In 1990, MacLaine starred as Meryl Streep’s mother in this biting adaptation 
of Carrie Fisher’s semi-autobiographical novel. Loosely based on Fisher’s mother
Debbie Reynolds <https://www.theguardian.com/film/debbie-reynolds>, MacLaine 
had to compete against Reynolds herself for the role. In this scene, we see 
MacLaine’s singing prowess as she provides one of her overbearing character’s 
less obnoxious moments in the film.
 