
Whether it’s an impulse-bought tray of pansies at the supermarket or a 
carefully chosen collection of shrubs ordered from a specialist nursery, buying 
plants for the garden can be hit and miss. The average British household spends 
£47 a year on garden plants, according to research from theHorticultural Trades 
Association <http://www.the-hta.org.uk>, so even if you’re not a keen gardener 
it is worth genning up on where to look for the best deals and the best-quality 
plants and seeds.

Mail order

You can have everything from mature trees to bedding plants delivered to your 
door, and there are many pluses to buying plants by post: you can obtain 
treasures you would never find in your local garden centre, you don’t have to 
spend time trudging around plant displays, and you can bulk-order more plants 
and trees than you could possibly fit in your car.

However, mail order is not a great choice if you are out at work all day and 
unable to take delivery in person, or can’t unpack and plant your items 
straightaway. Plants that sit around in their boxes don’t survive for long.

The key to good mail order is to do your research: that flowering shrub may 
seem like a good deal, but grown in a 9cm pot it may be years before it’s 
glorifying your garden. Charles Williams, managing director of mail order firm
Burncoose Nurseries <http://www.burncoose.co.uk/site/index.cfm>, says: “The 
reason that mail order gets something of a bad image is that people don’t 
understand the difference between ordering five plug liners for £3.99 and 
ordering a £12 shrub in a two or three litre pot. We are selling finished 
plants, which is why we are more expensive than those who don’t.” For this 
reason, the Burncoose website shows plants at different stages of growth, and 
displays an image of the plant in the advertised pot size.

Immature plants are usually sent as plug plants or in 9cm pots. It’s an 
inexpensive option but requires you to pot plants on and nurture them until 
they are mature enough to plant out. Mature plants, usually sent out in two or 
three litre pots, do cost more but can usually be planted straight into the 
garden and will establish more quickly.

And even though packaging design has improved greatly in recent years, fragile 
young plants are difficult to get through the delivery system without damage. I 
was recently sent six tomato seedlings through the post, and even though the 
packaging was state of the art, only half survived the journey.

Among the most successful items to buy mail order are bare-root trees, roses 
and perennials, which as the name suggests arrive without a pot and the roots 
bare of soil. They are easy to package and generally transport extremely well. 
The downside is that these are limited to the bare-root planting season 
(generally October to April).

Williams points out that the great move forward in the mail order market in 
recent years has been the competition in the courier market. “The number of 
errors that couriers make today is infinitely less than they made 10 years ago 
because it’s not worth their while to get a bad reputation, and they know it 
costs them money if they don’t fulfil the contract.”

If you like the idea of buying from specialist nurseries but don’t want to use 
mail order, there are many specialist plant fairs around the country. VisitRare 
Plant Fair <http://www.rareplantfair.co.uk/> or Plant Hunters’ Fairs 
<http://planthuntersfairs.co.uk/> to find one near you.

Seeds

Check the seed packet size when buying – some contain far more than you’d be 
able to sow in a year

Seed packets are the ideal mail order purchase: low postage and packing costs, 
a low risk of being damaged in transit, and access to a much greater array of 
varieties than you’d find in the average garden centre.

Prices for seeds can vary wildly. I shopped around for the compact courgette 
variety Patio Star online, and of the six UK seed suppliers I found that 
offered this variety, the cheapest per seed was Kent-basedNicky’s 
<http://www.nickys-nursery.co.uk/> Nursery at £1.65 for 10 seeds, and the most 
expensive wasSuttons Seeds <http://www.suttons.co.uk/> at £2.99 for six. Check 
the seed packet size when buying: some contain far more seed than you’d be able 
to sow in a year on the average garden or allotment, and not all seed remains 
viable beyond a year or two.

Online seed company MoreVeg <http://moreveg.co.uk/> offer smaller seed packet 
sizes suited to gardeners who don’t want to sow row after row of one crop, and 
promise that more than half of their 1,100 varieties cost 50p a packet.

There are also places to buy more unusual seeds, too. Join Garden Organic’s 
Heritage Seed Library <https://www.gardenorganic.org.uk/hsl> (there are 
membership fees) and you can choose six packets of unusual heritage vegetables 
from their catalogue each spring, as well as help to support the work of this 
charity. You can also track down open-pollinated varieties of vegetables that 
allow you to save your own seed from the plants you grow, saving you money in 
future years – try theReal Seed Catalogue <http://realseeds.co.uk/>, and Brown 
Envelope Seeds <http://www.brownenvelopeseeds.com/>, based in west Cork, 
Ireland.

If ornamentals are more your thing, check out the Royal Horticultural 
Society’s seed scheme for members 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/membership/rhs-members-seed-scheme>, where you can 
order up to 12 packets of seed grown in RHS gardens.

The siren song of the garden centre
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gardening-blog/2016/apr/23/the-siren-song-of-the-garden-centre>
Garden centres

Garden centres are one of the most popular ways of buying plants: 67% of us 
visit a garden centre at least once a year, according to a May 2015 survey. 
They have many plus points: you can select plants yourself, try different plant 
combinations “in the flesh”, ask staff for advice, and buy at a convenient time 
when you have a weekend of gardening stretching out ahead of you.

A good garden centre will have knowledgeable staff who are happy to answer 
your questions about watering, feeding and pests. Ask around for 
recommendations from gardening friends. Some wholesale plant nurseries also 
sell to retail customers, and though they lack the bells and whistles of the 
modern garden centre or nursery – you won’t be able to pick up a set of new 
mugs at the same time – the plants may be cheaper and the range a little more 
adventurous.

Many garden centres offer a guarantee on hardy plant purchases. For example, 
Wyevale <http://www.wyevalegardencentres.co.uk/> offers a lifetime guarantee, 
while Kent-basedCoolings <http://www.coolings.co.uk/> offers a five-year 
guarantee. This is worth taking note of, and keeping your receipts – if your 
plant fails, you could get your money back or a replacement to the same value.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fapr%2F23%2Fshopping-plants-seeds-best-deals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F711bac205b3d6ae647c1c20d2e39a810f6b34b18%2F0_178_4961_2976%2F4961.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shopping%20for%20plants%20and%20seeds%3F%20Get%20the%20best%20deals%20without%20forking%20out%20too%20much&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fapr%2F23%2Fshopping-plants-seeds-best-deals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shopping%20for%20plants%20and%20seeds%3F%20Get%20the%20best%20deals%20without%20forking%20out%20too%20much&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fapr%2F23%2Fshopping-plants-seeds-best-deals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F711bac205b3d6ae647c1c20d2e39a810f6b34b18%2F0_178_4961_2976%2F4961.jpg>
 Garden centres: 67% of us visit one at least once a year. Photograph: Alamy 
Always give the sales trolley a scan, too. Garden centres will often reduce 
perfectly healthy plants to mere pennies because they have reached the end of 
their season and are dying back, but if you know your herbaceous perennials 
from your annuals – or can look them up on your smartphone – you can bag a 
bargain. I recently bought 20 Cyclamen hederifolium plants for 20p each, 
reduced from £1.99, simply because they had finished their autumn flowering and 
were heading into dormancy.

Online auction sites

Sites such as eBay are worth a look as many smaller nurseries sell on them. 
But take care if your passion is rare plants: rare plant expert Robbie 
Blackhall-Miles, who works for specialist plant nurseryCrug Farm Plants 
<http://www.crug-farm.co.uk/> on the north Wales coast, warns that although 
there are plenty of legitimate sellers, and despite eBay’s best efforts to 
winkle them out, there are others trying to illegally sell extremely endangered 
orchids and other plants that have been taken directly from the wild, under the 
guise of nursery-bred plants.

Blackhall-Miles advises sticking to hybrids and named cultivars of rare 
plants, which are much more likely to be bred in a nursery rather than taken 
from the wild.

On the high street




The likes of Wilko, Lidl, Homebase and Tesco can offer value for money when it 
comes to plants, but their ranges tend to be limited to the “usual suspects” – 
a few dozen common garden plants.

Pound stores are starting to move in on the lucrative gardening market too: 
Poundland recently launched a range of gardening products fronted by TV 
gardener Charlie Dimmock. Again, the range in such stores is limited, but this 
can be an extremely cheap way to fill a garden or allotment with new plants. 
You will usually find a few unnamed varieties of climbing roses, common shrubs 
such as spirea and mock orange, some spring and summer bulbs, raspberry canes, 
blueberry bushes and grapevines. But beware: only buy newly arrived stock as 
plants tend to be ignored by staff and will die quickly.

Car boots and swaps

I’ve got some of my best plants from kindly fellow growers who have offered me 
a cutting of a plant I’ve admired. Some gardeners set up stalls at their garden 
gates or at car boot sales. These are always worth a look, but are a gamble – 
plants may be wrongly labelled or contain pests or diseases which could spread 
to your other plants, and you have no recourse should things go wrong. And bear 
in mind that gardeners often have “spare” plants of a particular type because 
it is taking over their garden: I ended up with an ever-growing border full of 
a variegated grass known as gardener’s garters picked up from a plant swap 
stall.

Also seek out a local seed swap. These events are usually well-organised and 
are a chance to pick up new varieties for nothing – as well as helping you part 
with seeds you don’t need.

How to buy plants

• Lift the plant from its pot: you should be able to see healthy roots, not so 
tightly packed that no soil is visible. Don’t buy plants with a mass of roots 
emerging from the holes in the bottom of the pot.

• Avoid plants with damage or any browning or yellowing; those that are 
wilting or have uneven growth; or those with a mat of moss and weeds growing on 
the surface of the soil.

• Buy flowers in bud, not full bloom – they will give a longer-lasting display.

• Learn the difference between hardy perennials, half-hardy annuals and so on. 
Take along a reference book, ask staff for help, or sign up for an app such as
Garden Compass <https://www.gardencompass.com/> or use the RHS plant finder 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants>.

• Check labels carefully. “Vigorous” can mean rampantly invasive, while plants 
that love full sun won’t be happy in a gloomy side return. Plants marked RHS 
AGM have received the RHS Award of Garden Merit and should be reliable and 
resistant to pests and diseases.
 