
A wave of speculative bets on company share price falls could sweep through 
the London stock market if recent rises in inflation push up borrowing costs, 
according to a veteran short-seller.

Simon Cawkwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2002/nov/17/mbas.highereducation1>, 70, 
is reputed to have made several fortunes placing financial bets against the 
shares in companies ranging from Maxwell Communications Corporation and Polly 
Peck in the early 1990s through to Northern Rock in 2007.

Along the way, there have been big losses too. But Cawkwell, who writes 
frequently under hisnom de plume Evil Knievil 
<https://masterinvestor.co.uk/category/evil-diaries/>, remains one of a 
shrinking band of incorrigible market gossips willing to pit their wits against 
large investment institutions and hedge funds that now dominate the London 
stock market.

The latest signs of rising inflation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/19/uk-inflation-rises-unexpectedfly-air-fares>
, Cawkwell argues, could soon trigger a different mood among investors. Some 
companies, he suggests, will be rapidly found out as short-sellers move in to 
target shares that are overvalued.

Cawkwell warns of a “weight of cash” that has been encouraged – by ultra-low 
interest rates and quantitative easing – into buying shares since the 2008 
financial crisis. “When the weight of the public’s money is there [invested in 
shares], or ready to have a go, it is difficult to go short.”

And until the mood in the market reacts to inflation, he concedes, “a much 
safer trade would be to slap it all on Almanzor at Ascot on Saturday”. Two days 
after this remark,the Champion Stakes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/15/almanzor-beats-found-champion-stakes-ascot-horse-racing>
 was indeed won by 11/8 favourite Almanzor.

“The Marmite stories is what all this is actually all about,” Cawkwell 
declares, identifying last week’sbrief pricing spat between Tesco and Unilever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/13/tesco-unilever-resolve-marmite-dispute-price-supermarket>
, maker of the spread, as a emblematic of a building upward pressure on prices. 
“We are having a rip-roaring rise in inflation.”

As a result, Cawkwell predicts, many weaker companies are likely to be 
squeezed between tougher trading conditions and rising borrowing costs.

At the height of the banking crisis eight years ago, there was fierce 
criticism of short-sellers, some of whom were accused of deliberately 
undermining confidence in bank stocks at a time when the global financial 
system was in peril.

The then chancellor Alistair Darling warned against “speculation that can be 
quite harmful 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/sep/17/stockmarkets.marketturmoil>”, 
while Alex Salmond, then Scotland’s first minister, referred to “short-selling 
spivs and speculators 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2009/jan/17/short-selling-ban-lifted>”. 
Regulators, meanwhile, imposed a temporary ban on short-selling bank shares.

Since then, however, several official inquiries have found serious failures in 
banks themselves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/mar/09/bank-of-scotland-fsa-serious-misconduct>
, while probes into the conduct of short-sellers have been dropped.

Cawkwell says: “Short-sellers are indeed regarded as a black-hearted brigade. 
But that is because most people are silly and, above all, dishonest with 
themselves. This is of course the prelude to being dishonest towards and about 
others.”
 