
Dear Rob

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fshould-labour-campaign-to-curb-immigration%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01e5d6099f02661bf218984b6b367cc98b01727b%2F1084_156_870_1088%2F870.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Should%20Labour%20campaign%20to%20curb%20immigration%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fshould-labour-campaign-to-curb-immigration%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Should%20Labour%20campaign%20to%20curb%20immigration%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fshould-labour-campaign-to-curb-immigration%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01e5d6099f02661bf218984b6b367cc98b01727b%2F1084_156_870_1088%2F870.jpg>
 Stephen Bush Photograph: Sam Frost 
It’s helpful to start with a number: how many major economies are there in 
which trade policy is decided by immigration policy? The answer is zero. In 
fact, there is no country in the developed world where immigration sets trade 
policy.

When we talk about “abandoning free movement”, we need to be clear about what 
that means: it means leaving the single market, because the free movement of 
peoples is an essential prerequisite to remaining inside it. It means accepting 
a worse standard of trade with our nearest neighbour and biggest export market;
a hard border between Northern Ireland and the Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/24/northern-irish-peace-sacrificed-english-nationalism>
; forgoing the passporting rights of British banks; losing out on the status of 
British-made products in the rest of Europe.

It’s not just letting immigration decide trade policy, but letting it dictate 
financial policy, industrial policy, even security policy. It means supporting 
a government that is pursuing a course that will lead to a major recession. 
It’s true that Labour has an immigration problem, and has had for a long time. 
Not just among voters who were Labour in 2005, but voted Conservative in 2010 
and 2015, the voters it must win back if it is to get into government any time 
soon. Even those who stuck with the party through successive defeats have 
doubts about immigration and would ideally like to see less of it. It’s true, 
too, thatdiscontent about immigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/01/immigration-to-uk-hit-record-levels-in-run-up-to-brexit-vote-latest-figures-show>
 was a large reason why people voted to leave the EU, and yes, even among those 
who voted to remain, the free movement of people is deeply unpopular. Any party 
which only gets the backing of those who are relaxed about immigration will 
win, at best, 22% of the vote and would end up confined to England’s great 
cities – London, Liverpool, Manchester, Bristol and Newcastle.

So you can see why the party’s strategists are tempted to abandon the 
commitment to freedom of movement, and go into the next election on a platform 
of tough border control – but that would be a mistake.

Why? Precisely because opposition to immigration cuts across party lines and 
even across the referendum divide. Although the majority of that pro-migration 
22% did vote to stay in the European Union, the big question that divided 
Remainers from Leavers was not “would you like immigration to be reduced?” but 
“can immigration be reduced without it costing anything?” On the whole, people 
who voted Leave thought they could get immigration down without becoming poorer.

The problem is, you can’t. Making British people poorer to get immigration 
down will not only lose the votes of the 16 million people who voted against 
doing that, but the 17 million who thought, wrongly, that they could get 
migration down without being hit in the wallets.

When it becomes apparent that you can’t have your cake and eat it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/22/no-boris-johnson-you-cant-have-your-brexit-cake-and-eat-it-too>
, people will be furious with the government and the Brexiters. The job of an 
astute opposition will be to be in the right place at the right time – and that 
means supporting an exit deal that is as close to the status quo as possible.

That means holding the line on free movement.

Dear Stephen

 Rob Ford Photograph: Graeme Cooper/PR 
If there is one lesson that I have learned from the past 18 months, it is the 
perils of overestimating the likelihood of things I would prefer to happen, and 
underestimating the likelihood of things I really want to avoid. I fear your 
argument risks falling into this trap.

The expectation behind what you are saying is that, at some point, either the 
public or the government (preferably both) are going to realise that the 
economic costs of a “hard Brexit” are more than they are willing to bear and 
that, given the priorities of our EU negotiating partners, they will have to 
swallow free movement.

This argument – “you’ll have to accept this unlovely thing because the 
alternative is a disaster” – seems awfully familiar. It was the argument for 
Remain. It didn’t work then, and I don’t see why it is going to work now. It 
relies on the assumption that, at the end of the day, a broad sense of national 
economic self-interest is the decisive political force. That seems a pretty 
strong assumption in a world where Trump is president-elect, Syriza governs 
Greece and Marine Le Pen is poised to make the run-off in the French 
presidential elections.

There are other plausible scenarios. The government, pressured by backbenchers 
and Ukip and irritated by EU intransigence, could decide it is willing to pay 
the economic costs of “hard Brexit”. Or the EU could give way and enable a 
hybrid position, featuring some limits on free movement. Either would leave a
Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> committed absolutely to 
free movement high and dry: committed to bringing back something deeply 
unpopular that was already gone (in whole or in part).

Can Scotland be part of Brexit-Britain and the EU at the same time?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/03/can-scotland-be-part-of-brexit-britain-and-the-eu-at-the-same-time>
Even if events pan out as you expect, it is not clear that voters will swing 
behind free movement when the costs bite. Opinion could swing the opposite way 
– even more firmly in favour of immigration control and opposed to an EU seen 
as inflexible and punitive. Which would once again leave a Labour party 
committed to retaining free movement high and dry.

An astute leftwing opposition should not base its policy on the idea that 
voters will come round to its point of view. That idea has produced repeated 
disappointment of late. Far more prudent to hope for the best, but prepare for 
the alternatives.

I think Labour should debate the idea that the free movement principle is a 
serious barrier to a sustainable liberal immigration policy framework. There is 
a good case to argue it is. Raw numbers are not the only thing that matters in 
the immigration debate – both the symbols and substance of control are 
important.

Liberal pro-Europeans are powerfully attached to the right of free movement 
across Europe as a symbol of their values. The rights of people matter as much 
to liberals as their economic contributions. Yet such arguments also cut the 
other way. Many migration sceptics believe the right to choose who comes and 
goes should lie with a national government, and do not believe that a small 
addition to GDP, or a reduction in the budget deficit, is sufficient to 
legitimate taking such rights away from government.

Framing migration in terms of unlimited rights extended to a very large group 
has not been very successful to date – and could well inflict further electoral 
harm in future. But I believe a different framing could produce a different 
result. My years of work on public opinion about immigration has left me 
cautiously optimistic: voters are both pragmatic and flexible once you work to 
meet them half way.Migration of professionals, students and workers to staff 
high-demand sectors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/30/ministers-want-controls-on-skilled-and-unskilled-eu-workers-say-sources>
, like social care or the NHS, wins solid support.

Large majorities are happy to extend full social rights to migrants after a 
period of a few years – but equally large majorities reject granting those 
social rights from day one. Once voters are reassured on the principle of 
control at the national level, it is possible to build liberal, high-migration 
systems. Australia and Canada have done just that.

So I think you are being both too optimistic and too pessimistic. Too 
optimistic that the tide of debate will turn in favour of a free movement-based 
Brexit deal, yet too pessimistic about the alternatives available if such a 
deal proves out of reach.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fed-miliband-mps-parliamentary-vote-brexit-terms-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ed%20Miliband%3A%20MPs%20should%20vote%20on%20Brexit%20terms%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fed-miliband-mps-parliamentary-vote-brexit-terms-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ed%20Miliband%3A%20MPs%20should%20vote%20on%20Brexit%20terms%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fed-miliband-mps-parliamentary-vote-brexit-terms-video&media=>
Ed Miliband: MPs should vote on Brexit terms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/oct/10/ed-miliband-mps-parliamentary-vote-brexit-terms-video>
Dear Rob


I suppose my biggest objection is the idea that my reading of the next four 
years is optimistic. I would love to believe that, come the crunch, voters will 
decide to buy a vision of a better society over having to pay for it, but 
that’s pretty hard to reconcile with the passage of politics in the 20th 
century, or, indeed, much of the 21st.

Having gone into so many elections believing that the punters would pay more 
for better public services, it would be a mistake to go into the next believing 
that free movement is any different.

You cite Syriza, Trump and Le Pen as examples of people voting against their 
economic self-interest; I’m afraid I simply don’t recognise that version of 
events. Trump channelled white America’s deep-rooted belief that it is in its 
economic interest to trample on black America. Le Pen, likewise, appeals to the 
sense that France’s problems – and the cost of fixing them – can be pinned upon 
the Muslim other.

In the case of Syriza, what Greek voters bought there was the argument that a 
more intransigent approach to their partners in the EU would allow them to have 
their cake and eat it too – in their case, that they would be able to continue 
their membership of the Eurozone and be freed from the demands of their 
creditors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/16/eu-and-imf-auditors-to-visit-athens-as-greeces-agony-continues>
.

To channel Theresa May: sound familiar? And of course, what the Syriza 
government has shown is that you can win power on that prospectus, but you 
can’t govern from it. It now trails in all the polls, while the right is once 
again re-ascendant.

Glibly, I don’t understand why you want Labour to play the role of Syriza when 
it could play the role of New Democracy? But, more importantly, I think you’re 
approaching the free movement question from the wrong direction. Yes, there is 
heavy opposition to immigration. There’s also support for rent controls, which 
would make the housing crisis worse.

There is opposition to free trade deals which, for all their flaws, are better 
than trade wars and protectionism.

But with all of these, we take the wider imperative of running the economy. 
Immigration policy shouldn’t set macroeconomic policy. The best interest of 
Britain’s economy is to stay in the single market, and that should be Labour’s 
position.

Dear Stephen


I don’t want to get sidetracked with debates on elections elsewhere – suffice 
to say, I don’t think any of the examples we have discussed are 
straightforwardly about economics, and none provide a pro-immigration 
centre-left with much cause for comfort.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fshould-labour-campaign-to-curb-immigration%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fabf45fda4566669015c60f298ad17fece622e3f2%2F358_590_3285_1972%2F3285.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Should%20Labour%20campaign%20to%20curb%20immigration%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fshould-labour-campaign-to-curb-immigration%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Should%20Labour%20campaign%20to%20curb%20immigration%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fshould-labour-campaign-to-curb-immigration%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fabf45fda4566669015c60f298ad17fece622e3f2%2F358_590_3285_1972%2F3285.jpg>
 Marine Le Pen ‘appeals to the sense that France’s problems can be pinned upon 
the Muslim other’. Photograph: MESSYASZ/SIP/Rex/Shutterstock 
Let’s return to Brexit, which is why we are having this discussion at all. 
There are three broad paths the Brexit process could follow from here, and on 
none of them does it seem to me that a reflexive commitment to free movement is 
the best option for Labour.

The first path is a hard Brexit, with single market access and free movement 
both gone. In this event, even if Labour is committed to returning Britain to 
both, it will need an immigration policy for the intervening period.

The second is fudged Brexit, with some forms of single market access retained, 
and some reforms on free movement introduced. Labour will need to decide what 
it thinks of such reforms: which would it retain? Which would it change? Which 
would it abandon?

The third path is soft Brexit, where the core elements of both the single 
market and free movement are retained. This would leave Labour once again 
needing to defend the free movement principle on similar terms to before the 
referendum, except now from voters who will feel their referendum vote to end 
it has been ignored.

Glibly, in none of these situations does it seem to me that putting “free 
movement is in our best economic interests” on a Post-it note is the optimal 
opposition approach. Labour should, at the very least, have a clear sense of 
the kind of immigration policy it would want if free movement were abandoned.

Even if this policy never gets adopted, debating the alternatives will provide 
Labour with a clearer set of positive arguments for the principle itself. At 
present, many on the left just defend it as an unlovely side-effect of a 
necessary trade policy – as, indeed, you have done here. “We don’t like it but 
we are going to have to go along with it” is not a great offer to voters, nor 
is it one recent evidence suggests they are minded to accept.

You also make another important pair of errors that are common on the left: 
equating free movement with immigration and characterising opposition to 
immigration as both monolithic and ill-informed. Free movement is unpopular. 
Some immigration is, too, but an awful lot is not. And voters are more 
pragmatic and flexible than you give them credit for. A more popular and 
sustainable left approach to immigration is possible. But only if Labour is 
willing to consider the options.



Dear Rob


 I don’t think it particularly matters if immigration in general is more 
popular than the free movement of labour. Only one is the price we pay to keep 
Britain in its biggest market, to maintain the primacy of the City of London as 
a financial centre, the success of our universities as both as contributors to 
research and as a great British export, and to maintain an open and untroubled 
border between Northern Ireland and the Republic.

There is far more at stake in leaving the single market than the mere question 
of whether or not Labour wins the next election. I agree that there are “three 
Brexits” and that each makes freedom of movement a tricky cross for Labour to 
bear. I agree, too that it’s difficult for the centre-left to win power in 
Britain supporting free movement. What you seem unwilling to accept are the 
severe limitations on the centre-left to wield that power in a failing economy.

You can’t have a fairer society if you don’t have a strong economy. If Labour 
sacrifices the pursuit of the latter to get the former, it will secure neither.

I also think you’re trying to have your cake and eat it, too, by saying that 
voters “are more pragmatic and flexible” than I give them credit for, while at 
the same time rejecting the idea that they can be won over to an argument based 
around giving up something you want in order to get something you need. That is 
the everyday calculation of most people’s lives; it’s not a difficult concept. 
Ultimately, the political success of austerity shows there is a majority to be 
found for the idea of shared sacrifice for the common good. The left needs to 
focus on building that case, not sacrifice its future to make a short-term 
problem go away.

Dear Stephen


Like you, I would much rather we were not having the discussion at all. Like 
you, I would much prefer to live in the world where my fellow citizens had 
voted to remain in the EU. But they didn’t, so I don’t. I fear you are also 
trying to have your cake and eat it, too – while acknowledging the reality of 
the Brexit vote, the only world you are willing to contemplate or discuss is 
the one where no meaningful Brexit occurs.

You are right that Brexit may well leave us economically worse off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/13/brexit-britain-cost-divorce-bill-questions-answered-uk>
. I agree that this puts the centre-left in a worse position as and when it 
takes power. Yet the terms on which the left takes power are out of its hands 
for now. It looks pretty likely that the process of Brexit, on whatever terms, 
will be well advanced by the time any government takes over.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Ffrancois-hollande-uk-must-pay-price-for-brexit-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fran%C3%A7ois%20Hollande%3A%20UK%20must%20pay%20price%20for%20Brexit%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Ffrancois-hollande-uk-must-pay-price-for-brexit-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fran%C3%A7ois%20Hollande%3A%20UK%20must%20pay%20price%20for%20Brexit%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Ffrancois-hollande-uk-must-pay-price-for-brexit-video&media=>
François Hollande: UK must pay price for Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/oct/07/francois-hollande-uk-must-pay-price-for-brexit-video>
I agree that voters may well be won round by arguments about the economic 
costs of Brexit. Labour can, and should, make that case as strongly as 
possible. But it seems, at present, unlikely that such a turnaround in public 
opinion will be swift and sharp enough to halt the process of Brexit entirely. 
What you seem to reject is any preparation for a world where Labour needs an 
immigration policy for a Britain entirely outside the EU, or hovering on 
Europe’s fringes. Yet that is the likeliest world the next Labour government 
will inhabit, even if it eventually succeeds in reversing this position.

Labour needs to think hard about what a progressive immigration policy in that 
world should look like. I am optimistic that such a vision could win over a 
broader electoral coalition, and could help to end (or at least ease) Labour’s 
long-running neurosis on this issue. If Labour does nothing, the field will be 
left to Theresa May and Paul Nuttall to define the terms of post-Brexit 
immigration policy. Britain’s voters deserve better than that.

Rob Ford is professor of political science at the University of Manchester and 
the author of Revolt on the Right (Routledge). Stephen Bush is special 
correspondent at the New Statesman
 