 My favourite memory of Sir Raymond Firth, emeritus professor of anthropology 
at London University, who has died aged 100, is of him talking animatedly with 
young graduate students about to go off on their first field work. His eyes 
twinkled, his body danced with the stimulation of the conversation; he would 
listen, comment, criticise, advise and suggest further avenues of investigation 
and further reading.
That was more than a decade ago. He was then approaching his 90s, and had been 
retired for more than 20 years. But it made no difference; he was still 
behaving in exactly the same way he had with similar students, including 
myself, some 30 years earlier - helpful, delighted and involved.

At the time of his death, Firth was, without doubt, the most distinguished 
living British anthropologist. Like some other leading figures from the golden 
years of their subject, between 1930 and 1950, his interest in non- European 
cultures probably owed more to the experiences of his formative years with 
subject peoples, particularly New Zealand Maoris, than he cared to admit. His 
study of the people of the small Polynesian island of Tikopia was clearly his 
greatest achievement. Singlehandedly, he created a British form of economic 
anthropology, which is still thriving.

Firth's long career is fairly typical of the subject, but highly unusual for 
an academic. He was born into a Methodist family in Auckland - he never touched 
alcohol until he arrived in London - where his father, who lived to be 104, was 
a builder with Lancashire roots. New Zealand was then a frontier society. In 
CurrentAnthropology <https://www.theguardian.com/education/anthropology> (vol 
29, no 2), Firth described going to school barefoot on horseback, and becoming 
a Sunday school teacher.

Most interestingly, he also describes his awareness of the Maori, "a people 
compressed from total ownership of the land into limited areas". Subsequently, 
he was to reject religion, but never the Maori and their Polynesian relatives. 
His first book, Primitive Economics Of The New Zealand Maori (1929), contains a 
brilliant discussion of their system of land tenure, making clear the 
immorality of the way in which they had been expropriated.

Firth was educated at Auckland grammar school and, in 1921, graduated in 
economics from what was then Auckland University College, where he also wrote 
his MA thesis, The Kaori Gum Industry (1924). In researching this project, he 
decided to do something quite unheard of for an economist; he went to talk to 
the miners about what they felt about their conditions and wages.

By then, he was already halfway to becoming an anthropologist, though when he 
came to the London School of Economics in 1924, it was to study economics. 
There he met Bronislaw Malinowski, who, with Alfred Radcliffe-Brown, with whom 
Firth was also associated, was the founder of modern British social 
anthropology; the conversion to anthropology was accompanied with a thesis on 
Maori materials.

In 1928, Firth set out for Tikopia, where he was to return on subsequent 
research trips throughout his life. His studies there led to nine books, the 
first of which was We The Tikopia: A Sociological Study Of Kinship In Primitive 
Polynesia (1936), and the most recent, Tikopia Songs (1990). There were also 
many articles. This work is, I believe, the most detailed and rich ethnography 
of any pre-literate group of people in the world.

At first sight, Firth's Tikopia seems very much in the Malinowskian mould, but 
in reality it is a very different enterprise to his teacher's work on the 
Trobriands of the Kiriwina islands of New Guinea. First, although no less 
theoretical, it is much less dogmatic. Secondly, it pays much more attention to 
the significance of individuals. For example, after reading Firth we know what 
kind of person the individual chiefs were, and what the significance of their 
personality was for the way things were done.

Such human details, which require intimate sympathy with the people studied, 
did not concern Malinowski, nor most anthropologists, unfortunately. But the 
warmth in the relationship between Firth and some Tikopians is very evident, 
and is clearly due to his attitude to others in general, and also perhaps to 
his early awareness of his Maori neighbours.

After that first period of field work on Tikopia, from 1928 to 1929, Firth 
taught and was acting professor at Sydney University (1930-32). The following 
year, he returned as a lecturer to the LSE, where, with minor interruptions, he 
remained - as reader from 1935, and professor from 1944 - until his retirement 
in 1968.

At first, he assisted Malinowski in the teaching of anthropology, but, little 
by little, he became a more independent figure, associated with the varied 
group of anthropologists trained at the LSE before and immediately after the 
war, which included Sir Edward Evans- Pritchard, Meyer Fortes, Audrey Richards 
and Jomo Kenyatta, as well as Sir Edmund Leach and the leading Chinese 
anthropologist and statesman Fei Hsiao-t'ung, both of whom were Firth's 
students.

Immediately before the war, Firth and his distinguished anthropologist wife 
Rosemary - a key influence - planned field work in China, but the Japanese 
invasion made this impossible, and, instead, they carried out research, from 
1939 to 1940, in a fishing village in Malaya. During the war, Firth worked for 
naval intelligence - writing Pacific island handbooks - and, from 1944 to 1945, 
was involved in setting up the colonial social science research council. He was 
still working for the Admiralty when he was promoted to his LSE chair, as part 
of the tentative rebuilding of the school after its wartime exile in Cambridge.

As professor, Firth transformed anthropology from a peripheral social science 
to a well-established subject with an undergraduate programme. He directed the 
theses of many leading anthropologists from many countries, and trained such 
people as Ernest Gellner, Terence Morris and Percy Cohen, who were to become 
leaders in cognate subjects such as sociology. He broadened the field of study 
of anthropologists through his book on the Malays, Malay Fishermen: Their 
Peasant Economy (1946) and his subsequent encouragement of the study of peasant 
societies. He even initiated the use of anthropological techniques for the 
study of middle-class England, as in his editing of Two Studies Of Kinship In 
London (1956).

Throughout this period, Firth developed what one might call a gentle criticism 
of the dominant structural functionalism of social anthropology by insisting on 
the importance of personal choice and flexibility in social life. Such an 
approach was to be taken up in more extreme, and perhaps less nuanced, form by 
such writers as Edmund Leach in this country and Fredrik Barth in Norway. This 
approach has often been attributed to the influence of economic theory on 
Firth's thinking, but perhaps it also owes much to these early contacts with 
the Maoris of his childhood and his evident sympathy for those he studied.

Firth was adviser to the Australian National University on the research school 
for Pacific studies (1948-52), and taught at many universities, including 
Stanford, Hawaii, British Colombia, Cornell, Auckland and Chicago.

Last year, he became a companion of the New Zealand Order of Merit, and this 
year the British Academy announced it was awarding him the first Leverhulme 
medal to be given to scholars of exceptional distinction in recognition of his 
"outstanding and internationally acknowledged contributions to 20th-century 
social anthropology".

Firth never ceased to be interested in the work of his successors, even though 
this might have been quite different from his own. British anthropologists, and 
many abroad, have lost an inspiring and delightful guide.

His wife, whom he married in 1936, died last year; he is survived by his son 
Hugh.

Â·Raymond William Firth, anthropologist, born March 25 1901; died February 22 
2002.
 