
I am standing with Sir Elton John 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/elton-john> in the lounge of his west London 
house looking at a wall hung with six black-and-white Cindy Sherman photographs 
from her seriesUntitled Film Stills. He is telling me how he came to own them. 
“I was sitting next to her at a dinner in New York for the New Museum and I 
said, ‘God, I love your stuff, Cindy, but it never comes up for sale.’ And she 
said, ‘I want a new house. I’ll sell you some artist’s prints’, and here they 
are, all six of them.”

Later, Nan Goldin <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/goldin>’s name 
comes up in conversation and he says that he owns a whole series of her work. 
“I remember going to Jay Jopling’s White Cube when it was in Duke St, in 
London, and I was walking around this whole room of Nan’s works and I said to 
Jay, ‘How can you buy just one of these?’ He said, ‘Well, buy the whole lot, 
then.’ I went, ‘How much?’, and he told me, and I said, ‘You’re on!’”

Not for the first time this afternoon, I find myself thinking what it must be 
like to be so famous and so connected and to have so much money that you can 
buy an entire exhibition of artworks if the fancy takes you. And yet Elton 
John, for all his wealth, celebrity and the access it grants him to the art 
world, is not, in his words, “an art trophy collector”. He buys what he loves 
and, since 1991, what he has loved most of all is photography.

When I was living with Bernie [Taupin] I had a poster of Glass Tears – I never 
imagined I would one day end up owning it

“I’d just gotten sober back then,” he says, referring to the long rehab that 
ended the years of chemical and alcohol-fuelled excess, “and it was like I was 
seeing with clear eyes. I was in a chateau in the south of France and David 
Fahey, who ownsa gallery in LA <http://www.faheykleingallery.com/>, showed me 
some prints byHerb Ritts  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/mar/13/herb-ritts-old-school-glamours-last-stand>
andHorst 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2014/may/02/horst-p-horst-the-king-of-fashion-photography-in-pictures>
 andIrving Penn <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/irving-penn> and that 
was it. Suddenly, I discovered something that I had been surrounded by for 
years and never noticed as an art form despite having had my portrait taken by 
the likes of Penn and[Richard] Avedon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/oct/02/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries1>
. I just flew into it and began to amass prints at auction and in private 
sales. It became the greatest passion I have outside of music.”

The extent of Elton John’s love for, and knowledge of, photography can be 
gauged by the 200 or so modernist works from his collection currently on 
display at Tate Modern in an exhibition calledThe Radical Eye 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-modern/exhibition/radical-eye-modernist-photography-sir-elton-john-collection>
. It traces the fertile experimentation of the period between 1920 and 1950 and 
includes iconic images by masters of the medium such asMan Ray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2012/sep/20/man-ray-portraits-in-pictures>
,Edward Weston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/aug/18/edward-weston-photography>
,André Kertész 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2014/nov/11/andre-kertesz-hungarian-photographer-in-pictures>
 andEdward Steichen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2014/oct/29/fashion-edward-steichens-trailblazing-vogue-photographs-vanity-fair-in-pictures>
. More revealing still, it includes many of their lesser known works as well as 
work by less famous names such asHarry Callahan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2012/jan/27/big-picture-harry-callahan-eleanor-barbara>
,Berenice Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/mar/10/berenice-abbott-science-photography-trailblazer>
,Imogen Cunningham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/picture/2013/nov/27/triangles-imogen-cunnigham-photography>
, Emmanuel Sougez and Paul Outerbridge. Curated by the Tate’s Shoair Mavlian 
with help from Newell Harbin, director of John’s entire collection of more than 
7,000 images, the show is divided into seven themes that range from portraiture 
to abstraction. In short, it is, quite apart from its link with the star, an 
exhibition that stands up as a deep and extensive exploration of what is 
arguably the most important period in the history of photography.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Felton-john-interview-i-collect-photographs-for-the-beauty-tate-modern-radical-eye%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b7a2c354c8c780683632460f31d651a62780e36%2F0_0_3500_2688%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sir%20Elton%20John%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20collect%20for%20the%20beauty%2C%20not%20the%20value.%20I%E2%80%99m%20in%20awe%20of%20these%20things%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Felton-john-interview-i-collect-photographs-for-the-beauty-tate-modern-radical-eye%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sir%20Elton%20John%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20collect%20for%20the%20beauty%2C%20not%20the%20value.%20I%E2%80%99m%20in%20awe%20of%20these%20things%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Felton-john-interview-i-collect-photographs-for-the-beauty-tate-modern-radical-eye%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b7a2c354c8c780683632460f31d651a62780e36%2F0_0_3500_2688%2F3500.jpg>
 Glass Tears, 1932, by Man Ray. John bought a vintage print in 1993. 
Photograph: © Man Ray Trust/ADAGP, Paris and DACS, London 2016 
“For me it’s the creative high point,” says John, “when artists like Man Ray 
andMoholy-Nagy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/aug/05/moholy-nagy-future-present-review-guggenheim-museum>
 were constantly pushing the boundaries of the form. In fact, I recently chose 
a Kertész photograph,Underwater Swimmer 
<http://www.getty.edu/art/collection/objects/55744/andre-kertesz-underwater-swimmer-american-negative-1917-print-1970s/>
, as the most important photograph of the 20th century because it has 
influenced so much art, from Hockney toMax Dupain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/picture/2016/jun/09/sunbaker-another-day-in-the-sun-for-max-dupains-classic-beach-photograph>
 to[Robert] Mapplethorpe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/robert-mapplethorpe>. Like many vintage 
prints I own, it is tiny, 32x45mm, and exquisite.”

Such restraint, I say, will surprise people.

“I know, I know, I’m not known for my restraint, but for me this collection is 
about love, not collecting for the sake of it or grandstanding. I often go 
around private galleries and collections and I see all the big obvious 
photographs by the masters, which are great, but I’m thinking, where is your 
personal selection? Where is the art that cost $150? Everything you see in the 
Tate was chosen by me. My curator will suggest stuff but nobody goes and 
collects on my behalf. I live with these works around me and they bring me 
great joy because every day I wake up and notice something new.”

Has he ever actually paid $150 for a photograph? “Yes! That’s the great thing 
about photography – you can walk into a gallery and see something that’s really 
beautiful and inspiring and it will cost you, well, 500 quid. I do that when I 
travel. I seek out new work. I don’t collect things for the value, I collect 
for the beauty. I’m in awe of these things.” He must have picked up some real 
bargains back in the early 1990s , though, before the current boom. “Oh God, 
yes. An Irving Penn colour vintage print will cost you $650,000 on today’s 
market. I just had a Penn I own valued at that amount. No one was more 
surprised than me. I went, ‘David! Have you seen this appraisal?’ He went, 
‘Wow!’ and I said, ‘It’s the one that’s hanging in the bathroom.’”

Today, there is no sign of his husband, David Furnish, who luckily also has a 
passion for photography – “I just bought him an amazing piece byChristopher 
Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/apr/28/dead-appealing-photographer-christopher-williams-whitechapel-gallery>
, whose work I’ve only just discovered.”

The Radical Eye review – Elton John's ravishing photography collection
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/nov/08/the-radical-eye-review-tate-modern-switch-house>
Elton John is one of those people who’s so famous that, when he enters the 
room, you find yourself thinking, is it really him? Dressed down today in a 
black Adidas tracksuit and pristine white trainers, and wearing tinted 
spectacles on his tanned face, he seems remarkably relaxed and eager to get 
down to business. This property, which he refers to as his second London home – 
the other, much grander one, is in Windsor – is a pied-a-terre in a mews in an 
exclusive west London neighbourhood. From the outside, it looks remarkably 
modest. Inside, too, by rock star standards, save for the art on display. 
Having shooed away two small, immaculately groomed pooches that appear 
alongside him, he leads me along the hallway into the dining room. The walls of 
both are lined with art and photography: we pass one filled with Irving Penn 
portraits, another dotted with black-and-white David Bailey prints of 60s 
icons, a vast Sam Taylor Wood recreation of the Last Supper, and at least two 
large triangular Hirsts – one filled with butterflies, the other with thousands 
of dead flies. Later, he will draw my attention to a crucifix made from 
scrubbing brushes that hangs on another wall. “It cost me a few quid in a 
market and I love it so much.”

Every surface holds crystal sculptures, evidence of his other obsession – rare 
glass. “I’m a huge collector of glass – I love it and feel it’s the last great 
underrated area of creativity,” he says, pointing to an insect created by the 
glass artist William Morris. “He was trained by Dale Chihuly at the Pilchuck 
Glass School. I went to visit him, which was interesting because he lives in 
the backwoods for days at a time and hunts with a bow and arrow. Amazing 
character and the most handsome man… I watched him work and it was stunning, 
just stunning.”

John is easygoing company and, disconcertingly, sounds like a regular bloke 
from Pinner even when talking about his wealth and the privileges it affords 
him. He is unselfconscious about his vast fortune and endearingly enthusiastic 
about his passions. “I’m self-taught. I read photography books and I keep up 
with all the prizes. I’m constantly on the look-out for new young artists to 
encourage, just as I am with music. [Three of the young artists from Atlanta 
turn up at his Tate private view the following evening.] I was very snobbish 
about colour photography at the start until I learned about Paul Outerbridge 
and how he did advertising to pay the rent. Then I got intoWilliam Eggleston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/william-eggleston> and William 
Christenberry, both southern photographers, and I became a big collector of 
contemporary colour work.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Felton-john-interview-i-collect-photographs-for-the-beauty-tate-modern-radical-eye%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa620de5457f8a1c50392744562edd4429ac1907d%2F0_0_3628_2568%2F3628.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sir%20Elton%20John%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20collect%20for%20the%20beauty%2C%20not%20the%20value.%20I%E2%80%99m%20in%20awe%20of%20these%20things%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Felton-john-interview-i-collect-photographs-for-the-beauty-tate-modern-radical-eye%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sir%20Elton%20John%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20collect%20for%20the%20beauty%2C%20not%20the%20value.%20I%E2%80%99m%20in%20awe%20of%20these%20things%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Felton-john-interview-i-collect-photographs-for-the-beauty-tate-modern-radical-eye%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa620de5457f8a1c50392744562edd4429ac1907d%2F0_0_3628_2568%2F3628.jpg>
 Underwater Swimmer, Esztergom, Hungary, 30 June 1917, by André Kertész. 
Photograph: © Estate of André Kertész/Higher Pictures 
Unlike many collectors, most of the vintage prints he owns are not secreted in 
a vault but displayed on the walls of his vast apartment in Buckwood, Atlanta, 
where he lives when he is not in Los Angeles or London or one of his holiday 
homes in Venice or the south of France. When I ask him how it feels to be back 
in post-referendum Britain, he grimaces. “You know, I don’t like it here at the 
moment, to be honest. I don’t like the hatred here. It’s like David said 
recently, it’s like a boil has been lanced that was there for a long time and 
suddenly all this hatred has come to the surface. People have been OK about gay 
marriage and things like that and suddenly they’re not. I have never, ever 
thought this of this country until now. I was always proud to come from here 
and to live here, because there are different opposing views about everything 
but it’s a pretty civilised place. At the moment, though, it’s not, and I don’t 
like it. It’s horrible.”

Unprompted, he mentions an editorial in last week’s edition of this paper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/06/high-court-ruling-brexit-not-sabotaging-parliamentary-democracy-best-deal-britain>
. “The greatest editorial I have read for a long time was in theObserver,” he 
says, brightening. “It was a fantastic piece about Brexit and the meanness in 
this country that has surfaced.”

We meet just two days before the American election and the surprise triumph of 
Donald Trump. When I mention Trump’s name, he shakes his head. “This election 
is like waiting to see if you’ve got cancer or not,” he says, letting out a dry 
laugh. “You’ve gone for the scan and you’re going to get the result in a few 
days. Trump is the only person I have ever known who can tell out-and-out lies 
and people just don’t seem to care. ‘I survived an assassination attempt.’ No 
you fucking didn’t. He tweeted it and his son tweeted it and it’s just lies. 
It’s like the world’s gone mad.”

He has been vocal in his condemnation of homophobia in Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/11/elton-john-condemns-homophobia-during-russian-concert>
, condemning it from the stage in concerts in St Petersburg and Moscow in 2014, 
and writing a message to Vladimir Putin on his website in which he described 
people he had met in Russian who were “decent, kind, patriotic men and women 
who had no thought of forcing their sexuality on anyone”. Does he feel 
pessimistic at the moment given the global rise of nationalism and populism and 
the attendant anti-gay rhetoric?

“I have to say I do. When you see what is happening in Russia and the African 
situation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/23/africa-homophobia-uganda-anti-gay-law>
, it’s pretty depressing. I remember going to Moscow when the gay scene was 
rampant and you’d go to this club in Moscow where nude boys would be swimming 
though a tank and stuff like that. Then the mayor of St Petersburg started 
taking books out of libraries and clamping down. It’s just extraordinary. We 
live in very strange times, but there are voices of reason and they need to be 
heard.”

When I was a child, my parents argued a lot, so I found comfort in objects and 
my collections were always pristine

One surprise in The Radical Eye show is the framing of the images, which is, 
well, a bit bling – gold and silver gilt rather than, as he puts it, “boring 
bloody black”. That will, I say, almost certainly annoy the purists. “Oh, they 
can fuck off,” he says. “All I am saying is, look at them in a different way – 
as magnificent works of art that should be magnificently framed.” I put it to 
him that Britain has been slow to accept photography as art. “I know. I know. 
For me, this country has always turned its nose up at photography and treated 
photography as the poor relation of art. That’s why I’m doing this show – I 
want people in England to see this incredible work and to look at it and 
discover photography as art. The very fact that I am having to say this is a 
bit ridiculous, but we’re stuck somehow. I just want people to react in awe and 
wonder, like I did when I first saw these works. I really hope they do.”

Was it his idea to call it The Radical Eye? He nods. “They initially said, we 
can’t call it that, the word radical has terrorist associations. I mean, for 
fuck’s sake!”

I ask him whether his sexuality has influenced his collecting? “Yes, of 
course! I also collect homoerotic prints, starting withMinor White 
<http://www.npr.org/2014/09/11/347426971/minor-white-who-lived-a-life-in-photographs-saw-images-as-mirrors>
 andGeorge Platt Lynes 
<http://www.robertmillergallery.com/george-platt-lynes-c1f6c>, both of whom 
feature in the show. Their work was incredibly risky at the time and they both 
got into a lot of trouble. Minor White got chastised for his beautiful male 
nude studies and so he started photographing plants and flowers and was never 
the same photographer again. These guys were pioneers in many ways. You can 
draw a line from them to Mapplethorpe.”

I know he collects Robert Mapplethorpe’s flowers series, but does he own any 
of the more extreme images, the ones that caused some of his work to beremoved 
from galleries in America 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/nov/17/robert-mapplethorpe-the-perfect-moment-25-years-later>
 in the Reaganite 1980s?

“I actually bought Jay Jopling [the art dealer and gallerist] the one of the 
fist up the arse,” he says, laughing. “I would love to get that back now. I do 
like edgy photographs.Larry Clark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/jun/05/larry-clark-tulsa-teenage-lust-photography-controversy>
 I love. I collectedAndreas Serrano 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/sep/28/andres-serrano-piss-christ-new-york>
 very early on. I have 10 works byJoel-Peter Witkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/feb/18/joel-peter-witkins-best-photograph-george-w-bush-the-raft-of-the-medusa-interview>
 and I want more. I was actually going to buy Richard Gere’s collection, which 
is the biggest, but it didn’t happen for some reason. I think Witkin is 
fantastic. His work is a bit like Hieronymus Bosch – you’re looking at them and 
thinking, how did you do this?”

I remind him of the controversy that erupted the last time he showed work from 
his photography collection, at the Baltic in Gateshead in 2007. A picture by 
Nan Goldin, entitledKlara and Edda Belly Dancing, Berlin (1998), was seized by 
the police the day before the exhibition opened after a complaint that it 
breached pornography legislation. It was later found not to be indecent by the 
Crown Prosecution Service. “Oh for fuck’s sake!” he explodes, when I bring it 
up. “I was so upset. Nan was so upset. I said, ‘Take the show down. This is so 
insulting.’ And you know who did it? Someone who worked for the gallery tipped 
the police off. He wanted to sabotage the show.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Felton-john-interview-i-collect-photographs-for-the-beauty-tate-modern-radical-eye%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9a3d75f90128be886370425de8a542e274c44d0%2F0_0_2160_1812%2F2160.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sir%20Elton%20John%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20collect%20for%20the%20beauty%2C%20not%20the%20value.%20I%E2%80%99m%20in%20awe%20of%20these%20things%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Felton-john-interview-i-collect-photographs-for-the-beauty-tate-modern-radical-eye%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sir%20Elton%20John%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20collect%20for%20the%20beauty%2C%20not%20the%20value.%20I%E2%80%99m%20in%20awe%20of%20these%20things%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Felton-john-interview-i-collect-photographs-for-the-beauty-tate-modern-radical-eye%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9a3d75f90128be886370425de8a542e274c44d0%2F0_0_2160_1812%2F2160.jpg>
 A Forgotten Model, c1937, by George Platt Lynes. Photograph: The Sir Elton 
John Photography Collection 
He shakes his head as if still baffled. “You know, with Nan’s work, I felt a 
deep personal connection. I remember walking around that White Cube show [work 
from her 2003 series,The Devil’s Playground] and thinking, ‘This is my life on 
the wall, this is my recovery, these are the people I lost from Aids.’ That’s 
why I bought it all. There was such an emotional connection. It was like the 
MunchScream but with a happy ending.” Does he have any of them on the walls at 
home? “No. It is tough to live with that sort of work, but I am glad I own it. 
I have a colour pic of her and Mapplethorpe in my kitchen in Atlanta, though. 
Every day as I’m having breakfast, I’m looking at Robert and Nan.”

That apartment must feel oddly empty at the moment. “Well, yes and no,” he 
says, laughing. “I mean, the Tate show is only the tip of a very large iceberg. 
I worked out that I could probably do 20 different shows of this scale on 
different themes – portraits, early colour, shadows. The apartment has actually 
grown to accommodate my collection. Initially, I had 2,500sq ft and then I 
bought the apartment next door to house the growing photography collection. Now 
I have 18,000sq ft of space – it’s covered mainly in photography but also 
houses 4,000 pieces of glass, 2,500 of which are big.”

He also collects themed photography series including portraits of Chet Baker, 
Igor Stravinsky, Francis Bacon and Salvador Dalí. He owns the biggest 
collection of 9/11 photographs in the world, some 2,000 in all, ranging from 
images made by amateur snappers on the ground to work by Magnum 
photojournalists. “I haveThe Falling Man 
<http://www.esquire.com/news-politics/a48031/the-falling-man-tom-junod/> [by 
Richard Drew],” he says, quietly. “It is one of the most beautiful and powerful 
and upsetting images ever. One side of the building in darkness, one side in 
light and this man falling in that perfect straight line, head first, out of 
the tower. It is the most beautiful photograph of the most painful, horrible 
thing. This is the power of photography, the dichotomy between tragedy and 
beauty. It makes you think about the thin line between death and life.”

Add to all this John’s ongoing collection of contemporary photojournalism, the 
large body of Australian photography he has accrued and a rapidly expanding 
contemporary collection that includes work byAlec Soth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/oct/06/alec-soth-gathered-leaves-photographer-uk-retrospective>
 and Todd Hido as well as rising stars likeAlex Prager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/jun/30/photography-alex-prager-best-shot>
 andEamonn Doyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/aug/06/eamonn-doyle-street-photography-dublin-portraits-on>
. Is there, I venture, an obsessive element to all this? He cracks up laughing. 
“Is there ever! I am so compulsive-obsessive. I recognise that. But it gives me 
so much genuine pleasure.”

I tell him I was pleasantly surprised to discover a whole room full of classic 
social documentary photography in the show alongside the portraits and the 
formal experimentation – work by the likes ofWalker Evans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/walker-evans>, Tina Modotti, Ilse Bing
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/aug/22/war-hungry-women-photographic-history-william-boyd>
 andDorothea Lange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/dec/06/dorothea-lange-biography-review>
. “It’s a genre I love because it’s that dichotomy between the beauty of the 
image and the suffering of the subject. I’m going to ruffle a lot of feathers, 
but I think that, with the exception of Lucian Freud, I think a portrait with a 
camera is always better than a portrait with a paintbrush. Look atMigrant Mother
 <http://loc.gov/pictures/resource/fsa.8b29516/> by Dorothea Lange – it’s just 
breathtaking. To me it’s like theMona Lisa, but with great suffering.”

The boys [Zachary and Elijah] both love art. We took Zachary to the Matisse 
chapel this year… he had the best time

Given that his late-flowering love of photography began in the wake of his 
late-flowering sobriety, has he, I ask, simply replaced one addiction – drugs 
and alcohol – with another – art and photography? He nods cheerfully. “It’s 
even more complex than that because I’m impulsive as well as compulsive. Before 
I’d gone into rehab, for instance, I was doing up my other house in Windsor and 
I suddenly realised that I was living in a cliched rock star’s house with gold 
discs on the wall and all that sort of stuff. It was weird because suddenly 
everything I had collected, except master paintings, I didn’t like any more. I 
didn’t like art nouveau, I didn’t like art deco. So, out it all went, sold at 
Sotheby’s. I sold all my classic cars. I sold all my paintings except for a 
Francis Bacon, a Patrick Proctor and two Magrittes.”

It turns out that his love of collecting precedes his wealth and fame. “I’ve 
always loved objects,” he told Jane Jackson – who sold her gallery in Atlanta 
and became the first director of his collection in 2003 – in an interview for 
The Radical Eye catalogue, “As a child, my parents argued a lot, so I found 
comfort in objects, and my collections were always pristine – my records, my 
toys, they were all beautifully kept.”

Was there art of any kind in his childhood home in Pinner back then? “Are you 
kidding me? We had those plaster plates with parrots painted on them. That was 
it, art-wise, in our house.”

His sons, Zachary and Elijah, are the opposite, I say, growing up in houses 
full of some of the world’s greatest art. He nods, smiling. “The boys both love 
art. We took Zachary to the Matisse chapel this year because he learned about 
Matisse in school. I tell you, he had the best time. Seriously. He loved it. 
When he was young, about eight or nine months, we took him around a Picasso 
exhibition in New York and when we came to any of the really wild ones, he went 
nuts. (He mimics a child roaring loudly and waving his arms about.) We were 
like, are you kidding me? It was instinctive.”

He falls silent for a moment and returns to his own youth. “When I became 
Elton John, I was still just a kid. I remember I was living with Bernie 
(Taupin, his longtime lyricist) and we had no money, but we’d have Athena 
reproductions of Man Ray on the wall. I even had a poster ofGlass Tears 
<http://www.getty.edu/art/collection/objects/37756/man-ray-larmes-tears-american-1930-1932/>
– I never ever imagined I would one day end up owning it.” Years later, in 
1993, he bought a vintage print ofGlass Tears for £112,500, setting a new 
auction price record for a single photograph. “I thought I’d lost my mind for a 
moment,” he chuckles, “but then I thought, no, I’m getting serious. I’m in it 
for the long haul now.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Felton-john-interview-i-collect-photographs-for-the-beauty-tate-modern-radical-eye%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5dcf7969b750190320c06e02c1e2cfad28a02e3%2F0_0_3045_3838%2F3045.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sir%20Elton%20John%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20collect%20for%20the%20beauty%2C%20not%20the%20value.%20I%E2%80%99m%20in%20awe%20of%20these%20things%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Felton-john-interview-i-collect-photographs-for-the-beauty-tate-modern-radical-eye%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sir%20Elton%20John%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20collect%20for%20the%20beauty%2C%20not%20the%20value.%20I%E2%80%99m%20in%20awe%20of%20these%20things%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Felton-john-interview-i-collect-photographs-for-the-beauty-tate-modern-radical-eye%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5dcf7969b750190320c06e02c1e2cfad28a02e3%2F0_0_3045_3838%2F3045.jpg>
 Nude, 1936, by Edward Weston. Photograph: 1981 Center for Creative 
Photography, Arizona Board of Regents 
Back then, photography was what the experts call a quiet area of the art 
market. Just six years later, though, another vintage print of the same 
photograph, of which there are only six in existence, became the first 
photograph to sell for over $1m. The rest is history, with the likes of Andreas 
Gursky and Cindy Sherman now fetching between $3-4m for a single print.

Sir Elton is as meticulous as he is obsessive. During a pre-opening walk 
around the Tate Modern show, the curator, Shoair Mavlian, tells me that Sir 
Elton’s vintage Man Ray prints are recognised as perhaps the most pristine in 
existence.

Are there are any masterpieces of photography that he covets, I ask.

“Not as many as you’d think. I’d love the Edward Weston of the woman lying 
naked in the dunes. I’ve had the chance to buy it, but I want the best print. 
Same withthe young boy holding the hand grenade 
<http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/works-of-art/2001.474/> by [Diane] Arbus. It 
sold for $450,000 recently, but it was a print that wasn’t made by her and it 
had coffee stains all over it.” He looks appalled. “I would never have anything 
like that in my collection. The slightest blemish is enough for me not to buy. 
Part of the beauty and the excitement for me, is to have the original print as 
it was when it was created and just to think of being there when it was made by 
a master like Man Ray or Weston. Can you imagine the thrill of that moment?” He 
thinks about this, enraptured. “It would be like being present in the sound 
booth when Aretha [Franklin] was recording Think. Oh my God! Just amazing.”

Elton John: 10 of the best
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/may/25/elton-john-10-of-the-best-bennie-and-the-jets>
Does he see any parallel between the golden age of analogue photography and 
the halcyon days of rock’n’roll? He nods. “I think so. The craft has been lost 
for a start. I was listening to some stuff in the Mercedes the other day, some 
Kings of Leon or something, and I thought, rock’n’roll is dead. It’s all the 
same and it’s not inspiring. And I’m someone who keeps up. I hear great 
Americana and great country, and lots of inventive electronic music, but no 
great new bands. It all comes out of a computer now and I hate the deadness of 
it. You disappear up your own arse with digital technology. That’s why I always 
record on analogue. I don’t care about the charts, I just do it now. I can’t 
get on the radio any more and you know what, neither should I. I’ve had my 
time, I want to make records that I like in the way that I like, so it’s 
analogue for me.”

In this age of Instagram, does he take photographs himself? “Nah, I can’t take 
a photograph to save my life. The singer John Grant is a great photographer, 
though he hasn’t published any yet. And Michael Stipe is fantastic. I’m not.”

Are there any great photographers whose work he doesn’t like? “I’m going to 
ruffle some more feathers, but I’m not keen onAnsel Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ansel-adams>. I find those big 
romantic American landscapes a bit too postcardy. They’re gorgeous and they’re 
great art, but, personally, they aren’t edgy enough for me.”

Has he thought about what will become of his collection in the fullness of 
time? “No. Never think about it. I’m too busy thinking of where to put the 
stuff I buy and what will happen if I ever decide to move. I tell you one thing 
– Pickfords will have a fucking field day!”

The Radical Eye: Modernist Photography from the Sir Elton John Collection 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-modern/exhibition/radical-eye-modernist-photography-sir-elton-john-collection>
 is at Tate Modern until 7 May. Elton John will be hosting The Radical Eye 
Dinner and Private View in aid of the Elton John Aids Foundation at Tate Modern 
on World Aids Day, 1 Dec. For more information call 020-7603 9996 orvisit 
ejaf.org <http://ejaf.org/>
 