



Player of the tournament

Michael Aylwin: George Kruis. Greatness emerges from Dorking. Kruis has been a 
relatively late developer, although not so late that he should not have played 
a major role in the World Cup. His work rate is phenomenal, his carrying hugely 
improved, and he ransacked the French lineout in Paris. England have always 
been well stocked with locks – and never more so than now. That Joe Launchbury 
can’t break into the team tells its own story. He’s come out of Horsham. 
Classic A24 rivalry.

England’s James Haskell and Robshaw get full marks as perfect six-and-a-halfs 
| Andy Bull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/mar/20/james-haskell-england-six-nations-rugby-chris-robshaw>
Andy Bull: Billy Vunipola No one has benefited more from Eddie Jones taking 
over the team.Vunipola says that Jones has helped him start to enjoy his rugby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/15/billy-vunipola-england-leader> 
again and, at the same time, he is fitter than he has ever been. The upshot was 
that Vunipola was named man-of-the-match three times in five games, an 
extraordinary run of form by any standards. Jones says Vunipola could grow into 
the best No8 in the world. He’s right.

Eddie Butler: George Kruis Commanding in the last two games, the ones that 
turned a solid recovery after the World Cup into prizes – a triple crown and a 
grand slam. Excellent in the air on both England’s throw and the opposition’s, 
and athletic on the hoof. Always good for 80 minutes, too.

Robert Kitson: George Kruis No one could possibly dispute the impact Billy 
Vunipola made in this championship but Kruis has been the consistent glue in 
England’s championship-winning pack. Along with his Saracens’ team-mate Maro 
Itoje, his lineout interventions in Paris proved pivotal in the grand slam 
decider and he is the most improved forward in Eddie Jones’s squad. France’s 
Guilhem Guirado and Scotland’s Stuart Hogg both deserve recognition, too.

Paul Rees: Billy Vunipola The England No8 started the tournament with a 
midfield burst at Murrayfield that scattered defenders, and never stopped. 
Fitness is no longer a concern and he now steps, offloads and thinks about his 
game. He will get even better.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fsix-nations-2016-guardian-writers-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe203dc3fce4f86ebd2e317c48a47a26a4bda318e%2F0_202_3784_2270%2F3784.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Six%20Nations%202016%20verdict%3A%20our%20writers%20give%20their%20highs%20and%20lows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fsix-nations-2016-guardian-writers-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Six%20Nations%202016%20verdict%3A%20our%20writers%20give%20their%20highs%20and%20lows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fsix-nations-2016-guardian-writers-awards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe203dc3fce4f86ebd2e317c48a47a26a4bda318e%2F0_202_3784_2270%2F3784.jpg>
 George Kruis was head and shoulders above the rest of the England squad. 
Photograph: JMP/REX/Shutterstock 
Favourite match

MA: Italy v Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/27/italy-scotland-six-nations-match-report>
. Things were starting to feel a little claustrophobic by the third Saturday. 
Although this championship has received worse press than it has deserved, the 
shadow of that Wales-France match the night before was long and doleful. But 
Scotland have been the most pleasing team to watch this championship, and this 
was the first of their two wins. Italy rose to the occasion, too. Both teams 
scored fine tries, and the result was not quite safe until Scotland’s brilliant 
try late on. A little gem.

AB: Scotland v France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/13/scotland-france-six-nations-match-report>
 France’s narrow win over Italy in the opening match had a more exciting 
finish, and I would have picked it if only Sergio Parisse’s drop kick had gone 
over in the final minute. But it sailed well wide. Instead, then, one the 
underdog did win. A match that swung to-and-fro, and was settled in the end, by 
a truly superb piece of skill from Stuart Hogg.

EB: England v Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/12/england-wales-six-nations-match-report>
 The home side must have been surprised at the lack of skill and spite in the 
challenge from the only other unbeaten team up to that point – and in their 
surprise England failed to drive home their patent advantage. It meant Wales 
were not buried with seven minutes to go, which allowed the wacky closing 
chapter to unfold.

RK: France v England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/mar/19/france-v-england-six-nations-live>
 Not for the quality, necessarily, nor the outcome. It was simply good to 
witness a competitive game on a good surface that gave everyone watching a 
timely reminder of why Six Nations grand slams are never easy to win. The 
post-match satisfaction in the eyes of England’s senior players also underlined 
that good things do eventually come to those prepared to wait long enough.

PR: No one stands out There was an anarchic quality to France’s victory over 
Italy, two teams trying to find out what it took to win. Overall, probably 
Scotland against France, although England’s first-half display against Wales 
stood out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fsix-nations-2016-guardian-writers-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9fb4924f26d19cb50a165a4141c7472f9a323fcf%2F423_39_2788_1674%2F2788.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Six%20Nations%202016%20verdict%3A%20our%20writers%20give%20their%20highs%20and%20lows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fsix-nations-2016-guardian-writers-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Six%20Nations%202016%20verdict%3A%20our%20writers%20give%20their%20highs%20and%20lows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fsix-nations-2016-guardian-writers-awards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9fb4924f26d19cb50a165a4141c7472f9a323fcf%2F423_39_2788_1674%2F2788.jpg>
 Stuart Hogg’s skill settled a to-and-fro match for Scotland against France. 
Photograph: David Davies/PA 
Best moment

Danny Care and Ben Youngs benefit from England’s attention to detail | Dean 
Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/mar/20/danny-care-ben-youngs-england-coaching-eddie-jones>
MA: The final whistle of the Wales v France match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/feb/26/wales-v-france-six-nations-2016-live>
. The Wales camp were offended by the reaction to their victory – and certainly 
it would be churlish to complain about the manner in which they gather their 
frequent wins these days. But we are allowed to call a mind-numbing game a 
mind-numbing game. George North’s try was hilarious in its construction. 
Guilhem Guirado’s consolation at the death was blunt-instrument coshing of the 
most dispiriting kind, mainly because it was so obviously in vain. Dispiriting 
is the word.


AB: Stuart Hogg’s deft flick overhead to put Tim Visser away in the far corner 
against France for one. Gareth Davies’ fine, flying try from 50m out against 
Scotland for two. But the pick of the lot would be Ireland’s fourth try against 
Italy, a team effort that took them from back in their own 22 to Italy’s 
try-line, 80m in all, covered in eight passes between seven players, who 
beating six tacklers along the way.

EB: The flick by Stuart Hogg over his head to Tim Visser for the try that sank 
France at Murrayfield. It gave Scotland a back-to-back win and handed the 
trophy to England – of which the Scotland full-back was presumably not aware as 
he played magician.

RK: Wales’s late comeback against England. In the end it did not quite happen 
but, for a stirring moment or two, Twickenham thought it might just be 
witnessing an improbable resurrection. If only the Welsh had turned up in the 
first half as well.

PR: The times Virimi Vakatawa received the ball on France’s wing. He had not 
played 15-a-side for more than two years having taken up sevens, but he made 
things happen; not always to his side’s benefit, but usually. He offered 
something different in an era of conformity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fsix-nations-2016-guardian-writers-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8d8a6df2588430125f84e6690d5ac07fe08eeb1%2F0_173_4164_2498%2F4164.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Six%20Nations%202016%20verdict%3A%20our%20writers%20give%20their%20highs%20and%20lows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fsix-nations-2016-guardian-writers-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Six%20Nations%202016%20verdict%3A%20our%20writers%20give%20their%20highs%20and%20lows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fsix-nations-2016-guardian-writers-awards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8d8a6df2588430125f84e6690d5ac07fe08eeb1%2F0_173_4164_2498%2F4164.jpg>
 France’s Virimi Vakatawa made things happen - though not always to the benefit 
of his side. Photograph: Christophe Ena/AP 
Biggest disappointment

MA: The fact that France are no longer even a disappointment. They just are 
the way they are, and the way they are is dull and incoherent. They can still 
rouse themselves, it appears, when England come calling in pursuit of a grand 
slam, but even then they were outscored three tries to nil. This tournament 
hasn’t been anywhere near as bad as some have complained, but France are the 
common denominator in the two worst matches by a distance. Bring in Georgia and 
Romania? Why not.

AB: That even at the end the championship still seemed to be suffering a 
hangover from the World Cup, when the gulf between the European teams and the 
four southern hemisphere sides seemed as wide as it has ever been. Even Eddie 
Jones sounded a little underwhelmed by his team’s achievement, describing it as 
“only a small step” before the Australia tour this summer. And he’s right, for 
all England have improved, theSix Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations> sometimes felt like a 
second-tier event.

EB: The Six Nations settled on the same old, same old – the familiarly tribal 
in winter. It was as if the World Cup had never happened – except as a low 
point to inspire England. There must be less painful incentives to give skills 
a chance to shine over contact, where concussion always lurked.


RK: Sergio Parisse missing the late drop-goal that would have given Italy 
victory over France. It would have been a champagne moment in another flat 
tournament for theAzzurri who endured a brace of heavy beatings in their final 
two games. A championship is only as strong as its weakest link and Italy’s 
woes make the continuing refusal to consider Georgia’s admission to the 
championship pyramid even more frustrating.

PR: Scotland’s opening 20 minutes against England at Murrayfield. They had so 
much build-up after nearly making the World Cup semi-finals but started with a 
whisper.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fsix-nations-2016-guardian-writers-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41310c39715eb2c12ec21d0d0116c0281acc2c9e%2F520_131_2607_1564%2F2607.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Six%20Nations%202016%20verdict%3A%20our%20writers%20give%20their%20highs%20and%20lows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fsix-nations-2016-guardian-writers-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Six%20Nations%202016%20verdict%3A%20our%20writers%20give%20their%20highs%20and%20lows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fsix-nations-2016-guardian-writers-awards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41310c39715eb2c12ec21d0d0116c0281acc2c9e%2F520_131_2607_1564%2F2607.jpg>
 Sergio Parisse attempts a drop goal against France. Photograph: 
INPHO/REX/Shutterstock 
One thing to change for 2017

Fast-finishing Celts serve up another feast on final day of Six Nations | 
Eddie Butler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/mar/20/six-nations-wales-italy-ireland-scotland>
MA: That more coaches follow Eddie Jones’s lead and speak their mind, 
whatever’s in it. Warren Gatland used to do it but he’s gone all melancholic 
and subdued. Even EJ took himself away for 10 days. People blame the press, but 
people get the press they deserve. Journalists are pussy cats compared to some 
of the slathering lunatics on social media. Let’s all cut these coaches a bit 
of slack when they say stuff that isn’t handed down to them by a media manager.

AB: For referees to stop endlessly re-setting scrums, and speed up the 
incessant TV referrals. More important than either of those though, is for the 
European teams to notch up a few wins in the summer tours and autumn 
internationals, so that in 2017 there is a genuine sense that whoever wins the 
Six Nations can claim to be up among the best teams in the world.

EB: “Why would we want to do that?” is the stock response of the Six Nations 
to any queries about change. The answer to its question to answer a question 
is: to make European rugby better. It is time to start laying plans for a 
play-off between the team that finishes last and one that tops the European 
Nations Cup. Chances of that happening? Slim to zero.

RK: Next season’s match schedule is set in stone but the championship is 
increasingly in danger of living on former glories. Just doing things the way 
they have always been done is far too complacent. Starting the tournament in 
better weather in March, discussing a promotion/relegation play-off or two 
divisions, encouraging more positive rugby … hopefully the age of enlightenment 
will dawn at some point.

PR: The weather. Perhaps the talks over a global season from the end of 2019 
will result in the Six Nations being played in March and April; dream on. And 
the disciplinary system.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fsix-nations-2016-guardian-writers-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8482507ff862a83d9a456cdca6a4ff1ed84ad7dd%2F135_467_4405_2644%2F4405.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Six%20Nations%202016%20verdict%3A%20our%20writers%20give%20their%20highs%20and%20lows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fsix-nations-2016-guardian-writers-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Six%20Nations%202016%20verdict%3A%20our%20writers%20give%20their%20highs%20and%20lows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fsix-nations-2016-guardian-writers-awards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8482507ff862a83d9a456cdca6a4ff1ed84ad7dd%2F135_467_4405_2644%2F4405.jpg>
 Scrums needed endless resetting during the tournament. Photograph: Tom Jenkins 
for the Guardian 
Michael Aylwin’s team of the tournament
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fsix-nations-2016-guardian-writers-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68134f834c041ef5cecf7d7ce5fc71621e5691a2%2F0_0_920_953%2F920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Six%20Nations%202016%20verdict%3A%20our%20writers%20give%20their%20highs%20and%20lows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fsix-nations-2016-guardian-writers-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Six%20Nations%202016%20verdict%3A%20our%20writers%20give%20their%20highs%20and%20lows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fsix-nations-2016-guardian-writers-awards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68134f834c041ef5cecf7d7ce5fc71621e5691a2%2F0_0_920_953%2F920.jpg>
 Michael Aylwin’s team of the tournament. Photograph: Guardian 
Five talking points from England’s Six Nations grand slam triumph
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/20/five-talking-points-england-six-nations-grand-slam>
MA: Quite a lot of Scots (four) for a side that came fourth and not many Welsh 
(one) for a side that came second. No apologies. Jamie Roberts was close, but 
this is a team of fresh faces. Duncan Taylor has been superb, and we want an 
Italian, so Michele Campagnaro is that man. Similar explanations for John 
Hardie over Sam Warburton and Virimi Vakatawa over George North. Special 
mentions for Jack McGrath, Gareth Davies - and our old friend Chris Robshaw.

Andy Bull’s team of the tournament
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fsix-nations-2016-guardian-writers-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa66353dec780ae60271c69e6c939271774e15a39%2F0_0_921_953%2F921.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Six%20Nations%202016%20verdict%3A%20our%20writers%20give%20their%20highs%20and%20lows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fsix-nations-2016-guardian-writers-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Six%20Nations%202016%20verdict%3A%20our%20writers%20give%20their%20highs%20and%20lows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fsix-nations-2016-guardian-writers-awards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa66353dec780ae60271c69e6c939271774e15a39%2F0_0_921_953%2F921.jpg>
 Andy Bull’s team of the tournament. Photograph: Guardian 
AB: Dan Biggar just pips Johnny Sexton at fly-half, partly because I saw so 
much more of Wales in this Six Nations. But even the little I caught of Ireland 
was enough to know that CJ Stander was superb, and so he holds off Chris 
Robshaw at No6. I love Gareth Davies’ speed over the ground and his ability to 
finish, so he’s at scrum-half, where there is real strength in depth across the 
tournament.

Eddie Butler’s team of the tournament
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fsix-nations-2016-guardian-writers-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd461b2001c227f9ce39099a811c8a60d6df56e23%2F0_0_921_950%2F921.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Six%20Nations%202016%20verdict%3A%20our%20writers%20give%20their%20highs%20and%20lows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fsix-nations-2016-guardian-writers-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Six%20Nations%202016%20verdict%3A%20our%20writers%20give%20their%20highs%20and%20lows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fsix-nations-2016-guardian-writers-awards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd461b2001c227f9ce39099a811c8a60d6df56e23%2F0_0_921_950%2F921.jpg>
 Eddie Butler’s team of the tournament. Photograph: Guardian 
EB: I would make Dylan Hartley captain, but have to find room for a Frenchman 
(don’t I?) … so he’ll have to do the job off the bench.

Robert Kitson’s team of the tournament
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fsix-nations-2016-guardian-writers-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d5aaa1c38e10f4d922bedb0190e0d0e86a43287%2F0_0_920_952%2F920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Six%20Nations%202016%20verdict%3A%20our%20writers%20give%20their%20highs%20and%20lows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fsix-nations-2016-guardian-writers-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Six%20Nations%202016%20verdict%3A%20our%20writers%20give%20their%20highs%20and%20lows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fsix-nations-2016-guardian-writers-awards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d5aaa1c38e10f4d922bedb0190e0d0e86a43287%2F0_0_920_952%2F920.jpg>
 Robert Kitson’s team of the tournament. Photograph: Guardian 
RK: A harsh call on, among others, Wales’s Rhys Webb, Taulupe Faletau and 
Jonathan Davies, as well as Ireland’s CJ Stander, England’s James Haskell, 
Virimi Vakatawa of France and the Italian centre Michele Campagnaro, but it is 
hard to argue with England’s right to the majority share. Next year’s Lions 
selection will be fascinating.

Paul Rees’s team of the tournament
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fsix-nations-2016-guardian-writers-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0524143b117dfeff9291f1d12b9c7d7cf319bec6%2F0_0_919_952%2F919.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Six%20Nations%202016%20verdict%3A%20our%20writers%20give%20their%20highs%20and%20lows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fsix-nations-2016-guardian-writers-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Six%20Nations%202016%20verdict%3A%20our%20writers%20give%20their%20highs%20and%20lows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fsix-nations-2016-guardian-writers-awards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0524143b117dfeff9291f1d12b9c7d7cf319bec6%2F0_0_919_952%2F919.jpg>
 Paul Rees’s team of the tournament. Photograph: Guardian 
RK: No half-backs stood out, although a few scrum-halves had their moments. 
Perhaps there should be more Englishmen, but they played as a team while their 
rivals relied more on individuals.
 