
Deep down, what we all want to be able to do is travel back in time. Kill 
Hitler, that sort of thing. Smoke on the tube again. Lead a revolution, buoyed 
to power by a foreknowledge of antibiotics and electricity. And while we all 
know the truth about time travel – that we would soon get bored without our 
apps and be too afraid to have sex with anyone in case they turned out to be 
our great-great-great-great-grandfather – it’s fun to fantasise, at least, 
isn’t it?

Or is it? Because the BBC’s latest take on the past, Six Wives With Lucy 
Worsley, makes me crave nothing but the future, gleaming chrome and hovercars 
and sex robots, and none of this awful, tedious history we’re lumbered with 
instead.

The thing with TV history is that we’ve basically pecked the carcass clean of 
all the meat – wars, murders, sex and death – and now we’re left with those 
sort of weird clear bones and bits of thin ligament and grease and stuff you 
have on a plate in the fridge under clingfilm afterwards. That clingfilm grease 
plate is basically Six Wives: a three-part straw-clutch focusing on Henry 
VIII’s variously doomed women, starting with his 24-year marriage to Catherine 
of Aragon and then moving to the painful three-year political chess game he 
played to make it OK to marry Anne Boleyn.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeL-0sEO8660&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeL-0sEO8660>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeL-0sEO8660&media=>
It is my sad duty to announce that the series contains acting. This is in 
order to liven up proceedings. To make it feel like olden days, actors swish 
around in period dress delivering intense dialogue only vaguely directed at 
each other, as Worsley, clad in a simple maiden’s cloth cap, watches rapt in 
the background. It’s weird: the historian peeks around corners, eavesdrops on 
romantic encounters, tends to fires as people storm across rooms. As Henry’s 
pursuit of a son becomes an ever more intense narrative, you keep expecting 
Worsley to pop her head up into a stiffly acted sex scene and shout-whisper “HE 
REALLY WANTS A BOY ONE” to the camera.

Essentially, it’s Game Of Thrones without any of the good bits where someone 
gets killed by a dragon, and on a much lower budget, and also the actor playing 
Henry has clearly only been briefed “just laugh under your breath a lot and 
seem as if you’ve never heard of emotion”. There are flaws.

But then, what can you really do with history? When actors aren’t dramatically 
lighting candles in old draughty houses, Worsley does all the TV historian due 
diligence – walks around Granada, where Catherine spent her childhood, squints 
against the horizon and imagines “what life would have been like here”; does 
some enthusiastic hand gestures in modern-day London; goes to the Vatican and 
says “Wow” as an Italian woman in white gloves runs her finger over some love 
letters Henry sent to Anne – but history, when beheld via a series of dry old 
artefacts, can be truly hard to relate to.

Yet is Six Wives’s overarching dramatic flashback concept any better? No. 
Worsley – a charming, knowledgable, enthusiastic presenter – basically spends 
one hour very slowly and carefully polishing a turd, that turd being “the 
subject of history”. See her in a servant’s costume cheerfully recount the 
horrors of Tudor childbirth while holding a silver bowl of apples, and know 
that there’s not much further for this genre to go. TV history programmes are – 
wait for it, wait for it –history.

Wednesday, 9pm, BBC1
 