
1) Tuilagi’s tackle on North spared England an examination

 A day of discovery and breakthrough and near breakdown. Maro Itoje and George 
Kruis were outstanding,individually and as a pair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/mar/13/eddie-jones-england-maro-itoje-george-kruis-six-nations>
, and Twickenham could break into song early, so tight was the home team’s 
grip. Roll back the years; the pack was mighty and the backs were flowing. What 
could possibly go wrong? Nothing in the end, but this was a scramble to the 
finish, a reduction of ordered systems to chaos. England’s resolve was stronger 
than their structures and they held out and the grand slam is within reach … 
but imagine the inquest into this if George North had not been pushed out of 
play by Manu Tuilagi. Postmortems by definition have a certain finality to 
them, but this one would have spelled out – line by line, position by position 
– the end for an entire generation. As it is,Paris here England come 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/12/grand-slam-england-wales-eddie-jones-six-nations>
, heads high and a spring in their step.Eddie Butler

• England win Six Nations after Scotland beat France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/13/england-win-six-nations-scotland-france>
• Jones keeps England focus on grand slam in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/13/eddie-jones-england-six-nations-grand-slam-france>
• Wales’ Francis cited for incident with England’s Cole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/13/wales-tomas-francis-cited-england-dan-cole-six-nations>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fsix-nations-grand-slam-is-on-for-england-says-coach-eddie-jones-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F3%2F13%2F1457865991548%2FKP_1835875_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Six%20Nations%20grand%20slam%20is%20on'%20for%20England%2C%20says%20coach%20Eddie%20Jones%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fsix-nations-grand-slam-is-on-for-england-says-coach-eddie-jones-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Six%20Nations%20grand%20slam%20is%20on%27%20for%20England%2C%20says%20coach%20Eddie%20Jones%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fsix-nations-grand-slam-is-on-for-england-says-coach-eddie-jones-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F3%2F13%2F1457865991548%2FKP_1835875_crop_640x480.jpg>
Grand slam is on for England, says Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/mar/13/six-nations-grand-slam-is-on-for-england-says-coach-eddie-jones-video>
. 
2) Wales must learn to dominate rather than simply fight back

It is part of the Warren Gatland way to keep pushing his players, to make them 
ask questions of themselves. This was an exam teaser taken to a ludicrous 
level: how far down can you lot gobefore you kick for the surface 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/mar/12/england-wales-twickenham-nightmare-six-nations>
; how bad can you be before you start to play? Perennially sluggish at the 
start of campaigns and games, Wales have been set this question before. The 
answer? Way down and too bad for belief. The supplementary poser: how are you 
going to redeem yourselves? By believing, coach, that the impossible is 
possible. Watch this. The difference between Wales at 73 minutes and in the 
opening exchanges was massive. From the disjointed and ponderous to 
fleet-footed and coordinated. Next question: is there any danger of you 
swapping the numbers? Seventy-three minutes of dominance against seven of 
misery? Answer: not sure, coach.EB

• Match report: England 25-21 Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/12/england-wales-six-nations-match-report>
• Paul Rees: five talking points from Twickenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/mar/13/five-talking-points-six-nations-twickenham>
• Scrum-half Davies expects ‘harsh words’ after loss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/13/wales-england-six-nations>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fsix-nations-talking-points-fourth-round-rugby-union%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb8881edb08e0127937c81cd73cdd42fc67732e7%2F53_176_4472_2684%2F4472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Six%20Nations%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20fourth%20round%20of%20matches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fsix-nations-talking-points-fourth-round-rugby-union%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Six%20Nations%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20fourth%20round%20of%20matches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fsix-nations-talking-points-fourth-round-rugby-union%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb8881edb08e0127937c81cd73cdd42fc67732e7%2F53_176_4472_2684%2F4472.jpg>
 Rhys Webb and Liam Williams take stock after Wales’ late fightback fell short 
against England. Photograph: JMP/Rex/Shutterstock 
3) Scotland have plenty of options in midfield

It’s worth pointing out that the defeat to Scotland was France’s heaviest in 
this Six Nations. Admittedly, the other one – by Wales – was only two points 
narrower, but an 11-point margin flattered France more thanthe nine-point 
deficit in Cardiff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/26/wales-france-six-nations-match-report>
. Scotland were strangely off against England, but lost by only six, and had 
Wales in some bother before succumbing to a four-point defeat that looked about 
right. By the above logic, a win in Dublin next weekend is far from out of the 
question. Of all the improvements in their game, one area that is thriving in a 
way not so traditionally Scottish is the midfield. Duncan Taylor has been 
building quite a reputation at Saracens of late, but now he’s taking his 
reputation to the international stage. A couple of years ago, Scott Johnson 
hailed Matt Scott and Alex Dunbar as a centre pairing for the ages. Then we 
thought it might be Scott and Mark Bennett. Here it was Dunbar and Taylor, 
while Peter Horne stepped in at No10 for Finn Russell and played a blinder. His 
favourite position? Centre. Scotland don’t lack options.Michael Aylwin

• Match report: Scotland 29-18 France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/13/scotland-france-six-nations-match-report>




4) France still have the quality to spoil England’s party

There are plenty of reasons to criticise France these days, but under Guy 
Novès, ambition isn’t one of them. Their main problem is that ambitious rugby 
is the last thing they should be attempting in their current state of 
mediocrity. They’re miles ahead as the top offloaders this championship, and 
they added another 14 to their tally against Scotland. But they also turned the 
ball over 14 times, and plenty of those were knock-ons. They carried the ball 
85 times, which means they turned the ball over once for every six of those. 
They held possession for 40% of roughly 35 minutes ball in play, which means 
they turned the ball over once every minute they had it. Still, however much 
their form is failing to live up to their intentions at the moment, they’re not 
mugs. Their first try against Scotland, in particular, was beautifully worked. 
Everyone knows that when the French click, they can tear anyone apart. Paris 
next Saturday, anyone?MA

• Scotland 29-18 France – as it happened 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/mar/13/scotland-v-france-six-nations-live>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fsix-nations-talking-points-fourth-round-rugby-union%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd28df686ae7647b289e010e7e7106043a459d712%2F0_0_2800_1939%2F2800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Six%20Nations%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20fourth%20round%20of%20matches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fsix-nations-talking-points-fourth-round-rugby-union%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Six%20Nations%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20fourth%20round%20of%20matches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fsix-nations-talking-points-fourth-round-rugby-union%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd28df686ae7647b289e010e7e7106043a459d712%2F0_0_2800_1939%2F2800.jpg>
 France coach Guy Novès has overseen ambitious but inconsistent performances in 
the Six Nations this year. Photograph: Adrian Dennis/AFP/Getty Images 
5) Schmidt goes some way to answering his critics

Dropping Stuart McCloskey – perhaps Ireland’s best player in defeat to England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/27/england-ireland-six-nations-match-report>
 – and retaining Devin Toner and Donnacha Ryan ahead of the claims of Ultan 
Dillane, Ireland’s coach was criticised by many fans for his apparently 
conservative team selection against an Italy side they should have been able to 
cut loose against. Well, cut loose they did and their fourth try, a brilliant 
team effort and the best score of the tournament to date that started with 
Simon Zebo exploding from his 22 and ended with Jamie Heaslip’s powerful 
finish, quietened the critics. Italy’s weakened side is some caveat but 
Ireland’s game was at its most expansive since Brian O’Driscoll’s heyday and it 
brought reward, in the form of nine tries: a record for them in the Six 
Nations. Schmidt is a shrewd enough coach to know that this is the approach the 
world’s best teams take rather than an anomaly;Argentina gave them a first-hand 
lesson in that during the World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/18/ireland-argentina-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
. Their final game of the tournament is against Scotland, who these days play 
with similar ambition and intent. The teams owe it to the tournament to make it 
a cracker.Dan Lucas

 * Match report: Ireland 58-15 Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/12/ireland-italy-six-nations-match-report>

 * Cronin warns Ireland not to get carried away 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/13/ireland-sean-cronin-big-win-italy-six-nations-rugby-union>



6) Calls for Italy’s demotion are unfair despite thrashing

Yes, this was an embarrassingly one-sided match that looked all too familiar 
to those who have seen Italian clubs in the Pro12 of late. And yes, Italy are 
now condemned to an 11th wooden spoon in 17Six Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations> tournaments. With a record that 
now reads P84 W12 D1 L71, calls will be renewed for the introduction of 
promotion and relegation; however this is not entirely fair. The Italians have 
improved immensely since a dismal 2015. Their effervescent style of play has 
brightened up a largely turgid tournament and they have looked impressive even 
in defeat – something that will sound familiar to Scotland fans. They were 
second-rate against, and mercilessly slaughtered by, Ireland on Saturday but 
this match should be seen as an outlier rather than a reflection on this team. 
Leonardo Ghiraldini and Martin Castrogiovanni were unavailable through injury 
and suspension respectively, and Lorenzo Cittadini withdrew the night before 
the match. The pack was further weakened by early injuries to George Biagi and 
Marco Fuser, while their world-class No9, Edoardo Gori, was also absent and 
they missed their conduit between forwards and backs. No team, never mind one 
so lowly-ranked as Italy, would have beaten Ireland with those losses. They 
have a number of exciting young players coming through and a new coach – 
presumably the excellent Conor O’Shea – will arrive this summer. The relegation 
argument is one to be had but, even after a 43-point thrashing, Italy have a 
defence.DL

• Ireland 58-15 Italy – as it happened 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/mar/12/ireland-v-italy-six-nations-live>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fshould-italy-be-relegated-from-the-six-nations-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F3%2F9%2F1457538876634%2FKP_1831682_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Should%20Italy%20be%20relegated%20from%20the%20Six%20Nations%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fshould-italy-be-relegated-from-the-six-nations-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Should%20Italy%20be%20relegated%20from%20the%20Six%20Nations%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fshould-italy-be-relegated-from-the-six-nations-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F3%2F9%2F1457538876634%2FKP_1831682_crop_640x480.jpg>
Should Italy be relegated from the Six Nations? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/mar/10/should-italy-be-relegated-from-the-six-nations-video> 