
The combination of teenagers, violence, drugs and premarital sex has always 
been enough to push American audiences over the edge. From the moral panic 
surroundingA Clockwork Orange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/20/clockwork-orange-kubrick-arthouse>
 toLarry Clark’s Kids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/22/harmony-korine-kids-20th-anniversary>
 in the mid-90s andGirls in the last decade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/21/rabidly-sexist-lena-dunham-language-rules-feminists>
, stories of young people being “out of control” have intrigued and dismayed 
censors and the general public for decades.

Now Norwegian web-drama Skam is about to enter the arena of teen tales that 
may produce palpitations, with the remake set to hit US screens (renamed Shame) 
via American Idol producerSimon Fuller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/simon-fuller>. On the face of it, Skam seems 
like an obvious investment for someone who has made his money from backing
largely youth-driven successes that others didn’t see coming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/07/the-spice-girls-at-20-women-werent-allowed-to-be-like-that-in-public>
. It’s the latestNordic TV hit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/25/modus-new-scandi-noir-drama-takes-genre-in-a-new-direction>
 (which thankfully can’t have“noir” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jan/29/fortitude-sky-atlantic> 
attached to it), a show which one-fifth of Norway’s population watched weekly. 
It cleverly gave its characters real-life Instagram accounts, and garnered a 
following so committed to getting the message out that fans translated the show 
for English speakers themselves andhounded journalists to write about it 
<http://www.dazeddigital.com/artsandculture/article/33790/1/the-risque-norwegian-tv-series-causing-teen-hysteria>
.


Shame: a Scandi TV sensation for the social media generation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/04/shame-skam-norway-teen-tv-drama-social-media-sensation>
The show’s episodes, which range from 20 to 50 minutes, slowly reveal the 
world of a group of 16-year-olds in an Oslo high school, with clips posted at 
the time of day the events are supposed to be happening. It’s already three 
seasons deep (all are available online viaNRK’s site 
<https://tv.nrk.no/serie/skam>), with each series focusing on a particular 
teenager from a group of makeshift friends. Eva, the protagonist of season one, 
has doubts about her boyfriend Jonas’s commitment to her; in season two Noora 
deals with her feelings for hard-to-read alpha male William; and in season 
three Isak comes to terms with his own sexuality. It may not sound that 
revolutionary, but it’s the frankness and calmness with which these subjects 
are dealt with that make Skam something special.

Aesthetically it’s beautiful, with vistas of Norway that would turn an editor 
ofCabin Porn pine green with envy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jan/04/cabin-porn-hideaways-gucci-furry-loafers-prada-coat-fashion-log-cabin>
. But beneath theKanken backpacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2012/feb/09/scandinavian-brands-anti-cool>
, the grassroots marketing and the perfectlyhelixed beanie hats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/nov/18/hipster-hats-the-art-of-helixing-harry-styles>
, there is a drama that’s hard-hitting without ever feeling like it’s falling 
over itself to deal with “issues”. There isn’t the same contrived controversy 
that came withSkins <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/skins> or “voice 
of a generation” baggage that followed Girls around. Its closest relative is 
probably Australian seriesHeartbreak High 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jan/15/the-family-law-review-an-affectionate-and-comedic-look-at-asian-australians>
, which presented a gritty but humorous look at life in a Sydney high school in 
the mid-90s. Like that show, the home lives of the students are just as 
important as the life lessons dished out in the schoolyard, with absentee 
parents getting as much flak as the kids on screen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fskam-us-remake-shame-norwegian-teen-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F909368e6f2f0e174ea250ce7eff3d82edf80a0c9%2F31_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Skam%3A%20the%20Norwegian%20hit%20that%20could%20take%20US%20TV%20into%20uncharted%20territory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fskam-us-remake-shame-norwegian-teen-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Skam%3A%20the%20Norwegian%20hit%20that%20could%20take%20US%20TV%20into%20uncharted%20territory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fskam-us-remake-shame-norwegian-teen-show%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F909368e6f2f0e174ea250ce7eff3d82edf80a0c9%2F31_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 ‘I told you no more helixing!’ … Jonas and Eva in season one of Skam 
Photograph: NRK 
It’s refreshing to watch a show about teenagers where the protagonists aren’t 
self-obsessed cliches. There are certain tropes: Vilde is the naive, socially 
awkward striver, for example, but mostly the characters are realistically 
flawed young people dealing with growing up. When issues do arise, they’re 
often punctured before they’re allowed to approach anything resembling a moral 
lesson, as when a teen pregnancy storyline is suddenly hijacked by the school 
nurse, whose bleak jokes about menstruationcould come straight from a Sarah 
Silverman routine <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sarah-silverman>. 

Vilde’s constant foot-in-mouth comments around Sana, a confident, nonchalant 
Muslim girl, are treated as low-hanging fruit, with Sana knocking back cliche 
after cliche about howMuslims are perceived by some in Norway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/aug/01/norway-muslim-immigrants-classes-western-attitudes-women-video>
 rather than descending into a pit of despair. Likewise, Isak’s story begins as 
one we think we’ve seen before, the best friend of the confident kid (in this 
case, Jonas), who might finally find his feet. But that trope is destroyed by 
the end of the first season when it becomes clear something else is going on. 
Subtle hints are dropped about storylines throughout, but with so much to keep 
an eye on, it’d be hard for asub-Reddit plot predictor to call most of these 
twists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/30/westworld-wild-fan-theories-about-sci-fi-tv-series>
.

The challenge for the US version will be how to translate that nuance and feel 
for an American audience. This year has seen shows which have shifted the 
needle when it comes to refreshing presentations of young American life.Insecure
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/07/insecure-review-hbo-issa-rae>
 andAtlanta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/19/atlanta-donald-glover-show-example-young-black-writers-creative-tv>
 are obvious candidates for television that, like Skam, garnered huge online 
followings, and did so by creating worlds that related to people on their 
terms. It can be done, but the success of those shows was built around studios
ceding power to young people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/02/atlanta-fx-donald-glover-bill-oreilly-black-lives>
; those who innately understood their reality and reproduced it, rather than 
left it down to the diluting influence of a traditional writers’ room. If Shame 
can do that when it hits screens in the US, Simon Fuller could have another 
huge hit on his hands – one that takes TV into new, uncharted territory.
 