
Although a winter holiday on the slopes may sound like an unaffordable luxury 
for many, Lee White has found that the DIY approach works for his family – and 
saved him more than £2,000.

The father-of-three from Redditch, near Birmingham, books his accommodation 
and travel independently, making the break much more affordable. “Rather than 
fly, we are going to travel by coach [from Redditch to the hotel in San 
Pellegrino, Italy],” says White, 41, who owns an online retail and distribution 
company. “The journey does take 27 hours but means we make some big savings on 
the cost of flights.

“The same coach then takes us to the slopes each day – it’s a 20-30 minute 
journey. This arrangement means we don’t have to fork out any extra for 
transport costs while we’re away.”

Along with children George (14), Freddie (12) and Emily-Rose (11), he stays 
half-board in a hotel, making lunches to avoid the high prices in the cafes on 
the slopes, and arranging ski passes through his hotel, which are included in 
accomodation – saving £1,000.

“Meals in the restaurants on the slopes are not cheap. If I’m not careful, I 
can easily end up spending £60-£80 a day on food for the four of us. I get this 
down to around £30,” he says.

“I’m pretty good at finding good deals on equipment. I use cashback websites 
such as Topcashback to earn money as I spend, and wait until close to the end 
of the season to buy. For example, my board cost me around £200 when it should 
have been around £450. Similarly, I paid around £130 for the boards for my 
children rather than £240.

“Our trip this year will cost around £3,000 for the four of us – including ski 
passes. I reckon that a similar holiday booked through a travel agent would be 
around £4,500, not including ski passes.”

White’s experience shows that, despite perceptions, a holiday on the slopes 
need not cost a family a fortune. So how else can you do a ski holiday on the 
cheap?
 Lee White from Redditch and his three children Freddie, George and Emily-Rose 
While expert skiers and snowboarders may rave about Whistler in Canada and 
Chamonix in France, most winter holidaymakers can have just as much fun in 
lesser-known – and much less expensive – resorts.

A typical week’s stay at the three-star Whistler Peak Lodge, for example, can 
cost from £940 per person including flights from London to Vancouver and 
transfers. However, Emma Coulthurst from TravelSupermarket.com says Soldeu and 
Arinsal in Andorra, and Bansko in Bulgaria, as well as smaller Italian resorts 
such as Bardonecchia, La Thuile or Cervinia offer cheaper options. Skiers could 
pay as little as £110 per person for a week in Bansko including flights and 
room-only accommodation, but not the ski pass. A week of skiing in Arinsal 
costs from £233 per person, while a week in Soldeu costs from £298 if you go 
self-catering. Other possibilities are Malaga or Grenada in Spain.

“High altitude and good snow-making means you can be assured of skiing during 
the peak season,” says Frank McCusker from the Ski Club of Great Britain. 
“Elsewhere, Slovakia is a country that is growing in popularity but which still 
offers great value – Jasná in the Tatras Mountains is the biggest resort and 
provides some excellent skiing.”.

A fully catered chalet may be the “only” way to do a ski trip for some, but it 
comes at a price. A catered four-star chalet in Meribel would cost £603 per 
person, according to the Ski Club of Great Britain. The good news is that there 
are now plenty of cheaper options, with two -star hotels and hostels 
increasingly featuring as options. “There are also a number of resorts that 
have areas for camper vans. The key is to check out all the possibilities,” 
says McCusker.

Alternatively, many resorts are now catered for by the growing number of 
AirBnB apartments.

If you are set on staying in a chalet, it’s worth doing a bit of negotiating 
to see if you can share with another family or couple. By taking the remaining 
spaces in a chalet booked by another group or family, you can enjoy the 
facilities and services of private accommodation for a lower price than booking 
a whole chalet or staying in a hotel.

In the restaurants surrounding the slopes, raclette can easily cost €25 (£21) 
per head, while half a chicken could cost around €29(£25). Supermarkets in 
small towns can also ratchet up the prices. To avoid both, stock up on food, 
drink and essentials at a big supermarket lower down the valley – this will 
save you 50% in some cases.

If you are taking your own food while skiing, the good news is many resorts 
now have heated picnic halls where you can sit down and relax. La Plagne in the 
French Alps, for example, has a large picnic hall at the bottom of the 
Boulevard and Bergerie lifts.

Slovakia is growing in popularity but still offers great value – Jasná in the 
Tatras Mountains provides excellent skiing
Frank McCusker, Ski Club of Great Britain 
Before you even get to the slopes, what you wear can set you back. However, 
all sorts of kit can be bought cheaply online, or at a discount clothes store 
such as TK Maxx, Aldi or Primark. At TK Maxx you can pick up a ski jacket for 
£69.99, a fleece for £54.99, leggings for £14.99 and goggles for £16.99.

Aldi, meanwhile, claims that it is possible to kit yourself out with a 
complete men’s ski outfit for just £54.94. This includes a ski and sports base 
layer set, top, gloves, socks, jacket and trousers. Alternatively, try and buy 
items secondhand from a site such as eBay or Preloved, or see if you can borrow 
bits and pieces from friends or family instead.

If you do need to hire gear at the resort, always book in advance online as 
this is usually cheaper than turning up at a hire shop. Recent research by Post 
Office Travel Money shows that six days of ski and boot hire in Soldeu in 
Andorra would cost £272.12, or £327.58 in Serre Chevalier in France.

Richard Piatkowski and his friends have saved significant sums by organising 
their own kit hire. In February, the 45-year-old from Colchester is heading to 
El Pas de la Casa in Andorra. “We all have our own boots but usually hire skis. 
However, we always go to at least three stores when we arrive at a resort until 
we find the best skis at the best price – and even then, we still negotiate. We 
find we have more buying power if we go as a group, and can typically expect 
10% off just by asking nicely.”
 Richard Piatkowski from Colchester (far left) with friends Dean Monahan and 
Carl Houlding find that negotiating ski hire as a group can mean larger savings 
Buying a pass to use the ski lifts can be one of the biggest outlays of the 
holiday, but there are also ways to keep these costs down. Post Office Travel 
Money found that a six-day ski pass in Bansko would cost £371.39, while a 
six-day pass for Les Deux Alpes in France would cost £764.36. “Many resorts 
don’t charge for the drag-lifts on the nursery slopes, meaning beginners can 
often get by without a ski pass at all – at least for the first few days,” says 
Coulthurst from TravelSupermarket. “Some resorts also offer mini-passes aimed 
at people who only ski the green and blue runs, while others let children ski 
for free. Don’t forget to check online or to ask at the lift-pass office before 
shelling out for a standard pass.” Also note that many tourist offices offer 
deals on passes for groups, and that weekday passes are cheaper than weekend 
passes. Sometimes it can be better to pay day by day rather than for a whole 
week.

The Post Office research also shows that five or six half-day lessons at ski 
school would cost around £470 in Soldeu in Andorra, and almost £500 in Morzine 
in France.

Rather than waiting to learn to ski until you get to the resort, a few trips 
to a local dry slope in the UK can save the necessity for lessons. At the Snow 
Dome in Tamworth, for example, a two-hour group lesson for an adult costs £64 
per day. At the Snow Centre in Hemel Hempstead, north of London, a two-hour 
lesson for an adult beginner, midweek and during the day, would cost £48.

Another good way to save money is by taking lessons in the afternoon. “Most 
people want to ski in the morning, so ski schools offer discounts to those who 
take their lessons after 2pm,” says Coulthurst.

CUTTING THE COSTS

■ Travel out of season. Mid-January to February half -term is usually the 
cheapest time . After this prices in all European countries start to creep up 
as holiday season approaches. Also check end-of-season prices as many operators 
offer holidays until well after Easter.

■ Consider a mid-week break. Specialist tour operators such as Ski Weekends 
sell such deals which are cheaper than weekend trips and often include more 
actual ski time.

■ Budget airlines offer flights to a range of ski destinations, but you need 
to be prepared to fork out for hefty equipment charges for taking your ski kit. 
These costs can add quite a bit to your flight costs, especially if you don’t 
book online in advance, as prices at the airport can be even higher.

■ Ski holiday costs can increase significantly for families who travel during 
the school holidays, with some prices almost doubling. Ski Esprit, the family 
specialist, offers the four-star Chalet Hotel Mariandre with flights and 
chalet-catering for £650 in January. However, this rises to £1,499 for the 
first week of half-term, and is then £1,099 for the second week.
 