
In the normal run of things, it would seem inconsequential to be discussing as 
fatuous a matter as thepresident-elect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>’s skin and hair before he has 
even set foot in the Oval Office.

However, given the circumstances, I am going to go right ahead.

A line heard frequently in the days since Donald Trump’s victory is that the 
media took Trump literally but didn’t take him seriously, whereas the voters 
took him seriously but didn’t take him literally. The truth in this that was 
there all along is in the aesthetics of the Trump family.

As a visual spectacle, the Trumps are like nothing modern politics has seen 
before. Donald has a touch ofHomer Simpson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/video/2016/nov/10/simpsons-prediction-james-l-brooks-donald-trump-video>
 in the utter fictionality of his skin tone. He has a note ofLiberace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/liberace> in the stiff upward swirl of his 
hair. There is something of the ageing Elvis impersonator in the way his eyes 
disappear like pin pricks into his face. There is Las Vegas, too, in hair the 
colour of white paint in a smoking room – a blond that makesBoris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> look positively wholesome. The 
only politician Trump even vaguely resembles is from dystopian science fiction:
Donald Sutherland <https://www.theguardian.com/film/donald-sutherland>’s 
white-haired President Snow fromThe Hunger Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-hunger-games>, a tyrannical despot who 
stages gladiatorial battles to the death between his teenage subjects to 
bolster his power.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fskin-the-colour-of-cheap-fried-doughnuts-trump-style-hair-tan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d5452a26295896d5f970a143f493873a113153d%2F0_104_1976_1289%2F1976.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Skin%20the%20colour%20of%20cheap%20fried%20doughnuts%3A%20why%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20style%20is%20really%20chilling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fskin-the-colour-of-cheap-fried-doughnuts-trump-style-hair-tan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Skin%20the%20colour%20of%20cheap%20fried%20doughnuts%3A%20why%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20style%20is%20really%20chilling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fskin-the-colour-of-cheap-fried-doughnuts-trump-style-hair-tan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d5452a26295896d5f970a143f493873a113153d%2F0_104_1976_1289%2F1976.jpg>
 As a visual spectacle, the Trumps are like nothing modern politics has seen 
before. Photograph: Jim Spellman/WireImage 
It is dangerous to assume that if a man looks absurd, the joke is harmless. 
(This much, perhaps, we learnt fromJimmy Savile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/jimmy-savile>.) That Trump looks so 
ridiculous – that he so spectacularly fails to conform with the sleek ideal of 
the modern politician embodied byBarack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> or Justin Trudeau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/justin-trudeau> – contributed to the 
assumption of many that Trump as president just couldn’t happen. All of this 
now needs to be revised. It is a measure of the contempt in which voters hold 
the Washington elite that the Trump aesthetic – light entertainment, huge ego, 
crude jokes – seemed no more untrustworthy or slippery to voters thanHillary 
Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>’s focus-grouped 
power bob 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jul/26/pob-power-haircut-women-theresa-may-political-bob>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fskin-the-colour-of-cheap-fried-doughnuts-trump-style-hair-tan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe83c36c45446e40de9ac81f39e7c3767780be190%2F0_0_975_585%2F975.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Skin%20the%20colour%20of%20cheap%20fried%20doughnuts%3A%20why%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20style%20is%20really%20chilling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fskin-the-colour-of-cheap-fried-doughnuts-trump-style-hair-tan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Skin%20the%20colour%20of%20cheap%20fried%20doughnuts%3A%20why%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20style%20is%20really%20chilling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fskin-the-colour-of-cheap-fried-doughnuts-trump-style-hair-tan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe83c36c45446e40de9ac81f39e7c3767780be190%2F0_0_975_585%2F975.jpg>
 The Simpsons was spot on with its goggled-up portrayal of Donald Trump. 
Trump’s skin is extraordinary. “Orange” doesn’t begin to cover the oddness of 
a shade that makes the previous intake of fake tan addicts –Peter Stringfellow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/apr/12/peter-stringfellow-tom-jones-food-tales>
,Simon Cowell <https://www.theguardian.com/media/simoncowell> – look 
sophisticated. Trump is the colour of cheap fried doughnuts: lurid and 
unhealthy (adjectives that could be used to describe Homer, who is, after all, 
a cartoon). Interestingly, there is little attempt made to hide the white 
circles around his eyes left by tanning goggles. (It must be spray or an 
old-school solarium. My heart says solarium, because he is definitely mad 
enough to be doing that every day; but my money is on spray, because of the 
ketchuppy tones.) Perhaps the white circles are a clumsy attempt at emulating a 
ski tan, the ultimate status symbol of the successful businessman that Trump 
claims to be.

Those white goggles – along with hair that looks like a toupee yet seems, even 
more bafflingly, to be his real hair, which he chooses to style to look like a 
toupee – are chilling because they make it clear that there is no one in the 
room who can have a quiet word in Trump’s ear when he is patently getting 
something wrong. What Trump chooses to do in the tanning booth is one thing; 
how he behaves with those oft-conjured nuclear codes is another.

And – to more serious matters – what will the new first lady look like? 
Melania Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/melania-trump>’s every 
wardrobe and hair choice will be combed for clues as to whether this presidency 
will be a joke, a cartoon, or can settle into something more statesmanlike.
Michelle Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/30/michelle-obama-first-lady-chic-white-house-flotus-jackie-kennedy>
 took her first lady wardrobe from the hallowed chapters of White House history 
(Jackie Kennedy) and from ordinary people (bare arms, shorts on holiday). 
Melania Trump borrows hers from fiction. Her sleek, curvy shift dresses are
Claire Underwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2015/feb/27/house-cards-new-1940s-style-direction-claire-underwood>
, but her long hair adds a chocolate-box femininity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fskin-the-colour-of-cheap-fried-doughnuts-trump-style-hair-tan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97616af9dec1625e3689c5fbfa29083f82ba75a0%2F0_57_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Skin%20the%20colour%20of%20cheap%20fried%20doughnuts%3A%20why%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20style%20is%20really%20chilling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fskin-the-colour-of-cheap-fried-doughnuts-trump-style-hair-tan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Skin%20the%20colour%20of%20cheap%20fried%20doughnuts%3A%20why%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20style%20is%20really%20chilling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fskin-the-colour-of-cheap-fried-doughnuts-trump-style-hair-tan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97616af9dec1625e3689c5fbfa29083f82ba75a0%2F0_57_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Ivanka with her daughter, Donald and Melania on election day. Photograph: Chip 
Somodevilla/Getty Images 
There is a fascinating tension in Melania’s look – one between cliched 
third-wife glamour and a ballsy kind of grit. Possibly I’m reading too much 
into this, but I was interested byMrs Trump’s polling-booth outfit 
<https://www.yahoo.com/style/subtle-message-found-in-ivanka-melania-trumps-outfits-on-election-day-175807248.html>
, in which sheshoulder-robed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2012/nov/09/how-to-dress-shoulder-robing> 
a double-breasted camel coat. She looked like a boss – a male boss. You could 
almost picture the cigar. And then, later that night, she worea jumpsuit rather 
than a dress 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/3am/style/celebrity-fashion/first-lady-white-melania-trump-9225761>
 for the victory speech. I was struck by this choice, because the jumpsuit has 
become party look of choice for young women who love dressing up but wish to 
subvert the male gaze. TheMan Repeller fashion blog 
<http://www.manrepeller.com/>, named after the type of on-trend clothes men 
find off-putting, is big on jumpsuits. Yes, we have all seen thefur-lined 
bikini shot 
<http://tenafterfive.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/metal-2-e1459410903963.jpg>
, but Melania is a long way from that now – as the jumpsuit proves. The age of 
the Trump aesthetic starts here. And we had better start taking it seriously.
 