
Before one dives into the political and regulatory thickets of media plurality 
and competition, there is a basic question to be asked about21st Century Fox’s 
£10.75-a-share bid for Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/09/rupert-murdochs-fox-agrees-deal-to-buy-sky>
. Are the financial terms any good?

Standard wisdom says Martin Gilbert and his panel of independent Sky 
non-executive directors can hold their heads high because the bid premium looks 
decent by traditional yardsticks. Rupert Murdoch’s US company is offering 36% 
more than Sky’s closing share price last Thursday, or 40% more than last 
Tuesday’s level.

But that analysis is too breezy, and too kind to Gilbert & co. The bid premium 
only looks vaguely pretty because Sky’s share price has tumbled in recent 
months – from £11 in April to 773p before Murdoch dispatched his offer last 
Wednesday. The reasons for that decline are reasonably well understood. The 
investment world has been fretting that Sky is losing its ability to raise 
prices. BT offers alternative football attractions these days, rich newcomers 
like Netflix and Amazon have arrived on the TV scene, and UK consumers’ real 
incomes may soon be squeezed by the fall in sterling. Plus, Sky, after the 
takeovers of Sky Italia and Sky Deutschland, is carrying more debt these days, 
introducing another level of risk.

Murdoch plans Sky bid tactic that would squeeze out opponents
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/12/murdoch-sky-bid-schedule-of-agreement-shareholders>
Yet there is little evidence that Sky’s management share such anxieties. “Each 
of our markets is making very strong progress,” chief executive Jeremy Darroch 
reported atthe full-year results in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jul/29/sky-profits-rise-customers-germany-italy>
, when the dividend was raised for the 12th year in a row. In October, the top 
brass delivered a blitz of bullishness in a day of presentations to investors, 
describing the many ways in which Sky can improve its Italian and German 
operations and feed new products, including mobile phones, to a fundamentally 
loyal set of customers in the UK.

View those presentations and you would not come away with the impression that 
the management think Sky is in structural decline, or that they viewed the fall 
in the share price as justified. Quite the reverse: they sounded confident in 
the business, frustrated by the valuation and eager to prove the doubters 
wrong, as Sky has done many times over the years.

Those outside Sky shareholders who are grumbling about the meanness of the 
£10.75-a-share offer are right to protest. Rupert Murdoch’s opportunism is 
legendary but Sky’s independent directors are not meant to make his life easy. 
It is true, of course, that the presence of a 39% shareholder complicates 
matters because no counter-bidder will enter the fray. But it is still open to 
the independents to argue that a fair take-out price for Sky is closer to, say, 
£12-a-share than £11 and refuse to recommend less. Indeed, they could go 
further. Analysts at investment bank Citi called 21st Century Fox’s offer 
“low-ball” and said fair value is £13.50.

As things stand, Gilbert and his independents have offered no detailed 
explanation of why they regard £10.75 (minus any dividends subsequently paid by 
Sky) as acceptable. All shareholders were told in Friday’s statement was that 
agreement was reached “after a period of negotiation” that lasted about 48 
hours. Why the hurry to lock down a price? The regulatory process could take 
months.

If Gilbert, senior independent director Andrew Sukawaty, and their colleagues 
could explain their thinking, and how it squares with the executives’ strong 
confidence in Sky’s long-term prospects as a standalone company, one might have 
sympathy. There would at least be scope for a proper debate. But, as it is, the 
process seems rushed and lacking in transparency – and miles away fromthe “belt 
and braces” scrutiny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/13/sky-shareholder-royal-london-asset-management-james-murdoch-replaced-chairman>
 the non-executives promised.

Opec’s oil production cuts are the first move in a long game

Round one in the latest battle in the oil market has gone Opec’s way. The 
cartel, to the suprise of some, managed to get its squabbling house in order 
and agree production cuts at the Vienna summit last month. It also promised to 
convince some non-Opec countries, led by Russia, to deliver their own cuts, and 
it has now secured compliant public statements to that effect. Thus the price 
of a barrel of Brent has risen from $46 to $56 in a month.The impact is being 
felt already on forecourts in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/12/uk-petrol-prices-opec-oil-deal>
.


Do not assume, however, that the outbreak of harmony at Opec will last. It is 
too soon to conclude the cartel will be able to enforce compliance. Relying on
Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> is an inherently uncertain 
stategy. The first test will come if US shale producers, who have cut costs to 
make it profitable to pump at $50 a barrel, start to increase volumes again. 
That would create tensions within Opec ranks. Early indications suggest the US 
shale industry, armed with fresh finance, is already drilling with more 
enthusiasm. It will be six months before we can tell if Opec has genuinely 
shifted the oil market in its favour.
 