
Snapchat <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/snapchat> is preparing for a 
“mega unicorn” flotation on the stock market that could value the five-year-old 
mobile app known for its disappearing photos at as much as $25bn.

Meet Snapchat's 'dudeocracy' of talent
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/22/snapchat-users-dudeocracy-of-talent>
The company behind the app, which its 26-year-old founder Evan Spiegel created 
at his Stanford University fraternity house in 2011, is said to have appointed 
Wall Street banks Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs to lead its initial public 
offering (IPO) on the New York stock exchange as early as March 2017.

If the Los Angeles-based firm goes ahead with the flotation it will be the 
biggest technology IPO for years, and could pave the way for other bigger tech 
firms to go public. There are a string of “mega unicorns” companies, defined as 
those valued at more than $10bn, looking to realise their founders’ and 
investors’ wealth by floating on the stock market. Among those waiting in the 
wings are Uber (which was last valued at $68bn) and Airbnb (worth $30bn 
<https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&ved=0ahUKEwj3wI-B3djPAhXIRCYKHXTjCA4QFgghMAE&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fairbnb-valuation-500-million-funding-round&usg=AFQjCNEINSbq154mHKWbcC1Bm6q-UPlGSw&sig2=o9yPX7zPYekez_af7JcVsQ&bvm=bv.135475266,d.cWw>
 at its last investment round).

The flotation of parent company Snap Inc, which was valued at $18bn at its 
last funding round, will be the largest social media IPO since Twitter floated 
in November 2013. Since then Twitter has suffered, with its shares falling from 
a high of $69 to $17.80 on Thursday. The 140-character messaging company has 
been struggling to find itself a buyer as it fails to build revenue and grow 
its user base.

A Snap flotation would turn Spiegel and co-founder Bobby Murphy into 
multi-billionaires. At a $25bn valuation the founders’ stakes in the company, 
which recently changed its name to Snap Inc as it moves away from chatting to 
photography, would be worth almost $4bn each.

It would vindicate Spiegel’s decision to reject a $3bn takeover by Facebook in 
2013, when Snapchat had yet to make any revenue.

Snap Inc: it’s Snapchat, but now with video-recording 'Spectacles'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/shortcuts/2016/sep/26/snap-inc-snapchat-spectacles-video-recording-sunglasses>
Since then Snapchat has grown its daily user base (of mostly teenagers and 
young adults) to 150m, and hopes to generate advertising revenue of more than 
$350m this year, a big increase on the $59m it earned last year as it further 
explores partnerships with brands including Burberry, Tiffany and KFC.

Analysts at eMarketer recently said the company could bring in advertising 
revenue of almost $1bn by 2017, as brands ditch traditional advertising models 
for new media that appeals to younger people. Just over 40% of Americans aged 
between 18-34 are Snapchat users.

The firm recently launched a new service, called Snap Audience Match, that 
lets marketers match consumers’ email addresses and phone numbers with 
Snapchat’s user data in order to deliver targeted ads. Snapchat also lets 
companies know if users often consume certain types of content, like sport or 
gaming, so they can direct ads to those groups of people. These developments 
have angered some users and privacy campaigners.

A spokeswoman for Snap refused to comment on the company’s IPO plans. The 
appointment of a suite of banks to prepare for an IPO, which also including 
Barclays, Credit Suisse, JP Morgan, Deutsche Bank and Allen & Co, was earlier 
reported by the Wall Street Journal andBloomberg 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-10-12/snapchat-said-to-pick-morgan-stanley-goldman-sachs-to-lead-ipo>
.

The company can file its IPO documents privately with the Securities and 
Exchange Commission because the company makes less than $1bn in revenue.
 