Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fprank-video-destroying-iphone-goes-viral-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Prank%20video%20destroying%20iPhone%207%20goes%20viral%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fprank-video-destroying-iphone-goes-viral-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Prank%20video%20destroying%20iPhone%207%20goes%20viral%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fprank-video-destroying-iphone-goes-viral-video&media=>
Prank video destroying iPhone 7 goes viral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/video/2016/sep/26/prank-video-destroying-iphone-goes-viral-video>
Unlike the viral prank video, I have not drilled a hole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/26/video-claiming-drilling-into-iphone-7-reveal-hidden-headphone-port-goes-viral>
 into the bottom left-hand corner of myiPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone>, but you wouldn’t know that to 
look at it. The fascia, after being dropped on to hard concrete a few months 
ago, had a faint hairline crack across it, which after several more accidents 
spread outwards like the limbs on a tree until an entire chunk fell off, 
revealing the naked eye of the camera. Every time I look at it, it feels like 
staring into the face of a dystopian future.

Video claiming drilling into iPhone 7 will reveal hidden headphone port goes 
viral
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/26/video-claiming-drilling-into-iphone-7-reveal-hidden-headphone-port-goes-viral>
To keep using something so close to broken is odd, particularly as our 
relationship with technology becomes increasingly seamless. For long periods, I 
forget how the device looks, then hand it over to someone to show them a photo 
of my children and watch them recoil. (Of course, it could be they are 
recoiling at some hideousness in my children that, as their mother, I will 
never, ever be able to see.)

The point is, I wouldn’t watch TV if there were a huge crack across the 
screen, and if my kettle broke I would get it fixed. But for some reason, I let 
this one stand. It is partly because I’m cheap, and partly because I’m lazy. 
But it is also to do with something I detect as resentment. I was never one to 
loveApple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> products; the clean 
lines make me nervous, and the store, with its lack of structure and those 
people in blue T-shirts milling about in lieu of a cash desk, feels as wrong to 
me as newscasters wandering about to deliver the news.

I know I’m not the only person to keep using their cracked iPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone>. I see them around all the time 
and feel a sense of solidarity with their owners that is, I’m sure, wholly 
imagined. But I do wonder, as I look at my phone approximately 45,000 times a 
day, if there isn’t something to be said for being reminded with every glance 
that it is a cheap, breakable, crappy piece of glass and metal, and not a 
portal to the infinite.

50 is the new … 50? 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fcracked-iphone-7-video-drill-hole-apple%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F882d85f503e7b6da61c6649d59eadfdb17cdb1fb%2F0_316_5111_3066%2F5111.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20you%20have%20a%20cracked%20iPhone.%20Carry%20it%20with%20pride%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fcracked-iphone-7-video-drill-hole-apple%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So%20you%20have%20a%20cracked%20iPhone.%20Carry%20it%20with%20pride%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fcracked-iphone-7-video-drill-hole-apple%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F882d85f503e7b6da61c6649d59eadfdb17cdb1fb%2F0_316_5111_3066%2F5111.jpg>
 Sarah Jessica Parker plays Frances in Divorce, created by Sharon Horgan. 
Photograph: HBO 
A long profile of Sarah Jessica Parker 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/25/arts/television/sarah-jessica-parker-leaving-carrie-behind-with-hbos-divorce.html>
 ran in the New York Times magazine last week, in which a single phrase caught 
my eye. In the process of describing Parker – who stars in the HBO comedy 
Divorce, created by thewriter/actor Sharon Horgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/sharon-horgan> – it pegged her, now 
51, as inhabiting, “early middle age”. I will be 41 this November and God knows 
I’m telling myself 40 is the new 30 is the new black is the new burger. But 
even with life expectancy in the US atnearly 80 
<http://www.worldlifeexpectancy.com/usa/life-expectancy>, can 51 really be 
described that generously? In 10 years’ time, Parker would be forcibly retired 
from most US government jobs. If she were a fire-fighter, she’d probably 
already be on the bench. I say this not, as the formulation goes, to age-shame 
the woman, only to suggest that there might be some strength in letting 50 be 
50 and not sell it as younger.

How much is that in lattes? 


Another off-putting sales pitch this week came from the Children’s Museum of 
Manhattan <http://cmom.org/>, membership of which is tiny compared to every 
other play space in the city, with annual dues – tax deductible! – of $225 
(indoor playgrounds that are not run as non-profits start at well over $1,000). 
Still, I was unnerved to see the museum tout membership as equal to “the price 
of a latte a week”. In the panic maths one does to justify expense, the latte 
is a reliable unit, small enough to seem trivial but still a luxury one tells 
oneself to forgo in tough times. Just this week, a bill came in that I tried to 
rationalise in terms of the egg sandwiches I buy daily from the snack truck 
across the street and that I won’t be buying for two days until I forget. These 
calculations are stupid, irrational, and almost impossible to resist, and it 
feels like poor sportsmanship for a company to encourage them.
 