
Fluids leaking, shoulders heaving, eyes clamped shut, a surge of pressure, the 
rush of liquid and then sweet, hollow calm. That the term “catharsis” has 
historically applied as frequently to vomit, boils and faeces as grief, fury 
and weeping tells you a lot about how we feel about feelings: intensely.

As someone who once cried so hard at Mork & Mindy that they actually threw up 
all over their tartan pyjamas, I have a lot of time for catharsis. Aristotle’s 
“better out than in” philosophy of drama is as relevant today as when those 
sandal-flapping Greek players first took to the stage, particularly in our 
fractious political climate. A spoonful of catharsis helps the headlines go 
down, after all.

For many, that catharsis will come in the form of television; forget the 
opiate of the people – we’re talking about the purgation of the masses. And 
family dramedy This Is Us seems to be leading a new, emotionally voluptuous 
charge. The show, which weaves between the lives of four people who all share 
the same birthday, seems almost designed to destroy your tear ducts. There are 
a set of twins, one of whom, Kate (Chrissy Metz), is a lonely, frustrated woman 
with weight issues whom we first see weeping on her bathroom floor after 
throwing an entire birthday cake in the bin. If your heartstrings aren’t 
twitching already, you then discover that she is also downtrodden by her 
handsome yet insecure sitcom-star brother, Kevin (Justin Hartley), who uses her 
as a PA-cum-emotional crutch.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhljQfJLQmaI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhljQfJLQmaI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhljQfJLQmaI&media=>
Then there’s the successful businessman, Randall (Sterling K Brown), who 
learns that his biological father is a homeless former addict who abandoned him 
as a newborn at a fire station. There’s Jack (Milo Ventimiglia), whose pregnant 
wife Rebecca (Mandy Moore) slips into unconsciousness and possible death during 
a traumatic labour. The music, the long panning shots, the small tragedies and 
brave-faced lip wobbling, even the credit sequence, are likely to prompt 
uncontrollable sobbing. At one point in the first episode, a folksy, 
white-haired doctor leans in to a weeping father and whispers, “All right if I 
try and say something meaningful?” before spilling his guts about a late wife 
and lost baby. It’s sentimental, sure, but in the week after the election, This 
Is Us drew in an impressive 9.5 million viewers. Some of us, it seems, need 
television to help us let it out.

Forget bleak and edgy shows, this is a time for blanket-hugging comfort
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/13/comfort-tv-this-is-us-gilmore-girls>
If This Is Us seems a harbinger of a more emotional era in television, it’s 
hardly unprecedented. Eighties and 90s TV was awash with oh-so-poignant dramas; 
Party Of Five, The Wonder Years, My So-Called Life, Thirtysomething, ER, all 
packed to bursting with heartfelt monologues, heart-plucking soundtracks and 
heartbreaking storylines. Who can forget Bob, the Polish receptionist 
performing emergency surgery in the “blizzard” episode of ER? Or Rickie’s 
homeless Christmas in My So-Called Life? But while these tear-inducing tropes 
may not have been forgotten they were, for some years at least, largely gone. 
Cancer storylines on ER gave way to Breaking Bad’s cancer-patient antihero 
Walter White; family dramas like Party Of Five were replaced by dynastic 
fantasies such as Game Of Thrones. The few exceptions, like Friday Night 
Lights, struggled in the ratings while the one weepie that hit big, Grey’s 
Anatomy, soon got soapier than a poodle in a carwash.

This Is Us creator Dan Fogelman, who also wrote cult romcom Crazy, Stupid, 
Love, admits that the success of the show “caught me by surprise a little bit. 
I always thought that people were going to like the show, that it would move 
people, but I wasn’t prepared for all the crying.” Nevertheless, Fogelman has 
always been a defender of sincerity on TV. As a child in the 70s and 80s he was 
drawn to sitcoms that “surprised you with their heart” like Family Ties and 
Cheers. The echoes of scenes such as the off-screen death of Ernie “Coach” 
Pantusso in Cheers (in response to the passing of Nicholas Colasanto, the actor 
who played him) are in evidence right through This Is Us.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fthis-is-us-channel-4-family-drama-tv-tearjerker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc418a2e204d72accc92bd035739f33018d102c65%2F0_139_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sob%20story%3A%20how%20This%20Is%20Us%20brought%20the%20TV%20tearjerker%20back%20to%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fthis-is-us-channel-4-family-drama-tv-tearjerker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sob%20story%3A%20how%20This%20Is%20Us%20brought%20the%20TV%20tearjerker%20back%20to%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fthis-is-us-channel-4-family-drama-tv-tearjerker%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc418a2e204d72accc92bd035739f33018d102c65%2F0_139_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 The cast of This Is Us (from left): Ron Cephas Jones; Mandy Moore; Milo 
Ventimiglia; Susan Kelechi Watson; Justin Hartley; Chrissy Metz and Chris 
Sullivan. Photograph: Chris Haston/NBC 
For Moore, This Is Us has filled an obvious gap. “There’s nothing else on the 
television landscape quite like this show,” she tells me from the set. “Not 
that there hasn’t been before and there won’t be again. But at this moment, 
people are feeling so much uncertainty. This show provides an escape but it’s 
relatable.”

Sterling K Brown: 'I allow myself to think about winning an Emmy'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/07/sterling-k-brown-emmy-people-v-oj-simpson>
“I’ve been arguing that people want to feel stuff and feel good,” says 
Fogelman. “We tend to reward, critically at least, art that’s a little darker 
and bleaker – the word ‘sentimental’ has become so negative these days. But, if 
it’s done well, sentimental art can be some of the most rewarding. I didn’t 
want to write a show that, after an hour, made people feel worse. The crying 
that’s coming out of the show seems more cathartic than sad, to me. And I think 
that’s important in the world at the moment.”

I wonder, is part of the show’s roaring success a response to the painful 
election we all just watched unravel across the pond? “I was looking at a map 
of the United States the other day,” says Sterling K Brown, who is perhaps best 
known to UK audiences as the prosecution attorney Christopher Darden in The 
People v OJ Simpson. “Eighty per cent of the land mass of the United States is 
red and just 20% is blue. But in that 20% are the larger cities that tend to 
vote Democrat.” The United States, argues Brown, isn’t as united as the name 
suggests or we might like to imagine. “But I do think entertainment and 
television is a way for both sides to come together. I think it’s time to start 
trying to make it a little more purple.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fthis-is-us-channel-4-family-drama-tv-tearjerker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F590b966e0d67ed40f9463ae7510ca7c845263d8c%2F0_200_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sob%20story%3A%20how%20This%20Is%20Us%20brought%20the%20TV%20tearjerker%20back%20to%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fthis-is-us-channel-4-family-drama-tv-tearjerker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sob%20story%3A%20how%20This%20Is%20Us%20brought%20the%20TV%20tearjerker%20back%20to%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fthis-is-us-channel-4-family-drama-tv-tearjerker%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F590b966e0d67ed40f9463ae7510ca7c845263d8c%2F0_200_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Hartley as Kevin in This Is Us. Photograph: Ron Batzdorff/NBC 
It’s certainly a nice idea – that by exploring our shared universal 
experiences we can put our differences into perspective; that through something 
as apparently small fry as sibling rivalry, weight loss and drunk dads we can 
learn to listen to each other again. “Hopefully when people watch this show 
they can say ‘Oh, this is us. This is who we are,’” says Brown.

There is, of course, more to This Is Us than schmaltz, snot, sentiment and 
sniffling. The show unpeels like an onion, with major twists at the end of the 
first two episodes and some sweet, if slightly hokey, comedy moments. All of 
which is not to say that the show is without its detractors. This Is Us has 
been labelled “dishonest smarm” by Alison Herman at culture website The Ringer, 
for its “easy, short-term injections of sentiment” over, say, complex 
characters living realistic lives. Yet the overwhelming impression created by 
the show is one of graphic, if not cynical, emotional engagement. From the 
title to the pillow talk between characters, the whole thing is a not-so-subtle 
rallying cry for caring and sharing.

As Sterling K Brown puts it, “Often, we feel we’re making these big life 
decisions in a vacuum – why is this happening to me, and me only? The show 
shows everyone that this is something we are all doing and we’re doing it 
together. There’s something comforting about recognising you’re not in it by 
yourself.”

All in it together? We’re going to need some bigger tissues.

This Is Us begins Tuesday, 9pm, Channel 4
 