
New Year’s Eve is reliably an anticlimax when you’re “out out”, as Micky 
Flanagan might put it, so why not just stay at home? It’s warm, familiar and 
you can BYOB. Just put your feet up and let TV do the heavy lifting when it 
comes to all the mood-setting and countdown coordinating, and if anyone calls 
you out on social media for being antisocial, simply tell them you’re having 
your own Gogglebox-themed NYE party. For those staying “in in”, here’s what not 
to miss.

Alan Carr’s New Year Specstacular, 9pm, Channel 4

Can’t summon the energy for NYE? Don’t fret ­­– irreverent specs pest Carr has 
plenty to spare. These annual 31 December shows are stealthily becoming a 
Channel 4 tradition, although you could be forgiven for thinking they’re 
transmitting the 2013 edition by mistake, since James Corden is on for the 
second year in a row and musical guests Tulisa and Professor Green don’t 
exactly scream “the exciting sound of 2015!” Still, two hours of chat and party 
games with good sports such as Jonathan Ross, Gok Wan and Alesha Dixon will 
help home viewers power up to the requisite NYE mood of caffeinated mania.

Queen and Adam Lambert Rock Big Ben Live, 11.15pm, BBC1

Hits from the bongs, with Brian May and Roger Taylor teaming up with American 
Idol runner-up Lambert to bracket the bells with some Queen belters, live from 
Westminster. May has intimated that the new guy can actually sing higher than 
Freddie, but will Lambert emerge for the 2015 half of the seton the shoulders 
of Darth Vader <https://twitter.com/historicalpics/status/544605376625512449>? 
If some of the most amazing and energising rock music ever recorded – albeit 
recreated live in a way that’s probably not quite as good – somehow isn’t your 
thing, you can run the Jools on BBC2 from 11.20pm. Boogie-woogie’s biggest Aldi 
fan is welcoming Sheeran, Goulding, Nutini and Faith (Paloma, not Adam), plus 
the mighty Wilko Johnson and many more for his 22nd Hootenanny.

LA Confidential, 11.05pm, ITV4

What better way to take your mind off an imminent and uncertain future than by 
luxuriating in the past? ITV3 puts its best brand-values foot forward with 
Julian Fellowes’s Downton warm-upGosford Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gosford-park> at 9pm, while BBC4 maintains 
the murderous aristocratic theme with the pristine and blackly comicKind Hearts 
and Coronets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/aug/18/kind-hearts-and-coronets-review> 
at 11pm. Arguably the pick of the bunch is on ITV4, the home of witty trails 
for lousy action movies, which is screening Curtis Hanson’s pump-action noir LA 
Confidential. It even takes place over Christmas and New Year 1952, though the 
grim trail of corruption and violent comeuppance bleeds into 1953.

Game of Thrones, from 9pm, Sky Atlantic

Do they have even do New Year’s Eve in Westeros, the land where winter is 
perpetually coming? No matter: Sky Atlantic is screening the last four episodes 
of the most recent season of luxe fantasy megahitGame of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/dec/11/best-tv-of-2014-no-9-game-of-thrones>
, which means 2015 will arrive slap-bang in themiddle of the siege of Castle 
Black 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/jun/09/game-of-thrones-recap-season-four-episode-nine-watchers-on-the-wall>
. Alarm bells ringing out? Chaos and cries in the dark? Rampaging northerners? 
Squint and you could be at the great Hogmanay celebrations in Edinburgh.

Wahlburgers, from 6pm, Lifetime

Most digital channels cobble together the scheduling equivalent of the shrug 
emoji 
<http://www.theawl.com/2014/05/the-life-and-times-of-%C2%AF_%E3%83%84_%C2%AF>on 
31 December, screening so many multiple episodes it can look like your EPG is 
on the blink. This year it’s a Celebrity Juice triple bill on ITV2, the usual 
endless episodes of Family Guy on BBC3 and a will-this-do? Inbetweeners-themed 
night on E4. Over on Lifetime, though, they’re gone nuclear withwall-to-wall 
Wahlburgers <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y9QoTyPDLuo>, the reality show 
about the operations of Marky Mark’s family restaurant chain in Boston and 
beyond. While it’s probably not a terrific idea to binge-watch all 20 of these 
episodes in one go, when friends post their newly minted resolutions on 
Facebook – “Going to do a marathon in 2015!” – at least you could smugly reply: 
“Already done one, mate.”
 