
Andrei Tarkovsky <https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrei-tarkovsky> started 
work on an adaptation of Stanisław Lem's philosophical science-fiction novel in 
1968 in an attempt to find a popular cinematic subject. After the usual 
labyrinthine negotations with the Soviet authorities over the script, what 
emerged was a space film unlike anything before or since.
Lem's novel posited the existence of solaristics; the study of an outlying 
star system that had bizarre effects on human psychology. Tarkovsky took this 
idea, and turned it into a dreamlike interrogation of faith, memory and the 
transfiguring power of love.

Tarkovsky begins his version of the story with some of the most magically 
earthbound images ever filmed, as his protagonist, a psychologist called Kelvin 
(Donatas Banionis), contemplates his garden. He then embarks on a voyage to the 
space station circlingSolaris <https://www.theguardian.com/film/solaris>, there 
to investigate the reports of eccentric behaviour of previous visitors. Kelvin 
undergoes an ordeal by memory, as Solaris' psychoactive properties trigger the 
reappearance of his dead wife, Hari (Natalya Bondarchuk). The space station 
becomes a place of mysterious hauntings and apparitions. His colleagues hardly 
inspire trust, and Kelvin attempts to make sense of what is happening to him as 
he retreats further into an internal world.

Tarkovsky was barely interested in Lem's main preoccupation: to theorise about 
what might constitute alien life. Solaris, and its apparently animate "oceans", 
are simply a conduit to, and externalisation of, deeper spiritual matters. It's 
fair to say that no other director can have got anywhere near the mystic uplift 
of this film. Lem didn't like the way his novel had been adapted; Tarkovsky 
himself considered it a less than successful film. But the clarity and beauty 
of Solaris ensures its majesty lives on.
 