
Never pay the ransom. It’s the the official line of governments across the 
world and yet, every year, millions of pounds change hands to secure the 
release of those taken in kidnappings.

The murky world of hostage negotiations is shrouded in mystery, done behind 
closed doors and often drags the most unsuspecting people into a web of 
organised crime or poverty-driven desperation.

But a new documentary series that lands on Netflix on 8 December will dive 
straight into these nefarious dealings, exposing how some of the most infamous 
kidnapping situations unfolded. Captive is the creation of Simon Chinn, the 
double Oscar-winning producer behind the documentary filmsSearching for Sugar 
Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jul/26/searching-for-sugar-man-review> 
andMan on Wire <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/aug/01/documentary1>, 
whose interest in hostage situations was piqued a decade ago by the kidnapping 
of Channel 4 film-makerSean Langan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/dec/04/taliban-celebrity-comment>
 in Pakistan by the Taliban.

Langan was released after three months, but “the suggestion was that a 
transaction was made and a ransom was paid, even though the government’s policy 
was clearly that they didn’t negotiate with hostage takers”, says Chinn. “But 
somehow or other, it all got figured out.”

Chinn became intrigued by these negotiations, so often carried out by family 
members who have no past experience at all with the criminal world. After 
toying with writing a fictional drama on the subject, he swiftly realised it 
was an area where “fact was so much more compelling than fiction”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fcaptive-real-life-hostage-situations-netflix-simon-chinn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a57bee0d85048dfca955f1fdc537bb727f89430%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Somali%20pirates%20to%20prison%20riots%3A%20the%20series%20on%20real-life%20kidnaps%20holding%20audiences%20Captive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fcaptive-real-life-hostage-situations-netflix-simon-chinn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Somali%20pirates%20to%20prison%20riots%3A%20the%20series%20on%20real-life%20kidnaps%20holding%20audiences%20Captive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fcaptive-real-life-hostage-situations-netflix-simon-chinn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a57bee0d85048dfca955f1fdc537bb727f89430%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Retold from all sides … the 1993 Lucasville prison riots. Photograph: Patrick 
Smith/Netflix 
Over the eight episodes of Captive, incidents such as US prison riots, 
kidnapping by Somali pirates, the captivity of British aid workers in Chechnya 
and the siege of Bethlehem are retold from all sides.

It has gained unprecedented access to not just those who were captured, but in 
some cases the people who actually did the kidnapping.

“Our idea was to tell the story from multiple perspectives and embrace the 
moral complexity of a hostage negotiation,” says Chinn. “Usually there are lots 
of competing agendas at play, but they are mired in politics or ideology or, 
frankly, material interest.”

“We were quite keen to strip our own morality out of this,” he added.

“There are obviously people you will have more sympathy with, usually those 
closest to the ‘victims’ – often the family members, who arguably have the 
purest agenda – but our position is that everyone else’s agenda is less pure 
and that’s what we wanted to explore.”

In many cases, the voices who contribute are those not usually found on 
television. In the Lucasville prison riot film, a former prisoner who was part 
of the white supremacist group Aryan Nations, and who took part in the 1993 
violence that left 10 dead, is interviewed, as are prisoners on death row. 
Permission was denied to talk to those still in prison, so they had to film 
them surreptitiously through the glass, talking over a phone, during a prison 
visit.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fcaptive-real-life-hostage-situations-netflix-simon-chinn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20de410aac91797a1b7b5e36be255aea9cd78136%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Somali%20pirates%20to%20prison%20riots%3A%20the%20series%20on%20real-life%20kidnaps%20holding%20audiences%20Captive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fcaptive-real-life-hostage-situations-netflix-simon-chinn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Somali%20pirates%20to%20prison%20riots%3A%20the%20series%20on%20real-life%20kidnaps%20holding%20audiences%20Captive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fcaptive-real-life-hostage-situations-netflix-simon-chinn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20de410aac91797a1b7b5e36be255aea9cd78136%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Al Gregg as Pierre Korkie, who was taken hostage by al-Qaida in Yemen. 
Photograph: Patrick Smith/Netflix 
The film about the kidnapping of the son of Coca-Cola heir Michael Bird in 
Brazil speaks to the man who carried out the capturing, while the episode on 
the siege of Bethlehem interviews everyone from members ofal-Aqsa martyrs 
brigade <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Al-Aqsa_Martyrs'_Brigades> to those in 
the Israeli Defence Forces in order to piece together how it happened.

“What always fascinated me was the humanity of a hostage situation,” says 
Chinn. “With the prison riots film, what’s fascinating is that even though it’s 
a prison, a place which is hell on earth and full of violent tribal groups, the 
prisoners and negotiator actually come together in pursuit of very reasonable, 
even laudable, demands – asking to be treated like human beings.”

Chinn sees Captive as part of a golden age of non-fiction TV that has recently 
emerged, with Netflix series such asMaking a Murderer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/making-a-murderer> becoming global talking 
points. He says that while the stories told in the show are dark and grisly, 
they are also “hopeful and human”.

“Kidnap negotiations are one of the very few moments in any conflict situation 
where two warring parties have to sit down and empathise with each other,” he 
says. “Hostage negotiation can teach us a hell of a lot about how to find 
common ground, and meet your enemy in the middle.”

 * Captive is on Netflix from 9 December.
 