
Are poor people poor because of inferior genes? This notion is especially 
popular with members of the ruling elite, who like to think their position is 
the result of genetic superiority rather than the fact they have privileged 
backgrounds.

Low intelligence and high rates of mental illness are more common in poor 
people. Geneticists maintain that genes play a major role in causing both. But 
if they were right there would be an inexorable logic that suggests inferior 
DNA caused poor people to sink to the bottom of the gene pool.

Psychologist on a mission to give every child a Learning Chip
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/feb/18/psychologist-robert-plomin-says-genes-crucial-education>
In the light of the findings of the human genome project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/human-genome-project>, however, that idea 
is no longer defensible – as theleading psychologist Ken Richardson 
<https://thepsychologist.bps.org.uk/so-what-gene> recently pointed out in the 
house magazine of the psychology profession. On the contrary, the implication 
of the unimportance of genes is that if we changed society in the right ways, 
we could virtually eradicate not only low academic performance and mental 
illness but also criminality and problems such as substance abuse.

Since the project published its results 16 years ago 
<http://www.genome.gov/10001457>, genes have been found that have a significant 
influence on physical traits like height and weight, so you might have expected 
the same for psychology by now. But Britain’s leading geneticist – Robert 
Plomin, of King’s College, London – hasn’t found any 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/feb/18/psychologist-robert-plomin-says-genes-crucial-education>
 specific DNA variants that have a significant effect on differences in our 
psychology.

Scientists call this the missing heritability. But there are strong grounds 
for supposing the heritability is not actually missing – it’s non-existent.

Of course, even if DNA variants are not found, it does not mean it’s all down 
to nurture. For instance, we know for sure that what happens in the womb can 
have a big effect on childhood problems like attention deficit hyperactivity 
disorder. It’s also clear that manyautistic children are born with brain 
abnormalities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2006/jul/18/health.medicineandhealth>. So 
if you have children who are rubbish at maths, knowing it’s not their genetic 
destiny increases the likelihood of improvement.

There are strong grounds for supposing the heritability is not actually 
missing – it’s non-existent

A classic study provided a large sample of children with the lesson that their 
maths ability was not fixed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/dec/27/family-medicalresearch>. 
Two years later their maths had improved significantly: the more children had 
initially believed their abilities to be fixed, the greater the improvement. 
Moreover, if parents and teachers believe children’s abilities are flexible, 
pupils are more likely to improve.

As has been shown in Finland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/11/finland-ranked-worlds-most-literate-nation>
, if it’s assumed that every child has the potential to do well and the right 
resources are put into your educational system, you can end up doing well in 
the international league tables. The Finns achieve that without the coercion 
and hothousing techniques used in Singapore.

There is similar evidence regarding people with mental illness. If they buy 
into the idea that they have an incurable genetic problem, they do worse. Their 
prospects are worse still if their families or carers believe it. But the 
crucial ingredient that passes down the generations is not genes but patterns 
of nurture. Around 70% of maltreated children become maltreating parents.

But let me be clear: no parent should feel guilty if their children are 
struggling. They need to be helped to understand how their own parents and 
grandparents had problems that have been passed down by maltreatment. That way, 
cycles of underachievement and distress can be broken. Sticking with the 
genetic story holds out no hope.

Emotional child abuse has to be banned – the science backs up our instincts | 
Oliver James
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/31/emotional-child-abuse-banned-government-love-adult-psychosis>
Mental health is largely improved by loving and playful parenting. Equally, 
mental illness is often caused by maltreatment and social disadvantage. In one 
study, a person who had suffered five or more kinds of maltreatment was193 
times more likely to become schizophrenic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/31/emotional-child-abuse-banned-government-love-adult-psychosis>
 compared with someone who suffered no maltreatment. It’s the same for other 
mental illnesses. In thebest study following children from an early age 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Development-Person-Minnesota-Adaptation/dp/1606232495>
, nine out of 10 who were maltreated had developed a mental illness by the age 
of 18.

This contrasts with the fact that, by 2011, there had been 115 genetic studies 
unable to find any convincing evidence 
<http://bjp.rcpsych.org/content/202/1/1.short> of a connection. It is the same 
with studies since then, including those for intelligence and personality.

We need parenting classes that help mothers and fathers identify how they are 
repeating the negative patterns of their forebears. As the world’s fifth 
richest society, Britain can afford to put in place the necessary support. 
Austria, for instance, has long provided substantial finance to parents who 
want to take time off work to care for their children.

Politicians often play on our desire to improve children’s material 
circumstances. If only we could see that once a basic level of material 
security has been achieved, it is far more important to pass love and 
playfulness down the generations than property, or stocks and shares.
 