
Southern <https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> rail passengers are 
facing more misery with no trains running at all for a second consecutive day, 
as unions and the company meet at Acas to seek a breakthrough in the 
long-running dispute.

Drivers from Aslef have continued their strike, with a third day planned for 
Friday.

Talks between Southern’s owner, Govia Thameslink Railway, Aslef, and the RMT 
union will start at 10am on Wednesday, with hopes that the escalating row and 
the extreme disruption will push the two sides into some form of agreement.

But previous talks broke down swiftly as the company continued to insist on 
the flexibility to run trains without a second crew member in some 
circumstances – a red line for the unions who fear jobs will be lost or 
deskilled, as the company, and more broadly the government, pushes to introduce 
more driver-only-operated trains.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fdisruption-for-commuters-as-southern-rail-strike-begins-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Disruption%20for%20commuters%20as%20Southern%20rail%20strike%20begins%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fdisruption-for-commuters-as-southern-rail-strike-begins-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Disruption%20for%20commuters%20as%20Southern%20rail%20strike%20begins%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fdisruption-for-commuters-as-southern-rail-strike-begins-video-report&media=>
Disruption for commuters as Southern rail strike begins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/video/2016/dec/13/disruption-for-commuters-as-southern-rail-strike-begins-video-report>
Talks come after Tuesday saw recriminations from both sides, with the train 
drivers’ union Aslef accusing the government of blocking serious talks and 
manipulating the Southern dispute while the transport secretary,Chris Grayling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/chrisgrayling>, said the unions had 
embarked on an unnecessary political strike.

Mick Whelan, Aslef’s general secretary, said: “The government is underwriting 
and causing the pain and misery of the travelling public. The reality is that 
the whole of this has been driven by the Department forTransport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> and their desire for driver-only 
operation.”

When, where and why is the Southern rail strike taking place?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/13/when-where-why-southern-rail-strike-industrial-action>
The strike prompted more calls from the Tory right for limits on strikes by 
transport workers. The Tory MP Chris Philp, who represents the badly affected 
constituency of Croydon South, called for urgent legislation to end the misery 
for passengers.

Philp, one member of a group that has been meeting regularly with Grayling and 
the rail minister Paul Maynard, said he wanted a rule that when a strike occurs 
on critical public infrastructure, at least a 50% service is maintained and the 
strike should be “reasonable and proportionate”.

He also said it should be mandatory to attend mediation at Acas. The Guardian 
understands that Grayling had an amicable meeting with Tory MPs on Tuesday and 
has agreed to keep legislation on the table, but it is not his preferred option.

No 10 meanwhile said that the strikes were “causing misery for hundreds of 
thousands of commuters” and said it would review recent trade union legislation 
to see if more legislation was necessary.

“Obviously we have recently passed legislation on unions and it’s right that 
we review that to see if that is working in practice,” the prime minister’s 
spokesman said.

Grayling on Tuesday said he was willing to meet unions and released a letter 
to Aslef complaining that he had had no reply to his offer of a meeting, 
subject to Aslef calling off strikes.

Whelan responded: “In one breath, he’s saying he won’t get involved; in the 
other, he’s saying we’re refusing to meet him. But why would we if he’s not 
going to say anything?”

All of Southern’s 2,242 weekday services, which normally carry more than 
300,000 passengers, have been cancelled again, causing the worst strike-led 
disruption since privatisation. Severe congestion was expected at rush hour 
elsewhere as passengers attempt to use other methods of travel. Southern has 
advised its customers not to travel.

A commuter group is planning a protest march from Southern’s major London hub, 
Victoria, to the Department forTransport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> on Thursday.

If no resolution is found, even without a strike on Thursday, an ongoing 
overtime ban will seriously disrupt services, while conductors in the RMT union 
will walk out for two days from Monday.
 