
Happy birthday, Spaced <http://www.spaced-out.org.uk/>, which was 10 years old 
yesterday, according to the seminal Channel 4 sitcom's director, Edgar Wright. 
"Not only that, but its 10th series starts tonight on Channel 4!"joked Wright 
<http://twitter.com/edgarwright>. "What? You guys haven't been watching series 
three to nine? Where have you been?"
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FbZSih1yJTbc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FbZSih1yJTbc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FbZSih1yJTbc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Actually, I reckon today is the show's 10th birthday – although I am loath to 
quibble with the man whose partnership with Spaced co-star and co-writer Simon 
Pegg has since given us the big-screen comediesShaun of the Dead 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yfDUv3ZjH2k> and Hot Fuzz 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VIcen_eRgtc>, and is in the process of making 
the third in the pair's "Blood and Ice Cream" trilogy, The World's End.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FyuTMm0AFKQY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FyuTMm0AFKQY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FyuTMm0AFKQY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Channel 4 was pretty confident about Spaced even before it arrived on the 
small screen on 24 September 1999. "It establishes a world that you want to be 
a part of and you're on a winner if you get that right," said the programme's 
commissioning editor Cheryl Taylor. But then, the channel also had high hopes 
for something called Hewitt, about a bloke who works in a video shop starring 
stand-up Tommy Tiernan, so nothing was guaranteed.

But with Spaced, Wright, Pegg and his co-writer and co-star Jessica Hynes (née 
Stevenson) got it absolutely right, one of a new breed of comedies, even more 
than BBC1's The Royle Family, that eschewed traditional sitcom rules. "No laugh 
track, no studio audience, non-linear narrative, complete with visual and 
verbal references to a video library's worth of film and television classics," 
reported the Guardian.

The "sit" of this particular sitcom was established in the first episode, when 
Tim and Daisy moved into a flat together and had to convince the landlady 
Marsha, brilliantly played by Julia Deakin, that they were a couple. The rest 
of the episode, and the 13 that followed, was purely comedy gold.

It worked because everything was spot on – the script, the direction and the 
casting, with a bunch of supporting characters who you could imagine all being 
given a spin-off show in their own right. Or at least, an episode – Nick Frost 
as Mike Watt, Mark Heap as Brian Todd, Peter Serafinowicz as Duane Benzie, not 
forgetting Aida as Colin the dog.

Unbelievably, looking back, the show didn't pull up too many trees, ratings 
wise.An episode of its second series in 2001 had 1.7 million viewers, 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2001/feb/26/overnights> fewer than were 
watching a repeat of the World at War on BBC2. Some people, eh? But it has 
since made up for it on DVD, of course.

Favourite moments? Too many to choose from. The paintballing 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h1yuhBtdHL0&feature=PlayList&p=16E82B5969F48DCF&index=11>
, the"slow motion commotion" 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W2tLKjeOstg&feature=PlayList&p=16E82B5969F48DCF&index=7>
, pretty much anything fromthe clubbing episode 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sfSndZPynQk&feature=PlayList&p=16E82B5969F48DCF&index=15>
? And of coursethe comedy pop culture references 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z3KfnPHiTqY&feature=PlayList&p=16E82B5969F48DCF&index=13>
 and any scenewith fab Nick Frost as Mike Watt 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RFEJstPBwvw&feature=fvsr>. There must be a few 
I've forgotten -about 300, probably <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=szJ07k-cHqU>
 – so tell me yours.

The US remake of the show 
<http://www.televisionaryblog.com/2008/05/where-pilots-go-to-die-foxs-spaced.html>
, however, was laughably bad, and never made it past the pilot stage. "One of 
these days, McG's Spaced remake pilot will leak onto the interwebs," tweeted 
Wright. "Myself, Simon, Jess and Nira saw it. Wow (not a good wow)."

A special shout out to Hynes, who once emptied a champagne bucket of iced 
water over my head as I slept on a sofa in Montreux during theRose d'Or 
<http://www.rosedor.com/> television festival. I thought it was going to be the 
start of a beautiful relationship, but she just laughed at me with her friends 
and walked out. Great days.

By coincidence I had the Spaced box set out only a few days ago. I was 
laughing like it was 1999.
 