
Spoiler alert: This blog contains spoilers for season five, episodes five and 
six ofSpiral <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/spiral>.

Catch up with the episode three and four blog. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jan/17/spiral-season-five-episodes-three-and-four-recap>

I had every intention of opening this blogpost with a discussion of how Pierre 
Clément had been outrageously sidelined by the producers ofSpiral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/spiral> this series, only for him to 
become the focus of this week’s most shocking storyline. Pierre is dead (or at 
least we are certainly meant to infer so). As Joséphine sits crumpled in a 
weeping Laure’s arms in the entrance to A&E, her handsome partner is lifeless 
in the emergency room thanks to a bullet to the stomach.

Wasn’t Cicero assassinated?

As ever with Spiral, there is nothing straightforward about Pierre’s shooting, 
even if the event itself was clear enough. Instead the responsibility is shared 
between a suspect on the edge of mental collapse; a judge determined to send a 
suicidal man back to prison, regardless of the doubts of others as to his guilt 
or fitness; and a prison guard who entirely misjudged the situation before him.

But when it comes to apportioning blame, it is surely Roban who is most at 
fault here. Viewers new to the show might wonder why they should care at all 
about the judge: entirely self-obsessed this season, he has grown harsh and 
narrow-minded, d­etermined to be proved right regardless of the consequences. 
He wasn’t always this way – although he’s been entirely less than likable 
before – but his actions in this case could well have pushed an innocent man 
into a most desperate situation. First Stephane Jaulin tried to take his own 
life; then, forced back to prison and separated from his son, his actions 
resulted in Pierre losing his.

Poor Joséphine, who will for ever have to live with the jealousy that drove 
her away from her lover’s arms on what appears to have been his final night. 
Part of what I had intended to write, before the final episode’s dramatic 
conclusion, was about how reformed she has been by Pierre; how her concern 
really does seem to be justice; that she is finding room to be concerned about 
people beyond herself. But I fear that she now stands on the edge. Already 
being cajoled back to the dark side by Eric Edelman – “Joséphine, you are going 
against your true nature” – she is also likely to be racked by the guilt of 
abandoning Pierre to his admiring onlookers. Just when she had her life on 
track …

I could easily discuss Pierre for the whole of this blogpost – and I imagine 
that’s what we’ll mainly be doing in the comments – but after paying tribute to 
Grégory Fitoussi’s fine performance in the role, I’ll also bring us up to date 
with the case, which has progressed at some pace.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F24%2Fspiral-season-five-episodes-five-and-six-recap-shocking-end-packed-double-bill%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422032700674%2Fcb2c730a-28de-494a-9e49-61e1917b4320-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Spiral%20season%20five%3A%20episodes%20five%20and%20six%20recap%20%E2%80%93%20a%20shocking%20end%20to%20a%20packed%20double%20bill&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F24%2Fspiral-season-five-episodes-five-and-six-recap-shocking-end-packed-double-bill%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Spiral%20season%20five%3A%20episodes%20five%20and%20six%20recap%20%E2%80%93%20a%20shocking%20end%20to%20a%20packed%20double%20bill&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F24%2Fspiral-season-five-episodes-five-and-six-recap-shocking-end-packed-double-bill%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422032700674%2Fcb2c730a-28de-494a-9e49-61e1917b4320-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Joséphine in season five, episode six of Spiral. Photograph: Caroline 
Dubois/BBC 
The Jaulin murders

So it is not Stéphane Jaulin who has a link to the bank raiders but his 
murdered wife. (Perhaps: Stéphane and Blanco still worked for the same company, 
and Blanco’s job at Travelcity came via Zac). Sandrine knew Zac, and had turned 
a blind eye to his forged papers when renting him a flat in Asnières. Blanco, 
with whom we spent a good deal of time this double bill, was useful only in 
terms of leading us to this Zacharai Gabbai, the ATM-raiders’ ringleader now 
lost toles flics, but with his methods revealed.

 Given the trail of traumatised and dead people Zac leaves behind him – 
Blanco, poor Frank the ATM guy, Laetitia, Sandrine and child – it presumably 
won’t be impossible to catch up with him. But you do feel that Laure, Gilou and 
Tintin had better pull their fingers out, given how quickly things appear to be 
escalating. Although I know, just typing that sentence, that I am basically 
becoming Herville.

 Herville was perhaps more annoying than ever this double bill, only a few 
French phrases away from an aggressive David Brent – “Is he having his period?” 
– but there were times when I shared his frustration. Although, equally, Tintin 
shooting the dog did also bring viewers one of those brilliantly gallic shrugs 
that Fremontin has down so well.

 Also worth bearing in mind: there is no match yet for the fingerprint on the 
slipper. And, of course, there is something properly dodgy going on with 
Dijbril, even if Tintin was unlikely to find out exactly what, driving around 
after him in a particularly obvious way.

Les flics

 So Tintin has effectively left home and abandoned his children, and is now 
literally fighting his colleagues in the office. Oh, Fremontin! You must pull 
yourself together, and definitely stop lying to your wife about where you are 
when she’s sitting in the office waiting for you. (“Do you live here now?” So 
busted.) So much for Gilou as the go-between: it was Laure who was doing the 
peacekeeping this week as she stopped her officers hurting each other. Tut tut.

Laure does appear to be having second thoughts about the baby. After another 
man counselled her not to have an abortion – this time her pathologist friend, 
who clearly saw through her line of questioning – we saw her holding her 
stomach while she and Tintin rifled through a massive bin. (On which note: good 
detecting work, team, to realise it was a fake bomb). At least Gilou will be 
pleased, I suppose.

Thoughts and observations

• A quick note on the cleverness of Spiral in linking Joséphine’s victory for 
Laetitia with Laure’s case and Pierre’s client. And also on the political point 
made by the girl’s release: with every intention of not returning to crime, the 
state’s inability to find her a bed for the first night of her release saw her 
relapse in a fairly massive way.

• Another quick note to say thank you for the explanations of France’s 
civil/criminal proceedings in the comments last week.

• Spiral never ducks violence or grisly details, but there has been a lot of 
really violent kicking this series.

• “You’ve become a feared judge. Congratulations.” Or not, in fact.

• “Shall I call you a doctor?” “Why don’t you call me an ambulance?” I would 
not be surprised if Roban’s furious putdown turns out to have been actually 
quite sensible advice. The nosebleeds are surely indicative of something more 
serious.

• I enjoyed Laure’s run in with Brémont in a kind of unbearable-to-watch way. 
But I do rather wish she’d just buy a bigger pair of trousers until she’s made 
a pregancy decision.

• I love that Tintin has a massive picture of Gilou’s face appear on his phone 
when he rings.

• More screentime for JP, who is always immaculately turned out – at least in 
comparison with his colleagues.

• Was Laure really eating Kraft cheese slices? I’m surprised they even exist 
in France.
 