
The founder of Sports Direct, Mike Ashley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/mike-ashley>, is taking over as chief 
executive of the troubled sports retailer, after the resignation of Dave Forsey.

The surprise move for Ashley to take a more hands-on role came after he 
admitted in a rare TV interview this week that he had taken his “eye off the 
ball”, before adding: “I’m going to fix it and I will.”

Forsey’s departure comes after months of mounting criticism of Sports Direct’s 
working practices and corporate governance by shareholders, unions and 
politicians,following a Guardian investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/sports-direct-warehouse-work-conditions>
 that exposed a climate of fear at its warehouse in Shirebrook, Derbyshire. MPs 
later likened it to a Victorian workhouse.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fmike-ashley-i-knew-little-about-sports-direct-failings-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mike%20Ashley%3A%20I%20knew%20little%20about%20Sports%20Direct%20failings%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fmike-ashley-i-knew-little-about-sports-direct-failings-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mike%20Ashley%3A%20I%20knew%20little%20about%20Sports%20Direct%20failings%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fmike-ashley-i-knew-little-about-sports-direct-failings-video&media=>
Mike Ashley: I knew little about Sports Direct failings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/video/2016/sep/20/mike-ashley-i-knew-little-about-sports-direct-failings-video>
Ashley, a majority owner of Sports Direct, which he founded in 1982, said of 
the departure of his long-serving righthand man, Forsey: “I feel like I have 
lost my right arm, but I do hope to have the opportunity to work with Dave 
again in the future.”

Sports Direct’s share price, which has taken a battering over the past 12 
months during which time the company fell out of the FTSE 100, were up nearly 
5% on Friday morning following the announcement of Forsey’s departure, to about 
300p. Twelve months ago they were changing hands at 748p.

Forsey started working for Ashley as a teenager three decades ago. In June, 
after months of criticism of the company, Forsey gave up a share award worth 
£3.7m he was due to receive next year. He has been paid a salary of £150,000 
but no annual bonus.

“I have given my entire working life to the company and in return the company 
has given me amazing opportunities and experiences,” Forsey said in a 
statement. “I wish everyone at Sports Direct well in the future.”

Sports Direct’s chairman, Keith Hellawell, who has also been under fire, 
thanked Forsey for his “significant contribution over the last 32 years and 
during a period of significant growth and change at the company”.

The company also announced that Karen Byers, its head of retail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/10/whos-who-at-sports-direct-mike-ashley>
, had been promoted to global head of operations and Sean Nevitt, head of 
buying, had been elevated to global head of commercial.

Byers, a multimillionaire, has been described as a tough “workaholic” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/26/karen-byers-sports-direct-hard-hitting-head-retail>
 and as “the person who sets the rules”. She has had a crucial role in the 
Sports Direct growth story since joining the firm 24 years ago as a shop 
manager. She caught Ashley’s eye when she sold him a pair of jeans in a store 
he was buying.

Independent retail analyst Nick Bubb said: “Poor old Dave Forsey may have 
fallen on his sword, but he did act as a human shield to Mike Ashley and it is 
not clear how somebody who admitted to MPs a few months ago that the Sports 
Direct business was getting too big for him will get on with now being the real 
CEO.”

This week, Sports Direct bowed to shareholder pressure by agreeing to an 
independent review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/20/sports-direct-bows-to-pressure-and-agrees-to-independent-review>
 of its working practices and corporate governance.

Ashley said he had not known about the poor treatment of employees but claimed 
there was little wrong at Sports Direct, telling BBC Breakfast on Tuesday that 
problems at the company’s warehouse were caused by “the odd rotten apple”.

He said: “It is odd, isolated instances. It’s the odd rotten apple in the 
barrel and then you say: ‘OK, I’ve got to go and find the rotten apple in the 
barrel’ … I’m now coming in to work very closely with HR, the warehouse and the 
[employment] agencies.”

The sportswear tycoon announced plans earlier in September to put an employee 
on the company’s board to show its willingness to listen to staff, after its 
reputation was battered bythe Guardian’s revelations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
 and a campaign by the Unite union.

Joshua Raymond, a market analyst at XTB.com, was surprised that Forsey’s 
departure had not been announced at Sports Direct’s recent annual general 
meeting. “He seemed to have come through the crisis over the firm’s working 
conditions with a vigour to rectify the problems despite huge pressure from the 
media and large shareholders.


“Nevertheless whilst the change would have long been mooted by shareholders, 
the fact Mike Ashley immediately assumes the CEO role will keep a laser focused 
attention on the firm’s ability to recover from the crisis. This point is even 
more pertinent given much of the concern focused on Ashley’s power grip on all 
aspects of the retailer, a grip which has just become even stronger.”

The company has also come under growing pressure from large City investors to 
make changes. More than half of independent shareholders (57%) failed to 
support Hellawell at the AGM, but Ashley insisted he was staying in the 
chairman role for at least another year to help him fix the problems.


The law firm Reynolds Porter Chamberlain (RPC), which has long worked with 
Ashley and Sports Direct,carried out a preliminary review published this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/06/sports-direct-to-ditch-zero-hours-contracts>
 and had been tasked with a further investigation. However, after shareholders 
called for an independent review at the retailer’s annual meeting, the company 
said it would ask someone else to conduct it.

RPC’s report, published the day before the AGM, criticised the company and 
prompted Ashley to apologise to staff for practices that were “potentially 
oppressive” at its warehouse.

Paul Lee, head of corporate governance at Aberdeen Asset Management, said 
Ashley’s move into the top job should be only temporary while the retailer 
finds a new boss from outsiode the organidsation: “My perception and my hope is 
that Ashley taking over is an interim measure while they go out and seek a new, 
strong candidate to take on the CEO role. We voted against Dave Forsey because 
we were very clear that the management team as it stood wasn’t capable of 
running the business. Ashley himself has said so.

“There may be an internal candidate but we think an external appointment is 
needed. Ashley is the heart of the business and we should be ensuring he is 
surrounded by the right team to build on the success they have had over the 
last several years, someone who is capable of managing a company of Sports 
Direct’s size and scale.”

 * Producing in-depth, thoughtful, well-reported journalism is difficult and 
expensive - but supporting us isn’t. If you value the the Guardian’s coverage 
of Sports Direct, please help to fund our journalism by becominga supporter 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/supporter?INTCMP=gdnwb_copts_editorial_mem_sportsdirectfooter_footer>
.  