
An important element of the Guardian Digital Agency's 
<https://www.theguardian.com/digital-agency> work continues to be around 
sustainability-related projects.

One of the agency's ongoing projects is the management of The Pod <>, a 
website and offline education programme. Its purpose is to encourage 
behavioural change among school children aged four to 14 around sustainability 
and the environment.

The site, managed on behalf of EDF Energy, offers a highly distinctive 
collection of activities, games and community features. All resources are 
curriculum-linked and enable teachers to invigorate their teaching in subjects 
such as science, geography, numeracy and literacy.

The Pod has become the website resource of choice for environmental 
sustainability and climate change in British schools. The Pod has more than 
15,000 schools registered and has engaged with well over 5 million children in 
the UK.

The Digital Agency has also worked on projects with Guardian Sustainable 
Business <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/sustainable-business>, such as 
producing an infographic to illustrate how SAB Miller works sustainably with 
communities around the world.

Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/>

Guardian Jobs provides digital resourcing solutions to clients through our 
main Guardian Jobs website and a variety of professional networks, especially 
Guardian Sustainable Business, but we also combine this with print-based 
advertising packages. 
 
Our primary objective during 2011-12 was to forge closer ties with 
organisations whose business was either wholly or partly environment and 
sustainability focused.
 
Despite extremely difficult conditions within the recruitment marketplace, 
particularly for public sector organisation, Guardian Jobs managed to grow 
revenue from the environmental and sustainability sector by 23% year on year. 
We achieved this by working more closely with key recruiters to identify and 
engage with relevant environmental professionals within their organisation.
 
In terms of events, we hosted environmental and sustainability recruitment 
forums at Kings Place, covering subjects such as the challenge of recruiting 
and retaining sustainability professionals. These events were heavily 
over-subscribed and will continue during the coming year.

Guardian Events <https://www.theguardian.com/events>

The events agency sits within Business & Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional> and delivers a wide range 
and variety of events for Guardian News & Media and its clients. These include 
award ceremonies, conferences, seminars, roundtables and networking receptions. 
The team also oversees the management of brand sponsorships for third-party 
events.

Many of the team have worked at GNM for a number of years, and we believe that 
working sustainably and ethically comes as second nature. New recruits have 
this brought to their attention when they join.

As a result, all events, regardless of the client, have sustainability running 
throughout – from the venue and catering to printed information.

The management team keep to appraisal dates and encourage training available 
within the business. We are strongly aware of maintaining good working 
practices – especially in times of high stress.

Volunteering is actively encouraged, and several members of the team read with 
children in local schools, while staff take the opportunity to use their 
allotted volunteering days.

Sustainability is an area of growth, and our related events are gaining real 
kudos.

Apart from the many Guardian Sustainable Business events, we also organise the 
Observer Ethical Awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/observer-ethical-awards-2012>, which 
are now in their 7th year. They are an opportunity for the Observer to 
recognise and reward the very best products, innovations and schemes that make 
living ethically both accessible and aspirational.

The Observer is well placed to initiate these awards, with Lucy Siegle's 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/lucysiegle> column in Observer Magazine 
providing authority and profile to ethical issues on a weekly basis.

Winners might range from a high-street multinational that has changed its 
buying strategy to a group of art students who have developed an urban hen 
house.

Categories cover aspects that affect our lives, from ethical building design 
to recognising young people who are tackling ethical issues.
 