
Around the giant pool of the Mediterranean Palace hotel in Tenerife hundreds 
of people are focused on a familiar star. As pounding bass-filled music booms 
out of the PA, a great mass of the young, the middle-aged and the old are all 
glazed with submission as they appear to seek the meaning of the universe in 
the transformative process of ultraviolet radiation.

A few yards away in a darkened auditorium beneath a strange mock pinkish 
pyramid theStarmus festival <http://www.starmus.com/speakers/> is under way. 
Dedicated to celebrating a synthesis between astronomy and music that is of a 
more transcendent kind than that practised around the Mediterranean Palace 
pool, it has drawn hundreds of people focused on very different but no less 
familiar stars:Brian Cox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/02/professor-brian-cox-interview-forces-of-nature>
,Richard Dawkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/may/29/selfish-gene-40-years-richard-dawkins-do-ideas-stand-up-adam-rutherford>
,Brian May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/29/brian-may-owl-stereoscope-interview>
 and, the greatest scientific supernova of them all,Stephen Hawking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/video/2016/may/31/stephen-hawking-on-eu-referendum-britain-risks-being-isolated-video>
.

These, along with 11 Nobel laureates, are some of the leading speakers at the 
third Starmus festival at the Pirámide de Arona, an island of vaulting 
intellectual aspiration surrounded by tourist hotels with armies of sunbathers 
fastened to their poolside loungers as if by superglue.

Starmus is an unusual affair, but not necessarily for its setting. It’s not a 
typical science conference for academics at which new papers are presented. Nor 
is it a typical public talk designed to popularise established academic 
theories. Instead it’s a sort of hybrid – at once specialist and popularising, 
openly public, and yet sufficiently off-circuit to feel discreetly private. It 
also seeks to bridge the separate worlds of science and the arts or, more 
specifically, music and cosmology. The brainchild of a bearded Armenian 
astrophysicist,Garik Israelian <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garik_Israelian>, 
Starmus was first held in 2011.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fstarmus-festival-tenerfie-stephen-hawking-brian-cox-eno-may-dawkins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6128f5461831cca419993e9cb489abf8199aeb48%2F367_46_1150_1150%2F1150.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Starmus%20festival%3A%20enough%20brains%20and%20Brians%20to%20fill%20the%20multiverse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fstarmus-festival-tenerfie-stephen-hawking-brian-cox-eno-may-dawkins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Starmus%20festival%3A%20enough%20brains%20and%20Brians%20to%20fill%20the%20multiverse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fstarmus-festival-tenerfie-stephen-hawking-brian-cox-eno-may-dawkins%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6128f5461831cca419993e9cb489abf8199aeb48%2F367_46_1150_1150%2F1150.jpg>
 Starmus festival’s director, Armenian astrophysicist Garik Israelian. 
Photograph: Ramon de la Rocha/EPA 
Israelian’s original idea was to do a concert at La Palma observatory 
<http://www.astrolapalma.com/>, which features the world’s largest optical and 
infrared telescope. A disarming 53-year-old with a scattershot charm, Israelian 
had been working atNasa <https://www.nasa.gov/> “trying to get acoustic sound 
waves in stellar atmospheres” and wondered if musicians might be able to use 
his collection. He approachedJean-Michel Jarre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/15/jean-michel-jarre-all-people-new-album-geeks>
, who was keen on the idea, only for the concert to be cancelled when the 
Canary Islands government withdrew funding.

Undeterred, Israelian decided to commemorate the 50th anniversary of Yuri 
Gagarin <https://www.theguardian.com/science/yuri-gagarin>’s first space flight 
with a festival in 2011. That was the first Starmus. In one sense it was a 
tremendous success because the keynote speaker wasNeil Armstrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/aug/25/neil-armstrong>, the first man 
to walk on the moon and someone whose public appearances were so rare as to 
raise suspicion of their authenticity.

“When we announced Neil Armstrong was coming,” Israelian recalls, “we 
completely lost our credibility because no one believed he was going to be 
there. People said we were crazy. It was the worst thing we could do. And then 
he came!”

Armstrong’s fellow crew member Buzz Aldrin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2009/jul/04/buzz-aldrin-moon-space-apollo> 
was also there, as well as Jim Lovell, commander of the ill-fated Apollo 13 who 
was played by Tom Hanks in theeponymous film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/17/apollo-13-tom-hanks-space-ron-howard>
. In addition there was the progressive electronic bandTangerine Dream 
<http://www.tangerinedream.org/>.

However, in financial terms it was a disaster. Admission was free for most 
visitors, there was no sponsorship, and Israelian and his co-producers were 
left to pick up a hefty bill. But that didn’t stop them holding asecond Starmus 
<http://starmusfestival2014.starmus.com/en/starmus-festival-and-stephen-hawking-launch-the-book-starmus-50-years-of-man-in-space/>
, again on Tenerife. This time Stephen Hawking came. He was a massive draw, but 
once again the festival lost money. Israelian talks darkly of broken promises 
by the Canary Islands government and the disappointing lack of sponsorship.

They say that one definition of madness is to keep doing the same thing and to 
expect different results. If so, then Israelian is mad in the best tradition of 
mad professors, because he came back for a third time with a cast list that was 
starrier than ever.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fstarmus-festival-tenerfie-stephen-hawking-brian-cox-eno-may-dawkins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fafa1742a2c7aab13ccf80b3259ce925c97cc4352%2F0_120_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Starmus%20festival%3A%20enough%20brains%20and%20Brians%20to%20fill%20the%20multiverse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fstarmus-festival-tenerfie-stephen-hawking-brian-cox-eno-may-dawkins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Starmus%20festival%3A%20enough%20brains%20and%20Brians%20to%20fill%20the%20multiverse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fstarmus-festival-tenerfie-stephen-hawking-brian-cox-eno-may-dawkins%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fafa1742a2c7aab13ccf80b3259ce925c97cc4352%2F0_120_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Brian Cox with the US astrophysicist Neil deGrasse Tyson. Photograph: Ramon de 
la Rocha/EPA 
Not until you’ve seen Brian Cox <https://www.theguardian.com/science/brian-cox>
 at a gathering of science buffs can you appreciate how much the awe-filled 
physicist and TV personality is adored by his public. To walk alongside him 
though the Pirámide de Arona is to be submerged by a sea of autograph hunters 
and selfie-takers. Unlike Dawkins, who looks as if he can’t wait to get to the 
green room, Cox seems to relish the attention. What did he think of his 
first Starmus?

“It’s brilliant,” he says, tucking into an ice-cream. “There’s a lot of time 
to talk to the speakers. And you don’t normally get people like Brian Eno, 
Brian May andHans Zimmer <http://www.hans-zimmer.com/> in the same room as 
Stephen Hawking andJoe Stiglitz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/josephstiglitz>.”

Prof Brian Cox: ‘Being anti-expert – that’s the way back to the cave’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/02/professor-brian-cox-interview-forces-of-nature>
We talk about Eno <https://www.theguardian.com/music/brianeno>’s lecture in 
which he discussed the intimate relationship between science and art, one the 
legendary music producer and former Roxy Music synthesiser player characterised 
as “science discovers and art digests”.

“He’s right,” says Cox. “If you look at the history of astronomy, these ideas 
of finding our place in the universe have had a massive social impact. The 
obvious one is the relegation of the Earth from the centre of it. That battle 
to define whether or not we’re special was one of the defining battles of the 
17th century onward. Our physical demotion is now widely accepted, but what of 
the emotional impact if you start talking asBrian Greene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/audio/2011/mar/21/science-weekly-podcast-brian-greene-tim-jackson>
 andMartin Rees <https://www.theguardian.com/science/martin-rees> [two other 
speakers] did about themultiverse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/audio/2014/dec/01/multiverse-podcast-parallel-universes>
. What does it mean if there are an infinite number of these pocket universes? 
If that’s the case, we’re not geographically significant. We’re not even lucky. 
We’re just inevitable. Does that matter?”

Good question, but I’m not sure that I’ve fully mastered the concept of an 
infinite number of pocket universes, so I silently nod with as much sagacity as 
I can muster.

“The fact that we’re in an insignificant physical speck in a possibly infinite 
universe,” he continues, “is as easy or difficult to accept as that we are a 
very tiny temporal speck in a possibly infinite time span. We know how to deal 
with that, with death and a finite life time. There is an interesting parallel 
to be drawn. But it’s a conversation that won’t be had by physicists. It’s a 
conversation that’s best had in art, philosophy, literature and theology. 
That’s where the meaning of the things we discover about the universe is teased 
out.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fstarmus-festival-tenerfie-stephen-hawking-brian-cox-eno-may-dawkins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae87344877b9947afa5d40b6cf9cef0334b076e4%2F0_142_2047_2045%2F2047.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Starmus%20festival%3A%20enough%20brains%20and%20Brians%20to%20fill%20the%20multiverse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fstarmus-festival-tenerfie-stephen-hawking-brian-cox-eno-may-dawkins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Starmus%20festival%3A%20enough%20brains%20and%20Brians%20to%20fill%20the%20multiverse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fstarmus-festival-tenerfie-stephen-hawking-brian-cox-eno-may-dawkins%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae87344877b9947afa5d40b6cf9cef0334b076e4%2F0_142_2047_2045%2F2047.jpg>
 Brian May... looks how Isaac Newton might if he’d ever rammed wet fingers into 
a plug socket. Photograph: Everett/Rex/Shutterstock 
Back in the darkened auditorium with its decorative scattering of fairy lights 
– to suggest the stellar illuminations of the cosmos? – Hawking is wheeled on 
stage. Hawking, as Cox says, is “iconic”, but as the presenter ofForces of 
Nature 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/10/the-week-in-tv-forces-nature-brian-cox-brief-encounters-boy-meets-girl-life-stripped-bare>
 also noted, his extraordinary image, the great brain trapped inside the 
paralysed body, has tended to overshadow his achievements, at least in the mind 
of the general public.

“He’s up there with the best,” says Cox. “Several of the things we take for 
granted – black holes, Big Bang, singularity – those are his contributions.”

Like everyone, Hawking pre-writes his speech – entitled A Brief History of Mine
 <http://www.channel4.com/programmes/stephen-hawking-a-brief-history-of-mine> – 
in his case by selecting the appropriate letters on his computer by moving a 
keyboard sensor with his cheek. But unlike everyone else, he records the 
speech, which is then issued one sentence at a time by another movement of 
his cheek.

The speech is a bit like an audio version of the film The Theory of Everything 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Salz7uGp72c>, with a gallop through Hawking’s 
life story plus key moments of scientific breakthroughs. Interestingly, he 
estimates that as a lazy Oxford undergraduate, he worked for 1,000 hours in his 
three years – so much for Malcolm Gladwell’s10,000-hour theory 
<http://gladwell.com/outliers/the-10000-hour-rule/> as the basis for genius. 
Several times there are long pauses, and a cosmic silence pervades the 
auditorium, until an assistant comes on stage to reboot Hawking’s computer. At 
the end of a funny, moving and profound speech there is a standing ovation.

A little while later there is a comedy musical tribute to Hawking by the 
American musician and web developer Ken Lawrence, who goes by the stage name of 
MC Hawking. He performs rap and hip-hop employing gangsta-style slang mixed in 
with the esteemed scientist’s quotes.

It’s sort of clever, even impressive in a way, but painfully unfunny, though 
that doesn’t stop people laughing. Among the most conspicuously entertained 
during a chorus of “Black hole yo!” is the Queen guitarist and doctoral 
astrophysicist Brian May, sitting in the front row. With his long frizz of 
white hair, May looks howIsaac Newton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2013/may/12/the-10-best-physicists>
 might have looked if he’d had the opportunity to ram his wet fingers into an 
electric plug socket. “That was what Starmus is all about,” says Cox afterwards.

The session closes with an inspirational talk by the astronaut Chris Hadfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/chris-hadfield>, who had a big hit on 
YouTube with his rendition of David Bowie’sSpace Oddity 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KaOC9danxNo>, recorded during his five-month 
spell up in the International Space Station. He argues that peopled space 
travel is a vital part of humanity’s fundamental desire to explore. Before 
that, though, there’s a discussion between Dawkins and the astrophysicist 
Steven Balbus about life on other planets. If it exists, says Dawkins, he 
believes that it’s governed by the laws of evolution.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fstarmus-festival-tenerfie-stephen-hawking-brian-cox-eno-may-dawkins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdec1acd82ed3e992a295dc6665c15406133e32bc%2F0_91_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Starmus%20festival%3A%20enough%20brains%20and%20Brians%20to%20fill%20the%20multiverse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fstarmus-festival-tenerfie-stephen-hawking-brian-cox-eno-may-dawkins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Starmus%20festival%3A%20enough%20brains%20and%20Brians%20to%20fill%20the%20multiverse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fstarmus-festival-tenerfie-stephen-hawking-brian-cox-eno-may-dawkins%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdec1acd82ed3e992a295dc6665c15406133e32bc%2F0_91_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 US planetary scientist Carolyn Porco, one of only four female speakers at 
Starmus. Photograph: Ramon de la Rocha/EPA 
Dawkins has appeared at every Starmus, but he doesn’t look any more 
comfortable for the experience. Perhaps it’s because – I’m told – he’s staying 
at the Mediterranean Palace. That thumping bass could get to the most relaxed 
of people, and not even his most devoted fans would describe him as relaxed.

The following day there is a round-table event at the observatory in La Palma. 
It lasts 108 minutes – the time taken for Gagarin’s first trip into space – and 
features eight great minds discussing various aspects of space exploration, 
global issues such as climate change and public communication. Seven of them 
are men – all white and middle aged or older – and one is a woman. Of the 
39 speakers listed for the whole week, only four are women. There are more men 
called Brian – five of them. And there is one solitary non-white face (the 
astrophysicistNeil deGrasse Tyson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/24/neil-degrasse-tyson-national-geographic-channel-startalk>
).

I asked Israelian if the lack of diversity was an issue for him. “No, no. I 
don’t think about such things,” he says, irritated by the question. “I invited 
many female scientists and they couldn’t come. I’ve got limited time – I cannot 
keep inviting people to get 50%. That’s not my problem.”

The round table debate turns out to be quite dull, with everyone speaking in 
optimistic platitudes or pessimistic generalities. It’s not a forum for deep 
expertise but strong opinion and it turns out that in a group debate the sum is 
less than its parts.

The debate is streamed live on the internet and also into the auditorium 
beneath the pyramid in Tenerife, which is about half full. As the crowd files 
out I take a good look at them. They’re much younger on average than the 
speakers and, in terms of gender at least, much more representative of the 
outside world.

I speak to a 40-year-old physics student called Raquel Rodriguez. If you were 
looking for a stereotype of an astro-nerd, then Rodriguez is not where you’d 
start. She looks like Sharon Stone inBasic Instinct and tells me her favourite 
area of discussion is “dark matter and quantum physics”.

Then there’s a 32-year-old Norwegian nurse called Guro Nygård. Her brother 
brought her here for the week as a birthday present. She’s fascinated by 
astronomy, she says, though this is the first time she’s been to such an event. 
Her personal highlight from the week was seeing Hawking. “He’s unbelievable,” 
she says. “His personal history is truly amazing.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fstarmus-festival-tenerfie-stephen-hawking-brian-cox-eno-may-dawkins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c3f4e10f2d64e66eae7f3aef09dfc43b444433b%2F0_86_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Starmus%20festival%3A%20enough%20brains%20and%20Brians%20to%20fill%20the%20multiverse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fstarmus-festival-tenerfie-stephen-hawking-brian-cox-eno-may-dawkins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Starmus%20festival%3A%20enough%20brains%20and%20Brians%20to%20fill%20the%20multiverse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fstarmus-festival-tenerfie-stephen-hawking-brian-cox-eno-may-dawkins%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c3f4e10f2d64e66eae7f3aef09dfc43b444433b%2F0_86_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Bono and Dave Howell, aka The Edge, give a speech at the Starmus closing gala. 
Photograph: Ramon de la Rocha/EPA 
Both women noticed the imbalance between men and women but both believed the 
key thing was to get the best people and that gender, in the short term, was a 
secondary issue.

I find 36-year-old Sam Alexandroni talking to a neuroscientist, a brain 
surgeon and a rocket scientist. He used to be ajournalist at the New Statesman 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/writers/315138>, he says, but now he’s writing a 
novel. “My teachers did a miserable job at school of communicating the wonder 
of science. Having discovered it later in life, events like this are brilliant 
for communicating ideas,” he says. As for combining the sciences and the arts, 
Alexandroni is all for it, though he says he’s “yet to experience the synergy” 
at Starmus.

The much-anticipated synergy is due to occur the following day at the closing 
Sonic Universe concert, featuring the woman who lost her heart to a starship 
trooper,Sarah Brightman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jan/16/sarah-brightman-begins-training-for-space-station-trip-after-paying-34m>
, along with the Tenerife Symphony Orchestra, Chris Hadfield and Rick Wakeman 
doing some Bowie, Hans Zimmer the Hollywood composer, and guest artist Brian 
May.

But sadly I won’t be there. It’s time to pick up my things from the 
Mediterranean Palace and take to the skies back to London. As I leave, the 
prostate worshippers of solar energy are still pursuing melanogenesis to the 
accompaniment of a bludgeoning Eurobeat. Science never stops. And nor, alas, 
does the music.

Chris Hadfield Q&A
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fstarmus-festival-tenerfie-stephen-hawking-brian-cox-eno-may-dawkins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6bc1ac8b0470eb93f9fa9da666e116718440402a%2F0_599_7908_4746%2F7908.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Starmus%20festival%3A%20enough%20brains%20and%20Brians%20to%20fill%20the%20multiverse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fstarmus-festival-tenerfie-stephen-hawking-brian-cox-eno-may-dawkins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Starmus%20festival%3A%20enough%20brains%20and%20Brians%20to%20fill%20the%20multiverse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fstarmus-festival-tenerfie-stephen-hawking-brian-cox-eno-may-dawkins%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6bc1ac8b0470eb93f9fa9da666e116718440402a%2F0_599_7908_4746%2F7908.jpg>
 Chris Hadfield: ‘In 2,600 orbits of the world you start to get a completely 
unfettered understanding’ Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
Chris Hadfield, 56, is a retired Canadian astronaut who served as commander of 
the International Space Station and became a viral sensation on the internet 
with his rendition of David Bowie’sSpace Oddity 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KaOC9danxNo>.

Did you ever get to have any communication with David Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/davidbowie>?
Yeah, I did. I never met him in person. I wish I had, but in order to do what 
we did, of course we needed his blessing and he was gracious enough to give us 
very heavily the thumbs-up. He loved the result and said it was the most 
poignant version ever. Everything I did with him he just came across as a 
thoughtful, funny, original gentleman of a guy.

How did you come to Starmus?
I got to know Brian May <https://www.theguardian.com/music/brian-may>. I 
forget how. I think we were conversing from space actually. Then I spent some 
time with him in Australia and we just hit it off. So I think it was initially 
Brian who sent a note to me saying, “Hey, this is going on. You should come if 
you can.”

David Bowie loved the result and said it was the most poignant version ever

How has being in space change you as a person?
Really, it did two things. It gave me a different perspective, and it gave me 
a level of public voice that I didn’t have before. So then the eternal question 
is, what do you do with what you are? Do I sell soap or do I buy a yacht? I 
mean I can’t afford to buy a yacht, but I’m just saying, what do I decide to do 
with fame? For me, the internal change that came from space flight clarified an 
understanding of what the world truly is. I think somewhere in my 2,600 orbits, 
you start to get a completely unfettered understanding of the world. You start 
to understand what four and a half billion years means.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKaOC9danxNo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKaOC9danxNo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKaOC9danxNo&media=>
Watch Chris Hadfield perform Space Oddity. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KaOC9danxNo> 
There’s also the commonality of the human experience. If you come to 
Tenerife you’ll kind of focus on the differences – how is this place different 
than where I am, or where I grew up, or they’re stupid here because it’s 
different to the way I do it. But if you goover Tenerife, and a few seconds 
later over the Cape Verde, and then you cross Africa and then you cross 
Madagascar, then you come across Perth and then you’re coming around to Sydney 
and that happens over and over and over again – it’s the similarities of the 
human experience that predominate. And therefore, obviously pretty quickly, the 
shared nature of life and the fact that our objectives, no matter what 
political or religious system we were raised with, have a lot more in common 
than they do apart.

Should human exploration stop? That’s a ridiculous expectation because human 
exploration is innate

Did you ever find that overwhelming? I mean, how do you not crack up with the 
weight of that perspective?
The people who have had epiphanies of various sorts or have cracked up, almost 
all of them were in the previous generation of space explorers. Because at that 
time we threw people into space with a purely technical purpose and almost no 
human preparation. This was the cold war and we gotta win it, so details be 
damned. So guys came back from the moon, and some of the cosmonauts... some of 
them came back alcoholic, depressed or with a religious epiphany. And no one 
ever treated them the same again.

Neil came back a recluse because that was the only way he could deal with it; 
Buzz came back an alcoholic, but he turned that around. I don’t know anyone in 
the latter-day era who has had an epiphany. I think it’s spiritual and 
immensely contemplative, but we prepare for it psychologically. We have a whole 
team of support people and psychiatrists. They put the guitar on the space 
station, and a movie library. They build us psychological support equipment.

You’re a believer in a peopled mission to Mars.
Well, it’s not a belief system. That misrepresents the fundamental question 
which is: should human exploration stop? That’s a ridiculous expectation 
because human exploration is innate. We learn to walk way before we learn to 
talk. You have to be able to explore in order to develop as a human being. A 
little toddler making odd decisions that are enabled by mobility is how we 
discovered everything. It took a long time to be able to see what’s over the 
ocean or even across the Red Sea. It took even longer to cross the Tasman 
Strait, or all the way down to Antarctica, and even longer to fly – and then 
even longer to fly above the atmosphere. But it’s all the same. There is 
nothing magic about space exploration.Space 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/space> is just an adjective.
 