
‘We all feel alone and isolated at times,” says Stephen Graham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/stephen-graham>. “You question whether you’ve 
been a good father, husband, friend. That’s human instinct, asking what we’re 
trying to achieve with our lives.”

It’s easy to see why an actor like Graham would fancy a show like The Watchman 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/the-watchman?promo=coming_soon>. More or 
less a single-hander, it casts him as Carl, a solitary CCTV operator who tries 
to bring down some drug dealers on an estate after the police refuse to respond 
to his tip-offs. For someone rarely granted leading-man status (“I’m never 
going to be Mr Darcy, but I’m always going to be the man that kicks Mr Darcy in 
the balls,” he has said), it’s a gift.

It slots into a frankly chaotic CV that has embraced Hollywood blockbusters 
(Gangs of New York, Pirates of the Caribbean), prestige TV (Boardwalk Empire, 
This is England) and microbudget indies (too many to mention) since his 2000 
breakthrough inSnatch <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nd7df-Yv_Z4>. Perhaps 
the only common thread is how many roles have leant on his coiled, pitbull 
physicality. Here, though, the cameras are trained, for much of the hour, on 
his face. I watch Graham filming a scene in the Watford warehouse that contains 
the CCTV station. His expression morphs from anger to fear and, finally, mute 
horror as Carl’s plans go south. It’s mesmerising.

“I’ve got to be at the peak of my concentration all the time,” he says. “It’s 
great because it adds to the pressure Carl’s feeling.” He picks up this thread 
a few weeks later, chatting from his home in Leicestershire, where he lives 
with his wife Hannah Walters (who played Trudy in This is England) and children 
Grace and Alfie. “I’ve had moments where I could have gone down one road but 
took another,” he says. “Thankfully, I made the right decisions most of the 
time. And I’d rather not elaborate,” he adds, pre-empting my next question.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fstephen-graham-tvs-most-terrifying-mesmerising-hard-nut-this-is-england-combo-the-watchman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60bc9accbbdd50b7e01d760b6c1f808f3741c66a%2F0_81_1299_779%2F1299.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stephen%20Graham%3A%20TV's%20most%20terrifying%20%E2%80%93%20and%20mesmerising%20%E2%80%93%20hardnut&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fstephen-graham-tvs-most-terrifying-mesmerising-hard-nut-this-is-england-combo-the-watchman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stephen%20Graham%3A%20TV%27s%20most%20terrifying%20%E2%80%93%20and%20mesmerising%20%E2%80%93%20hardnut&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fstephen-graham-tvs-most-terrifying-mesmerising-hard-nut-this-is-england-combo-the-watchman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60bc9accbbdd50b7e01d760b6c1f808f3741c66a%2F0_81_1299_779%2F1299.jpg>
 ‘I was going to pack it in and become a youth worker’ … after he played Combo 
in This is England, no one in the industry would touch him. Photograph: 
Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
Off-set, Graham is as disarmingly genial as his best-known characters – This 
is England’s National Front hardnut Combo, Boardwalk Empire’s rising crimelord 
Al Capone – are dangerously sociopathic. He concedes that he’d certainly take 
the law into his own hands if his children were in danger. “But I’m lucky,” he 
adds. “I can express those urges through my characters, without having to do it 
myself.”

Without his family, he might have given it all up. So incendiary was his 2006 
debut as Combo that casting directors wouldn’t touch him. “I couldn’t get work 
for eight months,” he says. “I was going to pack it in and become a youth 
worker, but Hannah told me to stick at it. She’s talked me down off mountains 
at work. I was on recently about having had a heavy day, thinking about losing 
the kids to get myself upset for a scene. She said: ‘All you’re doing is 
pretending to get upset about the kids, love. I’ve been doing that for real 
since seven this morning!’ There wasn’t much I could say to that …”

It’s no coincidence that family, surrogate or otherwise, humanises his 
greatest screen monsters, whether it’s Capone’s concern for his deaf son or 
Combo’s doomed devotion to Lol. Indeed, Combo was last seen being dragged off 
to apparent certain death screaming the names “Grace” and “Alfie”.

“We decided Combo had been in care after saving his brother and sister from an 
abusive relationship, so I used my children’s names to get into character.” It 
wasn’t the first time real family has intruded. “My uncle John’s been in prison 
for 15 years, and the letter Combo reads out to the parole board is exactly 
what my uncle said when he was up to be moved to a category D prison. He phoned 
me and said he cried watching it – it was one of the most beautiful things I’ve 
ever experienced.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fstephen-graham-tvs-most-terrifying-mesmerising-hard-nut-this-is-england-combo-the-watchman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7cd49d972215913d911ddbdaaaa4a4507d74e36d%2F0_108_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stephen%20Graham%3A%20TV's%20most%20terrifying%20%E2%80%93%20and%20mesmerising%20%E2%80%93%20hardnut&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fstephen-graham-tvs-most-terrifying-mesmerising-hard-nut-this-is-england-combo-the-watchman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stephen%20Graham%3A%20TV%27s%20most%20terrifying%20%E2%80%93%20and%20mesmerising%20%E2%80%93%20hardnut&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fstephen-graham-tvs-most-terrifying-mesmerising-hard-nut-this-is-england-combo-the-watchman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7cd49d972215913d911ddbdaaaa4a4507d74e36d%2F0_108_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 ‘I’m never going to be Mr Darcy’ … Graham as Carl in The Watchman. Photograph: 
Laura Radford/Channel 4 
The final series won more Baftas, although Graham lost out to Mark Rylance. “I 
take it with a pinch of salt,” he says. “It’s nice for me and Hannah to get 
dressed up, though sometimes I feel the industry should use that money to do 
something more constructive.”

This is England’s ensemble is a rare exception to the idea that acting is now 
a closed shop for the rich. “I was asked recently: ‘What do you think is wrong 
with the youth of today?’” says Graham. “Well, we’re very quick to point the 
finger and forget we were that age once ourselves. It’s easier to chastise than 
to encourage, promote and provide opportunities to excel. I used to go to the 
youth club every day after school. Some children just go home to their bedrooms 
because that’s the only space they have to themselves. The cutbacks are 
dramatic, but there has to be a way to turn it round.”

Ten years on from his first outing as Combo, he is in ceaseless demand. 
There’s Taboo, a period drama series with Tom Hardy. Little Boy Blue, a 
miniseries about the Rhys James shooting in 2007. The latest instalment of 
Pirates of the Caribbean. Even a rare comedy, playing opposite Jack Whitehall 
in the BBC’s Evelyn Waugh adaptation Decline and Fall. “I just want to keep 
doing something that has a voice,” he says. “I can come into people’s living 
rooms and make them think about themselves and about society.”

 What options were open to you when you were young, I ask, half-expecting a 
story of narrowed horizons in Thatcher-era Merseyside. “Anything,” he says. “My 
parents gave me that belief. They made sure I had opportunities, even when they 
had to scrimp and save for me to go away with the National Youth Theatre. I 
could have done anything.”

The Watchman is on Channel 4 at 9pm on Wednesday 24 August.
 