
It was the culmination of a film festival that attempted to correct a bias 
against celebrating black screen talent:Steve McQueen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/steve-mcqueen>, the film-maker, 
screenwriter and Turner prizewinning artist, was awarded the British Film 
Institute fellowship on Saturday by his friend and collaborator, the actor 
Michael Fassbender, in a starry awards ceremony that closed the annual London 
film festival. McQueen is the first black director or producer to receive the 
film industry honour.

The director of 12 Years a Slave celebrated his achievement with his producer 
wife, Bianca Stigter, and family and friends at a gala dinner in Whitehall’s 
historic Banqueting Hall, also attended by film stars Alicia Vikander, Gugu 
Mbatha-Raw, Anna Friel, Lily James, David Tennant, Kerry Fox, Matthew Macfadyen 
and Michael Sheen, who hosted the awards ceremony.

London-born McQueen, best known to film fans for his Oscar-winning epic story 
of a slave’s struggle for freedom in pre-civil war America, follows in the 
footsteps of Australian actress Cate Blanchett, who won the accolade last year, 
and British director Stephen Frears, who was honoured in 2014. Previous 
recipients include the late Sir Christopher Lee.

Fassbender described his friend as a “sensitive and dangerous” man as he 
introduced him, adding: “He’s like a very light hippo – an anomaly.”

McQueen used his acceptance speech to highlight the festival’s theme of 
encouraging diversity, describing himself as working class. “There are only two 
things I really know,” he said. “One of them is that I’m black and the other 
one is that I’m a Londoner. Everything else I don’t know. But I know I’ve had 
the possibility of exploring and of being reckless and of experimenting because 
I didn’t pay to go to university.

“I had the freedom to experiment and it seems to me that is being slowly 
eradicated. It is our job in this room to keep these doors open for people who 
don’t have all those chances.”

The award of the fellowship was the culmination of the BFI’s attempts to put 
black artists on centre stage, with aBlack Star season of films  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/13/bfi-black-star-uk-season-celebrating-black-cinema>
to follow.

“As winner of both the Turner prize and an Academy Award, Steve is pre-eminent 
in the world of film and the moving image. He is one of the most influential 
and important British artists of the past 25 years and his work, both short and 
long form, has consistently explored the endurance of humanity – even when it 
is confronted by inhumane cruelty – with a poetry and visual style that he has 
made his own,” said Josh Berger, chairman of theBFI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bfi>.

“We are thrilled that Steve has become a BFI fellow.”

Before striking Oscar gold in 2014, McQueen, 47, stepped nimbly between the 
world of art to the world of film with his acclaimed 2008 first featureHunger. 
Starring Fassbender as hunger striker Bobby Sands, it won the Camera d’Or at 
the Cannes film festival and many other international prizes.

His uncompromising second full-length feature, Shame, also starred Fassbender, 
alongside Carey Mulligan, and told a bleak story of sexual addiction. It won 
two best film awards when it premiered at the Venice film festival in 2011, as 
well as winning Fassbender the Volpi Cup for best actor.

McQueen’s biggest hit, 12 Years A Slave, was adapted from the memoir of 
Solomon Northup, a former black slave from New York state, and was released in 
2013, starring Chiwetel Ejiofor, Lupita Nyong’o, Brad Pitt and, once again, 
Fassbender. The director is currently working on heist thrillerWidows, with a 
screenplay written by Gillian Flynn, author ofGone Girl. It is based on Lynda 
La Plante’s 1980s TV series.

During his career as a groundbreaking contemporary artist, McQueen often 
worked in film and video and was awarded an Institute of Contemporary Arts 
Futures award in 1996 in recognition of his promise. Shortly after, he picked 
up a scholarship to Berlin and exhibited at the ICA site and at the Kunsthalle 
in Zürich, Switzerland, before winning the coveted Turner prize with footage 
that paid homage to the silent film era in Hollywood.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fbfi-fellowship-steve-mcqueen-first-black-recipient%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feefd5655e394b420299a83326e7028a6c09f30fb%2F0_116_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Steve%20McQueen%20honoured%20with%20BFI%20fellowship%20at%20London%20film%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fbfi-fellowship-steve-mcqueen-first-black-recipient%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Steve%20McQueen%20honoured%20with%20BFI%20fellowship%20at%20London%20film%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fbfi-fellowship-steve-mcqueen-first-black-recipient%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feefd5655e394b420299a83326e7028a6c09f30fb%2F0_116_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
 Michael Fassbender as Edwin Epps and Chiwetel Ejiofor as Solomon Northup in 12 
Years a Slave. Photograph: Allstar 
His artwork found controversy in 2003, when he was appointed official war 
artist for the Iraq war by the Imperial War Museum and producedthe project 
Queen and Country <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2007/mar/12/iraq.art>, 
which is still ongoing and features sheets of postage stamps bearing images of 
the faces of soldiers killed in action. His artwork is held in museums around 
the world and the Art Institute of Chicago and the Schaulager in Basel, 
Switzerland, have recently mounted a solo show of his work. He was awarded the 
OBE in 2002 and the CBE in 2011.

The film Certain Women, directed by Kelly Reichardt, was the big festival 
competition winner on Saturday night, when it was selected as best film. 
Reichardt’s film is a study of the lives of three very different women living 
in Montana. “In a vibrant year for cinema, it was the masterful mise en scène 
and quiet modesty of this film that determined our choice for best film. A 
humane and poignant story that calibrates with startling vulnerability and 
delicate understatement the isolation, frustrations and loneliness of lives 
unlived in a quiet corner of rural America,” said the jury.

The winning film in the first feature category, receiving the Sutherland 
Award, was Julia Ducournau’s shocking but playful tale of horrorRAW, about a 
young woman’s insatiable appetite for flesh.

The Grierson award for best documentary of the festival went to Starless Dreams
 which was written, produced and directed by Merhdad Oskouei and is a complex 
portrait of juvenile delinquent women at the extreme margins of Iranian society.

Directed by the team of Issa Touma, a Syrian photographer, Thomas Vroege and 
Floor van de Muelen,9 Days – From My Window in Aleppo was the winner in the 
short film category.

THE NIGHT’S WINNERS

Best Film Certain Women, directed by Kelly Reichardt. A study of the lives of 
three very different women living in Montana.

The Sutherland Award for First Feature Raw, directed by Julia Ducournau. A 
shocking but playful tale of horror about a young woman’s insatiable appetite 
for flesh.

The Grierson Award for Best Documentary Starless Dreams, written, produced and 
directed by Mehrdad Oskouei. A complex portrait of juvenile delinquent women at 
the extreme margins of Iranian society.

Best Short Film 9 Days: From My Window in Aleppo, written by Issa Touma, a 
Syrian photographer, and directed by Thomas Vroege and Floor van der Muelen.

BFI Fellowship Steve McQueen, director of 12 Years a Slave, Hunger and Shame, 
for his achievement in film.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fbfi-fellowship-steve-mcqueen-first-black-recipient%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d4e00bee0618e9e5bf07a5191f81386d3d385b3%2F0_110_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Steve%20McQueen%20honoured%20with%20BFI%20fellowship%20at%20London%20film%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fbfi-fellowship-steve-mcqueen-first-black-recipient%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Steve%20McQueen%20honoured%20with%20BFI%20fellowship%20at%20London%20film%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fbfi-fellowship-steve-mcqueen-first-black-recipient%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d4e00bee0618e9e5bf07a5191f81386d3d385b3%2F0_110_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 McQueen on the Set of 12 Years with Lupita Nyong’o, who won an Oscar for her 
role as Patsey. Photograph: Allstar  