
Steve Bruce <https://www.theguardian.com/football/steve-bruce> has outlined 
his vision for Aston Villa and revealed that one of his first moves upon 
becoming the club’s new manager was to allow Gabriel Agbonlahor to train with 
the first team again after a long period in the cold for the one-time captain.

Looking relaxed and refreshed, not to mention thinner, Bruce made his first 
public appearance as Roberto Di Matteo’s successor on Thursday. The 55-year-old 
described returning Villa to the Premier League at the first time of asking – 
with the club 19th in the Championship having won one of their first 11 games 
of the season – as the “biggest challenge” of his career but, after achieving a 
record four promotions from the second tier, he believes he can do that by 
bringing “spirit and passion” to the club. He also relayed that message to his 
squad – he took his first training session at Villa’s Bodymoor Heath before 
meeting the media there.

Steve Bruce shapes up to rewrite history with Aston Villa makeover | Louise 
Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/13/steve-bruce-aston-villa-championship-sunderland-hull-birmingham>
That includes Agbonlahor, who has not played for Villa since March having been 
suspended by the club in April after he was pictured smoking a shisha pipe 
while on holiday in Dubai. The 30-year-old, who came through Villa’s youth 
ranks and is their leading Premier League goalscorer with 73 goals in 322 
games, was then ordered by the then caretaker manager Eric Black to improve his 
fitness before being told by Di Matteo at the start of this season that he was 
not part of his plans. The forward has subsequently been training with the 
under-23s while looking for a new club.

But Bruce is adamant that every member of his squad is starting afresh under 
his charge – and that includes Agbonlahor. “I’ve said to them [the players] 
that I’ve got no problem with any of them and that means Gabby, too,” Bruce 
said. “He’s had his problems and he’s got to get himself into some sort of 
condition but, yes [he is training with the first team].”

Bruce resigned as Hull manager in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/22/steve-bruce-leaves-hull> and 
has become the sixth man to take charge of Villa in the past 12 months and the 
second in five years to have also managed city rivals, Birmingham. But while 
Alex McLeish’s arrival in 2011 was met by fierce supporter protest – more than 
10,000 signed a petition calling on the club’s then owner Randy Lerner not to 
hire the Scot – the former Manchester United player has met little resistance 
from the Villa faithful and he believes that his time at St Andrew’s will 
benefit his attempt to improve the fortunes of a club who have won four out of 
their past 54 league games. Two of the four promotions Bruce has achieved were 
with Birmingham, whom he managed between 2001 and 2007.

“One of the hardest parts of management is trying to bring a club back after 
it’s been relegated because there is a lot of doom and gloom around, especially 
among supporters,” said Bruce, who has signed a rolling contract with Villa and 
appointed Stephen Clemence as first‑team coach after working with the former 
midfielder in the same capacity at Hull. “The first thing I and the players 
have to do is win back the supporters’ trust and having lived in the area for 
15 years I know they want to see their team play with spirit and passion. 
That’s what I did with Birmingham and that’s what I’ll try and do here.”

Mike Phelan finally appointed as Hull’s permanent manager
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/13/hull-mike-phelan-permanent-manager>
Bruce’s first game in charge comes with the visit of Wolverhampton Wanderers 
on Saturday. The new manager is determined to “hit the ground running” and 
believes that if he does, promotion remains possible. Villa are currently 10 
points adrift of the play-off positions and have not won since a 3-0 triumph 
over Rotherham on 13 August.

Di Matteo lost his job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/03/aston-villa-roberto-di-matteo-sacked>
 after the2-0 defeat at Preston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/01/match-report-preston-north-end-aston-villa-championship>
 before the international break and the club moved for Bruce because of his 
excellent promotion record and because, according to the chief executive, Keith 
Wyness, he has the man-management skills to clear Villa’s “relegation cobwebs”.

Bruce has yet to meet Villa’s Chinese owner Tony Xia but has spoken with the 
39-year-old on the phone and will meet him when he travels to England next 
month. “He [Xia] said to me that he wants Villa back in the Premier League 
sooner rather than later,” Bruce said. “His plans after that are staggering and 
he’s got finances to be able to achieve that.”
 