
Steven Spielberg <http://Steven Spielberg> has joined a select group including 
the Queen, JK Rowling and Sir David Attenborough by being awarded a gold Blue 
Peter badge.

The Oscar-winning director, producer and screenwriter said he had “always 
secretly privately wanted” the badge, which is the BBC children’s television 
programme’s highest accolade.

The BFG review: delicate touch of Spielberg and Rylance proves hugely charming
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/14/the-bfg-review-mark-rylance-steven-spieberg-roald-dahl>
“I’m going to wear it with pride. I’ve been aware of Blue Peter ever since I 
started making movies here in 1980. I made Raiders of the Lost Ark here in the 
UK in 1980,” said Spielberg, whose latest film, The BFG, is in UK cinemas from 
Friday. “This is my firstBlue Peter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/blue-peter> badge … so thank you.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Fbfg-trailer-see-mark-rylance-as-the-big-friendly-giant-in-new-look-at-steven-spielberg-film-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=BFG%20trailer%3A%20see%20Mark%20Rylance%20as%20the%20Big%20Friendly%20Giant%20in%20new%20look%20at%20Steven%20Spielberg%20film%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Fbfg-trailer-see-mark-rylance-as-the-big-friendly-giant-in-new-look-at-steven-spielberg-film-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=BFG%20trailer%3A%20see%20Mark%20Rylance%20as%20the%20Big%20Friendly%20Giant%20in%20new%20look%20at%20Steven%20Spielberg%20film%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Fbfg-trailer-see-mark-rylance-as-the-big-friendly-giant-in-new-look-at-steven-spielberg-film-video&media=>
BFG trailer: see Mark Rylance as the Big Friendly Giant in new look at Steven 
Spielberg film – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/apr/06/bfg-trailer-see-mark-rylance-as-the-big-friendly-giant-in-new-look-at-steven-spielberg-film-video>
The 69-year-old US film-maker was awarded the badge for his talent, passion 
and pioneering work, according to the CBBC show. Each year a handful of gold 
badges are awarded in recognition of outstanding achievements, bravery, 
inspiration and citizenship.

Children are eligible, as well as adult guests on the show. Others to pin the 
ship-shaped badge to their lapels include Roald Dahl’s illustrator Sir Quentin 
Blake, children’s author Malorie Blackman and footballer David Beckham.

To coincide with The BFG <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-bfg> film and 
the centenary of Dahl’s birth, Blue Peter had been running a Dream Big 
competition, which asked young viewers to pitch their own fantasy stories. The 
winner, Betty, a 12-year-old from Hull, attended the UK premiere and was given 
the chance to discuss her winning entry with Spielberg.

 