
In 1968, an ex-ballet-dancing, now theatre-directing, son of a miner called 
Bill Hays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/mar/14/guardianobituaries.media> 
gathered the emerging playwrightAlan Plater 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alanplater> with the founding father of 
north-east working-class writing, the ex-minerSid Chaplin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/the-northerner/2011/sep/09/sid-chaplin-guardian>
; his aim was to create a show that would be "an unqualified hymn of praise to 
the miners". Rounding off the group wasAlex Glasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/may/17/guardianobituaries1>, a brilliant 
songwriter, famous for his hilarious, sardonic songs that – although virtually 
all written in the Geordie vernacular – were part Brecht, part Brassens and 
part Tom Lehrer.

(Hays and Plater, who had met while working on the groundbreaking BBC show Z 
Cars <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wL1HnDGTAK8>, would go on to create some 
of the most loved and provocative TV of the 1970s and beyond.) Chaplin was 
already a major figure through his groundbreaking work, which told of 
working-class life from the point of view of a working-class person. The show 
this group created, Close the Coalhouse Door, became a landmark of post-war 
regional theatre.

Inspired by Joan Littlewood's success with Oh! What A Lovely War 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/apr/14/oh-what-a-lovely-war-review>, 
the group wanted to use the tools of working-class entertainment – music hall, 
vaudeville, drinking songs and coarse humour – to tell the more politicised 
story of mining in the north east; or, more accurately, the popular unionised 
resistance to the incredible exploitation that had marred its history since the 
industrial revolution. It was an audacious task: could anything be more 
potentially boring, worthy and of limited local interest?

But the show they created, originally scheduled for a modest run of a few 
weeks, caused a sensation. The shock that a theatre might have a play that was 
not only a "good night out", but which also told the people's history from the 
people's perspective, was pretty much unheard of. The run was extended again 
and again. The car park was packed every night with coaches hired by miners 
from pit villages across the north. who were flocking to see the show in their 
thousands. You could spot the miners in the audience: they were all dressed 
immaculately in suits and ties, while the scruffy, leftish intelligentsia stuck 
out like sore thumbs. But for once, here was a show that satisfied both.

Six months after it opened, it went on the road, first to Nottingham, then to 
the West End; a triumphant run, but Newcastle was bereft without it. Over the 
next five years, there were three further productions, and it has since been 
revived regularly. Ironically, the play has proved more resilient than the 
monumental industry it critiqued.

As something of a specialist in the dramatic portrayal of miners (having 
writtenBilly Elliot <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/84830/billy.elliot> 
andThe Pitmen Painters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/sep/17/in-praise-of-pitman-painters>
), I was recently asked by the actor and directorSam West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/dec/10/sam-west-family-values> 
to help shape a new revival. (The late Alan Plater was a good friend of mine, 
and very much a mentor.) At first, I worried that what was once a celebration 
would seem like an elegy; but on closer examination, far from being an exercise 
in nostalgia, the play is more urgent than ever. As the specifics of the mining 
story have started to recede, the themes of popular resistance and the 
necessity, efficacy and cost of that struggle seem like a rebuke to our current 
quietism.

The play is anything but rousing agitprop. It is delicate, ironic and fraught 
with ambivalence, which, in my view, marks the best political art. It itemises 
economic crisis after crisis over the last 200 years, making it impossible to 
ignore the fact that what we are facing today is just the latest in a litany of 
such occasions: where external events are conveniently used to impoverish the 
majority.

The play today is no longer a hymn of praise to a dirty industry. It is a 
paean to generations of people in England who stood up to manifest injustice 
and often faced state-sanctioned gunfire, eviction and the draconian economic 
hardships. Clearly this is not an old story. This is a play for the age of 
Occupy and riots in Greece. As one of the first reviewers insisted, the play is 
about how history's slaves fought back. We can now see the struggle remains the 
same even if its specific industrial context has changed beyond recognition. 
The real question it asks is: what do we do now?
 