
Today marks the 25th anniversary of the murder of my brother, Bernard O’Hagan. 
He was shot by an undisguised gunman in front of a large number of staff and 
students as he arrived at Magherafelt college, County Derry, where he worked as 
a lecturer. Bernard was aSinn Féin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein> councillor on the Magherafelt 
district council. He was also the last elected representative to be murdered 
before the Good Friday peace agreement. No one was subsequently detained, 
arrested or convicted of the killing.

My family have always believed that the killing involved collusion between 
security forces and loyalist terror organisations and the case is part of an 
investigation into collusion inNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> during the time of the 
Troubles.

This week while visiting my family in Northern Ireland I was shown a copy of 
the inquest report into Bernard’s murder. One point that struck me deeply was 
that there were only two witness statements. I was incredulous that only two 
such statements had been presented to the coroner when so many people had 
witnessed the killing. I also thought it strange that photofit pictures of the 
killer were produced but were never published.

Back in England, the victims of Hillsborough have been finally been given 
justice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/26/hillsborough-families-27-year-struggle-for-truth-vindicated>
; a major inquiry into child abuse is ongoing and there calls for an inquiry
into police mistreatment of striking miners at Orgreave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/15/orgreave-miners-strike-inquiry-will-go-ahead>
.

We must not forget that in Northern Ireland justice is still being sought by 
the families of people who believed their loved ones were effectively murdered 
by the state whose duty it was to try and protect them. It is essential that 
the current British government acts to ensure that the necessary funding is 
available and that the process of investigation is allowed to progress without 
any hindrance.
Mary Gilhooley
Stanley, County Durham

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 