
Mario Draghi, president of the European Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank>, has helped calm 
jittery financial markets by saying he would not hesitate to take fresh action 
to boost eurozone growth and inflation.

Stock markets across Europe, which were already rallying after a turbulent 
start to 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/11/stock-markets-hit-by-global-rout-raising-fears-for-financial-sector>
, ended the day sharply higher in the belief Draghi would deliver on his pledge 
at the ECB meeting next month.

Financial markets believe Draghi will respond to fears of deflation and 
volatile share prices by pushing interest rates into negative territory and 
expanding the ECB’s quantitative easing programme.

Draghi has financial markets hoping bad news is really good news
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/15/mario-draghi-european-central-bank-japan-china>
Draghi dropped the broadest of hints in testimony to the European parliament 
that further stimulus was imminent. “The ECB is ready to do its part,” he said, 
adding that the bank was looking at the low level of inflation and whether 
enough money was getting through from the banks to the eurozone economy.

“If either of these two factors entail downward risks to price stability, we 
will not hesitate to act,” Draghi said.

He was speaking after the Chinese stock market opened for the first time in 
five days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/feb/15/market-turmoil-asian-stocks-soar-despite-japan-shrinking-14-live>
, during which global financial markets were rocked by fears of a rerun of the 
2008 banking crisis. It held steady, helped by a 7% increased in Japan’s Nikkei 
225, which posted its second-biggest one-day gain in three years.

The rally in Japan was prompted by weaker than expected growth figures, which 
led to speculation that the Bank ofJapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> would also step in to shore up the 
economy.
FTSE 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/02/ftse_100_index/giv-27167eVAAA9qk2FLl/>
The rally had already helped set a positive tone for European markets, which 
rose further after Draghi spoke. The FTSE 100 closed 2% higher at 5,824.28 with 
Germany’s DAX gaining 2.7% to 9,206.84, and France’s CAC 40 rising 3% to close 
at 4,115.25.

In the UK, Ian McCafferty, who sits on the Bank of England’s rate-setting 
body, the monetary policy committee, was also indicating that Threadneedle 
Street could act.

Despite the environment of low interest rates, which might hamper 
policymakers’ ability to inject stimulus, McCafferty said: “I certainly don’t 
believe we are out of ammunition.”

There was scope to cut interest rates and revive its bond-buying programme if 
the economy lurches downward, or even impose negative interest rates. Speaking 
to the Wall Street Journal, McCafferty, whohad been voting for a rate rise 
until this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/04/bank-of-england-votes-9-0-to-keep-interest-rates-on-hold>
, said: “I think an immediate rate rise isn’t as necessary as I had felt last 
autumn.”

Next month is the seventh anniversary of the Bank of England’s decision to 
lower official interest rates to 0.5%. Until recently, Threadneedle Street has 
been wary of pushing borrowing costs any lower for fear of the impact it might 
have on building societies, a concern that has now receded.

Amid fears for the health of the banking sector, particularly in Italy, Draghi 
tried to allay concerns. “In the euro area, the situation in the banking sector 
now is very different from what it was in 2012,” he said.

Draghi made his comments as some financial institutions responded to the poor 
start for 2016 by revising down theirgrowth forecasts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/19/imf-cuts-global-growth-forecasts>
. At Axa, the forecasts for global GDP for 2016 were cut to 2.7%, down from 
3.1%, while analysts at Berenberg said the slower start to the year had forced 
it to reduce its 2016 forecast for the US to 2.1%, from 2.3%. The Berenberg 
economists cut their predictions for eurozone GDP from 1.6% to 1.3%, citing 
market turmoil that was hitting sentiment.
 