
A recovery in US consumer spending revived battered stock markets in Europe 
and New York on Friday, despitethe latest eurozone GDP figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/12/eurozone-recovery-falters-greece-recession>
 showing a broad slowdown across the currency union and Greece slipping back 
into recession.


The FTSE 100 soared 169 points to register the strongest daily increase since 
last August, before theDow Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/business/dowjones>
 index followed suit in New York, wiping out much of the losses from earlier in 
the week as January figures for US consumer spending beat expectations. The 
FTSE 100 still ended the week down 2.4%.

Eurozone recovery falters as Greece slips back into recession
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/12/eurozone-recovery-falters-greece-recession>
Nine of the 10 major sectors in Wall Street’s Standard & Poor’s index were 
higher, led by a 2.4% rise in the financial sector, which fought off concerns 
that low interest rates and risky lending had undermined the stability of some 
institutions.

Banks were helped by comments from Bill Dudley, deputy chairman of the US 
Federal Reserve <https://www.theguardian.com/business/federal-reserve>, who 
said they were well capitalised and able to withstand a global shock. JP Morgan 
jumped 5.6% to $56.05 a share after chief executive Jamie Dimon bought more 
than $25m (£17.24m) of the bank’s stock.


For much of the week, investors feared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/feb/08/uk-business-confidence-falls-global-recession-fears-markets-business-live>
 that a contraction in US factory output, sluggish employment growth and 
persistently low inflation were signals that the US economy was heading for a 
recession.


Plunging oil prices, which slumped below $27 a barrel in the US, falling 
commodity values and a rush by investors to safe haven assets added to the 
gloomy picture.

James Knightley, an economist at ING Financial Markets, said resilient US 
employment, rising real incomes and a recovering housing market in a period of 
extreme volatility on global markets, were providing enough offsetting effects 
for now.

“However, equity markets don’t seem particularly interested unfortunately and 
the longer that this goes on the greater the risk that it feeds negatively into 
the real economy through weaker sentiment and tighter financial conditions,” he 
said.

Nancy Curtin, chief investment officer at Close Brothers Asset Management, 
said the health of theUS economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/useconomy> depended on how well it could 
weather the global risks in the long term, especially a devaluation of the 
Chinese currency that would make US exports more expensive.

“Clearly, the tentacles of the Chinese slowdown are spreading and the lack of 
a clear enough policy is a red flag to ongoing volatility,” she said.

Fed chief Janet Yellen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/09/interest-rates-markets-janet-yellen-briefs-congress>
 failed to calm markets during an appearance on Capitol Hill this week, when 
she said that it was possible the central bank would cut rates if the situation 
deteriorated.

Dudley waded into the debate on Friday, downplaying the likelihood of a rate 
cut: “To me, that’s not something that should be part of the conversation right 
now.”

The US economy has “quite a bit” of momentum that will help offset weakness 
from abroad, he said, even as he acknowledged he now expected inflation to take 
a bit longer to return to the Fed’s 2% target because of the drag from the 
falling price of oil.

The 19-member eurozone economy added another prop to market sentiment after 
figures showed it grew 0.3% in the final quarter of 2015 after German exports 
put in a strong performance.

But analysts continued to worry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/12/eurozone-crisis-back-on-boil> 
that the refugee crisis and the prospect of Greece defaulting on its loans, 
forcing it to seek further funds from Brussels and the International Monetary 
Fund, would halt the eurozone recovery.

France and Italy, which appeared to be recovering strongly last spring, showed 
that even the second and third largest economies in the currency zone were 
ailing.

France could only manage 0.2% growth in the final quarter while Italy 
registered 0.1% growth, despite benefiting from low energy costs, an 
export-boosting drop in the euro’s value and monetary stimulus from the central 
bank.

Jonathan Loynes, chief European economist at Capital Economics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics>, said the downside risks had 
increased and as a result the European Central Bank will back “further decisive 
policy support” at its March meeting.


Greece <https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece>, which has seen its debt to 
GDP ratio soar past 190% in recent months, fell into recession after recording 
its second quarter of negative growth.

The Syriza government, led by prime minister Alexis Tsipras, has struggled to 
maintain a recovery that followed an accord signed last summer for a third 
bailout.

Lenders are demanding that Greece scrap tax breaks for farmers and impose 
pension reforms that will lead to higher monthly contributions from the 
self-employed and salaried employees.


Farmers carried their protest to Athens on Friday, driving tractors through 
the centre of the city and rioting when blocked by police from approaching 
government buildings.
 