
Brexit fears stalk global markets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/13/sterling-brexit-fears-investors-eu-referendum-vote>
? Only up to a point. Since the pollsturned in leave’s favour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/13/eu-referendum-leave-campaign-takes-six-point-lead-in-guardianicm-polls>
, the FTSE 100 index has lost 370 points, or 5.8%, but is still well above 
February’s lows. The pound has fallen from $1.45 to $1.41 against the dollar, 
and from €1.28 to €1.26 against the euro. These arenotable moves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/jun/14/pound-uk-inflation-bank-of-england-brexit-liquidity-push-business-live>
 but they are not big enough to be called panicky.

Meanwhile, Tuesday’s record-breaking piece of market action – German 10-year 
bunds trading at a negative yield – was also being blamed on Brexit-inspired 
fears of a pan-European jolt to economic growth.

FTSE 100 hits three-month low as Brexit fears grow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/14/ftse-100-three-month-low-brexit-fears-shares-sterling>
But, again, one needs to tread carefully. German yields have been falling ever 
since the financial crisis of 2008. The march from 1% to zero started a year 
ago and (aside from low growth and low inflation in the eurozone) owes much to 
the European Central Bank’s huge programme of quantitative easing, or buying 
bonds regardless of price.

Brexit, to be fair, may have contributed something to the latest fall in 
German bond yields. But let’s not overstate it. A fortnight ago, when a remain 
victory looked an 80% probability, investors were willing to receive 0.2% for 
10 years to lend to the German government; now they are willing to pay 0.05% 
for the privilege. A line has been crossed, but we’re talking small actual 
movements in prices.

So, if one takes a step back from the non-existent mayhem, two conclusions are 
possible. First, investors are only mildly worried about Brexit and think the 
short-term economic consequences are either hard to predict or exaggerated. 
Alternatively, markets don’t think it will happen.

The guess here is that it’s the second. Why? Cast your mind back to last 
summer when Greece’s survival in the eurozone was in genuine doubt. The 
country’s banks closed and financial markets fell into a proper swoon. Yet – in 
financial and economic terms – Greece was, and remains, a tiddler. Brexit, 
rather than Grexit, would represent a far bigger shock to the entire 
eurozone/EU project.

No wonder the German political and financial establishment is pleading for the 
UK to remain. It would rather delay the day when the eurozone has to sign up to 
fiscal transfers – rich countries paying for poorer members – to ensure 
long-term survival. Treaty changes will be necessary and demands for 
referendums will only be encouraged by the UK’s example. While one vote to 
leave the EU might be tolerable, two might lead to a deeper unravelling, 
especially if the next opt-out were to be a eurozone member such as the 
Netherlands.

Have markets priced in such political risks? Almost certainly not. There has 
been a modest widening of bond spreads between Germany and so-called peripheral 
eurozone members, like Spain and Portugal, but faith remains high in the ECB’s 
ability to do “whatever it takes” to keep the show on the road.

Maybe, in the long-run, a UK exit from the EU would have a bracing effect of 
the eurozone’s attempts to cure its deep economic ills. That must be one 
possible script since eurozone politicians seem capable of collective action 
only when presented with a crisis.

Just don’t expect markets to display any such breezy confidence if they wake 
up to a leave vote on 24 June. If Grexit looked scary, Brexit raises bigger 
uncertainties. The past week’s market action, one suspects, would look like a 
tea party.

Shy Green comes out of his shell

Hurrah, Sir Philip Green has “given long and hard thought to the matter” and 
decidedto turn up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/14/philip-green-mps-parliamentary-committee-bhs>
 to answer questions from MPs on Wednesday about “the very sad BHS story”. He’s 
still complaining about parliamentarians making up their minds before they’ve 
heard the evidence but, never mind, he’ll be there.

But, please, Sir Philip, drop the parallel grumble about this being your 
“first and only opportunity” to tell your side of tale. You were free at any 
point since BHS’s administration in April to give an account. You could have 
issued a statement, held a press conference, whatever you wished. You have 
never previously been shy aboutsharing your views 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2003/mar/04/supermarkets>. Well done, the 
MPs, for ensuring we hear them.

Bookies need a nought to worry about

Is the Gambling Commission getting tougher? Well, the financial penalties for 
disobeying anti-money laundering and responsible gambling rules are becoming 
bigger. Betfredreceived an £800,000 penalty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/14/gambling-commission-orders-betfred-to-pay-800000-pounds>
 on Tuesday. That – and an £880,000 hitto GalaCoral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/27/gala-coral-fined-over-gambler-who-stole-850000-to-feed-habit>
 a few weeks ago – was a step up fromthe derisory £280,000 handed down to Paddy 
Power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/29/paddy-power-encouraged-gambler-lost-home-jobs-family-gambling-commission-report>
 earlier in the year. All different cases, of course. But given the size of 
some of these firms, penalties of less than £1m don’t hurt. Add a zero and the 
commission might get noticed in boardrooms.
 