
The Bank of England is scrutinising the terms under which mortgages are being 
granted to buy-to-let landlords as it decides whether to take action to cool 
the fast-growing market.

The Bank’s latest warning to landlords came in a list of risks to the 
financial system, as Threadneedle Street put banks on notice thatthey could be 
forced to hold a special capital cushion of up to £10bn to guard against any 
economic downturn.

On what analysts had dubbed “super Tuesday” for the banking sector, the Bank 
announcedthe results of its “stress tests” 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/financialstability/Pages/fpc/stresstest.aspx> 
which found that Standard Chartered and bailed-out Royal Bank of Scotland had 
the weakest financial positions.

UK banks pass stress tests, but RBS and Standard Chartered are weakest - live 
updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2015/dec/01/bank-of-england-stress-tests-and-financial-stability-report-live>
But in a shift in policy, Threadneedle Street said the banking system had 
moved out of the post-crisis phase and it was “actively considering” whether 
banks should start to put capital aside in anticipation of future downturns.

The Bank has been warning for many months that it is concerned about the 
buy-to-let mortgage market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/01/buy-to-let-boom-jeopardise-financial-stability-bank-england-house-prices>
. While it did not take immediate action to cool this sector – in which lending 
has risen 10% in the first nine months of the year compared with 0.4% in 
owner-occupied properties – it said it was reviewing the lending criteria 
adopted by firms and stands “ready to take action”.

It said it was monitoring the effect of the extra 3% stamp duty announced last 
week by George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/25/george-osborne-unveils-his-bold-plan-to-tackle-housing-crisis>
 in his autumn statement and provided a detailed analysis of the fallout on 
landlords from any interest rate rise. The Bank found that if mortgage rates 
were to increase by three percentage points, nearly 60% of buy-to-let customers 
could run into repayment difficulties while only 4% of homeowners would be 
likely to experience similar pain.

The announcement on bank capital was the first signal from Threadneedle Street 
that it could use new so-called countercyclical buffers in response to the 2008 
banking crisis when banks ran down their capital before the economic downturn.

Banks could be ordered to make use of profitable periods to build up 
additional safety funds. The move could push up lending rates without a rise in 
the Bank’s 0.5% interest rate.

The Bank of England governor, Mark Carney, said: “In the process of increasing 
capital requirements there will be cost passed on to borrowers that will have 
an impact on demand and some impact on inflation.” But the Bank played down the 
impact as knocking 0.1 percentage points off GDP over three years and 
increasing the cost of bank funding for loans by 0.05 percentage points.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fbank-stress-tests-rbs-and-standard-chartered-weakest-in-crash-scenario%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c8a7b404cd8c471210d438c11c99d97fa254fa0%2F0_35_4702_2821%2F4702.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stress%20tests%3A%20Bank%20of%20England%20flags%20up%20buy-to-let%20concerns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fbank-stress-tests-rbs-and-standard-chartered-weakest-in-crash-scenario%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stress%20tests%3A%20Bank%20of%20England%20flags%20up%20buy-to-let%20concerns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fbank-stress-tests-rbs-and-standard-chartered-weakest-in-crash-scenario%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c8a7b404cd8c471210d438c11c99d97fa254fa0%2F0_35_4702_2821%2F4702.jpg>
 An array of to let signs. Photograph: Christopher Furlong/Getty Images 
The Bank will announce in March whether it intends to put countercyclical 
buffers in place and each bank’s current capital will be assessed between now 
and then.

John Thanassoulis, professor of finance economics at Warwick Business School, 
said the move could “be in effect tightening monetary policy, which is not good 
for the UK with inflation so subdued”.

Shares in UK banks rose as Carney scotched lenders’ concerns that policymakers 
would keep increasing their demands for capital – which is now 10 times greater 
than before the crisis. Barclays,Lloyds Banking Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lloyds-banking-group> and RBS were among 
the 10 biggest risers on Tuesday.

The half-yearly assessment of risks to the system 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/fsr/2015/dec.aspx> – which 
warned that the global economic environment was challenging – was published 
alongside heath checks on seven major lenders. The Bank said it was not 
concerned about the strength of the banking system, seven years on from the 
crisis.

“The global environment is unforgiving and the legacy of the crisis means 
private and public balance sheets remain stretched. This calls for resilience 
not fatalism. Today we have reaffirmed the strength of our banks in the face of 
these risks,” Carney said.

The Bank subjected seven major lenders to a hypothetical scenario that 
involved a dramatic slowdown in the Chinese economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/01/buy-to-let-boom-jeopardise-financial-stability-bank-england-house-prices>
, prolonged deflation, a reduction in interest rates to zero and a huge 
increase in costs for fines and legal bills of £40bn. The test found that 
profits would fall more than they had done during the 2008 banking crisis – by 
£100bn by the low point of the hypothetical scenario in 2016 – but capital 
cushions remained strong enough to withstand the downturn while increasing 
credit to the economy by 10%.

While RBS and Standard Chartered both passed the overall thresholds set by the 
Bank, they did not meet the policymakers’ judgment-based assessment of their 
capital strength. But neither was forced to change its plans as they had 
already taken steps to improve their financial position: RBS by selling 
businesses including Citizens in the US andStandard Chartered by embarking on a 
£3.3bn cash call 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/03/standard-chartered-seeks-billions-from-investors>
.

The other lenders tested in the second annual assessment of financial health 
were HSBC, Barclays,Nationwide <https://www.theguardian.com/business/nationwide>
, Santander UK andLloyds.

Thanassoulissaid: “What the latest stress tests show is that we are out of the 
financial crisis – as all of the banks have passed – although two came close to 
not passing the test: Standard Chartered andRoyal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup>.”
 