
Strictly Come Dancing winner Ore Oduba has said Saturday night’s victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/17/ore-oduba-and-joanne-clifton-named-winners-of-strictly-come-dancing>
 was “the most unexpected moment” of his life.

The BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> sports presenter upset 
bookmakers’ predictions to waltz off with the glitterball trophy. Oduba and his 
professional partner, Joanne Clifton, beat former Eternal singer Louise 
Redknapp and Hollyoaks actor Danny Mac in a finale watched by 13.1 million 
viewers.

The final also marked the last live show of head judge Len Goodman, who is 
stepping down after 12 years. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/18/len-goodman-praised-as-the-king-of-strictly-after-final-show>

Strictly Come Dancing ends most popular ever series on ratings high
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/18/strictly-come-dancing-most-popular-series-ratings>
Speaking after the result was announced, Oduba said the victory “doesn’t make 
any sense”, adding: “I cannot believe it, we did not even consider this 
[winning], not even for a single week of this.”

Former shadow chancellor Ed Balls, whose routines on the show had appalled the 
judges, captivated the nation and almost saw him reach the quarter-finals,wrote 
in the Sunday Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/tv/2016/11/26/strictly-come-dancing-2016-week-10-saturday-will-ed-balls-fare/>
 that he had expected Redknapp to win. “Going into the final, Louise clearly 
had the edge. She’d never been in the dance-off and had clearly struck a chord 
with lots of people around the country,” he wrote.

Mac was “definitely banging on the door to win”, Balls added. But Oduba, who 
had no previous dance experience, had improved the most over the course of the 
series “and because the show is importantly about the amateur improving, that 
was Ore’s calling card”. Balls reprised his unforgettable Gangnam Style dance 
for the finale’s group-dance performance.

Ladbrokes ranked Oduba as a 7/1 outsider, writing before the finale 
<http://news.ladbrokes.com/tv/strictly-come-dancing/odds-suggest-its-a-two-horse-race-for-the-glitterball-trophy.html>
 that it was a “toss-up between long-time favourite Danny Mac and Louise 
Redknapp”.

But on the night, Oduba and Clifton narrowly beat their rivals, scoring two 
perfect 40s and dropping a single point for their revisiting of Singing in the 
Rain, which was watched by Gene Kelly’s widow, Patricia, in the audience.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fore-oduba-winning-strictly-come-dancing-was-most-unexpected%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd604949caf0b5b16bd0e276f5064bd86620d2d2f%2F0_67_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Strictly%20Come%20Dancing%20win%20was%20'most%20unexpected'%20says%20Ore%20Oduba&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fore-oduba-winning-strictly-come-dancing-was-most-unexpected%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Strictly%20Come%20Dancing%20win%20was%20%27most%20unexpected%27%20says%20Ore%20Oduba&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fore-oduba-winning-strictly-come-dancing-was-most-unexpected%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd604949caf0b5b16bd0e276f5064bd86620d2d2f%2F0_67_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Ore Oduba and Joanne Clifton celebrate after winning Strictly Come Dancing. 
Photograph: Guy Levy/BBC/PA 
After the victory, Oduba praised his wife, Portia, for being his “anchor” and 
described how much it meant to have his parents, who had travelled from 
Nigeria, in the audience.

Oduba said: “She’s supported us so much and just been my absolute anchor, and 
my mum and dad just being here, they’ve sacrificed so much, both of our parents 
have sacrificed so much for us in our lives, so for them to be here and see 
this, the most unexpected moment of my life, is just incredible.”


Oduba said he was looking forward to Christmas and planned to take a two-week 
holiday. He will return to sports presenting but intends to dance for the rest 
of his life. “I can’t think of a time when I will not be dancing now. It’s 
just, it is in me now, I can’t not dance,” he said.

Clifton paid tribute to her older brother Kevin, who partnered Redknapp in his 
fourth final but has yet to win the trophy. “I just said sorry to him because 
he’s made four finals and he’s never won it yet,” she said, adding: “I was away 
from my family for 14 years living in Italy and I didn’t see him that much and 
since I’ve come back, he’s been a big brother to me again.”

Oduba said he was looking forward to reuniting with the cast for the Strictly 
tour, which starts in Birmingham next month. “We don’t get to see the fans 
who’ve been so supportive of us on this journey so to be able to go out and 
show it to people in January through to March will be amazing because they love 
this show,” he said.

Oduba added: “Len will be there, we’re going to give him another swan song, 
it’s going to be exceptional and I can’t wait.”
 