
Oh no! Not Claudia! I had a little weep. Well, it has to be someone at this 
stage, doesn’t it? But why her? Sigh. It was a strange semi-final, especially 
the bit with the glitterball conveyor belt which made no sense whatsoever. The 
Saturday show felt curiously underwhelming, perhaps because the preparation for 
two dances meant they were tired. Or perhaps because the last four contestants 
have all ended up being of a very similar level. I have to say I was surprised 
with the result on Sunday, though. I thought Ore was for the chop.

In the end the constant weeping and gurning have not cost Ore as much as they 
could have. In fact, it was a lack of emotion that lost Claudia her place. I 
love the way the voting public changes its mind about the contestants the whole 
time. No one in the final has been in as many dance-offs as Ore. But in the 
end, more people voted for him than Danny. What does it mean for the final? 
According to Strictly history, pretty much nothing. Next week they’ll start 
again from scratch and have to re-earn every single vote.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fstrictly-come-dancing-final-my-moneys-now-on-ore-i-did-not-see-that-coming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe1be38a60818060f6c67dc8eff36b3b4b9a93819%2F0_208_4100_2460%2F4100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Strictly%20Come%20Dancing%3A%20my%20money%E2%80%99s%20now%20on%20Ore.%20I%20did%20not%20see%20that%20coming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fstrictly-come-dancing-final-my-moneys-now-on-ore-i-did-not-see-that-coming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Strictly%20Come%20Dancing%3A%20my%20money%E2%80%99s%20now%20on%20Ore.%20I%20did%20not%20see%20that%20coming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fstrictly-come-dancing-final-my-moneys-now-on-ore-i-did-not-see-that-coming%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe1be38a60818060f6c67dc8eff36b3b4b9a93819%2F0_208_4100_2460%2F4100.jpg>
 I have to say I was surprised with the result on Sunday, though … Danny and 
Oti in the dance-off. Photograph: BBC/Guy Levy 
Sunday’s show was far more entertaining, featuring Sting singing a song about 
two penguins and a bear during which Oksana used Pasha as a pole. There was 
also much hilarious and fascinating rearranging of facial expressions during 
the “red light” announcements. And much attempting to articulate things that 
are very difficult to articulate. (“What would you like to say to your 
partner?” “I’m very proud. Er ... I’m so proud ... Er ...”)

Regular readers of this column will know that I like to gripe about the music 
choices. This week’s were utterly dire. Who is responsible for this? With a few 
exceptions, most of the music was obscure or unrecognisable. That is no fun for 
the audience and hasn’t helped the weird lack of feel-good factor post-Ed 
Balls. I mean this as no disrespect to Dave Arch and his wonderful band because 
they are excellent. But they come into their own when they have to perform 
things like Gangnam Style. And all that kind of fun has been lost in the latter 
part of this series.

But what most mystifies me about this whole series is the success of Louise. 
Yes, I see that she’s gorgeous and has worked bloody hard. But she keeps on 
looking down – and the judges haven’t even mentioned it for weeks. There’s no 
need to build up a whole conspiracy theory here but ... something doesn’t quite 
add up. Logistically, she ought to now win it easily, as she’s never been in a 
dance-off and it has been proven that Ore has more voters than Danny. But we’ll 
see. Meanwhile, what did it look like from the judges’ chairs?

Darcey: woman of a thousand hairstyles

Darcey is perhaps the biggest fan of Louise. (Bruno doesn’t count; he’s the 
biggest fan of everyone.) “The joy in your face! Heaven!” And she is the 
harshest on Danny, so harsh that Bruno fell off his chair. “Needs more wildness 
and attitude ...” I feel Darcey is the one who will miss Len most of all. She 
was clinging to him proprietorially throughout Len’s Lens this week.


Bruno: the jack-in-the-box
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fstrictly-come-dancing-final-my-moneys-now-on-ore-i-did-not-see-that-coming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe08fad0823039372b08008a012d5115b71b19dec%2F0_0_3131_2278%2F3131.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Strictly%20Come%20Dancing%3A%20my%20money%E2%80%99s%20now%20on%20Ore.%20I%20did%20not%20see%20that%20coming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fstrictly-come-dancing-final-my-moneys-now-on-ore-i-did-not-see-that-coming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Strictly%20Come%20Dancing%3A%20my%20money%E2%80%99s%20now%20on%20Ore.%20I%20did%20not%20see%20that%20coming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fstrictly-come-dancing-final-my-moneys-now-on-ore-i-did-not-see-that-coming%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe08fad0823039372b08008a012d5115b71b19dec%2F0_0_3131_2278%2F3131.jpg>
 ‘How tutti frutti was that?’… what most mystifies me about this whole series 
is the success of Louise. Photograph: Guy Levy/BBC/PA 
Vintage Bruno-isms: “How tutti frutti was that?” “The world around him belong 
to you and that what he did.” “You craddle her like a loffly pet.” Bruno has 
had the most fun this series. He clearly doesn’t want Len’s job because he 
probably already thinks it’s enough work to do what he does and also do the 
American show. Plus, he is Bruno so he never really worries about such things 
or plans for anything. At some point, I wish he would just give in and go and 
join them on the dance floor. Itwill happen.


Len: the diamond geezer on a farewell tour
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fstrictly-come-dancing-final-my-moneys-now-on-ore-i-did-not-see-that-coming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F623c184156ddd74eca7b24caa0c31e8f48c26c74%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Strictly%20Come%20Dancing%3A%20my%20money%E2%80%99s%20now%20on%20Ore.%20I%20did%20not%20see%20that%20coming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fstrictly-come-dancing-final-my-moneys-now-on-ore-i-did-not-see-that-coming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Strictly%20Come%20Dancing%3A%20my%20money%E2%80%99s%20now%20on%20Ore.%20I%20did%20not%20see%20that%20coming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fstrictly-come-dancing-final-my-moneys-now-on-ore-i-did-not-see-that-coming%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F623c184156ddd74eca7b24caa0c31e8f48c26c74%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 ‘You’ve come dressed as my favourite Quality Street!’ … a vintage Len quote as 
he prepares to stand down. Photograph: Guy Levy/BBC/PA 
It was the last ever Len’s Lens. Let’s hear it for the Maypole! His face when 
Craig was demonstrating his figure of eight was priceless. I don’t think they 
will miss each other much. In fact, a fight nearly broke out between Craig and 
Len this week: “You were dancing too much with your leading arm.” “What are you 
on about?” I feel like Len has had enough now; he’s probably booked in an extra 
golf lesson for next Sunday already. He did allow himself one vintage Len 
quote, though: “You’ve come dressed as my favourite Quality Street.”

Craig: the great choreographer trapped inside a pantomime dame

Craig had an incipient Conchita Wurst look this week. Let’s hope he goes Full 
Wurst for the final. His audition to be head judge continues and surely it is 
going over well? Honest-but-fair Craig is the judge we’ve had this series, with 
not a mention of “Dis-ah-stah.”

This week’s verdict

It’s hard to know whether this week’s result makes Danny’s win less or more 
likely. I do now think, though, that despite the maths (which would indicate 
Louise), it’s between Danny and Ore. So the vote will either be for The 
Non-Dancer’s Journey (Ore) or The Dancing Excellence (Danny). Having previously 
assumed it had to be Danny, my money’s now on Ore. My own vote goes to Danny. 
Not that I have one, except on speed-dial on my phone.
 