
Let's be in no doubt. The announcement in George Osborne's autumn statement of 
theremoval of the cap on undergraduate student numbers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/dec/05/university-places-restriction-lifted-student-loan-george-osborne>
 is unequivocally good news. It is good news for those additional students who 
will now have the opportunity to experience the transformative effect of higher 
education.

It is good news for the economy, as higher numbers of graduates in the 
workforce will increase productivity. And it is good news for universities, who 
will no longer be constrained by distorting policies which seek simultaneously 
to promote competition while restricting demand. The boldness of the vision and 
aspiration should be applauded.

This is a game-changing announcement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2013/dec/09/autumn-statement-student-numbers-loanbook>
. But there are risks ahead. The government also announced that it would pay 
for the expansion by selling off part of the student loan book. Along with 
deregulation of student numbers, this has long been an aim of Treasury, but up 
to now market conditions have never been right to ensure value for money. The 
Treasury now believes it can get close enough to this position to warrant a 
sell-off.

There are strong arguments in favour of the government using its balance sheet 
in this way to invest in a critical element of the nation's competitive 
advantage. Such expansion would have been inconceivable under the old system of 
student finance, in which all the costs associated with growth would have been 
scored against the national deficit. Now only a portion is accounted for in 
this way, but it's here where the catch lies – and the risk.

Expanding student numbers requires financial support from the government in 
three ways: first, the long-term subsidy on student loans, which is scored as 
an impairment on the Department for Business, Innovation & Skills (BIS) budget; 
secondly, the cash needed each year to pay for maintenance grants and what 
remains of the teaching grant; thirdly, the cash needed to pay out the upfront 
loans for students, so that higher education rightly remains free at the point 
of consumption for everyone who qualifies for it.

Selling the student loan book year by year will pay for the third of these 
items, but it is not clear how the needs of the first two will be met over the 
long-term.Universities are becoming concerned by this lack of detail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2013/dec/09/autumn-statement-student-numbers-loanbook>
. These are genuinely unanswered questions.

The worry is that this long-term commitment will be unaffordable, and will 
crowd out other important funding priorities for higher education which can 
only be met from the cash allocation to BIS every year.This budget is coming 
under increasing pressure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/dec/12/higher-education-budget-multibillion-shortfall>
, as the government continues to prioritise deficit reduction above all other 
policies, as inflation eats into cash settlements, and as demand for higher 
education continues to grow.

Universities' concern is genuine and the government needs to address it. 
Funding <https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/funding> for 
science and research in particular needs to be increased above inflation, and 
there should be a similarly bold aspiration in this area as there has been in 
relation to student numbers. Intellectual capital is every bit as important to 
the UK economy and society as human capital, and the UK university research 
base plays an unusually significant role in generating this by international 
standards. The cash ring-fence is being eroded by inflation, and there are 
threats ahead to the strength and diversity of the research base if this 
position is not reversed in future.

Work which addresses how to bring down the long-term costs of the student 
funding system, without damaging provision, must now be accelerated. This will 
be needed to address the student loan subsidy, and cash for maintenance and 
teaching grants. The principles that should guide this work are maintaining the 
overall quality and reputation of provision, and ensuring equality of 
opportunity.

The government has effectively backed its own policy, betting that expansion 
of the higher education system will lead to future economic growth. Past 
evidence supports this position. Looking into 2014 and beyond, the government 
would increase the likelihood of success if it decided to increase investment 
in science and research, grant funding, and infrastructure, as well as giving 
assurance that the proceeds of the sale of the student loan book would continue 
to be invested in universities.

Only a virtuous cycle of investment and growth will allow the UK to take its 
deserved place at the forefront of global economies.

Paul Clark is director of policy at Universities UK 
<http://www.universitiesuk.ac.uk/Pages/default.aspx> – follow it on Twitter 
@UniversitiesUK <http://twitter.com/UniversitiesUK>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Looking for your next 
university role? BrowseGuardian jobs 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/education/higher/job-vacancy/direct-employer/?INTCMP=BACJOBBTN6240I2>
 for hundreds of the latest academic, administrative and research posts
 