
What is it? A restless treat of a sitcom.

Why you’ll love it: Sunny D peaks early. Really early. The funniest joke of 
the entire series comes seven seconds into the first episode, but it is 
a belter. Not to spoil anything, but it featuresDon Warrington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/mar/15/don-warrington-actor> dancing in 
a sweater. It is a sight gag so timely, so culturally relevant, so perfectly 
observed – like an even more uncomfortableToo Many Cooks 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QrGrOK8oZG8> – that it made me fall off my 
chair because I was laughing so much. I had to pause the show, and I ended up 
in pain from laughing so hard. It is perfect.

It is all downhill from there. But not too far downhill. Sunny D is the 
brainchild ofDane Baptiste 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/20/dane-baptiste-standup-comedy-interview-sunny-d-bbc3>
 – the first black Briton to be nominated at the Edinburgh comedy awards – and, 
like a lot of creator-driven sitcoms that have sprung up in the wake ofLouie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/jan/19/louie-is-finally-coming-to-uk>
, it delivers a heavily authored viewpoint with a strong whiff of 
autobiography. It isn’t perfect by a long shot – there are plenty of rough 
edges – but that just adds to its irresistible charm.

Dane plays Dane, a thirtysomething man who still lives with his parents. He 
has a job he hates, a sister he can’t get along with and – thanks to a drunken 
misjudgment – a fiancee he isn’t sure about. His predicament is part societal, 
part self-sabotaging and fully bleak. But in no way is Sunny D a bleak show.

Each episode zips along on an antsy procession of cutaways. We see Dane’s head 
transposed on to a child’s body. We see splitscreens and flashbacks and 
flash-forwards and Sliding Doors-style what-if? moments. At one point the cast 
breaks off into a Kardashian-style reality-TV diary-room situation. At other 
times, Dane plunges into note-perfect recreations of well-known music videos. 
He narrates some scenes and breaks the fourth wall in others. A show such as
Fleabag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/05/fleabag-a-hilarious-sitcom-about-terrible-people-and-broken-lives>
 – the big BBC3 breakout of the year, the success of which Sunny D presumably 
hopes to emulate – cautiously picked one or two of these devices and leant on 
them as an artistic crutch. In Sunny D, however, it’s completely 
indiscriminate. You are constantly rushing to keep up with everything. It’s 
dizzying.

In terms of performance – at least outside the cutaways – Baptiste largely 
sticks to his downbeat standup persona, preferring to take the centre ground 
around more florid roles. Gbemisola Ikumelo, who plays Dane’s twin sister, hits 
the ground fast and never lets up. On the other side of the spectrum, 
Warrington plays Dane’s dad so stoically that, on the few occasions he is asked 
to deliver lines, it is like watching Mount Rushmore creak into life.

Each episode is loosely themed around an aspect of Dane’s disenchantment: one 
is about love, one about work, one about family – before they finally coalesce 
for the requisite bittersweet ending.

Nothing is quite as brilliant as that one opening moment, but Sunny D is still 
a great show. If it achieves a Fleabag-style crossover to terrestrial TV, it 
will be well-deserved.

Where: BBC3 on iPlayer 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/p04f24n7/sunny-d-1-d-is-for-declarations>.

Length: Four 20-minute episodes, released weekly.

Stand-out episode: Episode three, where Dane watches the rest of his life play 
out before him in incredibly morose fashion.

If you liked Sunny D, watch: Master of None 
<https://www.netflix.com/gb/title/80049714> (Netflix) and Fleabag 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p040tlqx/episodes/player> (iPlayer).
 