
Suzanne Vega, the youthful lone voice of folkish revival in the 1980s, is now 
a 57-year-old woman but she remains, as she always has been, a mysteriously 
protean presence. She’s elfin small with large blue eyes and a face that tends 
towards cool inexpressiveness. She tells me that she’s often mistaken in the 
street for other people. “I’ve been told I’m Cynthia Nixon,Beth Orton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/beth-orton>, Isabella Rossellini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/isabella-rossellini> and Molly Ringwald 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/molly-ringwald>,” she says, shaking her 
head with bemusement.

Which one, I ask, does she most enjoy being confused with.

“Oh Isabella Rossellini. I was like, holy cow, thanks!”

Vega 
<https://mobile.twitter.com/suzyv?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 says she’s fascinated by the idea of “pretending to be other people”, and 
she’s auditioned unsuccessfully for several high-profile film parts down the 
years. She was up for the role of the underground musician inDesperately 
Seeking Susan <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xtu6cLtkML8>, but lost out to 
Madonna. She got rejected as a nun inSister Act, because her audition was “too 
dark”, and nearly played opposite Tom Cruise inThe Color of Money 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k7gmrKAFshE>.

She hasn’t yet landed a film role but in recent years she has acted the part 
of another young woman who found fame early and was hailed as a prodigious 
talent – the writer Carson McCullers. Five years ago Vega performed a musical 
stage piece she had written, Carson McCullers Talks About Love 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QjwrCJHm4Pw>, portraying the alcoholic, 
disabled writer with her endlessly complex bisexual romantic interests and 
embittered literary rivalries. Now she has a new album out,Lover, Beloved: 
Songs from an Evening With Carson McCullers, based on the songs from that show, 
which she has rewritten and will be performing this week atseveral venues 
across the UK <http://www.suzannevega.com/tour/>. Is it radically different 
from the original?

McCullers wrote about her characters with an acute appreciation for human 
diversity and vulnerability

“The original play was actually done when I was in college. So this is the 
third version. I ripped it up because I was unhappy with it. I was trying 
something experimental and I felt it didn’t come off. This new version is more 
a classic one-woman show.”

Vega has been intrigued by McCullers ever since she read the short story 
Sucker as a teenager. Vega started out as a dancer at New York’s School of 
Performing Arts (immortalised inFame) but dropped out to study English and 
drama at Barnard. One day her drama tutor set a project in which students were 
asked to come dressed as a real person who was dead, and they had to field 
questions as though in a TV interview. Vega decided to read a large biography 
of McCullers overnight.

“I really got into it. I could act out all these things I wasn’t inclined to 
do privately. She drank, she smoked, she apparently had all these affairs with 
different men and women. So I did my senior thesis on her and then put the 
project away for 30 years.”

In the meantime, of course, she came to prominence as the singer-songwriter of 
Marlene on the Wall <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CXb6Lb_h0Oo>, Luka 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VZt7J0iaUD0> and Tom’s Diner 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mNWyF3iSMzs>. She arrived in the mid-1980s, 
aged 25, during the height of female flamboyance, when Madonna andCyndi Lauper 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VdQY7BusJNU> were strutting their 
exhibitionist stuff. By contrast she looked as if she was going for a coffee in 
the student union. “I always felt that I knew myself pretty well and I didn’t 
really bother with having an image,” she says.

But pop abhors a vacuum, so the image she got lumped with was of an earnest 
young folk singer who was too po-faced to play the game. In truth she was not 
immune to the pressures of success. By her third album,Days of Open Hand, 
released in 1990, she felt trapped by industry expectation.

“We worked for a whole year on that album. In the end I wasn’t really happy 
with it and there was this palpable sense of disappointment that we’d only sold 
a million copies. Now that seems really ridiculous. It felt like a crime that 
we didn’t sell three million!”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVZt7J0iaUD0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVZt7J0iaUD0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVZt7J0iaUD0&media=>
Watch the video for Suzanne Vega’s Luka. <https://youtu.be/VZt7J0iaUD0> 
Subsequently her sales have steadily diminished, though she retains a hardcore 
of devoted fans. There is an echo here of McCullers’s career, who also started 
out with great success, publishing her first novel,The Heart Is a Lonely Hunter
, in 1940 at the age of 23. Although she continued to produce acclaimed works 
likeReflections in a Golden Eye and the collection The Balad of the Sad Cafe, 
she began to fall out of fashion towards the end of her career, and when she 
died from a brain haemorrhage at the age of 50, she had been supplanted in the 
public imagination by other southern writers such as Harper Lee, Truman Capote 
and Tennessee Williams.

Just as Vega had started out as a dancer in New York, McCullers initially set 
out on a different track, studying piano at Manhattan’s Juilliard School. But 
after developing rheumatic fever, she took up writing seriously.

Often bracketed in the genre of southern gothic, McCullers wrote about her 
characters with an acute appreciation for human diversity and vulnerability. 
For Vega, the novelist was decades ahead of her time.

“From her disabilities to her bisexuality, what she called her dual nature, 
she was so modern. She was interested in writing from the point of view of 
black people. And she embodied these things. It wasn’t just ‘Oh I think I’ll 
write about civil rights’. She was deep in everything she wrote, and I think 
she suffered from it too.”

Like her heroine, Vega also has a gift for narrative empathy. Her songs often 
feature characters that feel novelistic in their realisation. After all, Luka 
was about the abuse of a young boy. At her best she brings to bear formidable 
powers of writerly observation, which may have something to do with a slight 
outsider’s perspective developed in her unorthodox cross-cultural upbringing.

Vega grew up in the Latino neighbourhood of East Harlem in New York and until 
she was nine years old, she believed that her stepfather, the Puerto Rican 
writer Ed Vega, was her father.

“I didn’t know my real father at all,” she says. “It was a huge shock and very 
embarrassing. All kinds of issues came up, mostly of identity. Because I was 
raised to be a proud half-Puerto Rican girl, and I loved my grandmother and 
aunt and I’d been to Puerto Rico, and I spoke Spanish and ate Puerto Rican 
food. And suddenly to be told that I was not Puerto Rican at all, that I was 
white!”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuEvjFThqmq0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuEvjFThqmq0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuEvjFThqmq0&media=>
Watch the video for99.9 F° by Suzanne Vega. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uEvjFThqmq0> 
In her teens and early 20s, when she was reading a lot of revolutionary 
writers, she felt uncomfortable with her ethnic status. “It’s taken me a while 
to say ‘You are what you are, it’s fine’.”

She didn’t meet her biological father, Richard Peck, until she was in her late 
20s, after she had gained international recognition. She says they have been in 
each other’s lives ever since and that he’s been very understanding of her 
sense of dislocation, having been an adopted child himself.

For the past 10 years she has been married to a lawyer called Paul Mills, and 
she has a 22-year-old daughter from a previous marriage to the musician and 
record producer Mitchell Froom.

If her own personal life is pretty stable, that wasn’t the case with 
McCullers. She married a soldier and wannabe writer, Reeves McCullers, when she 
was just 20, and thereafter suffered a torturous relationship based on that 
familiar but unhealthy dynamic of not being able to live together, and not 
being able to be apart.

It ended 16 years later, after various splits and reconciliations, a divorce 
and remarriage, with Reeves killing himself in what he hoped, mistakenly, would 
be a double suicide pact with his wife.

“They were almost always out of control,” says Vega, “but they really sort of 
needed each other. She took his name, but he kept trying to take bits of her 
identity, forging her cheques and professing to have all this writing talent 
himself, though he never put anything on the page.”

There were rumours, the kind often associated with successful women, that it 
was Reeves, who was the real author of the work. Vega knows the syndrome well. 
Her first husband produced her fourth album, which marked a significant shift 
towards a more electronic style of music. At the time there were suggestions 
that Froom drove the change.

“There was a camp of people who said, ‘Oh she changed her style to suit her 
husband’, which is nonsense. I hired him to do the thing that he did, and he 
did it really well, and that’s what I wanted him to do.”

McCullers wrote about police brutality very early. The things that she was 
thinking of, and embodied, are very current

But while McCullers was the obvious author of her own work, Vega believes her 
writing lost something when Reeves died, some of its earlier passion and social 
vision. What McCullers never lost, and Vega makes gentle fun of in one song 
entitled Harper Lee, is her competitive spirit. The song runs through 
McCullers’s opinions of other writers – “Virginia Woolf/She leaves me cold/I 
recognise the genius/But I’m twice as bold” – and boasts the catchy chorus: 
“Oh, Harper, Harper./Lee. Lee. Lee./She only wrote that one book!/I’ve written 
more than three.”

“She was trained by her mother to be a genius,” Vega says of McCuller’s 
motivation. “So you get the sense if you’re not a great genius maybe your 
mother won’t love you. She wasn’t going to let that go, and if that wrecked 
your marriage, well then that’s just too bad.”

I ask her if she feels competitive with other musicians.

“Yes,” she says without prevarication. “I have a jealous streak. I’m jealous 
of other people’s success, their acclaim, their recognition I guess. But over 
the years I’ve had to say, you just have to put that away. What I’m not jealous 
of is people’s freedoms. Because I’ve done what I’ve wanted. So I don’t 
begrudge anybody’s art. But sometimes I say, ‘Oh, they’re not up to much.’ I 
have to wrestle with that, though, because ultimately it will poison your art.”

A former Orange prize judge, she says she doesn’t read much modern fiction, 
preferring classics like Edith Wharton, Charles Dickens, the Brontës, James 
Joyce and Hemingway. The most up-to-the-moment novel she has read recently is 
25 years old – Brett Easton Ellis’sAmerican Psycho, which she didn’t finish 
first time round. She appreciated the satire much more this time.

But what she really loves are biographies, particularly of creative people. 
Although she’s very careful about maintaining the privacy of her own life, 
she’s not one of those artists who argue that it’s all about the work. For her, 
it’s knowledge of the life that enhances appreciation of the work.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuAWGw8meEDE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuAWGw8meEDE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuAWGw8meEDE&media=>
Watch the video for Book of Dreams by Suzanne Vega. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uAWGw8meEDE> 
“Say Francis Bacon <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/bacon>,” she 
explains. “You see his work on the canvas, but it’s so much more enriching when 
you know some of them are his lovers and this is how he lived. This is what his 
room looked like.”

I say it’s notable that Bacon, like McCullers, led a chaotic, alcoholic life.

“I think that’s why you become an artist,” she says, “to clear all that out. 
You have this troubled life and you figure, where am I going to put all this? 
And you put it on the canvas or the page as overspill in a way.”

What survives from that overspill is entirely unpredictable. I tell her that 
on the way to the interview, I suddenly found myself humming the insanely 
catchy melody to Tom’s Diner, and having to remind myself to stop, in case she 
thought I was mocking her.

She laughs, but she’s grown used to its background ubiquity. She wrote the 
song in 1982 and it lay dormant for five years, before becoming a huge global 
hit. Since then it has been covered, sampled and resampled by everyone fromREM 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ci7NhvYeXEk> to Snoop Dogg 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vcKIXpyvTAI>.

As for McCullers’s legacy, Vega would like to see her read more widely. Her 
work, she says, is growing more relevant by the day.

“Even in the last five years between the last production [of her McCullers 
show] and this one, so much has changed. The fact that gay people can marry 
each other now is an amazing leap forward. And that, sadly, we have to have
Black Lives Matter <https://twitter.com/hashtag/blacklivesmatter?lang=en-gb> – 
that [campaign] would be shocking to her. She wrote about police brutality very 
early in her career. The things that she was thinking of, and embodied, are 
very current. So I think there’s a whole generation of people who might find in 
her a kindred spirit. They just don’t know.”

Perhaps, with Vega’s help, they will soon.

Suzanne Vega performs Lover, Beloved at the Queens Hall Edinburgh 
<http://www.thequeenshall.net/whats-on/shows/suzanne-vega-the-lover-beloved-tour-2016>
 (9 Oct),RNCM Manchester <http://www.rncm.ac.uk/performance/suzanne-vega/> (10 
Oct),Cadogan Hall <https://www.cadoganhall.com/event/suzanne-vega-161011/> 
London (11 Oct) and theTown Hall Birmingham 
<https://www.thsh.co.uk/event/suzanne-vega-the-lover-beloved-tour> (13 Oct). 
The album Lover, Beloved is out on Friday
 