
1. 20,000 Days on Earth

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Da8vy-DO-I5E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Da8vy-DO-I5E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Da8vy-DO-I5E&media=>
The last couple of Sydney film fests have shown “hybrid” documentaries (mixing 
reality with fictional techniques) to be one of the most exciting trends in 
filmmaking. This year the tendency gets major official recognition with the 
gala opening night and official competition slot given to this acclaimed UK 
film aboutNick Cave <https://www.theguardian.com/music/nick-cave>, made by 
artistsIain Forsyth and Jane Pollard <http://www.iainandjane.com/> with the 
singer-writer’s co-operation, and imagining his “20,000th day on earth.” If 
nothing else, it sounds unique.

2. Black Coal, Thin Ice

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbaJK7EhCTEI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbaJK7EhCTEI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbaJK7EhCTEI&media=>
The festival has a strand of Chinese filmmaking this year and this crime story 
is the first title to head for, judging from the electrifying scene depicted in 
the trailer, in which a police raid on a hairdressing salon goes wrong. If the 
rest of the film is only half as accomplished as this – andgiven it bagged the 
top prize at the Berlin film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/16/chinese-film-noir-top-prize-berlin-film-festival>
 it could well be - audiences are in for a treat.

3. The Rover
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Disp2OUG6phE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Disp2OUG6phE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Disp2OUG6phE&media=>
The new Mad Max? Let’s see. David Michôd’s follow-up to his gripping debut, 
Animal Kingdom, is a post-apocalyptic Australian road movie, a two-hander for 
Guy Pearce and Twilight’s Robert Pattinsonthat recently premiered in Cannes  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/17/the-rover-review-cannes-robert-pattinson>
to encouraging reviews.Variety noted its “desolate beauty” 
<http://variety.com/interstitial/?ref=http%3A%2F%2Fvariety.com%2F2014%2Ffilm%2Freviews%2Fcannes-film-review-the-rover-1201183127%2F>
 along with a “career-redefining” performance from Pattinson.

4. Eastern Boys
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DS664v713C2E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DS664v713C2E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DS664v713C2E&media=>
The ingeniously unpredictable second film from French writer-director Robin 
Campillo <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0133028/> (who made Les Revenants, the 
inspiration for teleseries the Returned, and penned the Cannes Palme 
d’Or-winningthe Class 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/feb/27/the-class-entre-les-murs> for 
Laurent Cantet) has at its centre the shifting relationship between a gay 
single man and a gang of eastern European illegal immigrants. It shows Campillo 
becoming as accomplished a director as he is a writer.


5. Finding Fela!

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSjG0zJz1ZCk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSjG0zJz1ZCk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSjG0zJz1ZCk&media=>
 Last year’s docos on African American music, Muscle Shoals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/24/muscle-shoals-review> and Twenty 
Feet From Stardom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/27/20-feet-from-stardom-review>, lit 
up the festival, and this long overdue documentary on the founder of Afrobeat, 
a vibrant blend of funk, jazz and Nigerian highlife, could be this year’s 
equivalent. It doesn’t do any harm that Fela Kuti’s life as a musician and 
political agitator was unusually eventful and his music hard to resist, or that 
the director is the prolific, Oscar-winningAlex Gibney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alex-gibney>. 

6. McCabe and Mrs Miller
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DF2BSHp9oYD0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DF2BSHp9oYD0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DF2BSHp9oYD0&media=>
How can you not adore a western that dares to open with a Leonard Cohen song 
as the antihero rides into in town through the mud and drizzle? This delectably 
downbeat 1971 classic is part of aRobert Altman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/nov/22/guardianobituaries.filmnews> 
mini-retrospective. If some of the director’s titles are missing, viz. his 
wonderfully laidback Chandler adaptation,The Long Goodbye 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0070334/>, it offers among other things a chance 
for viewers to re-evaluate one of his most underrated films, 1978’sA Wedding 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0078481/>. 

7. Boyhood
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DISaSHUSrEUw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DISaSHUSrEUw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DISaSHUSrEUw&media=>
US indie stalwart Richard Linklater 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/richard-linklater>’s portrait of a character 
growing from boy to young man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/21/sundance-boyhood-review-richard-linklater>
 was filmed at intervals of a few years with the same group of actors over 12 
years, almost a fictional equivalent ofMichael Apted’s 7 Up  
<http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/culture/2013/01/what-56-up-reveals.html>
documentary series. On one level the film is engagingly modest, showing 
extracts from a life in progress, bolstered by well-written dialogue (is 
Linklater the US answer toEric Rohmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/eric-rohmer>?) and consistently unaffected 
performances –Patricia Arquette and Ethan Hawke play the parents. But its free 
will v determinism theme also gives an intriguing aftertaste –do we make our 
way in life, or does fate make it for us?

8. An Evening with Fred Schepisi 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsmXcqW18H7Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsmXcqW18H7Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsmXcqW18H7Y&media=>
Veteran Australian director Fred Schepisi <http://fredschepisi.com/> speaks in 
public rarely but when he does he usually proves tartly candid, so his talk 
session with criticDavid Stratton 
<http://www.abc.net.au/atthemovies/txt/s1138600.htm> should prove illuminating. 
This is hooked on the screening of his latest film,Words and Pictures 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/23/movies/clive-owen-and-juliette-binoche-star-in-words-and-pictures.html?_r=0>
, a romantic drama starring Clive Owen and Juliette Binoche, and a sneak 
preview of Rachel Ward and Tony Krawitz’s new teleseries, the Devil's 
Playground, based on characters depicted in his widely admired1976 debut 
feature. <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0074404/>

9. My Neighor Totoro

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJr_QzxrKhJ0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJr_QzxrKhJ0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJr_QzxrKhJ0&media=>
 The recent release of The Wind Rises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-wind-rises>, the final film of Japanese 
animation masterHayao Miyazaki <https://www.theguardian.com/film/hayaomiyazaki>
, makes this an appropriate occasion to salute the filmmaker with a revival of 
one of his most beloved films, with its unforgettable bus in the form of a 
grinning cat.

10. Jodorowsky’s Dune
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXVliO0wAiu4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXVliO0wAiu4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXVliO0wAiu4&media=>
 A film about a film that might have been, this documentary on hallucinatory 
maestroAlejandro Jodorowsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/may/23/alejandro-jodorowsky-film-danza-realidad>
’s abortive efforts to film Frank Herbert’s science fiction story (later filmed 
by David Lynch <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0087182/>at great personal cost) 
threatens to be the film about filmmaking must-see of the festival.

 *  Lynden Barber is a former artistic director of the Sydney film festival  