
Update: In the last 24 hours, the UN has added more than 14,000 refugees to 
their total, bringing it to1,014,757 
<http://data.unhcr.org/syrianrefugees/regional.php>.

Two years after nationwide protests sparked upheaval in Syria, the ensuing 
refugee crisis has reached one million people. Far from slowing down, the 
number of refugees has almost doubled in the past three months alone. 
Meanwhile, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees haswarned 
<http://www.unhcr.org/513623756.html> that the "humanitarian response capacity 
is dangerously stretched".

The current estimate, compiled by the UN's Refugee Agency is 1,000,669 
<http://data.unhcr.org/syrianrefugees/regional.php>. Previously, the UN had 
thought that the number of refugees would not reach 1 million until the middle 
of this year. Most of the 1 million (79%) are registered as refugees but the 
figure also includes individuals awaiting registration.

As registration remains difficult, data collection has become a "top priority 
<http://data.unhcr.org/syrianrefugees/download.php?id=1574>" for the UN, 
meaning that the 1 million mark may be an underestimate. In Lebanon, even with 
the addition of two new registration centres, it typically takes 2 months to be 
recognised as a refugee, in Jordan, it's 2.5 months (and was 5). Iraq, which 
continues to struggle with its own refugee crisis, has only managed to register 
192 of the estimated 105,000 Syrians that have arrived on its territory..

Where to?

via chartsbin.com <http://chartsbin.com/view/12105> 
A third of Syrians fleeing their country head to Lebanon. Jordan received 
another 33%, Turkey 19% and Iraq 11%. Thevulnerabilities 
<http://www96.reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/Inter-Agency%20Regional%20Refugee%20Response%20for%20Syrian%20Refugees%2019%20-%2025%20February%202013.pdf>
 which individuals face, as well as the challenges which host governments 
encounter will vary from country to country. Lebanon faces a severe shortage of 
essential medical supplies needed to treat refugees while aid workers in Egypt 
have identified mental health issues among Syrians entering the country. 
Meeting refugees' food needs is cited as a problem across the region.

Jordan, which has already borne a large part of Iraq's refugee crisis over the 
past ten years, is now seeing its public services being stretched to breaking 
point. As one of the region's smaller countries, the influx of refugees has 
meant that Lebanon's population has swelled by 10%. Turkey has had to spend 
$600 million setting up 17 refugee camps and will need to continue to build 
more to accommodate the thousands that continue to flee Syria's borders every 
day.

The strain placed on these countries poses another risk: that they will close 
their borders. In August 2012, Iraq sealed theAl Qaim border 
<http://www96.reliefweb.int/report/syrian-arab-republic/inter-agency-regional-refugee-response-syrian-refugees-19-25-february>
 it shares with Syria. Though exceptions are being made for medical emergencies 
and family reunification, the closure is a serious concern according to UNHCR.

Who?

Demographics are an important indicator of which groups are the most 
vulnerable. There is a near equal split between female (52%) and male (48%) 
refugees. Children under the age of 18 make up more than half of the refugees
according to the UN <http://data.unhcr.org/syrianrefugees/regional.php>. The 
British charitySave the Children 
<http://www.savethechildren.org.uk/news-and-comment/news/2013-03/half-syrias-one-million-refugees-are-children>
 claims that many of these children have been separated from one or both of 
their parents.


Refugees represent just one element of the humanitarian disaster. The UNHCR 
estimates that2.5 million <http://www.unhcr.org/pages/49e486a76.html#SYRDA> 
Syrians were internally displaced as of January 2013 - meaning that they were 
forced to leave their homes but remained within Syria's borders. Given the 
ongoing conflict inside the country, these individuals are near impossible for 
aid agencies to reach and assist.

Who's Helping?

So far, over $145 million has been pledged to alleviate the crisis in 2013 - 
less than a third of the $494 million which the UN says is needed. Contributing 
46%, the United States is by far the biggest donor, followed by the European 
Commission (21%) and Japan (18%).

Though the amounts given are very small, as a proportion of their GDPs, Norway 
and Kuwait are the most generous donors. In January this year, Kuwait hosted a
conference <http://www.unocha.org/syria-humanitarian-pledging-conference> for 
international donors aimed at increasing pledges. Though donors committed to 
give $1.5bn, international aid agenciesannounced 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/feb/28/aid-syria-fails-materialise> last 
month that most of this had failed to materialise.

Funding is further complicated by the number of organisations vying for 
support from governments and intergovernmental organisations. The UNHCR alone 
has 102 partners listed on itsSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> 
Refugee Response page and there are many other smaller local NGOs operating in 
camps.

Some contributions are made on a regional basis, but many donors prefer to 
contribute to efforts in a specific country. In line with the distribution of 
the refugees themselves, most funds are funnelled towards Jordan (28%), 
followed by Lebanon (26%), Turkey (15%) and Iraq (11%).

The humanitarian disaster has increased pressure for other forms of aid too. 
Foreign Secretary William Hague said on Sunday that the UKwould not rule out 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/mar/03/hague-aid-syria-rebels-weapons> 
arming Syria's rebels if the crisis worsens.

Why?

The reasons cited for leaving vary by country of destination - though these do 
provide an insight into life in Syria. Speaking to families arriving in 
Lebanon, the Danish Refugee Council found that 52% claimed to have left Syria 
due to 'the destruction of their houses' and 10% said they fled to Syria for 
"fear of being arrested".



 <>Download the data

• DATA: download the full spreadsheet 
<https://docs.google.com/spreadsheet/ccc?key=0ArwVnOqE20IkdEYxTDJSR3VUNVFJR2tiT1hwd0t1bEE&usp=sharing>

SOURCE: UNHCR <http://data.unhcr.org/syrianrefugees/regional.php>

NEW! Buy our book

• Facts are Sacred: the power of data (on Kindle) 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Facts-are-Sacred-Guardian-ebook/dp/B006PI9PQG/>

More open data

Data journalism and data visualisations from the Guardian 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/data>

World government data

• Search the world's government data with our gateway 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world-government-data>

Development and aid data

• Search the world's global development data with our gateway 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/data-store/global-development-data/search?q=>

Can you do something with this data?

• Flickr Please post your visualisations and mash-ups on our Flickr group 
<http://www.flickr.com/groups/1115946@N24/>
• Contact us at data@guardian.co.uk <mailto:data@guardian.co.uk>

• Get the A-Z of data <http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/page/2009/jun/17/1>
• More at the Datastore directory <http://www.guardian.co.uk/data-store>
• Follow us on Twitter <http://twitter.com/GuardianData>
• Like us on Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/pages/Guardian-data/155291341187950>
 