
Hello and welcome everyone. How you feel about Taboo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/taboo> probably depends on how gothic 
you like your historical dramas to be. Personally I’m a fan of period pieces 
stuffed full of doom, gloom and melodrama and served with side dishes of 
long-stewing revenge and simmering violence. Thus I thoroughly enjoyed the 
opening episode of Tom Hardy’s passion project, conceived with his father 
Chips, and written by Peaky Blinders creator Steven Knight.

Sure, there were times when it threatened to topple into parody – Hardy’s 
delivery of the line “they’re my rocks now” edged too close to The League of 
Gentlemen for comfort – but overall this was a nicely paced opener, which threw 
up a number of intriguing storylines and felt tonally closer to Dickens than
Downton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/dec/25/downton-abbey-the-finale-happy-endings-for-virtually-every-single-character>
.


“We are all owned and we have all owned others so don’t you stand there and 
judge me. Today I have work to do”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Ftaboo-recap-episode-one-tom-hardy-devilish-welcome-unholy-hero%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29bc7c2f99526cdb0441646de5f1d8553e5a7f1a%2F0_286_4284_2570%2F4284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Taboo%20recap%3A%20season%20one%2C%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20a%20devilish%20welcome%20to%20Tom%20Hardy's%20unholy%20hero&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Ftaboo-recap-episode-one-tom-hardy-devilish-welcome-unholy-hero%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Taboo%20recap%3A%20season%20one%2C%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20a%20devilish%20welcome%20to%20Tom%20Hardy%27s%20unholy%20hero&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Ftaboo-recap-episode-one-tom-hardy-devilish-welcome-unholy-hero%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29bc7c2f99526cdb0441646de5f1d8553e5a7f1a%2F0_286_4284_2570%2F4284.jpg>
 A cross between Bill Sikes, Heathcliff and Hamlet … Tom Hardy is clearly 
having a ball as Delaney. Photograph: FX Networks / Robert Viglasky 
Welcome to Regency England. The year is 1814 and the setting a grubby London 
stuffed to the gills with schemers and chancers. Our hero, if we can call him 
such, is James Keziah Delaney, renegade, rebel and owner of a quite magnificent 
top hat and billowing coat. As played by Hardy, who is clearly having a ball, 
Delaney is an unholy cross between Bill Sikes, Heathcliff and Hamlet, with a 
dash of The Last of the Mohicans’ Hawkeye and a penchant for gruesome curses, 
ghostly hallucinations and eye-catching graveyard rituals.

Presumed dead for a decade following the sinking of a slave ship, Delaney is 
in fact very much alive and heads back to London after his father’s death to 
settle some scores, claim his inheritance and return to the woman he loves. At 
this point some of you might be saying – hang on, isn’t that the initial plot 
of Poldark? Yes it is: if Ross Poldark were a devious diamond-burying devil 
with an apparently tenuous grip on sanity, a desire to beat most people to a 
pulp and a deep-held passion for his half-sister.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Ftaboo-recap-episode-one-tom-hardy-devilish-welcome-unholy-hero%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb92d4c38f83d4a75d92fa82403414b672ecfb9ce%2F0_0_4284_2856%2F4284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Taboo%20recap%3A%20season%20one%2C%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20a%20devilish%20welcome%20to%20Tom%20Hardy's%20unholy%20hero&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Ftaboo-recap-episode-one-tom-hardy-devilish-welcome-unholy-hero%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Taboo%20recap%3A%20season%20one%2C%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20a%20devilish%20welcome%20to%20Tom%20Hardy%27s%20unholy%20hero&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Ftaboo-recap-episode-one-tom-hardy-devilish-welcome-unholy-hero%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb92d4c38f83d4a75d92fa82403414b672ecfb9ce%2F0_0_4284_2856%2F4284.jpg>
 A seething mass of barely concealed rage and Byronic urges … Hardy as Delaney. 
Photograph: FX Networks/Robert Viglasky 
But Delaney is not just a seething mass of barely concealed rage and Byronic 
urges – he also has a sharp head for business. The scene at the end where he 
filleted the East India Company and explained the real importance of Nootka 
Sound, the apparently worthless piece of land his father left him, was a 
masterclass in strategy. It also suggested that Delaney plays up to polite 
society’s image of him as a half-mad savage (again shades of George Gordon, 
Lord Byron who similarly encouraged the swirl of gossip and stories of devilish 
behaviour) while hiding his true personality. As to what that true personality 
might be – it’s not yet clear, but I for one didn’t buy his claim that he has 
no fear and no guilt. Bluster all you like, dear James, but I know a man 
haunted by the (mis)deeds of the past when I see one.

“I do know the evil that you do because I was once part of it”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Ftaboo-recap-episode-one-tom-hardy-devilish-welcome-unholy-hero%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d5c9415c1c51babc9a41c944e6748ee91ddffaf%2F0_0_4664_2624%2F4664.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Taboo%20recap%3A%20season%20one%2C%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20a%20devilish%20welcome%20to%20Tom%20Hardy's%20unholy%20hero&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Ftaboo-recap-episode-one-tom-hardy-devilish-welcome-unholy-hero%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Taboo%20recap%3A%20season%20one%2C%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20a%20devilish%20welcome%20to%20Tom%20Hardy%27s%20unholy%20hero&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Ftaboo-recap-episode-one-tom-hardy-devilish-welcome-unholy-hero%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d5c9415c1c51babc9a41c944e6748ee91ddffaf%2F0_0_4664_2624%2F4664.jpg>
 Delaney’s foes are lining up … The East India Company. Photograph: Robert 
Viglasky/Scott Free Prods 
Lining up against Delaney Jr are a number of foes, from his enigmatic sister 
Zilpha (Oona Chaplin, doing her best with an underwritten role) and her venal 
husband Thorne (whose casual utterance of the N word was perhaps the episode’s 
most shocking moment) to the mighty East India Company, led by the devious Sir 
Stuart Strange (a fantastic Jonathan Pryce making even the most obvious lines 
sound suitably sinister).Steven Knight has stressed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/01/steven-knight-peaky-blinders-taboo-risky-period-drama>
 that it would be a mistake to presume that Strange and co are simply the 
villains of this piece, though the script relished the opportunity to draw 
comparisons with that modern-day “vampire squid 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/politics/news/the-great-american-bubble-machine-20100405>
” Goldman Sachs.

Additional notes
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Ftaboo-recap-episode-one-tom-hardy-devilish-welcome-unholy-hero%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2c8657d4c32e3dcb15dcfd9fc25741aa96ac3a9%2F0_0_3129_3911%2F3129.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Taboo%20recap%3A%20season%20one%2C%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20a%20devilish%20welcome%20to%20Tom%20Hardy's%20unholy%20hero&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Ftaboo-recap-episode-one-tom-hardy-devilish-welcome-unholy-hero%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Taboo%20recap%3A%20season%20one%2C%20episode%20one%20%E2%80%93%20a%20devilish%20welcome%20to%20Tom%20Hardy%27s%20unholy%20hero&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Ftaboo-recap-episode-one-tom-hardy-devilish-welcome-unholy-hero%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2c8657d4c32e3dcb15dcfd9fc25741aa96ac3a9%2F0_0_3129_3911%2F3129.jpg>
 Making the most of a small scene … Franka Potente as brothel madam and 
squatter Helga. Photograph: Robert Viglasky/Scott Free Prods 
• Delaney Sr was a man of many parts: shipping magnate, resurrection man, 
communer with the dead. He also apparently fathered three children with three 
different women. James’ Native American mother was apparently thrown in with 
the purchase of Nootka Sound, and was passed off as Neapolitan by Delaney Sr. 
Zilpha’s mother must have been of wealthier stock, or else I can’t believe 
Thorne would have married her. And the unknown mother of the mysterious third 
child, the brother James agreed to pay for but claims he will never see again 
and who was sent away for reasons as yet unknown.

• There is, of course, another possibility here – that the “brother” is really 
a son, the product of James and Zilpha’s much hinted at union who has been 
hidden away to avoid scandal.

• Also unknown: who poisoned Delaney Sr and why. My money’s on Zilpha, who 
plays her cards very close to her chest indeed.

• One thing we do know about her: she loathes her husband, no matter what she 
claimed in that letter at the end.

• Slimy East India Company representative Thoyt had more than a touch of the 
Tulkinghorn 
<https://charitysplace.wordpress.com/2010/06/14/what-the-dickens-the-intolerable-mr-tulkinghorn/>
 about him.

• Nice to see veteran Scottish actor David Hayman popping up as loyal retainer 
Brace.

• Also making the most of a small scene: Franka Potente, who played 
enterprising brothel madam and squatter Helga.

• The episode was directed by Kristoffer Nyholm, who also directed The Enfield 
Haunting and episodes of The Killing, and who revelled in the chance to get up 
close and personal with the blood and guts of Georgian England.

Most magnificently brooding Tom Hardy moment

Much as I admired Delaney’s ability to stalk the east London wastelands with 
faithful lurcher in tow, this has to go to his decision to commune loudly with 
the dead during his father’s autopsy.

Most fantastically baroque threat of the week

“Please do not misunderstand the situation. You send me 12 men, I will send 
you 12 sets of testicles in a bag and we can watch your little whore devour 
them together.”

So what did you think? Who murdered Delaney Sr? Why did Delaney Jr bury the 
diamonds? And what exactly are those “fucking rumours” Sir Stuart Strange was 
so keen to uncover? As ever, all speculation welcome below …
 