
If you are fortunate enough to have quite a lot of cash stashed away in 
savings, your number one new year’s resolution should be to check whether you 
are affected by a change to the protection that kicks in if a bank goes bust.

New rules took effect yesterday, and the bottom line is that if you have more 
than £75,000 tied up with one financial institution, you should probably move 
the surplus to another bank or building society. However, as is so often the 
case with money and finance, it’s not quite as simple as that.

The change amounts to a watering down of the protection offered by the 
Financial Services Compensation Scheme (FSCS), the official safety net for 
customers of financial firms that go out of business, which has paid out in 
excess of £26bn to more than 4.5 million consumers since it was set up in 2001.

For several years, the deposit protection limit covering money in savings and 
bank accounts, cash Isas, savings bonds etc stood at £85,000. This figure was 
“per person, per firm”, and for joint accounts was £170,000. However, as of 1 
January this has been cut to £75,000 (£150,000 for joint accounts) because of a 
European directive. Britain has been forced to make this change to bring it 
into line with the rest of the EU, which has a threshold of €100,000 (£73,000). 
The UK is in effect being penalised for the fact that the pound has risen 
against the euro.

Some commentators have previously described the change as “bonkers”, though it 
is fair to say the vast majority of savers won’t be impacted because they don’t 
have anything like £75,000 put away. However, those who do “have a lot to lose” 
if their financial institution were to go under, warns Hannah Maundrell, editor 
in chief of themoney.co.uk <http://www.money.co.uk/> website.

The obvious way for savers to raise their protection is to split their money 
between different banks and building societies. However, while this should be 
quite simple, says Maundrell, it is made complicated by the fact thatFSCS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/fscs> cover is shared between banks that 
operate under the same licence. For example, HSBC and First Direct fall under 
the same umbrella, so share combined protection.

In some cases a whole group of seemingly separate savings brands share the 
same licence, where one £75,000 protection limit now applies. For example, you 
could have £75,000 in a Saga savings account, £75,000 in an AA savings account, 
£75,000 in Birmingham Midshires and £75,000 in the Halifax, but in effect only 
one of them will be FSCS protected as they are all part of Bank of Scotland for 
compensation purposes.

Another group of brands sharing a licence is Yorkshire building society, Egg, 
and the Norwich & Peterborough and Barnsley and Chelsea building societies. 
It’s the same story with Nationwide and the Cheshire, Derbyshire and 
Dunfermline building societies.

Last month peer-to-peer lender RateSetter published research claiming that 
public awareness of the level of FSCS protection is declining, and many people 
overestimate its ability to protect them. It quoted a retired investor from 
Yorkshire, Sean Hodgson, as saying: “The reduced FSCS cover is a definite 
consideration in how I allocate my investments. I certainly don’t want the risk 
of losing a large percentage of my investment, so I’ll be careful not to exceed 
the new limit in any single provider.”

While most banks offering products to UK savers have a UK banking licence and 
the £75,000 FSCS protection, European banks are also allowed to operate here 
under their home country’s regulations under a system known as passporting. The 
main difference affecting consumers is that these passporting banks are covered 
by their home country’s compensation scheme (up to €100,000 per person) and not 
the UK’s, says data provider Moneyfacts.co.uk. These banks include AgriBank 
(regulated in Malta); Fidor Bank (Germany); Handelsbanken and Ikano Bank (both 
Sweden); RCI Bank UK (France); and Triodos Bank (Netherlands).

Rachel Thrussell at Moneyfacts says: “Savers can be reassured that under 
European law, savings with European banks are covered by the compensation 
scheme of the bank’s home country, though they should bear in mind that in the 
event of a crisis they face language and exchange rate issues.”
 