
Exhibition of the week

Sean Scully: Kind of Red
What is it about red? Auctioneers claim that paintings with red in them always 
sell, so Sean Scully should be on to a good thing. In his new works, this 
powerful and intelligent abstract painter, whose art is reminiscent both of 
Frank Stella's grids and Seamus Heaney's poetic landscapes, explores the 
fieriest, sexiest and most vital of colours. Well, actually there's a lot of 
grey and black here, too, in Scully's earthy, resonant, mysterious paintings.
• Timothy Taylor Gallery <http://www.timothytaylorgallery.com/>, London W1, 
from 11 June until 12 July.

Other exhibitions this week

Marina Abramović 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/may/12/marina-abramovic-ready-to-die-serpentine-gallery-512-hours>

The legendary performance artist will be present all summer in London with a 
few props, herself, and the audience. The Serpentine Gallery denies that the 
work's title, 512 Hours, indicates how long you will have to queue for.
• Serpentine Gallery <http://www.serpentinegalleries.org/>, London W2, from 11 
June until 25 August.

British Folk Art
See the original wicker man from the film of the same name! See the actual 
strings used by The Incredible String Band! Well, probably not, but this is a 
survey of British popular art with a rustic, homespun flavour. They're buying a 
stairway to heaven.
• Tate Britain <http://www.tate.org.uk/visit/tate-britain>, London SW1, from 
10 June until 31 August.

Antony Gormley
It's a giant Gormley figure with a hotel room inside it! Gormley's latest 
public, or semi-public, sculpture is launched this week as part of the facade 
of a new Mayfair hotel.
• Beaumont Hotel <http://www.thebeaumont.com/>, London W1, from 10 June.

Ed Atkins
While Abramović holds court at the Serpentine, high-definition video by Atkins 
can be seen at its nearby Sackler Gallery, promising to absorb the visitor in a 
multi-screen labyrinth.
• Serpentine Sackler Gallery <http://www.serpentinegalleries.org/>, London W2, 
from 11 June until 25 August.

Masterpiece of the week
 Bathers at Asnières, 1884, by Georges Seurat Photograph: Georges Seurat/Getty 
Georges Seurat – Bathers at Asnières, 1884

It is a cliche to think Seurat is just a painter of pointillist dots. This 
eerily beautiful painting is not so much about his search for a science of 
seeing as it is a revelation of classical calm and grace hidden at the margins 
of modern life. The smokestacks of factories billow pollution into the 
ethereal, magnificently rendered atmosphere – Seurat seems to paint every 
molecule of oxygen and smoke – but here on the riverside is a moment of 
timeless summer peace. Utopia even.
• National Gallery 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/georges-seurat-bathers-at-asnieres>
, London WC2

Image of the week
 Stuart Franklin's photo of 'tank man' stopping the column of T59 tanks in 
Tiananmen Square, Beijing, 1989. Photograph: Stuart Franklin/Magnum Photos 
What we learned this week



How modern artists have tackled Hogarth's Rake – with booze and floozies and 
high living 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/jun/06/hogarth-rakes-progress-david-hockney-grayson-perry>

How Rem Koolhaas has blown the ceiling off the Venice Biennale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2014/jun/05/rem-koolhaas-architecture-biennale-venice-fundamentals>
 …

… And why he believes architecture has become a total fiction these days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/video/2014/jun/06/rem-koolhaas-fundamentals-venice-architecture-biennale-video>

How Magnum photographer Stuart Franklin took the iconic 'tank man' shot in 
Tiananmen Square 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/photography-blog/2014/jun/03/stuart-franklin-tiananmen-square-tank-man>

Why Larry Clark's early photographs, with their hustlers and gun-toters, still 
have such raw power to shock ... 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/jun/05/larry-clark-tulsa-teenage-lust-photography-controversy>

... and what Clark's most controversial photographs are 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2014/jun/05/teenage-lust-larry-clarks-most-controversial-photography-in-pictures>

That Van Gogh's ear has been regrown from a relative's cells  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2014/jun/04/vincent-van-gogh-ear-genetically-engineered-art>

Mr Comic Sans explains how he made the world's most hated font 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/shortcuts/2014/jun/04/comic-sans-creator-vincent-connare>

Why the Chinese state are sponsoring a series of art about "chubby women" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2014/jun/03/china-tiananmen-square-chubby-women-xu-hongfei>

How a ghost town in Belgium became paradise for the world's street artists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/jun/04/doel-ghost-town-belgium-street-art-decay>

Restoration uncovers a hidden whale in a 17th-century painting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/jun/04/restoration-hidden-whale-dutch-painting>

Francis Bacon's portrait of Lucian Freud – owned by Roald Dahl – is up for sale
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/jun/04/bacon-portrait-of-freud-owned-by-dahl-up-for-auction>

The grim, gruesome art of medical illustration, used in the time before 
photography 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/jun/02/sick-rose-gruesome-art-medical-illustration-will-self>

What the most spooky, occult artworks of all time are 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/jun/05/top-10-magical-artworks>

That you can skip back in time to the D-day landings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ng-interactive/2014/jun/01/d-day-landings-scenes-in-1944-and-now-interactive>

What the wild block parties Mondrian had in his studio were really like 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/jun/04/piet-mondrian-painting-studio-tate-liverpool-turner-contemporary-colour>

And finally ...

Share your art on the theme of play now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/jun/02/share-your-artworks-about-play>

Follow us on Twitter <https://twitter.com/Gdnartanddesign>
 