
This statement covers all our significant findings regarding issues covered in 
the target section of the Living our Values report to date. As we are using a 
rolling assurance process alongside the rolling publication of sections in the 
report, we may add additional findings that come to light as we investigate 
each section. All data and significant claims made in this section have been 
assured.

The inclusion of a single section with progress on all targets together with 
future targets in one place is a useful addition to the report. Perhaps the 
first most striking point it demonstrates is the number of targets that the 
Guardian were working towards last year. It is notable that two thirds of the 
retained targets were achieved during the year (there was a 25% reduction in 
targets as part of the rationalisation relating to the digital first strategy).

The decision to summarise progress across all the targets in the six Strategic 
Priority Areas according to an overall Red, Amber, Green status helps simplify 
the picture for readers and has maintained focus on key areas of performance.

This year the number of actions has reduced to around 40, which is a more 
appropriate number to actively manage. The Guardian has also has gone to some 
effort to make these more focused and specific. The notable gap is the 
Editorial department and we would encourage the Guardian to establish an action 
plan for this area.

The bottom up process of setting actions by department, aligned to priority 
areas, builds on the positive progress made last year in departmental 
engagement. We recommend this is followed up by a strategic, top-down review 
that reviews holistic coverage across the strategic priorities. The action to 
set KPIs for 2015 will be an important element of this as it will enable the 
action plan to incorporate targets against these measurements of progress.
 