
With the launch of the Apple Music streaming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/music-streaming> service just two days away, 
the music industry has been indulging in cliffhanger negotiations worthy of 
Greece and its creditors.

Few can have missed the recent public announcement by Taylor Swift 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/taylor-swift>, one of the biggest-selling 
artists on the planet, that she would not be allowing any of her music to be 
streamed on the service, because Apple was not planning to pay artists for 
songs streamed during the free three-month trial it would offer every user.

It took only hours for Apple to cave in. Eddy Cue, head of its Internet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/internet> Software and Services 
division (and thus in charge of Apple Music), announced on Twitter: “Apple will 
always make sure that artist [sic] are paid … Apple Music will pay artist [sic] 
for streaming, even during customer’s free trial period”. And he ended with the 
words: “We hear you [Taylor Swift] and indie artists. Love, Apple.”

The conclusion came on Thursday afternoon when Swift responded with her tweet: 
“After the events of this week, I’ve decided to put 1989 [her latest album] on 
Apple Music … and happily so.” 
<https://twitter.com/taylorswift13/status/614092816940167168>

Swift’s high profile and huge sales meant everyone paid attention to that row, 
but independent music labels had been making the same threats for weeks.Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> had faced the prospect of 
launching its streaming service without the biggest names or most popular indie 
artists.

Apple’s capitulation will hardly hurt its bottom line. Neil Cybart, a former 
Wall Street analyst who runs a subscription news site focusing on Apple, 
calculates that if 40 million people (out of about 400 million iPhone owners 
worldwide) try Music for three hours a day over the free trial period, at 
Apple’s 0.2-cents-per-song rate the company would have to pay out about $400m.

That’s roughly the operating profit it makes from selling 2.5m iPhones; in the 
past year, it has sold more than 210m. So if the trial persuades even a small 
fraction of non-iPhone users to switch, or persuades sceptical customers to 
stick with iPhone, Apple will come out ahead. Once people start to pay $9.99 a 
month (there is no free tier after the trial), the company could even make 
money.

The launch of the service to compete with Spotify 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/spotify>, Deezer and Google is a 
typical example of negotiating down to the wire for the music business and 
Apple, but it nevertheless marks a new era.

“We’re getting an emerging retailer hegemony,” says Mark Mulligan, co-founder 
ofMidia Research <http://www.midiaresearch.com>, which looks at business models 
in the “content industries”, particularly video and music. “It’s a complete 
transformation from how it used to be in the physical world.”

The launch opens an outright battle in which Apple will vie with Spotify 
(which has 20 million paying subscribers, and 55 million more listening to its 
ad-supported format) as a source of recording revenue for artists, while 
Facebook, YouTube and social media become the key route to win fans.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Ftaylor-swift-triumphed-apple-music-calls-tune%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F26%2F1435340432603%2Fd61db4b2-bfa5-4165-9942-bebb467e1214-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Taylor%20Swift%20may%20have%20triumphed%2C%20but%20Apple%20will%20still%20call%20the%20tune&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Ftaylor-swift-triumphed-apple-music-calls-tune%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Taylor%20Swift%20may%20have%20triumphed%2C%20but%20Apple%20will%20still%20call%20the%20tune&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Ftaylor-swift-triumphed-apple-music-calls-tune%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F26%2F1435340432603%2Fd61db4b2-bfa5-4165-9942-bebb467e1214-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Eddy Cue announced Apple’s climbdown in a series of tweets. Photograph: Stan 
Honda/AFP/Getty Images 
From a time when the labels held so much sway that they could decide the new 
formats music would take, from the LP to the CD, the industry has moved to an 
era when the companies that provide the output wield as much, or more, power 
than the labels.

For decades, EMI owned the Gramophone Company, with its emblematic terrier, 
Nipper, peering into a gramophone horn at the sound of his master’s voice. Sony 
got into the music business in 1987, buying the CBS Record Group just as the CD 
– a format it had co-created with Philips – was taking off.

But the simultaneous rise of the internet and the MP3 format, which could be 
copied and transmitted endlessly, finally killed the record labels’ dominance 
over formats. In 2004, Apple’s iTunes Music Store formalised the “atomisation” 
of the album, allowing people to pick almost any track, rather than the entire 
product – something internet piracy had enabled for years.

In 2009 Spotify entered the picture, just as smartphones were taking off. 
Faster internet connections meant that streaming music became not just possible 
but preferable: smartphones had limited storage, so it was simpler not to keep 
music files on the device itself.

Spotify and the other streaming services aren’t hugely popular with artists. 
They may be a legal alternative to illicit copying – for which artists get 
nothing – but they pay tiny amounts for every song played. Last November, Swift
announced that she was pulling all her music from Spotify 
<http://www.midiaresearch.com>, having already withheld her album 1989, 
released in October. Small payments can’t have been the reason, however, 
because her album could still be found, for free, all over Google’s YouTube. 
Swift could have demanded that Google remove her content, just as she had with 
Spotify, but she didn’t.

Martin Goldschmidt, the founder and chief executive of independent record label
Cooking Vinyl <http://cookingvinyl.com>, whose artists include Marilyn Manson, 
Amanda Palmer, Billy Bragg and Groove Armada, says that Swift’s decision could 
certainly not have been because the video service pays better.

“YouTube has a revenue-sharing scheme from adverts, not per-stream, but 
compared to Apple or Spotify it pays one-tenth to one-twentieth as much per 
play,” he says. “People see music on YouTube as promotion – wrongly – and 
Spotify as the destination, the endgame. The reality is that YouTube is the 
biggest place for music consumption on the planet.

“The reason is that YouTube has colossal reach. We’re in the strange situation 
where 10m plays on Spotify is viewed as lost sales, while 10m plays on YouTube 
is a marketing success.”

That tension between bigger payments and more exposure plays out at the record 
labels. In the internet age, the two aren’t always compatible. As Apple 
embraces streaming, the worry for artists is that comparatively lucrative 
download sales will make way for parsimonious streaming payouts.

For the labels, the worry is a different one. Apple’s service includes “Apple 
Music Connect <https://www.apple.com/music/connect/>”, where musicians can post 
extra content to get closer to their fans. First-time artists could use it too: 
once they get onto Apple’s service via any of dozens of music distribution 
companies, they can start cultivating a fanbase outside the traditional 
channels.

Apple is too important for the labels to cut if off but won't get the same 
largesse from them as it does now
Mark Mulligan, Midia Research 
“The best analogy is … Netflix and Amazon Prime, which have commissioned their 
own original content,” says Mulligan. “It’s a ‘frenemy’ strategy: Apple is too 
important for the labels to cut it off, but won’t get the same largesse from 
them as [it does] now.”

But Goldschmidt plays down the power of this part of Apple’s service: “Connect 
will have to compete with Facebook and YouTube, which people would already 
rather use; they’re already so far ahead.”

The labels do have one lasting power: they own the rights to use the music. 
“Because four record companies effectively own all the big catalogue, they are 
the kingmakers for any new service,” Mulligan says. “Spotify, which has seen 
more growth than any other music service, was held over a barrel a couple of 
years ago by the major record labels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/oct/25/spotify-artists-sue-labels-music-streaming>
about perhaps having to revisit its business model.”

According to Goldschmidt, this is the weakness of a business that relies on 
the content providers – they determine payment rates, which makes it impossible 
for streaming companies to cut monthly rates to a level that would attract more 
users. Research suggests that more than twice as many people would sign up if 
monthly streaming sessions cost $4.99 instead of $9.99, but the per-stream 
charges would be horrible.

Another problem for customers is that the hardware is no longer compatible. 
“The way the consumer electronics marketplace used to work was that they agreed 
on standards, and competed on those. It was almost gentlemanly,” says Mulligan. 
A Sony Walkman would play the same cassettes as a Philips cassette player.

“But internet companies just compete from start to finish, which is why there 
are so many competing standards,” Mulligan continues. “They understand the huge 
benefits of having proprietary playback methods. And that model is working very 
well for the content makers too. The Kindle, Xbox, iTunes – they all lock 
people into an ecosystem, and each one creates a consistency of experience that 
gets people over the hump of paying for digital content.”

Goldschmidt is positive about the prospect of Apple’s launch. “Apple coming in 
to streaming is very exciting. It should be positive,” he says. “It’s got a 
massive community who are willing to pay. And now the independent labels are 
signed up, we’re all in the right place. It’s a win-win.”

From 78s to MP3
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Ftaylor-swift-triumphed-apple-music-calls-tune%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F26%2F1435340698791%2F748c5ea2-4a67-4d26-bd42-d6e686f36b09-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Taylor%20Swift%20may%20have%20triumphed%2C%20but%20Apple%20will%20still%20call%20the%20tune&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Ftaylor-swift-triumphed-apple-music-calls-tune%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Taylor%20Swift%20may%20have%20triumphed%2C%20but%20Apple%20will%20still%20call%20the%20tune&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Ftaylor-swift-triumphed-apple-music-calls-tune%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F26%2F1435340698791%2F748c5ea2-4a67-4d26-bd42-d6e686f36b09-1020x612.jpeg>
 The image of Nipper and the gramophone that became emblematic of the EMI music 
chain in its heyday. Photograph: PA 
Hardware that plays recorded music goes back a long way – even to the player 
pianos of the 1900s which replayed pianists’ efforts by means of long rolls of 
punched paper. But it was the advent of the gramophone, able to replay 
mass-produced records rotating first at 78 rpm (on shellac) – and later at 33⅓ 
or 45 rpm on albums and singles – that initially gave record labels dominance 
not just over music creation, but the means of its reproduction.

EMI was a British conglomerate that made everything from radar sets to TV sets 
– and, crucially, the early gramophones: Nipper the dog, peering into the giant 
horn of a player, was one of its trademarks (shared, after 1935, with RCA 
Victor in the US).

The EMI music business, which had started as the Gramophone Company in the 
1930s, also owned the famous Abbey Road studios, and for a while it dominated 
recorded music in Britain from creation through to reproduction, with the 
Beatles and Pink Floyd signed to its roster.

The 33⅓ rpm vinyl LP format was introduced in 1948, the brainchild of Edward 
Wallerstein, then president of Columbia Records. He wanted to be able to hear 
the entire movement of a symphony on a single side. (Its 20 minutes or so 
sufficed.) Once again, the music industry had decided the format for the 
hardware.

But the first cracks in control came with the cassette, introduced by Philips 
of Holland in 1962. That was followed by Ford’s introduction of the eight-track 
tape, playable only in cars, in 1965: by the 70s it accounted for a third of 
music sales in the US. Though eight-track eventually died off, it showed that 
what people wanted was convenience and portability: music wherever they wanted, 
in the format they wanted. That became clear when in 1978 Sony, then purely a 
hardware business, came up with the Walkman, the first truly portable cassette 
player. It followed that up by devising the CD format with Philips; the 
apocryphal story has it that, in an echo of Wallerstein and the LP, Sony 
founder Akio Morita insisted on a capacity of 72 minutes so that all of 
Beethoven’s ninth symphony would fit on a single disc.

The CD arrived in 1982. In this case, losing control of hardware seemed to 
help the music business: sales rocketed as people bought music that they 
already had on LP and snapped up new releases. So profitable were CDs for 
record labels that Sony decided to buy CBS and, in 1990, Columbia Records.

But in retrospect, time was running out. In 1995, Germany’s Fraunhofer 
Institute released the MP3. The digital format was intended as a standard to 
store videogame soundtracks on PCs, but was quickly adopted for compressing and 
sharing CDs. With its arrival, the music genie had escaped the hardware bottle, 
and internet use exploded.

Since music has been untied from hardware, listening has blossomed but the 
music business has found itself making less money from reproduction.
 