
2.16am GMT 02:16  <> 

Today in #Campaign2016

Scott Bixby

March comes in like a lion and out like a lamb - and so, too, did today’s 
political news. Beginning with the aftermath analysis of 2 Super 2 Tuesday, 
fallout from the suspension of Florida senator Marco Rubio’s presidential 
campaign and Barack Obama’s nomination ofMerrick Garland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/merrick-garland> to fill the current 
vacancy on the supreme court, Wednesday started as a banner day in this 
tempestuous campaign season.
 Donald Trump addresses a press conference following his victory in the 
Florida state primary. Photograph: Rhona Wise/AFP/Getty Images 
Now that things have settled down a bit, let’s look back at some of the 
biggest political news of the day:

 * Barack Obama nominated DC circuit judge Merrick Garland to the US supreme 
court, sketching the biography of a man who graduated first in his class at 
Harvard and paid his way through law school by selling his comic books. (To pay 
for college that way nowadays, you’d better own a near-mint edition of Action 
Comics #1.) Obama called on senate Republicans to “just be fair” in considering 
the nomination, which leadership in Congress fromMitch McConnell on down has 
vowed to ignore until a new president is sworn in. 
 * If no candidate is elected in the first round of voting at the national 
convention in July, presumably after having crossed the 1,237 delegate barrier, 
former speaker of the houseJohn Boehner said he’s planning on supporting 
current speakerPaul Ryan for the Republican nomination: “They all had a chance 
to win. None of them won. So I’m for none of the above. I’m for Paul Ryan to be 
our nominee.” Ryan, for his part, is not having it. 
 * After Donald Trump declared that he would not be participating in the 
scheduled 21 March debate in Salt Lake City, a recent add to the debate 
calendar, Fox News cancelled the debate entirely. Trump will instead be 
speaking to AIPAC, the American Israel Public Affairs Committee. “I’m doing a 
major speech in front of a very important group of people that night,” Trump 
said. 
 * Florida governor Rick Scott endorsed Trump for president, a day after Trump 
beat home-state senatorMarco Rubio by 19 points. “With his victories yesterday, 
I believe it is now time for Republicans to accept and respect the will of the 
voters and coalesce behind Donald Trump,” a Scott statement says. “The voters 
are speaking clearly – they want a businessman outsider who will dramatically 
shake up the status quo in Washington.” 
 * Pundits aren’t the only ones foreseeing chaos in Cleveland this summer at 
the Republican national convention - the candidates are too.Trump, asked in a 
telephone interview with CNN this morning about the possibility of a brokered 
national Republican convention if no one candidate hits 1,237 delegates, 
declared that if such an event arises, there will be rioting in the street. “If 
we’re 20 votes short or if we’re you know 100 votes, and we’re at 1,100 and 
somebody else is at 500 or 400, cause we’re way ahead – I don’t think you can 
say we don’t get it automatically, I think you’d have riots,” Trump said. 
That’s it for today in politics - check in again tomorrow, the day after that 
and every day from now until election day for minute-by-minute coverage of 
democracy in action.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56ea0dc5e4b0072e644fc1bf%23block-56ea0dc5e4b0072e644fc1bf>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ted%20Cruz%20backs%20Senate%20inaction%20over%20Merrick%20Garland%20%E2%80%93%20today%20in%20the%20campaign&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56ea0dc5e4b0072e644fc1bf%23block-56ea0dc5e4b0072e644fc1bf>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56ea0dc5e4b0072e644fc1bf%23block-56ea0dc5e4b0072e644fc1bf&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56ea0dc5e4b0072e644fc1bf%23block-56ea0dc5e4b0072e644fc1bf>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ted%20Cruz%20backs%20Senate%20inaction%20over%20Merrick%20Garland%20%E2%80%93%20today%20in%20the%20campaign&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56ea0dc5e4b0072e644fc1bf%23block-56ea0dc5e4b0072e644fc1bf>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56ea0dc5e4b0072e644fc1bf%23block-56ea0dc5e4b0072e644fc1bf&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
1.51am GMT 01:51  <> 

Lili Loofbourow

The fourth season of House of Cards is still fun, but the grim, satisfying 
resonance with the present is gone in the age ofDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. Did the show’s cynical view 
of politics contribute to making its own commentary obsolete?
 House of Cards. Photograph: handout/Handout 
Netflix’s House of Cards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/house-of-cards> made its name by 
shocking and thrilling viewers with its political chiaroscuro and seductive 
cynicism. The show’s gorgeous cinematography emphasized Washington’s clean 
lines and sharp edges. The only dirtiness was Frank Underwood’s, and his filth 
was philosophical. He’s apseudo-Shakespearean 
<https://lareviewofbooks.org/essay/house-cards-season-2> devil, a cunning 
exploiter of defects. The only character more compelling than Frank is his wife 
–Robin Wright’s magnificent turn as Claire Underwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/feb/14/house-of-cards-robin-wright-underwood-season-two>
 exposed the metastasizing ambitions of a political partnership, and her 
riveting trajectory resonated with real events. Through Claire, the show 
implicitly theorized the bitter and intoxicating vertigo of being – and 
becoming – Hillary Clinton, the brilliant ally and eventual political equal of 
a sweet-talkin’, power-hungry southern man.

That’s all to say that House of Cards was fun and dark, but also – and this is 
the key term – it wasrelevant. It no longer is.

How the reality of Trump's America outpaced House of Cards
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/16/donald-trump-house-of-cards-frank-underwood-election-2016>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9e6f4e4b00edf63a53f6e%23block-56e9e6f4e4b00edf63a53f6e>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ted%20Cruz%20backs%20Senate%20inaction%20over%20Merrick%20Garland%20%E2%80%93%20today%20in%20the%20campaign&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9e6f4e4b00edf63a53f6e%23block-56e9e6f4e4b00edf63a53f6e>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9e6f4e4b00edf63a53f6e%23block-56e9e6f4e4b00edf63a53f6e&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9e6f4e4b00edf63a53f6e%23block-56e9e6f4e4b00edf63a53f6e>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ted%20Cruz%20backs%20Senate%20inaction%20over%20Merrick%20Garland%20%E2%80%93%20today%20in%20the%20campaign&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9e6f4e4b00edf63a53f6e%23block-56e9e6f4e4b00edf63a53f6e>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9e6f4e4b00edf63a53f6e%23block-56e9e6f4e4b00edf63a53f6e&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
1.31am GMT 01:31  <> 

Amber Jamieson

So far, the road to the 2016 presidential election has been more like a 
terrifying parade ofinsults 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/08/trump-repeats-insult-from-crowd-member-calling-cruz-a-pussy>
,fights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/10/black-protester-punched-donald-trump-rally-north-carolina>
 and even featuredthe occasional white supremacist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/28/donald-trump-former-kkk-leader-david-duke>
. It’s been an unpredictable campaign season; Donald Trump is looking 
increasinglymore likely to be the Republican nominee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/15/donald-trump-hillary-clinton-florida-ohio-primary-vote>
, establishment candidates like Jeb Bushdropped out early 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/20/jeb-bush-suspends-presidential-campaign-south-carolina-primary-donald-trump>
 and despite her best efforts, Hillary Clinton still hasn’t locked in her place 
on the ballot. It’s no surprise we’re gripped with election anxiety.
 Donald Trump addresses a press conference following his victory in the 
Florida state primary. Photograph: Rhona Wise/AFP/Getty Images 
Maybe you’re fearful of a president who flip-flops or one who’ll take away 
your healthcare. Maybe you’re passionate about Bernie Sanders’ political 
revolution and worried it won’t happen. Perhaps you had been gripped by 
#Rubiomentum only to see his strong head of hairbow out last night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/15/marco-rubio-ends-presidential-campaign-trump-wins-florida-primary>
. There are still seven and a half months to go.

We asked a psychoanalyst, a cultural theorist and a meditation expert for 
their tips on how to navigate your election anxiety (things we haven’t included 
but go without saying: go for a walk, cuddle a baby, sip some whiskey).

How to cope with anxiety caused by Donald Trump: experts lend advice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/16/election-anxiety-stress-advice-trump-clinton-sanders>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9c12de4b0c723f0c29e7d%23block-56e9c12de4b0c723f0c29e7d>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ted%20Cruz%20backs%20Senate%20inaction%20over%20Merrick%20Garland%20%E2%80%93%20today%20in%20the%20campaign&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9c12de4b0c723f0c29e7d%23block-56e9c12de4b0c723f0c29e7d>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9c12de4b0c723f0c29e7d%23block-56e9c12de4b0c723f0c29e7d&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9c12de4b0c723f0c29e7d%23block-56e9c12de4b0c723f0c29e7d>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ted%20Cruz%20backs%20Senate%20inaction%20over%20Merrick%20Garland%20%E2%80%93%20today%20in%20the%20campaign&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9c12de4b0c723f0c29e7d%23block-56e9c12de4b0c723f0c29e7d>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9c12de4b0c723f0c29e7d%23block-56e9c12de4b0c723f0c29e7d&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
1.10am GMT 01:10  <> 

Scott Bixby

An editorial written under Donald Trump’s name appears to have heavily 
plagiarized a similar editorial written under the name of former presidential 
candidate Ben Carson,according to the Daily Caller. 
<http://dailycaller.com/2016/03/16/trump-appears-to-have-heavily-plagiarized-op-ed-from-carson/>
 Donald Trump shakes hands with former presidential candidate Ben Carson. 
Photograph: Joe Raedle/Getty Images 
Carson’s editorial was published in the Marianas Variety 
<http://www.mvariety.com/cnmi/cnmi-news/editorials/84081-opinion-restoring-equality-and-fairness-to-our-fellow-americans-in-the-territories-and-commonwealths>
, a newspaper in the Northern Mariana Islands, on February 26. Trump’s 
editorial was published in thePacific Daily News 
<http://www.guampdn.com/story/opinion/2016/03/09/trump-wont-ignore-territories/81516134/>
, a newspaper in Guam, 12 days later.

Both pieces, written on the topic of territories and commonwealths of the 
United States, feature extensive passages that are identical word-for-word:

From Carson’s piece:

“Medical care in the American territories and commonwealths has historically 
lagged far behind the continental states, and Obamacare has only made the 
situation worse. Good health is an essential part of a thriving society and 
economy, and citizens of the territories and commonwealths deserve policies 
that work. More must be done to fix the broken healthcare systems.”

From Trump’s piece:

“Medical care in the American territories and commonwealths has historically 
lagged far behind the continental states, and Obamacare has only made the 
situation worse. Good health is an essential part of a thriving society and 
economy, and citizens of the territories and commonwealths deserve policies 
that work.”

The relationship between Trump and Carson, who endorsed the billionaire 
Republican frontrunner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/11/ben-carson-endorses-donald-trump-florida-primary>
 on March 11, has been increasingly complicated following the suspension of 
Carson’s campaign. The retired pediatric neurosurgeon has admitted in 
interviews that he preferred other candidates but had been promised a position 
in Trump’s administration in exchange for his support.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9ff7be4b06837afd3e379%23block-56e9ff7be4b06837afd3e379>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ted%20Cruz%20backs%20Senate%20inaction%20over%20Merrick%20Garland%20%E2%80%93%20today%20in%20the%20campaign&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9ff7be4b06837afd3e379%23block-56e9ff7be4b06837afd3e379>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9ff7be4b06837afd3e379%23block-56e9ff7be4b06837afd3e379&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9ff7be4b06837afd3e379%23block-56e9ff7be4b06837afd3e379>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ted%20Cruz%20backs%20Senate%20inaction%20over%20Merrick%20Garland%20%E2%80%93%20today%20in%20the%20campaign&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9ff7be4b06837afd3e379%23block-56e9ff7be4b06837afd3e379>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9ff7be4b06837afd3e379%23block-56e9ff7be4b06837afd3e379&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
12.40am GMT 00:40  <> 

David Smith

Chicago was just the beginning. Millions of Americans are ready to form a 
grassroots movement againstDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, activists say, determined to 
challenge the politics of prejudice and show there is now more at stake than 
the White House.
 A group of gun control advocates from the Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun 
Violence hold a small protest against Republican presidential candidate Donald 
Trump in front of Trump Tower in New York. Photograph: Justin Lane/EPA 
“There was a deer in the headlights quality in the country at the rise of 
Donald Trump over the past year,” said Ben Wikler, Washington director of the 
civil society groupMoveOn.org <http://front.moveon.org/>. “That’s now over.”

An election campaign that has transgressed the normal boundaries of party 
politics demands a commensurate response in the eyes of many.Even as the 
Republican party flounders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/01/super-tuesday-crisis-republican-party-trump-heads-for-victory>
 and the media remains transfixed, there are signs that activists, students and 
ordinary citizens are ready to mobilise against Trump, whowon another series of 
states in the Republican primaries on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/15/donald-trump-hillary-clinton-florida-ohio-primary-vote>
.

Wikler continued: “It’s rapidly coalescing. The conversations are starting 
within movements and between movements across the country. People are having 
conversations about how they can connect. What’s clear is that there is an 
incredible hunger to push back against hate.”

Anti-Trump movement grows in urgency to 'push back against hate'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/16/donald-trump-protest-grassroots-movement>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9e4c4e4b06837afd3e360%23block-56e9e4c4e4b06837afd3e360>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ted%20Cruz%20backs%20Senate%20inaction%20over%20Merrick%20Garland%20%E2%80%93%20today%20in%20the%20campaign&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9e4c4e4b06837afd3e360%23block-56e9e4c4e4b06837afd3e360>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9e4c4e4b06837afd3e360%23block-56e9e4c4e4b06837afd3e360&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9e4c4e4b06837afd3e360%23block-56e9e4c4e4b06837afd3e360>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ted%20Cruz%20backs%20Senate%20inaction%20over%20Merrick%20Garland%20%E2%80%93%20today%20in%20the%20campaign&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9e4c4e4b06837afd3e360%23block-56e9e4c4e4b06837afd3e360>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9e4c4e4b06837afd3e360%23block-56e9e4c4e4b06837afd3e360&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
12.14am GMT 00:14  <> 

Oklahoma senator Jim Inhofe has announced his support for Ohio governor John 
Kasich’s presidential campaign this evening, calling the governor “my guy.”
 John Kasich speaks at a town hall event at Villanova University in Villanova, 
Pennsylvania. Photograph: Dominick Reuter/Reuters 
I served with John in Congress when he successfully spearheaded the effort to 
balance the federal budget and, as a member of the Armed Services Committee, 
helped President Reagan enact his national security agenda,” Inhofe said.

“During this time, I also attended a weekly Bible study with him for eight 
years. You learn a lot about a person when you attend a Bible study together, 
so I can tell you personally that he is a man of his word. When he talked, 
people listened. Now the country is listening to his message of optimism and 
results. That’s refreshing. I’m proud to stand by his side as we spread this 
message to voters in the weeks ahead.”

“It is an incredible honor to receive the support of my friend and former 
colleague, Senator Jim Inhofe,” said Kasich in the release. “Jim is a role 
model to several generations of conservatives, and I trust his expertise and 
judgment implicitly. He knows Oklahoma voters better than just about anyone, so 
it’s a major win to have him in our corner going forward.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9f65ae4b00edf63a53f7b%23block-56e9f65ae4b00edf63a53f7b>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ted%20Cruz%20backs%20Senate%20inaction%20over%20Merrick%20Garland%20%E2%80%93%20today%20in%20the%20campaign&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9f65ae4b00edf63a53f7b%23block-56e9f65ae4b00edf63a53f7b>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9f65ae4b00edf63a53f7b%23block-56e9f65ae4b00edf63a53f7b&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9f65ae4b00edf63a53f7b%23block-56e9f65ae4b00edf63a53f7b>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ted%20Cruz%20backs%20Senate%20inaction%20over%20Merrick%20Garland%20%E2%80%93%20today%20in%20the%20campaign&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9f65ae4b00edf63a53f7b%23block-56e9f65ae4b00edf63a53f7b>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9f65ae4b00edf63a53f7b%23block-56e9f65ae4b00edf63a53f7b&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
11.46pm GMT 23:46  <> 

Scott Lemieux

Barack Obama’s pick for the supreme court is unlikely to be approved, writes 
Scott Lemieux.But the political beating he’ll receive will make Republicans 
look bad – and that’s the point.
 Barack Obama shakes hands with his Supreme Court nominee Merrick Garland. 
Photograph: UPI / Barcroft Media 
In ordinary times, you would expect a president like Barack Obama to nominate 
a young, liberal judge for theUS supreme court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/us-supreme-court>. But these aren’t ordinary 
times. On Wednesday, Obama announced his pick: Merrick Garland. The 63-year-old 
Chief Judge of the District of Columbia Court of Appeals is older than many 
expected the nominee to be – and more moderate. In other political 
circumstances, the choice of Garland would be unusual. But these are not 
ordinary times.

The pick would be unusual in that Garland is more moderate than Obama’s two 
previous supreme court nominees, Elena Kagan and Sonia Sotomayor. While not a 
conservative, he does have a conservative streak on some issues,most notably 
<http://www.scotusblog.com/2010/04/the-potential-nomination-of-merrick-garland/>
 the civil liberties of criminal defendants. As Obama observed more than once 
when announcing Garland’s nomination, the judge’s moderation earned him 
significant bipartisan support for his confirmation in the US Senate. Had 
Garland been nominated in 2007, liberal groups would be up in arms.

But it’s not 2007. Senate Republicans have made 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/powerpost/wp/2016/02/23/key-senate-republicans-say-no-hearings-for-supreme-court-nominee/>
 it clear that they will not hold hearings, let alone a vote, on any Obama 
replacement for Scalia. Given the stakes – even if he is more moderate than 
Kagan or Sotomayor, Garland would still be the first Democratic nominee to be 
the median vote on the court since early in the Nixon administration and would 
move the court to the left – they have no reason to back off before the 
election.

Merrick Garland, the piñata nominee | Scott Lemieux
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/16/merrick-garland-supreme-court-nominee-process-senate-republicans>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9e60de4b0c723f0c29eae%23block-56e9e60de4b0c723f0c29eae>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ted%20Cruz%20backs%20Senate%20inaction%20over%20Merrick%20Garland%20%E2%80%93%20today%20in%20the%20campaign&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9e60de4b0c723f0c29eae%23block-56e9e60de4b0c723f0c29eae>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9e60de4b0c723f0c29eae%23block-56e9e60de4b0c723f0c29eae&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9e60de4b0c723f0c29eae%23block-56e9e60de4b0c723f0c29eae>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ted%20Cruz%20backs%20Senate%20inaction%20over%20Merrick%20Garland%20%E2%80%93%20today%20in%20the%20campaign&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9e60de4b0c723f0c29eae%23block-56e9e60de4b0c723f0c29eae>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9e60de4b0c723f0c29eae%23block-56e9e60de4b0c723f0c29eae&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
11.13pm GMT 23:13  <> 

Five deputies with the Cumberland County sheriff’s office in Fayetteville, 
North Carolina, have been disciplined after they witnessed an assault against 
an anti-Donald Trump protestor and restrained the protestor, rather than his 
assailant.

In a statement to local news station WRAL 
<http://www.wral.com/5-cumberland-county-deputies-disciplined-in-connection-with-trump-rally/15554135/>
, Sheriff Earl Butler said that the deputies in question faced disciplinary 
measures for “unsatisfactory performance and failing to discharge the duties 
and policies of the office of the sheriff.”

“The actions of the deputies and their failures to act in situations such as 
that which occurred during the Trump rally at the Crown Coliseum have never 
been and will never be tolerated under the policies of this office,” Butler 
said.

Two deputies were suspended without pay for three days, while three more were 
demoted and suspended without pay for five days. All five of the deputies were 
placed on a one-year probation.

At the rally on March 9, Rakeem Jones was punched in the face 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/10/black-protester-punched-donald-trump-rally-north-carolina>
 by a Trump supporter – after which uniformed sheriff’s deputies tackled and 
detained Jones. Charges have since been filed against his assailant.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9da37e4b0c723f0c29ea2%23block-56e9da37e4b0c723f0c29ea2>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ted%20Cruz%20backs%20Senate%20inaction%20over%20Merrick%20Garland%20%E2%80%93%20today%20in%20the%20campaign&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9da37e4b0c723f0c29ea2%23block-56e9da37e4b0c723f0c29ea2>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9da37e4b0c723f0c29ea2%23block-56e9da37e4b0c723f0c29ea2&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9da37e4b0c723f0c29ea2%23block-56e9da37e4b0c723f0c29ea2>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ted%20Cruz%20backs%20Senate%20inaction%20over%20Merrick%20Garland%20%E2%80%93%20today%20in%20the%20campaign&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9da37e4b0c723f0c29ea2%23block-56e9da37e4b0c723f0c29ea2>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9da37e4b0c723f0c29ea2%23block-56e9da37e4b0c723f0c29ea2&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
10.53pm GMT 22:53  <> 

Obama's address to Cuban people will highlight historic visit

Dan Roberts

Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> will make an 
historic address to the Cuban people, calling for more freedom but stressing 
that the US is no longer seeking regime change on the island, according to the 
White House.

 A man in a bici-cab adorned with American and Cuban national flags waits for 
costumers in Havana. Photograph: Alejandro Ernesto/EPA 
This first speech on Cuban soil by a US president in almost 90 years will be 
the highlight of a three-day trip that also includes a bilateral summit with
Raúl Castro <https://www.theguardian.com/world/raul-castro>, a joint news 
conference, a private meeting with dissidents, a baseball game and a moment to 
pay homage to the Catholic church for helping broker talks that led to the 
opening of relations in September.

Obama, who will travel with his wife Michelle and daughters Malia and Sasha, 
will be the first US president to visit Havana since Calvin Coolidge in 1928.

Obama's address to Cuban people will be highlight of historic visit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/16/barack-obama-cuba-address-historic-visit>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9e375e4b00edf63a53f69%23block-56e9e375e4b00edf63a53f69>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ted%20Cruz%20backs%20Senate%20inaction%20over%20Merrick%20Garland%20%E2%80%93%20today%20in%20the%20campaign&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9e375e4b00edf63a53f69%23block-56e9e375e4b00edf63a53f69>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9e375e4b00edf63a53f69%23block-56e9e375e4b00edf63a53f69&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9e375e4b00edf63a53f69%23block-56e9e375e4b00edf63a53f69>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ted%20Cruz%20backs%20Senate%20inaction%20over%20Merrick%20Garland%20%E2%80%93%20today%20in%20the%20campaign&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9e375e4b00edf63a53f69%23block-56e9e375e4b00edf63a53f69>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9e375e4b00edf63a53f69%23block-56e9e375e4b00edf63a53f69&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
10.21pm GMT 22:21  <> 

Ellen Brait

Scandal is about to get even more dramatic - with the addition of a character 
inspired byDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>.

During a panel on Tuesday night at PaleyFest at the Dolby Theater in Los 
Angeles, the cast revealed the existence of the character in this week’s 
episode, which they screened for an audience. The character will be entering 
the show’s ongoing presidential race.


“There will be a candidate who will emerge who has many qualities that Mr 
Trump has. How could we resist that?” Tony Goldwyn, who plays President Fitz 
Grant, said during an interview withVariety 
<https://twitter.com/Variety/status/709945213817528320?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>. 
“Except I guarantee you there’s no way he will be as outrageous as Trump is.”

Kerry Washington, who plays crisis manager Olivia Pope, joked: “You think the 
debates you’ve seen in the real world are fun!”

Scandal: Donald Trump-inspired character added to show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/16/scandal-donald-trump-character-shonda-rhimes>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9d5c5e4b0c723f0c29e9e%23block-56e9d5c5e4b0c723f0c29e9e>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ted%20Cruz%20backs%20Senate%20inaction%20over%20Merrick%20Garland%20%E2%80%93%20today%20in%20the%20campaign&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9d5c5e4b0c723f0c29e9e%23block-56e9d5c5e4b0c723f0c29e9e>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9d5c5e4b0c723f0c29e9e%23block-56e9d5c5e4b0c723f0c29e9e&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9d5c5e4b0c723f0c29e9e%23block-56e9d5c5e4b0c723f0c29e9e>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ted%20Cruz%20backs%20Senate%20inaction%20over%20Merrick%20Garland%20%E2%80%93%20today%20in%20the%20campaign&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9d5c5e4b0c723f0c29e9e%23block-56e9d5c5e4b0c723f0c29e9e>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9d5c5e4b0c723f0c29e9e%23block-56e9d5c5e4b0c723f0c29e9e&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
10.10pm GMT 22:10  <> 

Video: Michelle Obama says that there’s no way she’d run for president
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9cdb6e4b0072e644fc18b%23block-56e9cdb6e4b0072e644fc18b>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ted%20Cruz%20backs%20Senate%20inaction%20over%20Merrick%20Garland%20%E2%80%93%20today%20in%20the%20campaign&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9cdb6e4b0072e644fc18b%23block-56e9cdb6e4b0072e644fc18b>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9cdb6e4b0072e644fc18b%23block-56e9cdb6e4b0072e644fc18b&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9cdb6e4b0072e644fc18b%23block-56e9cdb6e4b0072e644fc18b>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ted%20Cruz%20backs%20Senate%20inaction%20over%20Merrick%20Garland%20%E2%80%93%20today%20in%20the%20campaign&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9cdb6e4b0072e644fc18b%23block-56e9cdb6e4b0072e644fc18b>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9cdb6e4b0072e644fc18b%23block-56e9cdb6e4b0072e644fc18b&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
9.41pm GMT 21:41  <> 

Scott Bixby

With its eyes on the upcoming winner-take-all Republican primary in Arizona, 
the campaign of Texas senatorTed Cruz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ted-cruz> has announced a high-profile 
endorsement in the Grand Canyon State: Congressman David Schweikert, a Tea 
Party darling who represents parts of Phoenix and Scottsdale.
 Ted Cruz speaks at a watch party on March 15, 2016 in Houston, Texas. 
Photograph: Bob Levey/Getty Images 
“My top priority in Congress has always been to do what the Washington 
insiders simply refuse to do, and that is to reduce the size and cost of 
government and save our nation from the crushing debt that the Washington 
politicians have placed on the backs of each and every citizen of our nation,” 
Schweikert said in a statement released by the campaign.

“Throughout the never ending battles to do this, Ted Cruz has always been a 
principled leader fighting to do the very same thing,” Schweikert said. “With a 
federal debt that is quickly approaching an unfathomable $20 trillion, our 
country’s future economic growth and prosperity are in grave danger unless we 
elect a principled conservative who is truly committed to stopping the out of 
control spending and borrowing that has led us to where we are today.”

“It’s clear that Ted is the conservative leader that we need as our next 
president, and my wife Joyce and I are proud to give him our strongest 
endorsement. In the upcoming Arizona presidential preference primary, Ted is 
the clear choice for voters who want a conservative president who is truly 
committed to fixing the mess in Washington,” Schweikert concluded.

“I am thrilled to have such a passionate fighter for liberty on our team,” 
Cruz said in the same statement. “David has spent his time in Congress fighting 
against the Washington Cartel and protecting the interests of the American 
people. He has worked to rein in Obama’s lawlessness, repeal Obamacare, and 
stop the President’s illegal executive amnesty. David is a strong addition to 
our team and I am thankful for his leadership fighting on issues that are most 
important to conservatives.”

Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, whose strong 
rhetoric on immigration will likely strike a cord in the border state, has won 
the endorsements of Jan Brewer, the popular former governor who bore the brunt 
of nationwide criticism after she signed a controversial bill requiring 
immigrants to carry documents proving their legal status, as well as that of 
Joe Arpaio, “America’s Toughest Sheriff,” whose stances on undocumented 
immigrants have made him a celebrity in the state.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9d06be4b00edf63a53f56%23block-56e9d06be4b00edf63a53f56>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ted%20Cruz%20backs%20Senate%20inaction%20over%20Merrick%20Garland%20%E2%80%93%20today%20in%20the%20campaign&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9d06be4b00edf63a53f56%23block-56e9d06be4b00edf63a53f56>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9d06be4b00edf63a53f56%23block-56e9d06be4b00edf63a53f56&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9d06be4b00edf63a53f56%23block-56e9d06be4b00edf63a53f56>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ted%20Cruz%20backs%20Senate%20inaction%20over%20Merrick%20Garland%20%E2%80%93%20today%20in%20the%20campaign&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9d06be4b00edf63a53f56%23block-56e9d06be4b00edf63a53f56>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Felection-live-trump-clinton-sanders-primaries-missouri-presidential-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56e9d06be4b00edf63a53f56%23block-56e9d06be4b00edf63a53f56&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close  
March comes in like a lion and out like a lamb - and so, too, did today’s 
political news. Beginning with the aftermath analysis of 2 Super 2 Tuesday, 
fallout from the suspension of Florida senator Marco Rubio’s presidential 
campaign and Barack Obama’s nomination ofMerrick Garland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/merrick-garland> to fill the current 
vacancy on the supreme court, Wednesday started as a banner day in this 
tempestuous campaign season.
 Donald Trump addresses a press conference following his victory in the 
Florida state primary. Photograph: Rhona Wise/AFP/Getty Images 
Now that things have settled down a bit, let’s look back at some of the 
biggest political news of the day:

 * Barack Obama nominated DC circuit judge Merrick Garland to the US supreme 
court, sketching the biography of a man who graduated first in his class at 
Harvard and paid his way through law school by selling his comic books. (To pay 
for college that way nowadays, you’d better own a near-mint edition of Action 
Comics #1.) Obama called on senate Republicans to “just be fair” in considering 
the nomination, which leadership in Congress fromMitch McConnell on down has 
vowed to ignore until a new president is sworn in. 
 * If no candidate is elected in the first round of voting at the national 
convention in July, presumably after having crossed the 1,237 delegate barrier, 
former speaker of the houseJohn Boehner said he’s planning on supporting 
current speakerPaul Ryan for the Republican nomination: “They all had a chance 
to win. None of them won. So I’m for none of the above. I’m for Paul Ryan to be 
our nominee.” Ryan, for his part, is not having it. 
 * After Donald Trump declared that he would not be participating in the 
scheduled 21 March debate in Salt Lake City, a recent add to the debate 
calendar, Fox News cancelled the debate entirely. Trump will instead be 
speaking to AIPAC, the American Israel Public Affairs Committee. “I’m doing a 
major speech in front of a very important group of people that night,” Trump 
said. 
 * Florida governor Rick Scott endorsed Trump for president, a day after Trump 
beat home-state senatorMarco Rubio by 19 points. “With his victories yesterday, 
I believe it is now time for Republicans to accept and respect the will of the 
voters and coalesce behind Donald Trump,” a Scott statement says. “The voters 
are speaking clearly – they want a businessman outsider who will dramatically 
shake up the status quo in Washington.” 
 * Pundits aren’t the only ones foreseeing chaos in Cleveland this summer at 
the Republican national convention - the candidates are too.Trump, asked in a 
telephone interview with CNN this morning about the possibility of a brokered 
national Republican convention if no one candidate hits 1,237 delegates, 
declared that if such an event arises, there will be rioting in the street. “If 
we’re 20 votes short or if we’re you know 100 votes, and we’re at 1,100 and 
somebody else is at 500 or 400, cause we’re way ahead – I don’t think you can 
say we don’t get it automatically, I think you’d have riots,” Trump said. 
That’s it for today in politics - check in again tomorrow, the day after that 
and every day from now until election day for minute-by-minute coverage of 
democracy in action.
 
The fourth season of House of Cards is still fun, but the grim, satisfying 
resonance with the present is gone in the age ofDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. Did the show’s cynical view 
of politics contribute to making its own commentary obsolete?
 House of Cards. Photograph: handout/Handout 
Netflix’s House of Cards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/house-of-cards> made its name by 
shocking and thrilling viewers with its political chiaroscuro and seductive 
cynicism. The show’s gorgeous cinematography emphasized Washington’s clean 
lines and sharp edges. The only dirtiness was Frank Underwood’s, and his filth 
was philosophical. He’s apseudo-Shakespearean 
<https://lareviewofbooks.org/essay/house-cards-season-2> devil, a cunning 
exploiter of defects. The only character more compelling than Frank is his wife 
–Robin Wright’s magnificent turn as Claire Underwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/feb/14/house-of-cards-robin-wright-underwood-season-two>
 exposed the metastasizing ambitions of a political partnership, and her 
riveting trajectory resonated with real events. Through Claire, the show 
implicitly theorized the bitter and intoxicating vertigo of being – and 
becoming – Hillary Clinton, the brilliant ally and eventual political equal of 
a sweet-talkin’, power-hungry southern man.

That’s all to say that House of Cards was fun and dark, but also – and this is 
the key term – it wasrelevant. It no longer is.

How the reality of Trump's America outpaced House of Cards
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/16/donald-trump-house-of-cards-frank-underwood-election-2016> 
So far, the road to the 2016 presidential election has been more like a 
terrifying parade ofinsults 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/08/trump-repeats-insult-from-crowd-member-calling-cruz-a-pussy>
,fights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/10/black-protester-punched-donald-trump-rally-north-carolina>
 and even featuredthe occasional white supremacist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/28/donald-trump-former-kkk-leader-david-duke>
. It’s been an unpredictable campaign season; Donald Trump is looking 
increasinglymore likely to be the Republican nominee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/15/donald-trump-hillary-clinton-florida-ohio-primary-vote>
, establishment candidates like Jeb Bushdropped out early 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/20/jeb-bush-suspends-presidential-campaign-south-carolina-primary-donald-trump>
 and despite her best efforts, Hillary Clinton still hasn’t locked in her place 
on the ballot. It’s no surprise we’re gripped with election anxiety.
 Donald Trump addresses a press conference following his victory in the 
Florida state primary. Photograph: Rhona Wise/AFP/Getty Images 
Maybe you’re fearful of a president who flip-flops or one who’ll take away 
your healthcare. Maybe you’re passionate about Bernie Sanders’ political 
revolution and worried it won’t happen. Perhaps you had been gripped by 
#Rubiomentum only to see his strong head of hairbow out last night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/15/marco-rubio-ends-presidential-campaign-trump-wins-florida-primary>
. There are still seven and a half months to go.

We asked a psychoanalyst, a cultural theorist and a meditation expert for 
their tips on how to navigate your election anxiety (things we haven’t included 
but go without saying: go for a walk, cuddle a baby, sip some whiskey).

How to cope with anxiety caused by Donald Trump: experts lend advice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/16/election-anxiety-stress-advice-trump-clinton-sanders> 
An editorial written under Donald Trump’s name appears to have heavily 
plagiarized a similar editorial written under the name of former presidential 
candidate Ben Carson,according to the Daily Caller. 
<http://dailycaller.com/2016/03/16/trump-appears-to-have-heavily-plagiarized-op-ed-from-carson/>
 Donald Trump shakes hands with former presidential candidate Ben Carson. 
Photograph: Joe Raedle/Getty Images 
Carson’s editorial was published in the Marianas Variety 
<http://www.mvariety.com/cnmi/cnmi-news/editorials/84081-opinion-restoring-equality-and-fairness-to-our-fellow-americans-in-the-territories-and-commonwealths>
, a newspaper in the Northern Mariana Islands, on February 26. Trump’s 
editorial was published in thePacific Daily News 
<http://www.guampdn.com/story/opinion/2016/03/09/trump-wont-ignore-territories/81516134/>
, a newspaper in Guam, 12 days later.

Both pieces, written on the topic of territories and commonwealths of the 
United States, feature extensive passages that are identical word-for-word:

From Carson’s piece:

“Medical care in the American territories and commonwealths has historically 
lagged far behind the continental states, and Obamacare has only made the 
situation worse. Good health is an essential part of a thriving society and 
economy, and citizens of the territories and commonwealths deserve policies 
that work. More must be done to fix the broken healthcare systems.”

From Trump’s piece:

“Medical care in the American territories and commonwealths has historically 
lagged far behind the continental states, and Obamacare has only made the 
situation worse. Good health is an essential part of a thriving society and 
economy, and citizens of the territories and commonwealths deserve policies 
that work.”

The relationship between Trump and Carson, who endorsed the billionaire 
Republican frontrunner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/11/ben-carson-endorses-donald-trump-florida-primary>
 on March 11, has been increasingly complicated following the suspension of 
Carson’s campaign. The retired pediatric neurosurgeon has admitted in 
interviews that he preferred other candidates but had been promised a position 
in Trump’s administration in exchange for his support.
 
Chicago was just the beginning. Millions of Americans are ready to form a 
grassroots movement againstDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, activists say, determined to 
challenge the politics of prejudice and show there is now more at stake than 
the White House.
 A group of gun control advocates from the Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun 
Violence hold a small protest against Republican presidential candidate Donald 
Trump in front of Trump Tower in New York. Photograph: Justin Lane/EPA 
“There was a deer in the headlights quality in the country at the rise of 
Donald Trump over the past year,” said Ben Wikler, Washington director of the 
civil society groupMoveOn.org <http://front.moveon.org/>. “That’s now over.”

An election campaign that has transgressed the normal boundaries of party 
politics demands a commensurate response in the eyes of many.Even as the 
Republican party flounders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/01/super-tuesday-crisis-republican-party-trump-heads-for-victory>
 and the media remains transfixed, there are signs that activists, students and 
ordinary citizens are ready to mobilise against Trump, whowon another series of 
states in the Republican primaries on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/15/donald-trump-hillary-clinton-florida-ohio-primary-vote>
.

Wikler continued: “It’s rapidly coalescing. The conversations are starting 
within movements and between movements across the country. People are having 
conversations about how they can connect. What’s clear is that there is an 
incredible hunger to push back against hate.”

Anti-Trump movement grows in urgency to 'push back against hate'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/16/donald-trump-protest-grassroots-movement> 
Oklahoma senator Jim Inhofe has announced his support for Ohio governor John 
Kasich’s presidential campaign this evening, calling the governor “my guy.”
 John Kasich speaks at a town hall event at Villanova University in Villanova, 
Pennsylvania. Photograph: Dominick Reuter/Reuters 
I served with John in Congress when he successfully spearheaded the effort to 
balance the federal budget and, as a member of the Armed Services Committee, 
helped President Reagan enact his national security agenda,” Inhofe said.

“During this time, I also attended a weekly Bible study with him for eight 
years. You learn a lot about a person when you attend a Bible study together, 
so I can tell you personally that he is a man of his word. When he talked, 
people listened. Now the country is listening to his message of optimism and 
results. That’s refreshing. I’m proud to stand by his side as we spread this 
message to voters in the weeks ahead.”

“It is an incredible honor to receive the support of my friend and former 
colleague, Senator Jim Inhofe,” said Kasich in the release. “Jim is a role 
model to several generations of conservatives, and I trust his expertise and 
judgment implicitly. He knows Oklahoma voters better than just about anyone, so 
it’s a major win to have him in our corner going forward.”
 
Barack Obama’s pick for the supreme court is unlikely to be approved, writes 
Scott Lemieux.But the political beating he’ll receive will make Republicans 
look bad – and that’s the point.
 Barack Obama shakes hands with his Supreme Court nominee Merrick Garland. 
Photograph: UPI / Barcroft Media 
In ordinary times, you would expect a president like Barack Obama to nominate 
a young, liberal judge for theUS supreme court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/us-supreme-court>. But these aren’t ordinary 
times. On Wednesday, Obama announced his pick: Merrick Garland. The 63-year-old 
Chief Judge of the District of Columbia Court of Appeals is older than many 
expected the nominee to be – and more moderate. In other political 
circumstances, the choice of Garland would be unusual. But these are not 
ordinary times.

The pick would be unusual in that Garland is more moderate than Obama’s two 
previous supreme court nominees, Elena Kagan and Sonia Sotomayor. While not a 
conservative, he does have a conservative streak on some issues,most notably 
<http://www.scotusblog.com/2010/04/the-potential-nomination-of-merrick-garland/>
 the civil liberties of criminal defendants. As Obama observed more than once 
when announcing Garland’s nomination, the judge’s moderation earned him 
significant bipartisan support for his confirmation in the US Senate. Had 
Garland been nominated in 2007, liberal groups would be up in arms.

But it’s not 2007. Senate Republicans have made 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/powerpost/wp/2016/02/23/key-senate-republicans-say-no-hearings-for-supreme-court-nominee/>
 it clear that they will not hold hearings, let alone a vote, on any Obama 
replacement for Scalia. Given the stakes – even if he is more moderate than 
Kagan or Sotomayor, Garland would still be the first Democratic nominee to be 
the median vote on the court since early in the Nixon administration and would 
move the court to the left – they have no reason to back off before the 
election.

Merrick Garland, the piñata nominee | Scott Lemieux
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/16/merrick-garland-supreme-court-nominee-process-senate-republicans> 
Five deputies with the Cumberland County sheriff’s office in Fayetteville, 
North Carolina, have been disciplined after they witnessed an assault against 
an anti-Donald Trump protestor and restrained the protestor, rather than his 
assailant.

In a statement to local news station WRAL 
<http://www.wral.com/5-cumberland-county-deputies-disciplined-in-connection-with-trump-rally/15554135/>
, Sheriff Earl Butler said that the deputies in question faced disciplinary 
measures for “unsatisfactory performance and failing to discharge the duties 
and policies of the office of the sheriff.”

“The actions of the deputies and their failures to act in situations such as 
that which occurred during the Trump rally at the Crown Coliseum have never 
been and will never be tolerated under the policies of this office,” Butler 
said.

Two deputies were suspended without pay for three days, while three more were 
demoted and suspended without pay for five days. All five of the deputies were 
placed on a one-year probation.

At the rally on March 9, Rakeem Jones was punched in the face 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/10/black-protester-punched-donald-trump-rally-north-carolina>
 by a Trump supporter – after which uniformed sheriff’s deputies tackled and 
detained Jones. Charges have since been filed against his assailant.
 
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> will make an 
historic address to the Cuban people, calling for more freedom but stressing 
that the US is no longer seeking regime change on the island, according to the 
White House.

 A man in a bici-cab adorned with American and Cuban national flags waits for 
costumers in Havana. Photograph: Alejandro Ernesto/EPA 
This first speech on Cuban soil by a US president in almost 90 years will be 
the highlight of a three-day trip that also includes a bilateral summit with
Raúl Castro <https://www.theguardian.com/world/raul-castro>, a joint news 
conference, a private meeting with dissidents, a baseball game and a moment to 
pay homage to the Catholic church for helping broker talks that led to the 
opening of relations in September.

Obama, who will travel with his wife Michelle and daughters Malia and Sasha, 
will be the first US president to visit Havana since Calvin Coolidge in 1928.

Obama's address to Cuban people will be highlight of historic visit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/16/barack-obama-cuba-address-historic-visit> 
Scandal is about to get even more dramatic - with the addition of a character 
inspired byDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>.

During a panel on Tuesday night at PaleyFest at the Dolby Theater in Los 
Angeles, the cast revealed the existence of the character in this week’s 
episode, which they screened for an audience. The character will be entering 
the show’s ongoing presidential race.


“There will be a candidate who will emerge who has many qualities that Mr 
Trump has. How could we resist that?” Tony Goldwyn, who plays President Fitz 
Grant, said during an interview withVariety 
<https://twitter.com/Variety/status/709945213817528320?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>. 
“Except I guarantee you there’s no way he will be as outrageous as Trump is.”

Kerry Washington, who plays crisis manager Olivia Pope, joked: “You think the 
debates you’ve seen in the real world are fun!”

Scandal: Donald Trump-inspired character added to show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/16/scandal-donald-trump-character-shonda-rhimes> 
Video: Michelle Obama says that there’s no way she’d run for president
 
With its eyes on the upcoming winner-take-all Republican primary in Arizona, 
the campaign of Texas senatorTed Cruz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ted-cruz> has announced a high-profile 
endorsement in the Grand Canyon State: Congressman David Schweikert, a Tea 
Party darling who represents parts of Phoenix and Scottsdale.
 Ted Cruz speaks at a watch party on March 15, 2016 in Houston, Texas. 
Photograph: Bob Levey/Getty Images 
“My top priority in Congress has always been to do what the Washington 
insiders simply refuse to do, and that is to reduce the size and cost of 
government and save our nation from the crushing debt that the Washington 
politicians have placed on the backs of each and every citizen of our nation,” 
Schweikert said in a statement released by the campaign.

“Throughout the never ending battles to do this, Ted Cruz has always been a 
principled leader fighting to do the very same thing,” Schweikert said. “With a 
federal debt that is quickly approaching an unfathomable $20 trillion, our 
country’s future economic growth and prosperity are in grave danger unless we 
elect a principled conservative who is truly committed to stopping the out of 
control spending and borrowing that has led us to where we are today.”

“It’s clear that Ted is the conservative leader that we need as our next 
president, and my wife Joyce and I are proud to give him our strongest 
endorsement. In the upcoming Arizona presidential preference primary, Ted is 
the clear choice for voters who want a conservative president who is truly 
committed to fixing the mess in Washington,” Schweikert concluded.

“I am thrilled to have such a passionate fighter for liberty on our team,” 
Cruz said in the same statement. “David has spent his time in Congress fighting 
against the Washington Cartel and protecting the interests of the American 
people. He has worked to rein in Obama’s lawlessness, repeal Obamacare, and 
stop the President’s illegal executive amnesty. David is a strong addition to 
our team and I am thankful for his leadership fighting on issues that are most 
important to conservatives.”

Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, whose strong 
rhetoric on immigration will likely strike a cord in the border state, has won 
the endorsements of Jan Brewer, the popular former governor who bore the brunt 
of nationwide criticism after she signed a controversial bill requiring 
immigrants to carry documents proving their legal status, as well as that of 
Joe Arpaio, “America’s Toughest Sheriff,” whose stances on undocumented 
immigrants have made him a celebrity in the state.
 