
The first female child refugee, a teenager from Eritrea, has arrived in the UK 
fromFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> along with 12 male 
refugees aged between 13 and 17 who were due to be reunited with their families 
as part of the Home Office’s speeded up response to the Calais crisis.

They arrived on the second coach to carry unaccompanied refugee children from 
Calais to Britain in two days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/17/refugee-children-britain-calais-resettlement-uk>
. They were greeted with clapping and cheering by a small crowd outside a Home 
Office processing centre in Croydon, south London, before being swiftly 
chaperoned inside by police.

But there was growing cross-party concern from MPs and charities about the 
fate of the estimated1,000 unaccompanied child refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/24/new-fears-for-lone-children-calais-refugee-camp>
 still stuck in the Calais camp, part of which is set for demolition on 
Wednesday.

In a letter to the home secretary, Amber Rudd, they expressed “deepest 
concern” for the unaccompanied minors’ and vulnerable people’s safety and 
welfare amid what they called “inadequate” plans for their future. The letter, 
signed by Conservative MP Heidi Allen, Labour’s Yvette Cooper, and more than 50 
other MPs, requests that “all unaccompanied minors should be removed to a place 
of safety before demolition begins”. It also requests that a “designated safe 
area for any remaining minors and vulnerable people” should be createdbefore 
the eviction starts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/08/child-refugees-calais-camp-stranded-britain-ignored-pleas-home-office>
.

The UK must fulfil its moral duty to Calais’ unaccompanied children | Bernard 
Cazeneuve
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/17/uk-moral-duty-calais-unaccompanied-children-asylum>
The Kids’ Cafe, where lone migrant children receive free food, has been issued 
with a demolition notice and volunteers expect that it will be knocked down 
within the next 48 hours. “It is absolute chaos,” said Mary Jones, who helps to 
run the cafe. “None of them know where they will be going. It is like taking 
their home away from them.”

The medical charity Doctors of the World, which has been working with refugees 
inCalais <https://www.theguardian.com/world/calais> since 2003, said there was 
no clear plan for those children not going to the UK.

“We are very concerned for unaccompanied children who aren’t entitled to come 
here. What will happen to them? Past camp clearances have only caused them more 
suffering,” Leigh Daynes, executive director of the charity, said. “Dismantling 
the camp won’t stop refugees coming to Calais nor make the thousands there 
already disappear. People will just come back only to live in even more squalid 
conditions in much smaller settlements and squats with fewer facilities, which 
could badly affect their physical and mental health.”

Daynes added that he hoped the police would act “proportionately” when the 
main stage of camp demolition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/01/calais-camp-razed-refugees> 
begins, “as our medics regularly see refugees who’ve been injured, sometimes 
seriously, at their hands”. Shops and cafes are expected to be knocked down 
this week and tents and shacks where asylum-seekers sleep are expected to be 
destroyed from Monday.

Refugee charities in Calais said the Home Office drive to speed up 
reunification of child refugees with family in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/13/unaccompanied-child-refugees-uk-families-from-france>
 has not been accompanied by any provision for vulnerable children believed to 
be eligible to travel to Britain under the“Dubs amendment” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/14/child-refugees-in-limbo-in-calais-because-of-home-office-delays>
, which gives an unspecified number of “vulnerable unaccompanied child 
refugees”, who arrived in the EU before 20 March, the possibility of coming to 
the UK. French officials are understood to be working in the camp with British 
officials this week to register children with relatives in Britain, but 
charities say there is no evidence of any registration process for “Dubs” 
children.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Funcle-meets-nephew-from-calais-camp-i-think-it-is-a-dream-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Uncle%20meets%20nephew%20from%20Calais%20camp%3A%20'I%20think%20it%20is%20a%20dream'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Funcle-meets-nephew-from-calais-camp-i-think-it-is-a-dream-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Uncle%20meets%20nephew%20from%20Calais%20camp%3A%20%27I%20think%20it%20is%20a%20dream%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Funcle-meets-nephew-from-calais-camp-i-think-it-is-a-dream-video&media=>
Uncle meets nephew from Calais camp: ‘I think it is a dream’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/oct/17/uncle-meets-nephew-from-calais-camp-i-think-it-is-a-dream-video>
“We think there are at least 54 unaccompanied girls, mostly Eritrean and a few 
from Ethiopia and Sudan, the vast majority of whom have no family in the UK, so 
are only eligible for Dubs,” Liz Clegg, a volunteer, said. “We have only five 
days left before demolition and there has not been a single mention of Dubs 
children; we believe they are the most vulnerable children on the site.”

A Home Office spokesperson said there would be no announcement about the 
quantity of children expected to be transferred to Britain until the process 
was complete. “Children who may be eligible to come to the UK under the Dubs 
Amendment to the Immigration Act 2016 must be supported in France while their 
cases are considered. If it is in the best interests of children who meet the 
Dubs criteria they will be transferred to the UK,” an official said.

But volunteers said there was no information available about where the 
potentially eligible children could be rehoused in France. “The registration 
process is chaotic. We have no information about what will happen to the 
children when the camp is demolished. The children are in a state of complete 
confusion,” Mary Jones said.

Laura Griffiths, senior field manager for Safe Passage UK, the charity that 
has been working to reunite refugee children with relatives, said: “The main 
concern is that in the chaos children with a right to reunite with family are 
being missed and no plan is yet in place for the highly vulnerable children who 
qualify for sanctuary in the UK under Dubs. With demolition potentially just 
days away there are still well over 1,000 children in the camp.”
 