
What the world needs now is a live gameshow with factual journalism and a 
gaggle of laughs. Fortunately, one has come along in the form ofTell Me 
Something I Don’t Know 
<https://itunes.apple.com/ro/podcast/tell-me-something-i-dont-know/id1171534532?mt=2>
, a collaboration between Stephen J Dubner and the New York Times (iTunes).
Freakonomics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/29/guardian-view-on-freakonomics-quirky-charming-too-ambitious>
 Radio’s Dubner expertly hosts this new US podcast, bringing a shot of low-key 
observational humour. He describes it as “a new inside-out kinda gameshow” 
where contestants reveal their IDKs (things they think the panel won’t know).

It’s crammed with useless facts, in the best way possible. The guests on the 
panel are ridiculously smart and likeable: Debora Spar, president of the 
women-only Barnard College in New York and Tony Marx, head of New York Public 
Library, along with The Bugle’s Andy Zaltzman. Their credentials are laid out: 
Spar can talk backwards and Zaltzman delivered his own child.

The Sporkful: does your race affect the restaurant you choose?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/oct/27/the-sporkful-foodie-podcast-restaurants-race>
The first episode, entitled Strange Danger, is the podcast for you if you have 
always want to know what happens before you freeze to death. (If you must know, 
freezing humans have been know to take their clothes off, known as “paradoxical 
undressing”. Oh, and they burrow into the ground in search of warmth.)

Conundrums are fired off by the finest brains in the studio audience, and – 
with a proliferation of doctors, an aerospace engineer and a history teacher 
from Princeton – the standard of brain-teaser is high. As is the comedy value, 
as the panel tries to guess the answer to their questions.

“When is the most dangerous time to vote for a US president on election day?” 
asks one, as the inevitable Trump-baiting quips hang in the air. (The first 
episode was recorded pre-election.) “We vote with pencils back home, so the 
earlier you are to the polling station, the sharper the pencil,” offers 
Zaltzman. The answer? At the end of the day, when something of a voting rush 
hour kicks off.

The question: “Why is it necessary for humans to spend a third of their life 
asleep?” elicits a long overdue discussion aroundJon Bon Jovi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/bon-jovi>’s theory of “I’ll live while I’m 
alive and I’ll sleep when I’m dead”. If the renowned sleep scientist of rock 
really did stick to that pattern, he wouldn’t live as long because research on 
mice has shown that sleep has a cleansing effect on the brain that helps to 
prevent dementia. All in all, a podcast that makes your conversation smarter – 
and brings the laughs.

If you like this, try: Freakonomics Radio <http://freakonomics.com/>
 