
Telstra <https://www.theguardian.com/business/telstra> has stepped up its 
attack against possible plans to force it to share its huge network with other 
telecom companies, warning that the move would hurt profits and investment 
across regional Australia.

Telstra, which has the largest network across reaching 98% of Australia’s 
population, currently sells access to parts of its network at negotiated 
prices. Two previous inquiries by the Australian Competition and Consumer 
Commission found that access did not need to be regulated.

Triple-zero emergency calls service to be put out to private tender
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/06/triple-zero-emergency-calls-service-to-be-put-out-to-private-tender>
A third ACCC inquiry is under way as a result of pressure from rivals such as 
Vodafone <https://www.theguardian.com/business/vodafonegroup> who think 
Telstra’s charges are too high. Farmers also think they should be able to 
choose from providers other than the former state monopoly.

But the chairman of Telstra, John Mullen, told the group’s annual general 
meeting on Tuesday that opening up the company’s networks would cost 
shareholders dear.

“Why would anyone invest in maintaining or upgrading their regional networks 
when they can hitch a ride on someone else’s network and there is no longer any 
competitive differentiation from greater network coverage?

“If the ACCC decides to declare mobile roaming, it would absolutely be at the 
expense of you, the Telstra shareholders,” Mullen told the meeting in Sydney.

“It would also be very bad for Australians that live and work in regional 
areas.”



https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/11/telstra-to-spend-3bn-improving-network-after-profits-jump-366-to-58bn

The chief executive of Telstra, Andrew Penn, took a shot at UK-based Vodafone, 
which has argued in favour of the ACCC inquiry on the basis that roaming – 
sharing another company’s network – is regulated in other western countries 
with large land mass and areas of low population density.

“The principal advocate for mobile roaming is a foreign company that has 
chosen not to invest to the extent that Telstra has,” Penn said.

“A foreign company that is very capable of investing and a foreign company 
that has argued against roaming in other markets where it suits it do so.”

Optus has agreed with Telstra that regulating roaming could pose a risk to 
investment in regional areas.
 